
More employers than ever now use assessment centres to recruit for jobs, with 
as many asone third of companies using them 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.getfeedback.net%2Fhrmanagers%2Fassessment-centres-benefits&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNG9ulFoC1W_s-kr8CtjVVp_xUaKYg>
 to choose applicants.

However, being invited to an assessment centre may feel like your worst 
nightmare. The thought of undergoing tests, simulated exercises and interviews 
can reduce even the most confident candidate to a nervous wreck. So why are 
they so scary and what can you do about it?

1. Fear of the unknown

All assessment centres are different. Some may involve a number of tests: 
aptitude or psychological exercises, role play, verbal or written communication 
simulations, presentations, activities to test prioritisation and organisation 
skills, or group tasks with the other candidates. And not forgetting the 
dreaded competency-based interview. If you've never experienced these kinds of 
tests before it can make you feel anxious and less confident.

What can you do?

Ask for information: most employers will tell you what is going to be 
involved, and may send you practice papers. Search for example exercises: try
www.practiceaptitudetests.com <http://www.practiceaptitudetests.com/> or 
www.jobtestprep.co.uk <http://www.jobtestprep.co.uk/>. You cannot practice the 
exact test you will be set but becoming more familiar with the types of 
exercises you might be asked to do can remove the fear, and you can develop an 
approach which works for you. If you discover that a particular type of test is 
a weak area for you then you can put in more practice or get some coaching on 
how to improve.

2. Fear of the competition

In most recruitment scenarios you don't meet the other candidates but at 
assessment centres not only do you meet them but you may be asked to 
participate in a group exercise where you are competing directly with them. In 
such situations you may find yourself making huge assumptions about their 
capability compared to yours which can erode your confidence.

What can you do?

Mentally prepare yourself: use positive thinking to increase confidence 
through reinforcing and reminding yourself of your key skills and achievements.

Be yourself: no matter how tempting it can be to compete with the alpha 
male/female in the group try not to be drawn into behaviour that doesn't 
enhance your performance. Be authentic and act with integrity.

3. Fear of being exposed

The assessors are with you most of the time and you may feel there is nowhere 
to hide – that you have to perform at all times, even breaks and mealtimes. 
This can be quite stressful, and depending on your personality type you may 
become withdrawn and quiet or talk too much, maybe saying things you later 
regret.

What can you do?

Develop a strategy: what kind of impression do you want to give? If you know 
you tend to withdraw when under stress then make a point of talking in breaks 
and lunchtime with an assessor or another candidate on a one to one basis where 
you feel comfortable. Similarly if you know you can over compensate and say too 
much then have a few safe topics (news, sport, current affairs) which you can 
stick too and involve other people in.

Think ahead about how to cope with nerves for a whole morning or day, such as 
breathing techniques, mindfulness, or keeping hydrated.

Remember the assessors are human and they want you to do well – they want to 
appoint a good candidate.

Above all remember to keep it in perspective – it's a good opportunity for you 
to work out if the company/job is right for you should you be offered the role. 
The experience can give you real insight into the culture and the 
organisational values of the company. Plus if you're not successful you can 
learn from the experience so the next assessment centre may not be so daunting.

Sarah Archer is a career coach and co-founder of CareerTree 
<http://www.careertree.org.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 