
Three men who had taken a shortcut to circumvent a stopped freight train were 
killed instantly as anAmtrak <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amtrak> 
passenger train hit their truck as they crossed the tracks, police confirmed on 
Friday.

The three, who were described as Hispanic males between 20 and 30, were all 
killed instantly on impact. No injuries were reported among the 217 passengers 
and crew on board the train, said Vernae Graham, a spokeswoman for Amtrak.

The train was traveling at more than 70 miles per hour, according to Josh 
McConnell, a public information officer for theCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> Highway Patrol. The car was 
split in half by the impact, and the engine was thrown more than 40ft from the 
crash site.

McConnell said that the train’s engineer reported pain, but was not 
hospitalized.

The three men in the truck had taken a detour along a private road along land 
owned by the Madera Water District in order to circumnavigate a stopped freight 
train. They drove along the side of the road, then turned at around 12.30pm to 
cross at a private crossing without seeing the oncoming passenger train.

There was no opportunity for the train to slow down, McConnell said, and 
though the investigation was still ongoing, he said, there was no suspicion 
that anyone was under the influence of alcohol, and indicated that there was no 
fault on the part of the train driver.

“When those trains are traveling at that speed it takes them a very, very long 
distance to slow or come to a stop, and I believe the truck turned right in 
front of the train – the driver of the truck had no idea there was a train 
[coming],” he said.

McConnell added that anyone approaching railway tracks should act with 
“extreme caution”.
 