
One morning in 1973, Christopher Lee requested a pre-release showing of his 
latest film. 'What do you think of it?' asked Michael Deeley, British Lion's 
managing director. 'It's an extraordinary movie,' Lee enthused. He never forgot 
Deeley's reply. 'He just looked at me and said, 'I think it's one of the 10 
worst films I've ever seen'.' Lee was gobsmacked.

 'Well, you're entitled to your opinion. But I think you're totally wrong.' 
That year two masterpieces of Gothic horror were released which changed the way 
directors and audiences saw the genre. William Friedkin's The Exorcist and 
Nicolas Roeg's Don't Look Now were critically acclaimed worldwide. But Robin 
Hardy's The Wicker Man was mishandled and overlooked, only belatedly recognised 
as an original and audacious debut.

 Lee believes it contains his greatest role and 'if it were released today for 
the first time it would collect Oscars for best film, direction, photography... 
the most remarkable screenplay.' Fans include Brian De Palma, Martin Scorsese 
and Francis Coppola, all of whom admire its power to shake even modern 
cinemagoers sated with CGI and special effects. It has such a cult status that 
the soundtrack sold out within three weeks of going on sale earlier this year.

So what went wrong? 'The film business - or what's left of it in England - 
likes to play safe,' playwrightAnthony Shaffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyshaffer>, who wrote the film's 
screenplay, once told the French film magazine Cinefantastique. 'Originals are 
difficult to get done, and I think it's the fault of those who sell the films 
and advertise them.' In May 1972, with the British film industry in a slump, 
young millionaire businessman John Bentley took control of troubled British 
Lion and its studio arm, Shepperton, bringing in Peter Snell as production 
head. In order to convince the unions he was not out to asset-strip the 
company, Bentley needed to get a low-budget, but appealingly-pitched, film into 
production - fast.

 By summer, the studio approved a script by Shaffer and Hardy. Hardy had a 
background in religious affairs programmes, and had researched rites in The 
Golden Bough, the Victorian study of comparative religion and social 
anthropology written by JG Frazer. Hardy and Shaffer were interested in the 
Bacchic rites of Greek antiquity, which involved a torn-apart human sacrifice, 
associated with fertility; though the actual idea of The Wicker Man seems to 
owe more to the references in The Golden Bough to areas of northern Europe 
settled by the Celts, where pre-Christian customs survived into the 19th 
century. In historic times, the rites involved animals, especially cats, burnt 
alive within basket-work effigies of men: Frazer wrote that he believed the 
animals were substitutes for the humans who had once been sacrificed this way.

 Hardy transferred this to 20th century Scotland, and passed the idea to 
Shaffer, a horror nut like his twin brother, Peter. In Shaffer's script Edward 
Woodward's repressed, virginal policeman is called to Summerisle to investigate 
a young girl's disappearance. There he encounters a pantheistic clan led by 
Lee's lord of the island. They venerate ancient gods and rituals; Britt Ekland 
and Ingrid Pitt are among the believers. Too late Woodward discovers the real 
reason he has been lured there: to be sacrificed - burned alive - in an immense 
wicker man to ensure a bountiful harvest.

 The power of the film, which is considerable, is in the feeling the audience 
shares with Woodward's character: that he is the outsider, a butt of jokes - 
the community in the film knows what he does not, that he is doomed. The 
landscape of the British Isles is seen imaginatively as a place where anything 
might happen in the broadest of daylight.

 As the film was considered a gamble, Snell, Lee and Shaffer agreed to waive 
their salaries and with casting and budget secured (Â£468,000 - the same as for 
Carry On Camping) filming began in Scotland in autumn 1972. Shooting proceeded 
without a hitch, despite the freezing weather and mysterious visits by the 
'money men'. The editing was to be handled by the veteran Eric Boyd-Perkins, 
distribution by British Lion.

 In spring 1973, a 102-minute version of The Wicker Man was complete, but 
British Lion was bought out again by stockholder Michael Deeley who, with 
businessman Barry Spikings, replaced Snell. Lee requested the screening and 
discovered that Deeley hated the film. Thinking it had no market value, he 
refused to grant it even a British release. Hardy recalls the film was seen as 
'wildly esoteric by British film standards. British Lion distribution hadn't 
the faintest idea what the film was about. Here was something which was 
actually more like the French Film Fantastique genre, which they were 
completely unused to and didn't know how to sell. Management said, 'Our sales 
people don't know what to do with this thing. It's a disaster and we'd better 
get rid of it. Meanwhile, Boyd-Perkins's editing was attacked. The film's 
composer, Paul Giovanni, claimed Boyd-Perkins hated the film and deliberately 
sabotaged scenes he felt were immoral. Boyd-Perkins balks at the suggestion. 'I 
didn't object to any of it. Giovanni must have repeated things he heard me say 
which were taken out of context. He didn't understand how you talk in a cutting 
room.' At any rate, the scene in which Ekland dances seductively nude survived 
the allegedly uptight editor's attentions.

 That summer at the Cannes film festival, a huge replica of the Wicker Man 
towered over the seafront: Snell's last-ditch attempt to sell the foreign 
rights. Deeley sent the 102-minute version to horrormeister Roger Corman in 
Hollywood for suggestions on cuts and how to pitch the film to the US market. 
Following Corman's advice, Deeley cut the film to 87 minutes - the version 
available on video - without consulting the film-makers. Hardy and Snell claim 
he later locked them out of the editing suite to put together an even shorter 
version with an unknown editor.

 In December, The Wicker Man finally crept out as the lower half of a double 
bill with Don't Look Now. There were no press screenings, no announcements, no 
publicity. Deeley's cuts had 'butchered' the continuity, according to Lee: 'I 
was horrified, and I did something I've never done before or since. I rang up 
all the critics I could think of and said 'Look, I'll pay for your seats if 
that's what it takes, but just please go and see this film as a favour to me'.' 
Following Lee's appeal, most critics heralded it as an original British film, 
many speculating about why it had received such shoddy treatment. Deeley 
eventually moved the film into the Odeon Haymarket in London's West End as the 
feature attraction. It never made it into the provinces.

 However, it won first prize in the 1974 Festival of Fantastic Films in Paris, 
and British Lion found an American buyer in National General which promptly 
went bankrupt. Warner Bros took over the catalogue, and ran The Wicker Man at 
several drive-ins. After showings around San Diego and Atlanta in order to 
satisfy its tax shelter requirements, Warner pulled the plug on it as a tax 
loss.

 In 1976 Robin Hardy returned to New York to try to locate the missing 
out-takes and negatives, working from British Lion through National General to 
Warner Bros, and back to Shepperton's vaults, 'writing God knows how many 
letters to Deeley and Spikings, none of which were answered,' Hardy says. 
Ploughing on, he finally got his answer about the missing footage: 'It's all 
been destroyed'. Lee recalls that 'Snell was taken to a roadworks beside the 
studio where there were lots of film cans at the bottom of the hole. Someone 
said to him, 'The Wicker Man's down there'.' 'Down there' was the M3, running 
alongside Shepperton studios. While looking for roadfill, builders had emptied 
British Lion's vaults of positive trims. 'They were all chucked in,' Snell 
laments. 'I suspect the negative was, quite innocently, taken away with the 
positive trims and dumped.' Boyd-Perkins was shattered. 'I knew the 
vault-keeper, and I went down when I heard these stories and he said 'It was a 
genuine mistake, I was horrified when it happened'.' Trims and spares were 
always collected a few years after films had been shot but, somehow, during one 
van-loading session, the Wicker negative had been wheeled away as well.

 Hardy went on to make documentaries, directing only one more feature film, 
The Fantasist in 1986, with Christopher Cazenove and Timothy Bottoms. He now 
plans to return to the Scottish Highlands for a film called The Riding Of The 
Laddies, while remaining tight-lipped about its theme. His main job is setting 
up multimedia theme parks around the world.

 But the Lee-Hardy connection jumped a generation when in 1995 Christopher Lee 
starred in the film A Feast At Midnight, directed and co-written by Robin's son 
Justin.

 Our attempts to track down Michael Deeley were unsuccessful. The closest we 
came to Deeley was Barry Spikings, his joint managing director at British Lion. 
The pair went on to run EMI films, which was responsible for The Deer Hunter. 
Spikings is still involved in films; Deeley, it seems, has retired.

 Spikings said from Malibu Beach that The Wicker Man was 'a very well made, 
quirky movie that was going to be hellishly difficult to market. And whether 
that was a self-fulfilling prophecy I don't know, but that's the way it turned 
out. To be fair to Michael, we'd bought movies that were not appropriate for 
the market. We were all under a lot of pressure and sometimes you say things 
you wish you hadn't - Michael's comments about it being one of the 10 worst 
films might have been one of those. People in the US still talk about it. In 
the middle of a conversation they suddenly ask, were you involved with The 
Wicker Man?' Only Lee remains convinced that the original might yet be 
salvaged: 'Every studio keeps the negatives and trims of every film it makes, 
good, bad or indifferent. How do you destroy 386 cans of film 'by mistake'? 
That's in the realms of fantasy. Something very strange is going on here. I 
firmly believe those negatives do exist, either in cans bearing the label of 
another film, or with no label at all. But somebody still knows where those 
cans are, and they should hand it over to us to re-cut, and we could really 
make a work of genius.'

And the film's wicker man? That stood on Burrow Head, off the Stranraer coast, 
until a few years ago, when holidaymakers had a barbecue next to it and 
accidentally razed it. The area is now a caravan site and only a solitary leg 
remains.
 