
Police probing alleged fraud at welfare-to-work firm A4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> have arrested three more people.

The two women and one man were taken into custody as part of the inquiry into 
the company, formerly run by the prime minister's one-time "family champion",
multimillionaire Emma Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/dec/02/emma-harrison-dividend-payment>.

Officers have already made numerous prior arrests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/22/staff-welfare-work-company-4ae-arrested>
 as part of the long-running investigation into activities of the organisation 
at its office in Slough, Berkshire.

A4e said the investigation was in relation to incidents that took place in 
2009, and which the company had itself flagged to the Department of Work and 
Pensions for investigation. The DWP,A4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> 
said, had subsequently felt the need to refer the matter for criminal 
investigation.

On Thursday a spokesman for Thames Valley police said: "Officers investigating 
allegations of fraud in connection with A4e have made three further arrests.

"Two women, aged 26 and 30 years, and one man, aged 34 years, were arrested by 
officers from Thames Valley police this morning on suspicion of fraud by false 
representation.

"The three people remain in police custody at this time."

The Yorkshire-based company handled millions of pounds' worth of government 
contracts for welfare-to-work schemes.

In February last year, Harrison stepped down as the company's chairwoman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/oct/25/emma-harison-bullied-out-of-a4e> 
after numerous allegations were made about the organisation's business 
practices.

In a statement A4e said, "We are aware that Thames Valley police officers have 
arrested three people as part of their ongoing investigation into allegations 
of fraud relating to a specific incident dating back to 2009."

"We welcome the fact that the police are conducting a thorough investigation 
and we continue to support them during their enquiries."

"The incident being investigated occurred on a contract delivered a number of 
years ago, and we will not – and do not – hesitate to refer specific incidents 
of this nature to the relevant authorities immediately, as we did on this 
occasion.

"Put simply, there is no place for dishonesty at A4e, and the audits 
undertaken by the Department of Work and Pensions and the Skills Funding Agency 
in May last year confirmed they identified no evidence of fraud, systemic, 
attempted or otherwise in relation to any audit completed of the contracts they 
currently hold with us."
 