
Apple’s chief executive, Tim Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tim-cook>, has attempted to assuage 
fears over the company’s fall in earnings, saying that the dip in stock price 
was a “huge overreaction” and that forthcoming iPhones will make people look 
back and ask “how did I live without this?”


Cook described the 26% year-on-year drop in revenues Apple suffered last 
quarter and thetrouble in China which caused the billionaire investor Carl 
Icahn to sell his entire stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/29/billionaire-investor-carl-icahn-sells-entire-stake-in-apple>
 in the company as “short-term turbulence”.

Talking to Jim Cramer on CNBC’s Mad Money 
<http://www.cnbc.com/live-tv/mad-money/full-episode/mad-money-may-2-2016/678177859960>
, he said: “What we’re seeing is that people are upgrading at a lower rate than 
they did last year, but still higher than the year before. So we had this 
abnormally high upgrade rate last year as people bought into the iPhone 6.”

The iPhone 6 brought with it a change in screen size and design for the 
flagship smartphone, expanding to 4.7in for the iPhone 6 and 5.5in for the 
iPhone 6 Plus, Apple’s first smartphone with a screen larger than 4in. But 
Apple has been accused of failing to offer a compelling reason to upgrade with 
the 2015iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 6S and 6S Plus.

A brief guide to everything that’s annoying about Apple
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/a-brief-guide-to-everything-thats-annoying-about-apple>
‘How did I live without this?’

“We have great innovation in the pipeline, like new iPhones that will incent 
you and other people that have iPhones today to upgrade to new iPhones,” said 
Cook. “We are going to give you things that you can’t live without, that you 
just don’t even know you need today. You will look back and wonder: ‘How did I 
live without this?’”

Cook, who admitted that the company was secretive and “didn’t talk about 
futures” as some others do, would not be drawn on what the anticipated iPhone 7 
would contain. LGrecently unveiled a fingerprint scanner 
<http://www.lginnotek.com/community/news_view.jsp?seq=611> that can work 
through a glass screen, without the need for dedicated button, which has long 
been expected to be Apple’s end-goal for its Touch ID fingerprint scanner.

Whether that technology, which is expected to appear in phones towards the end 
of 2016 or the beginning of 2017, will be included in the iPhone 7 is unknown.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has also faced criticism 
over its Watch, which has failed to meet expectations, despite being the 
number-one selling smartwatch in the world with 13m sold in 2015, according to 
research firm IDC, and a further 14m expected this year. Cook was bullish, 
saying the company was still in “learning mode” and that its goal was to slowly 
establish the category.

The iPod or iPhone weren’t seen as overnight successes

Cook said: “If you look all the things Apple has done over time, at the time 
that they were done they are rarely ever seen like they were in retrospect.

“I think the watch will be like that too. If you look at iPod it wasn’t viewed 
as a success, but today it’s viewed as an overnight success. The iPhone was the 
same way. People were writing about it not having a physical keyboard, 
obviously no one would want it.

“In a few years we will look back and people will say, ‘how could I ever have 
thought about not wearing this watch’, because it will be doing so much for 
you. Then it will be viewed as an overnight success.”

Cook also addressed concerns that the iPhone had finished its growth and that 
it was entering a plateau, saying that what is seen in the US is not 
representative of the rest of the world.

“Eventually everyone in the world will have a smartphone, but penetration is 
around 40% so there is a long way to go. In the short term, the iPhone upgrade 
rate affects all countries, including China. But the switcher rate is up to 
nearly 40%.

“What that says is that the market doesn’t need to be growing hugely for Apple 
to grow. If we can get switchers we can grow.”

 * Are slow iPhone sales just a blip or is Apple starting to struggle? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/30/apple-iphone-sales-slowdown-tim-cook-china-market>

 * 40 years of Apple – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gallery/2016/apr/01/40-years-of-apple-in-pictures> 