
As US senators race to announce their support for gay marriage, and public 
support for gay couples to wed increases, perhaps it's not surprising that Out 
magazine couldn't find a closeted public figure to unmask for the first time in 
itslatest list of the most powerful gay men and women in the US 
<http://www.out.com/out-exclusives/power-50/2013/04/10/power-list-2013>.

In the past, the magazine has included figures it knew to be gay but who had 
not made public declarations:Anderson Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anderson-cooper> and Jodie Foster were cover 
stars in 2007, but it was only last year that both publicly announced they were 
gay.

That said, the magazine has not shied from placing Apple's CEO Tim Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tim-cook> at the top of its latest 
list, published on Wednesday. The Fox News anchor Shepard Smith is at No 8, and 
the media mogul Barry Diller is at No 12. None have addressed their sexuality 
publicly, but all three have featured in the list before. It is Cook's third 
consecutive year at the top of the list.

"Maybe that means we have less need to [out people] now," said Out 
editor-in-chief Aaron Hicklin.

"I think one of the most phenomenal things in American society is that the 
argument for being in the closet is being eroded by progress, and it seems 
increasingly arcane – to a lot of people – for a public figure to be in the 
closet," he said.

Hicklin said the magazine can't avoid putting influential people who aren't 
publicly out on the list – which is why someone like Anderson Cooper has been 
on it so many times. "It wasn't really an exposé so much as it didn't make 
sense to have this list without having them on it."

Cooper earned the No 5 spot this year. The big shock: Foster, who came out in 
a speech at the Golden Globes in January, failed to make the list at all. 
Hicklin said Foster failed to make the cut in part because she has no major 
projects coming up this year.

The list is intended to show "who wields the most influence on broader 
America", and people are assigned points based on four criteria: social and 
cultural influence, media profile, political influence, and wealth. The list is 
mainly white and male, something Hicklin hopes will change in the future.

"If it's difficult for gay men and women, it's even harder for black gay men 
and women, or transgender men or women," Hicklin said.

Newcomers to the list this year include drag queen RuPaul Charles (50) and 
statistician Nate Silver (6), who accurately predicted the outcome of the 2012 
presidential election on his FiveThirtyEight blog.

Other new additions include musician Frank Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean> (10), music mogul Clive Davis 
(42), and the newspaper boss Kevin McClatchy (50).

Davis addressed his sexuality in his memoir, which was released in February 
this year 
<http://shelf-life.ew.com/2013/02/19/clive-davis-whitney-houston-kelly-clarkso/>
. Ocean has yet to publicly define his sexuality, but wrote a note about a 
longtime affection for his first love, a man he met when he was 19,in July 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/04/odd-future-frank-ocean>. 
McClatchy announced he is gay in aNovember 2012 interview 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/23/opinion/sunday/bruni-a-new-inning-late-in-the-game.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
 with the New York Times, where he said he kept his sexuality a secret while he 
was CEO of the Pittsburgh Pirates between 1996 and 2007.

Jenna Lyons, the president and creative director at J Crew (38), also 
acknowledged her sexuality for the first time in 2012, but, like others, had 
appeared on the list before.
 