
Tippi Hedren has revealed how Alfred Hitchcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfredhitchcock> allegedly sexually assaulted 
her while they were working on the films The Birds and Marnie.

The actor has spoken in the past about the director’s treatment of her, much 
of which was portrayed inthe 2012 HBO movie The Girl 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/starsandstories/9753977/Tippi-Hedren-interview-Hitchcock-put-me-in-a-mental-prison.html>
, but she goes into fresh detail in a new autobiography, Tippi: A Memoir.

Do Hitchcock and The Girl reveal the horrible truth about Hitch?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/11/hitchcock-the-girl-truth-master-suspense>
According to the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3882442/How-obsessed-Alfred-Hitchcock-tried-ruin-Tippi-Hedren-s-career-refused-succumb-sexual-demands.html>
, Hitchcock’s abusive behaviour began when he cast Hedren in The Birds, her 
first film and Hitchcock’s follow-up to Psycho.

Hedren alleges that the director ordered other cast members not to socialise 
with her or touch her, and grew petulant if he saw her talking to other men.

She claims he once threw himself on top of her and tried to kiss her while 
they were travelling in his limousine. The next day on set, while filmingthe 
famous phone booth scene <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D15HPy4x73g> in which 
Hedren’s character is attacked by birds, she says one of the mechanical crows 
broke the supposedly shatterproof glass, shards of which hit her in the face. 
She also says that in a scene where her character was attacked by birds in a 
bedroom she was told the mechanical birds would not work, and that they would 
have to use live ones.

 She allegedly spent five days filming the scene with live birds being thrown 
at her and attached to her body with elastic bands. Hedren says she broke down 
when a bird that had been attached to her shoulder almost pecked her in the 
eye, and she spent the following week in bed, exhausted.

Hedren suspects that Hitchcock was attempting to punish her for rebuffing his 
sexual advances.

When Sienna Miller met Tippi Hedren
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/16/sienna-miller-tippi-hedren-interview>
The next film under Hedren’s contract was Marnie, about a kleptomaniac with 
mental health problems. It includes a scene in which Hedren’s character is 
raped by her new husband. Hedren believes that the scene of a man forcing 
himself on his unattainable, beautiful bride was Hitchcock’s personal fantasy 
about her.

The director’s behaviour continued, Hedren says, and he commissioned a replica 
mask of her face for himself, even though it was not needed for the film. He 
also placed her dressing room next to his office, and was able to enter through 
a connecting door.

Hitchcock would “find some way to express his obsession with me, as if I owed 
it to him to reciprocate somehow,” Hedren writes in the new autobiography, and 
even expressed his love for her directly.

Q&A: Tippi Hedren
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/feb/14/tippi-hedren-interview> 
One day, Hedren says, he summoned her to his office. “He suddenly grabbed me 
and put his hands on me. It was sexual, it was perverse and it was ugly,” she 
writes.

Hitchcock reportedly grew frustrated at her resistance and threatened to ruin 
her career. Hedren says he blocked the studio, Universal, when it wanted to 
submit her performance for an Oscar, and talked disparagingly of her to others.

She was still under contract to him for two more years, and Hitchcock refused 
to allow her to take work with other directors. This, combined with studios’ 
reluctance to antagonise Hitchcock, meant her career never recovered.


“Studios were the power,” Hedren said in 2012 
<https://thinkprogress.org/studies-in-actorly-courage-tippi-hedren-on-sexual-harassment-and-alfred-hitchcock-and-lance-reddick-5b0273c5bcbe#.ms16r0thd>
. “And I was at the end of that, and there was absolutely nothing I could do 
legally whatsoever. There were no laws about this kind of a situation. If this 
had happened today, I would be a very rich woman.”
 