
Welcome to this week’s blog. Here’s a roundup of your comments and photos from 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/mar/01/tips-links-and-suggestions-what-are-you-reading-this-week>
, including a novel so overwhelming it made a reader cry, a Harry Potter 
challenge and must-read ancient Greek and Roman authors.

“Alright George Eliot!! .... Show me what you got,” says ihath 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/56d58d65e4b0a243d17822e2/1955392>, 
who is getting ready to devourMiddlemarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/10/100-best-novels-middlemarch-george-eliot>
:

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftips-links-and-suggestions-george-eliot-ali-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87903a9a28493667bf93b4e220a731286df26078%2F0_0_640_423%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tips%2C%20links%20and%20suggestions%3A%20what%20are%20you%20reading%20this%20week%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftips-links-and-suggestions-george-eliot-ali-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tips%2C%20links%20and%20suggestions%3A%20what%20are%20you%20reading%20this%20week%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftips-links-and-suggestions-george-eliot-ali-smith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87903a9a28493667bf93b4e220a731286df26078%2F0_0_640_423%2F640.jpg>
Can any novel be capable of overwhelming serenity? Yes
conedison 
conedison <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10021252> was moved by 
Marilynne Robinson’s writing, a passion he shareswith Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/13/president-obama-turns-books-journalist-in-marilynne-robinson-interview>
:

Barack Obama’s admiration for Marilynne Robinson was such that when he was in 
Iowa in September of last year he made a point of seeking her out and having a 
little chat. I share his admiration. I finishedGilead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/apr/16/fiction.alismith> last night. It 
made me cry – only the second time that’s ever happened to me. Can any novel be 
capable of overwhelming serenity? Yes. Finding the thought of turning to 
another work of fiction absurd I will ease my way down from Gilead’s empyrean 
heights withThe Genius of the System: Hollywood Film-making in the Studio Era 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/101447.The_Genius_of_the_System> by Thomas 
Schatz. That will return me to our prosaic world without too much regret at 
having placed on the shelf one of the most beautiful books I’ve ever read.

Let’s u-turn and move on to Emmi Bowles 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/56d58d65e4b0a243d17822e2/1949072>, 
who has decided to read Harry Potter for the first time:

I have read the first two books in the past but did not enjoy them. But I have 
made it my goal to finish the series this year, so this month I am starting by 
reading Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone.
 Good luck to Emmi. 
paulburns <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13121203> has started to 
dip intoThe Jewish War <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jewish-war.html> by 
Josephus – his third time:

... and am enjoying it more than I thought I would and I’m only a couple of 
pages in. I’m curious if any of you have other favourite ancient Greek and 
Roman authors or writers from Late Antiquity, or ones you particularly dislike. 
Among my favourites are Herodotus, Ammianus Marcellinus, published by Penguin as
The Later Roman Empire AD 354-378 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/669343.The_Later_Roman_Empire> (who was an 
absolute joyful revelation and was probably responsible for the beginning of my 
love affair with Late Antiquity), Tacitus, of course, Seutonius, Procopius’sThe 
Secret History 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Secret_History_of_Procopius_Scholar.html?id=7o5PrgEACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
. On the other hand, no matter how many times I read Thucydides’sThe 
Peloponnesian War <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/peloponnesian-war-7.html>, 
I can’t get away from the impression I’m reading about Lilliputians.

Here are some of other readers’ responses 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69931726>. What are yours?

Interesting links about books and reading

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 * The Weight of James Arthur Baldwin 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/rachelkaadzighansah/the-weight-of-james-arthur-baldwin-203>
: a writer travels to Baldwin’s home in France and examines the impact of a 
writer whose legacy cannot be erased. In Buzzfeed. 
 * Jane Eyre and the Invention of the Self 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2016/03/how-jane-eyre-created-the-modern-self/460461/?>
: “Butefore theselfie 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/photo-booth/finding-the-self-in-a-selfie> 
came ‘the self,’ or the fairly modern concept of the independent ‘individual.’ 
In The Atlantic. 
 * Books I wish I’d read as an LGBTQ teenager 
<http://lithub.com/books-i-wish-id-read-as-an-lgbtq-teenager/>: queer writers 
on what they’d recommend to their past selves. In Literary Hub. 
 * We Are Hopelessly Hooked 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2016/02/25/we-are-hopelessly-hooked/>: Tech 
companies are engaged in “a race to the bottom of the brain stem,” in which 
rewards go not to those that help us spend our time wisely, but to those that 
keep us mindlessly pulling the lever at the casino. In the New York Review of 
Books. 
 * “You Will Be Tokenized”: Speaking Out About the State of Diversity in 
Publishing 
<http://www.bkmag.com/2016/02/24/you-will-be-tokenized-speaking-out-about-the-state-of-diversity-in-publishing/>
. Leaders in the US publishing industry speak out, in Brooklyn Magazine. 
 * 10 Books About Loneliness 
<http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/tip-sheet/article/69506-10-books-about-loneliness.html>
: Olivia Laing, author of just-publishedThe Lonely City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/28/the-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol>
, explores the link between loneliness and literature in 10 books for 
Publishers Weekly. 
 * Staff picks: Feminist books for International Women’s Day 
<http://www.versobooks.com/blogs/2527-staff-picks-feminist-books-for-international-women-s-day>
: The women workers of Verso and New Left Review share some of their favourite 
feminist books “in tribute to the radical roots of the observance,”.

If you would like to share a photo of the book you are reading, or film your 
own book review, please do. Click the blue button on this page to share your 
video or image. I’ll include some of your posts in next week’s blog.


If you’re on Instagram and a book lover, chances are you’re already sharing 
beautiful pictures of booksyou are reading 
<https://instagram.com/explore/tags/nowreading/>,“shelfies” 
<https://instagram.com/explore/tags/bookshelf/> or all kinds of still lifes 
with books as protagonists <https://instagram.com/p/5foOfkLDFI/>. Now, you can 
share your reads with us on the mobile photography platform – simply tag your 
pictures there with #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection here.

And, as always, if you have any suggestions for topics you’d like to see us 
covering beyond TLS, do let us know.
 