
The government’s most helpful former employee, Peta Credlin, has posed a 
theory to Sky News overnight.Marriage equality will doom the Liberal party 
leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/peta-credlin-says-marriage-equality-plebiscite-bill-may-fail>
.


“It is very likely [the plebiscite] will be opposed by the Greens and Labor 
and Labor has got stronger in this campaign, not weaker,” she said.

“The government might claim a mandate but if Labor block it and the Greens 
block it in the upper house, what is plan B?”

Australian election 2016: plebiscite bill likely to fail, says Peta Credlin – 
politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/28/australian-election-2016-plebiscite-bill-likely-to-fail-says-peta-credlin-politics-live>
Credlin predicted if the plebiscite vote failed, Turnbull would push for a 
parliamentary vote and that would create “enormous stresses” in the party, 
similar to the split over the ETS which saw Turnbull lose leadership the first 
time.

The big picture

The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> will 
release its costings this afternoon. The treasurer,Scott Morrison, yesterday 
said they would be “within the envelope” of the most recent budget.

Both leaders were given the Sarah Ferguson treatment on Four Corners last 
night, grilled on their pasts, personalities and policies, and quickly cut off 
if they started to speak like politicians.

When asked about asylum seekers held in offshore detention, Turnbull said 
Australia was not responsible for them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/turnbull-suggests-australia-is-not-responsible-for-asylum-seekers-held-offshore>
.

“You have to remember that those places are … those centres are managed by the 
respective governments, PNG andNauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>. 
That’s a fact,” he said.

“But are you not responsible for the people in those centres or on those 
islands as the Australian prime minister who runs the regime that holds them 
there?” responded Ferguson.

“Well, we don’t hold them there. We don’t hold them there. That is not 
correct. We do not hold them there.”

Asked a similar question, Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, said: “I feel a 
responsibility that we make sure that we solve the problem. We do owe them a 
duty of care.”

A new report has found that more than 40% of the benefit of the Coalition’s 
$48bn company tax cut will go offshore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/coalitions-company-tax-cuts-more-than-40-of-benefit-flows-overseas-report-finds>
 in dividends to shareholders of multinational corporations and foreign tax 
authorities.


And new modelling has found a majority of families would be better off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/most-families-better-off-under-labors-childcare-policy-modelling-finds>
 under Labor’s childcare and family payments policy than under the Coalition’s 
plans.

There is an escalating dispute over budget repair 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-no-plan-but-shorten-takes-super-savings/news-story/abec85b53678d2364e8cfbc9522ef83d>
, with the Coalition accusing Labor of banking $3bn in Coalition savings from 
the most recent budget, while promising to “revisit” them if Labor wins.

Labor is in a tricky position, having to convince the electorate to trust 
their plan for higher deficit in the short term in return for long term surplus.

The fight for New England is getting extremely dirty. Tony Windsor has called 
forthe removal of a Nationals attack ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/27/tony-windsor-demands-nationals-apologise-to-wife-over-gutter-attack-ad>
 which he says made suggestions about his personal life.

And Senator Ricky Muir is sticking around. He’s told AAP if he loses he’ll run 
again at the next election.

“Whether it be the Senate, the lower house, the state, even local council,” he 
said”.


Q&A: Tanya Plibersek says Labor has '40 years of evidence' to back Medicare 
claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/qa-tanya-plibersek-says-labor-has-40-years-of-evidence-to-back-medicare-claim>
“One way or another I’ll find my way back into politics.”

On the campaign trail

The PM is visiting Brisbane and Petrie today. Petrie is the country’s second 
most marginal electorate, and you can read about it here.

Turnbull will begin with a forum of small business owners and construction 
industry stakeholders.

Shorten is expected to visit Eden-Monara today, before appearing at the 
National Press Club around lunch time.

The campaign to watch

Far away from the “heartland” seats of Western Sydney, the bellwethers, and 
the city seats, Lingiari covers more than 1.3m square kilometres, with just 
65,000 odd people, 42% of whom are Indigenous. One of the biggest issues is 
roads – and not because the traffic’s bad but because quite often you just 
can’t drive on them.

The incumbent is Labor “Man with the Mo”, Warren Snowdon, but he holds it by 
just 0.9%. He’s hoping to see off CLP candidate, pastoralistTina MacFarlane.

The two went head to head on ABC NT Radio’s Country Hour yesterday. You can 
have a listen here 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-27/lingiari-debate-snowdon-and-macfarlane/7545822>
.

And another thing

As if England wasn’t hurting enough after Brexit, they’ve now been humiliated 
in the football.

Plenty of noise about jobs and Medicare, but deathly silence on so much else | 
Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/plenty-of-noise-about-jobs-and-growth-and-medicare-but-deathly-silence-on-so-much-else>
The manager resigned immediately 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/roy-hodgson-facing-end-england-manager-iceland-euro-2016>
 after the side lost 2-1 to Iceland. Here’s part ofthe write-up from the 
Guardian’s Daniel Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
:

For Roy Hodgson, it was a desperate and ignominious way to end his four years 
asEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> manager. Whatever else 
happened in that time, his period in charge will probably always be remembered 
for the full-on humiliation that accompanied this defeat and the knowledge it 
will rank among the more infamous results in the history of the national team.

How can it not when the suffering comes against a country with a population 
roughly the size of Croydon and absolutely no history of tournament football? 
What heroes Iceland were: brave, organised, superb.
marcus kelson (@marcuskelson) 
Iceland right now #ENGICE <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ENGICE?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/kb6qkNMSAJ <https://t.co/kb6qkNMSAJ>
 <https://twitter.com/marcuskelson/status/747536786696478720> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/marcuskelson/status/747536786696478720> Mona (@MonaChalabi)
1 in every 1,000 Icelandic men (age 25-29) was on that pitch vs. 1 in every 
200,000 British men. They still beat us.pic.twitter.com/NtWZa2AEnb 
<https://t.co/NtWZa2AEnb>
 <https://twitter.com/MonaChalabi/status/747535324738424832> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MonaChalabi/status/747535324738424832>  