
Good morning, everyone. It’s Thursday, but I think I might just have the hang 
of this one.

All opinions are not equal. Some are a very great deal more robust, 
sophisticated and well supported in logic and argument than others.

Or so says Douglas Adams. I’ll leave it to you to apply the wisdom where you 
see fit.

We are two days out from the election and things are picking up speed. Head on 
over here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/29/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup>
 to catch up on yesterday.

The big picture

Malcolm Turnbull will address the National Press Club at lunchtime, and call 
for a little more foot traffic on the higher road. After eight weeks of 
sometimes hostile campaign battles, the PM will make use one of his final major 
speeches to urge the next parliament to “offload the ideology, to end the 
juvenile theatrics and gotcha moments, to drop the personality politics”.

As Lenore Taylor observes over here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/30/malcolm-turnbull-to-claim-high-ground-in-final-election-set-piece-speech>
, the call for more mature politics and an end to “division for division’s 
sake”, is quite similar to the speech he made after taking the leadership from 
his predecessor,Tony Abbott.

Abbott, ever helpful, has popped up and suggested this hasn’t been the 
campaign he would have run. The former PM told Sky News budget repair and 
border security had been ignored.

“This has been an election campaign where a lot of big issues have been 
touched on without really being developed,” he told Sky News last night. 
“National security has played almost no part in this campaign and even border 
security has been just an intermittent visitor to the campaign.”

This has meant “less substantial stuff” has been front and centre instead.

Abbott also said people would feel “ripped off” if a marriage equality 
plebiscite didn’t happen now.
Sky News Australia (@SkyNewsAust) 
.@TonyAbbottMHR <https://twitter.com/TonyAbbottMHR> says border security has 
been 'just an intermittent visitor' in this campaign#ausvotes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ausvotes?src=hash> #pmlive 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/pmlive?src=hash> https://t.co/3AkcgfW8nO 
<https://t.co/3AkcgfW8nO>
 <https://twitter.com/SkyNewsAust/status/748116227654983680> June 29, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SkyNewsAust/status/748116227654983680> 
The election was called over a construction industry watchdog but in its last 
days is all about marriage equality.

Turnbull said a Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> win on Saturday would 
deliver a clear mandate for a plebiscite and he demanded thatBill Shorten 
respect that and pass the legislation.

“I think it would be very rash of any political party to deny the Australian 
people a say on this issue when it is clear a majority do want a say, and 
particularly when a government is returned on the very clear mandate to do it,”
he told the Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-turnbull-to-claim-gay-marriage-mandate/news-story/3b91a54c779ffb05ba2cc18a09476d31>
.

Turnbull was very confident it would pass, very confident voters would approve 
it, and has previously said he was sure the free vote then granted to Coalition 
members would see it “sail through”.

“Sailing through” may be an optimistic prediction for the future Senate. A 
Guardian Australia survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/29/turnbulls-tax-cuts-and-savings-would-face-senate-roadblock-after-election>
 has found Coalition measures like the corporate tax cut and the so called 
“zombie cuts” would be unlikely to get through parliament. It also found a 
Labor government would be forced to negotiate on its negative gearing measures.

Such an event is looking more unlikely though, as polls suggest Labor won’t 
win the 21 seats it needs for government. Leadership questions are in the air, 
according to News Corp papers, which are suggesting a possible challenge by
Anthony Albanese after an unsuccessful election.

Today the opposition leader has warned of Australia heading towards a 
situation where the likes of Donald Trump and Ukip gain traction because of 
increased inequality – which he says three more years of the Coalition would 
foster.

“We’re not at the point of America, but cooperative economic growth where 
people are included, not left behind, that’s how you avoid in democracies where 
people are feeling marginalised and alienated,”he has told Fairfax Media 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-bill-shorten-says-turnbull-government-creating--preconditions-for-disadvantage-and-inequality-20160629-gpuqdu.html>
.

“We’re not immune from that – I don’t think we’re as far down the track.”

Shorten again denied Labor was running scare campaigns on Medicare, and said 
Turnbull had given up some of the “centre ground”.

“I think in this election he’s emerged as hollower than people thought.”

On the campaign trail

Bill Shorten is in Brisbane today, pushing on with education and health – 
specifically Medicare.

If you want to make sure we have a government that looks out for working- and 
middle-class families, not just the big end of town, then you need to vote 
Labor,” a campaign spokesman said.

Malcolm Turnbull is in Canberra and will address the press club at lunchtime.

The campaign to watch

Less a campaign to watch than one to keep an eye on and perhaps send to the 
naughty corner, but things have alreadygotten heated at pre-poll booths in one 
New South Wales seat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/29/liberal-and-labor-volunteers-scuffle-at-pre-poll-election-booths-in-macarthur>
.

In pre-poll booths in Macarthur, a Labor volunteer allegedly pushed over an 
elderlyLiberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> 
volunteer and Liberal volunteers have allegedly removed how-to-vote cards from 
the hands of voters and verbally harassed a young woman. Police were called but 
no charges laid and the matter has been referred to the electoral commission.


The safe Liberal seat (3.3%) in Sydney’s outer south-west is held by Russell 
Matheson, who accused Labor of being “increasingly desperate and aggressive”, 
and demanded the party apologise for the behaviour of its volunteers.

Istanbul Atatürk airport attack: Turkey declares day of mourning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/29/istanbul-ataturk-airport-attack-turkey-declares-day-of-mourning>
And another thing …

Turkey has declared a day of morning after a terrorist attack on the Ataturk 
airport in Istanbul killed 41 people and injured more than 250.

President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan> has blamed Islamic 
State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> for the late-night attack.

• Follow the day’s developments live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/30/australian-election-2016-turnbull-claims-a-mandate-and-calls-for-maturity-politics-live>
• Sign up here to receive your Campaign catchup in your inbox every afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/guardian-campaign-catchup>
 