
Good morning everyone. We are another day closer to the end of this campaign, 
thepolitical equivalent of Lambchop 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0U2zJOryHKQ>. It doesn’t feel like it’s going 
to stop, but eventually the credits do roll.

The big picture

The Coalition released its costing yesterday, two days after Labor and three 
days before the last-minute effort by Tony Abbott’s opposition in 2013. The key 
takeaway is aCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> 
classic. A crackdown on welfare and pensioners, saving $2.3bn.

Lenore Taylor took a look 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/coalition-finds-23bn-to-pay-for-pork-barrelling?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 at exactly how the old, infirm and unemployed will help pay for all the 
football stadiums and CCTV cameras promised over the last eight weeks.

Australian election 2016: Alan Jones grills Turnbull on housing affordability 
– politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/29/australian-election-2016-morrison-wont-say-whether-he-would-vote-in-line-with-plebiscite-politics-live>
Fairfax’s Peter Martin called it a “get out of jail free card”. 

“If it looks as though you’ll be in the red, you simply add in a figure for 
general unspecified savings and, magically, your problem’s solved,”he writes. 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-coalition-uses-getoutofjailfree-card-to-fix-its-costings-20160628-gpu0fs.html#ixzz4CuDfVcWy>

The Australian Financial Review’s Laura Tingle labelled the welfare crackdown 
“the one you keep in your back pocket just in case”, and was incredulous about 
the “detail” of the savings which will apparently come from it.
Laura Tingle (@latingle) 
Here are said details pic.twitter.com/lvp61Uk98G <https://t.co/lvp61Uk98G>
 <https://twitter.com/latingle/status/747667908164259846> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/latingle/status/747667908164259846> 
Appearing on ABC’s 7.30 last night, the treasurer, Scott Morrison, spruiked 
the announcement and hit Labor for forecasting a bigger deficit.

He also refused to say if he would vote in favour of same-sex marriage if a 
plebiscite calls for it.

He repeatedly said he would “respect the will of the plebiscite” but when 
pushed wouldn’t exactly clarify whether respect equalled voting in line with 
its result.

What does this mean? 

Let’s work off the presumption a plebiscite will match current opinion polls 
and the people will vote yes. Morrison can’t at this moment say he would vote
against one of Turnbull’s key election commitments without completely 
undermining it. To say he would vote with it is a pretty uncontroversial move, 
and a number of Coalition MPs have said as much already.

So will he “respectfully” vote against a yes result? Will be abstain? What 
does this kind of waffle do to either side’s claims about the benefits or 
uselessness of holding a plebiscite?
Declan Fay (@declanf) 
The end of that @ScottMorrisonMP <https://twitter.com/ScottMorrisonMP> 
interview with@leighsales <https://twitter.com/leighsales> reads like a Clarke 
and Dawe sketch.#ausvotes <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ausvotes?src=hash> 
#abc730 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/abc730?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/mtkyW67KMT
 <https://t.co/mtkyW67KMT>
 <https://twitter.com/declanf/status/747733012280807425> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/declanf/status/747733012280807425> 
Labor has said it wouldn’t hold a plebiscite, wouldn’t do a “deal” with the 
Coalition, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/labor-will-not-accept-marriage-equality-plebiscite-if-it-loses-election-shorten>
 and would instead put a marriage bill before parliament as its first act of 
government. At the Labor campaign launch last week, Bill Shorten described a 
plebiscite as a “taxpayer-funded ­platform for homophobia”.

That view is in contrast to what he expressed at the time of the 2013 election,
the Australian has reported this morning 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-bill-shorten-flips-on-gay-plebiscite/news-story/fd7f72809333817973db6448f554e371>
. The paper has resurfaced a video of Shorten addressing an Australian 
Christian Lobby conference in his electorate during the last federal campaign. 
He reportedly told the crowd he would prefer a parliamentary vote but didn’t 
think it would vote yes for some time.

“Personally speaking, I’m completely relaxed about having some form of 
plebiscite,’’ he reportedly said, adding that he was, however, not comfortable 
with a referendum. “I would rather the people of Aust­ralia could make their 
view clear on this than leaving this issue to 150 people.”

Still on Shorten for a moment, he addressed a town hall meeting yesterday and 
when asked about Indigenous inequality gave more credit to the former prime 
minister Tony Abbott than Turnbull.

At election campaign's 11th hour, sneaky tactics trump credible arguments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/coalition-finds-23bn-to-pay-for-pork-barrelling>
“I thought he was more interested in it than Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> ... Of course I’m 
not sure Tony got all the issues but he was certainly interested. Certainly if 
we were elected we would reach out to the electorate and say ‘let’s get on with 
it’.”

It’s a view likely shared by the professor of governance at Darwin’s Charles 
Darwin University, Don Fuller, who wrote to Turnbull asking the federal 
government to step in and look at the issue of people ripping off Indigenous 
communities and misusing taxpayer funds.Fuller received no reply for for three 
months 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-28/pm-criticised-over-non-reply-to-indigenous-corruption-letter/7550968>
, and so wrote to Abbott instead, who got back to him within a week.

There hasn’t been a great deal said about Indigenous issues this election. 
Neither candidate has visited Durack, the largest electorate in the country 
which also encompasses a large Indigenous population. The Kimberley region is 
currently experiencing a despairing suicide crisis. The rate among Indigenous 
people in the area is seven times that of other Australians, and there are 
calls for a royal commission,Calla Wahlquist reports. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/27/indigenous-suicide-rates-in-kimberley-seven-times-higher-than-other-australians>

On the campaign trail

The PM is in the Sydney electorate of Barton (held by Labor with 4.4% but 
radically different after electoral redistribution) this morning. He’ll be 
catching up with Alan Jones for an interview just after 7am, before heading to 
Canberra for a National Press Club appearance tomorrow.

Shorten will be just nearby for the morning, in the marginal Liberal seat of 
Banks (held by David Coleman on 2.6%). He’ll be pushing on the rising costs of 
medication and seeing a doctor.

The campaign you should be watching

Someone has taken it upon themselves to conduct what appears to be robocalling 
residents in the Cowper electorate, urging them to vote for hopeful returnee 
senator Rob Oakeshott. It’s not him.
Rob Oakeshott (@RobOakeshott1) 
Automated phone messages saying "Protect Medicare-vote Oakeshott" r now 
happening.I might agree, but it is not me.Whoever it is,please stop.
 <https://twitter.com/RobOakeshott1/status/747749892580249602> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RobOakeshott1/status/747749892580249602> 
Oakeshott is looking increasingly threatening as a challenger, illustrated by 
none other than Turnbull cold-calling a local radio station to support 
incumbent Luke Hartsuyker,the Sydney Morning Herald reports 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-coalition-panics-at-possible-return-of-rob-oakeshott-in-seat-of-cowper-deploys-malcolm-turnbull-20160628-gptjdh.html>
.

Cowper was considered a safe Nationals seat, won by Hartsuyker with a 13.2% 
margin. But Oakeshott, whose home of Port Macquarie was moved from the seat of 
Lyne to Cowper in a redistribution, is closing in. A Seven News ReachTel poll 
earlier this month found a 50-50 split on two-party preferred.

And another thing

I’ve focused a bit on Brexit lately, but it is hard to look away. Let’s go 
over the pond today, whereDonald Trump has found the whole thing rather 
inspiring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jun/28/us-election-campaign-2016-clinton-trump-sanders>
.

Our friends in Britain recently voted to take back control of their economy, 
politics and borders.

I was on the right side of that issue – with the people – while Hillary, as 
always, stood with the elites, and both she and president Obama predicted that 
one wrong.

Now it’s time for the American people to take back their future.

So far so Trump, but just for something extra, he’s made the remarks standing 
in front of a wall of crushed aluminium. It’s supposed to be some sort of 
statement about manufacturing but it’s ... not great.
Garance Franke-Ruta (@thegarance) 
This is the most passive-aggressive work of campaign advance I have ever seen. 
pic.twitter.com/tqfJGCKxTm <https://t.co/tqfJGCKxTm>
 <https://twitter.com/thegarance/status/747869058809364480> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/thegarance/status/747869058809364480> Mark Berman 
(@markberman) 
exclusive look at the crew putting together the wall for this speech 
pic.twitter.com/BWQW44CdPX <https://t.co/BWQW44CdPX>
 <https://twitter.com/markberman/status/747865535023620096> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/markberman/status/747865535023620096> 
This seems like an appropriate moment for today’s Douglas Adams appearance.

“Anyone who is capable of getting themselves made president should on no 
account be allowed to do the job.”

Follow the day’s developments live  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/29/australian-election-2016-morrison-wont-say-whether-he-would-vote-in-line-with-plebiscite-politics-live>
• Sign up here to receive your Campaign catchup in your inbox every afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/guardian-campaign-catchup>
 