
This sad headline ran in last Tuesday's issue of the Irish Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent>, the newspaper once owned 
by Tony O'Reilly.

I can only imagine how painful it will be for O'Reilly to sell off the 
graveyard where his parents and two of his grandchildren are buried on his 
Irish estate,Castlemartin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Castlemartin_House_and_Estate> in Kildare.

Back in the days when he was a global media tycoon, he drove me from his 
imposing house to the grave - in a Mini, I seem to recall - and, as we stood 
together, I could see how much it meant to him to have the graves close at hand.

He was none too pleased that I wrote about it as part of the interview. But it 
was not the cause of a lasting breach in our relationship. I think my frequent 
articles about his stewardship ofThe Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent> in the UK caused him greater 
anxiety. He just didn't "get" the digital revolution.

On the plus side, as I never failed to record, he was a generous benefactor to 
the Indy and its Sunday stablemate and, arguably, too generous. The monies he 
lavished on it were a contributory cause of his business downfall.

Like so many media magnates, the major reason for the decline of his 
multi-national company, Independent News & Media (INM), was that perfect storm 
- deep recession, high borrowings and the rise of the internet. In addition, he 
was beset by an aggressive and determined insurgent in the form ofDenis O'Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien>.

O'Brien, far richer than O'Reilly had ever been, was willing to sacrifice 
millions - something like £400m - in order to gain control of INM. He first 
ousted O'Reilly and later saw off his engaging son, Gavin.

Ever since, life for the "one-time billionaire" - as the Irish Times referred 
to him last week 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/crime-and-law/aib-seeks-22m-judgment-against-sir-anthony-o-reilly-1.1809459>
 - has been going downhill, and not just on the media front.

His attempt to rescue the glass and ceramics company Waterford Wedgwood from 
financial difficulty ended in disaster. He borrowed heavily and, along with his 
brother-in-law, Peter Goulandris, poured €400m into the firm. But it collapsed 
in 2009.

O'Reilly, who has just celebrated his 78th birthday now lives in the Bahamas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahamas>, at Lyford Key. Details of his 
financial problems emerged in documents presented to Dublin's commercial court 
last week because he is being sued by Allied Irish Banks (AIB) for €22m 
(£17.8m).

O'Reilly evidently told the bank he had disposed of assets valued at more than 
£90m since 2011 and had used it all to reduce borrowings.

But the state-owned AIB alleged that it received only £250,000, which was the 
profit from the sale of a property the bank had requested be sold. The bank has 
lost patience with O'Reilly's failure to settle his debts.

O'Reilly has since told AIB he is prepared to sell Castlemartin, with some 750 
acres "of the finest stud land in Ireland". A second Irish estate, Glandore in 
Co Cork, is also on the market.

As I noted last month, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/may/05/anthony-o-reilly-independent-news-and-media>
 O'Reilly sold off 9m shares in INM for a reputed €1.5m (£1.2m) - the first 
time he had disposed of stock in his former company. More are likely to be sold 
soon.

O'Reilly has several more assets, such as property holdings and shares, and 
including a holding in an oil exploration company, Providence Resources, which 
is run by his son, Tony Junior. But its fate is uncertain and the value of 
O'Reilly's stakeis reported to have fallen from £60m to £18m. 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/business/Companies/article1417023.ece>

In addition, AIB is also pursuing further sums from two of his investment 
vehicles, Indexia Holdings and Brookside Investments.

The judge, Mr Justice Peter Kelly, gave O'Reilly's lawyers time to outline a 
possible defence by adjourning AIB's application until 23 June.

This is an ignominious end to the business career of the indebted O'Reilly. 
Despite his innate caution, he dared to live on borrowings.

Now the man who was once regarded as having the Midas touch is scrabbling 
around to save himself from bankruptcy. And his embarrassment is compounded by 
the fact that the paper reporting every detail of his downfall, the Irish 
Independent, was once his cash-generating flagship.

Sources: Irish Independent (1) 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/courts/oreilly-will-sell-family-graveyard-to-meet-debts-of-226m-30306687.html>
 &(2) 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/courts/tony-oreilly-sold-off-110m-of-assets-to-pay-down-debts-court-told-30305786.html>
/Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/crime-and-law/aib-seeks-22m-judgment-against-sir-anthony-o-reilly-1.1809459>
/RTE <http://www.rte.ie/news/2014/0526/619683-aib-oreilly/>/Sunday Times 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/business/Companies/article1417023.ece>
 