
I wrote on 2 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jun/02/anthony-o-reilly-independent-news-and-media>
 that the former media tycoon Tony O'Reilly was struggling to stave off 
bankruptcy. Yesterday, Ireland's commercial court confirmed thathe and two of 
his investment companies were all insolvent. 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/financial-services/judgment-for-22m-entered-against-sir-anthony-o-reilly-1.1842481>

At the hearing, as The Guardian reported, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/23/sir-tony-oreilly-irish-billionaire-insolvent>
 the former owner of The Independent was "left pleading... for more time to 
sell off assets." These include his beloved 750-acre estate in Co Kildare and 
shares in Independent News & Media (INM), the company he used to run.

This is humiliating for the man who once seemed to have the Midas touch. He is 
now routinely described in Irish newspapers - including his former flagship 
title - as a "one-time billionaire".

At 78, he finds himself begging a judge for more time to pay off debts that, 
in his glorious, glittering past, would have seemed like small beer.

O'Reilly may not be entirely on his uppers. He lives in the Bahamas - one of 
the world's richest countries in terms of its residents' individual wealth - 
and his second wife, the Greek-American shipping heiress Chryss Goulandris, is 
thought to be wealthy in her own right.

But that isn't much comfort to a man who once bestrode the globe as one of its 
leading media magnates. At its height, INM owned newspapers inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, Britain, Australia, New Zealand 
and South Africa.

That company was built while he was drawing large salaries, with appropriate 
perks, as chief executive and chairman of Heinz. For O'Reilly, beans meant 
money. And lots of it.

Now he is waiting anxiously while a judge decides his fate. He owes €22.6m 
(£18m) to Allied Irish Banks (AIB) and a further €23m is owed by his two 
investment vehicles. Those sums are small compared to his other borrowings, 
which total about €195m (£156m).

O'Reilly wants the commercial court to stay its judgment against him for six 
months to avoid a fire sale of his assets. AIB, which has lost patience with 
O'Reilly, opposed to the delay,calling it "threadbare". 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/courts/businessman-anthony-oreilly-insolvent-bank-tells-court-30376776.html>

The judge, Mr Justice Peter Kelly, listened to the arguments on each side and 
promised to give his decision on whether to grant the stay on Friday.

A great deal hangs on his ruling. If it goes against O'Reilly the consequences 
for him are "potentially enormous",reported the Irish Times. 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/financial-services/judgment-for-22m-entered-against-sir-anthony-o-reilly-1.1842481>

The creditors who are owed €195m have agreed to give O'Reilly more time in 
order to sell off his assets in an orderly fashion. AIB, however, is eager to 
get back as much money as quickly as possible, even though a fire sale will 
produce less of a return than an orderly disposal.

How did it all come to this? O'Reilly's financial dramas can be traced in part 
to the problems that struck all media companies - that clichéd perfect storm of 
recession, advertising retreat and the digital revolution.

Most of INM's newspaper divisions were profitable, with the notable exception 
of The Independent titles in Britain. But they were not profitable enough to 
withstand the downturn. And that problem was compounded by O'Reilly's stubborn 
refusal to embrace the changes wrought by the internet.

He also misread Denis O'Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien>
, his business rival, who arrived like a cuckoo in the INM nest and eventually 
tipped out O'Reilly and his son, Gavin, to assume control.

But it was O'Reilly's businesses outside the media world that really undid 
him. In his Midas days, he thought he could could save the ailing the glass and 
ceramics companyWaterford Wedgwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/waterford-wedgwood>.

So, in company with his brother-in-law, Peter Goulandris, he poured €400m into 
the firm but, in 2009, it collapsed anyway.

He also backed an offshore oil exploration company, Providence Resources (now 
run by his son, Tony Jr), but millions were sacrificed before oil was 
discovered. It is costly to extract it andthe first commercial flow is not 
expected until 2017 
<http://www.irishexaminer.com/business/oil-firm-in-detailed-talks-over-barryroe-partner-271002.html>
, so its long-term fate is uncertain

Providence shares fell back a week ago 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/shares-in-providence-fall-as-company-announces-new-loan-agreement-30357663.html>
 after a refinancing deal that reduced still further the value of O'Reilly's 
stake, which is reported to have fallen from £60m to less than £18m.

NB: The Irish broadcaster, RTÉ, is due to screen a profile of O'Reilly in its 
main TV current affairs programme, Prime Time, on Thursday.

Sources: Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/financial-services/judgment-for-22m-entered-against-sir-anthony-o-reilly-1.1842481>
/Irish Independent(1) 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/courts/businessman-anthony-oreilly-insolvent-bank-tells-court-30376776.html>
 and(2) 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/shares-in-providence-fall-as-company-announces-new-loan-agreement-30357663.html>
/Irish Examiner 
<http://www.irishexaminer.com/business/oil-firm-in-detailed-talks-over-barryroe-partner-271002.html>
/The Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/23/sir-tony-oreilly-irish-billionaire-insolvent>
 