
Russia should consider issuing an apology and providing compensation to 
relatives over the downing of MH17, Tony Abbott has toldVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> at a meeting in Beijing.


The Australian prime minister and the Russian president discussed the Malaysia 
Airlines tragedy during a 15-minute meeting on the sidelines of the Asia 
Pacific Economic Cooperation (Apec) summit on Tuesday.

Abbott, who had previously threatened to “shirtfront” Putin over Russia’s 
alleged role in the shooting down of the passenger plane over eastern Ukraine 
in July, emphasised the need for all countries to abide by the United Nations 
Security Council resolution 2166 and fully co-operate with the independent 
investigation.

Abbott’s office said the prime minister indicated he “was in possession of 
information suggesting that MH17 was destroyed by a missile from a launcher 
that had come out ofRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, was 
fired from inside eastern Ukraine and then returned to Russia”.

Abbott, who had previously accused Russia of supplying the equipment to 
separatists in eastern Ukraine, told Putin this would be “very serious” if true.

The prime minister’s office said Abbott cited the US navy’s shooting down of 
an Iranian passenger plane in 1988, saying it “had duly apologised and made 
appropriate restitution”.

“He commended the precedent to president Putin,” Abbott’s office said.

“The prime minister and president Putin agreed that all relevant information 
should be provided to the independent investigation and that the investigation 
should proceed with the full support of the international community.”

The Kremlin said Abbott and Putin both urged investigators to speed up the 
investigation into the MH17 crash, which killed 298 passengers including 38 
Australian citizens and residents.

The Kremlin noted “the unacceptability of a situation when experts cannot get 
to the crash site”,Agence France-Presse reported 
<http://www.afp.com/en/node/3042410>.

“Vladimir Putin stressed that from the very beginning Russia consistently 
demanded that the investigation be unbiased, quick and effective.”

Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, was quoted by the state news agency RIA 
Novosti as saying Abbott did not appear to deliver on his “shirtfront” threat – 
an Australian Rules football term for a physical confrontation.

“It appears that he did not try,” Peskov said.

A Dutch-led investigation’s preliminary report in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/09/malaysia-airlines-mh17-crash-dutch-investigators>
 said MH17 broke up in mid-air as a result of structural damage caused by “a 
large number of high-energy objects that penetrated the aircraft from outside”, 
but did not assign blame.

The meeting with Putin on Tuesday was not the first time Abbott had raised the 
example of theUS shooting down an Iranian passenger plane 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/july/3/newsid_4678000/4678707.stm>
 in 1988.

On 18 July, just hours after the MH17 crash, Abbott said: “Some years ago now, 
an American warship by mistake downed an Iranian aircraft. There were immediate 
apologies, there was massive compensation paid and, as I understand it, there 
were various changes to procedures to ensure this kind of thing, as far as is 
humanly possible, could not happen again in those circumstances.”

In 1996, the US government expressed “deep regret” rather than a formal 
apology, and agreed to a $132m settlement, including $62m for the families of 
the 248 Iranian victims.
 