
Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> has 
backed an inquiry into possible “predatory” behaviour by iron ore miners, which 
has driven down the price of Australia’s single biggest export earner.

The iron ore price forecast in Tuesday’s budget was $US48, down nearly 50% on 
last year’s budget forecast of $US90, leaving a multibillion-dollar hole in the 
nation’s finances.
The Senate this week rejected a bid by independent senator Nick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> for an inquiry, but 
there is growing support for a joint parliamentary committee to look at the 
issue.

Twiggy Forrest is right: we shouldn't sell our natural resources at bargain 
basement prices | Richard Denniss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/01/andrew-forrest-is-right-we-shouldnt-sell-our-natural-resources-at-bargain-basement-prices>
“I think we do need an inquiry,” the prime minister said. “We do need to know 
the facts of what’s going on here.”

Abbott said the impact on the economy made it all the more important to ensure 
there was no “predatory behaviour”.

Australia’s No 3 iron ore producer, Andrew Forrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-forrest>, founder of 
Fortescue Metals, has launched the Our Iron Ore campaign against multinational 
companies such as Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton which he says are “choosing to 
oversupply the iron ore market in the medium term”.

He was criticised in March this year after calling for the big two producers 
to cap their production in order to stabilise prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/25/accc-slaps-down-andrew-forrests-call-for-cap-on-iron-ore-production>
.

Along with Brazilian company Vale, the pair have ramped up supply  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/17/rio-tinto-well-thrive-on-lower-iron-ore-prices-while-others-suffer-says-boss>
with the aim of driving less efficient miners out of business. The strategy, 
when added to slowing demand for the steel-making commodity from China, has 
seen the sale price fall by more than half in 18 months to around $62 on Friday.

Joe Hockey, the treasurer, on Friday lamented that iron ore prices were not at 
$180 a tonne as they were in 2011.

“It has a big impact on our budget bottom line,” he said, adding that in the 
past 18 months he written down $90bn in revenue.

Brendan Pearson, chief executive of the Minerals Council, cautiously welcomed 
an inquiry but believed the iron ore market was operating in line with market 
principles.

“While the inquiry is arguably not the most effective use of parliamentary 
resources, it will shine a critical light on a number of false claims,” Pearson 
said in a statement.

He said it would also expose the folly of calls from Forrest for the 
Australian government to remove his competitors’ “licence to operate”, to 
reregulate commodity markets and to establish illegal cartel arrangements.

The chairman of the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission, Rod Sims, 
last month said it seemed “misguided” to suggest BHP andRio Tinto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rio-tinto> were engineering a fall in 
prices.

The export of Australian iron ore was valued at $74.8 billion in 2013-14.
 