
A lesbian coming-of-age musical and a play about a boy with Asperger’s 
syndrome shared top honours at the 69th annualTony awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tony-awards> in New York on 7 June.

Fun Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/20/fun-home-review-childhood-trauma-revisited-with-songs-alison-bechdel>
 andThe Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/06/the-curious-incident-of-the-dog-in-the-night-time-review-broadway>
, named best musical and best play respectively, picked up five awards each at 
the Radio City Music Hall ceremony, where edgy new shows went up against the 
classics.

Tony awards 2015: red carpet arrivals and winners – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/jun/08/tony-awards-2015-red-carpet-arrivals-in-pictures>
Based on Alison Bechdel’s graphic novel memoir about growing up gay in a 
funeral parlour, Fun Home’s award haul included best original score and book 
for Jeanine Tesori and Lisa Kron, best leading actor for Michael Cerveris and 
best director for Sam Gold.

The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time, Simon Stephens’ adaptation 
of Mark Haddon’s best-selling book, was also recognised for best director 
(Marianne Elliott), best leading actor in a play (Alex Sharp), best scenic 
design for Bunny Christie and Finn Ross and best lighting design for Paule 
Constable.

“We’ve had quite an adventure with this play,” said Elliott about the 
adaptation of the story of a teenage math whiz with Asperger’s who goes on an 
incredible journey.

It was a successful night all round for the British with Helen Mirren winning 
her first Tony forher role as Queen Elizabeth II in The Audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/09/the-audience-review-helen-mirren-queen-broadway-gerald-schoenfeld-theater>
, her co-star Richard McCabe named best featured actor, and awards forSkylight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/03/skylight-review-bill-nighy-carey-mulligan>
, which was named best revival, andWolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/10/wolf-hall-review-hilary-mantel-winter-garden-theater-new-york>
 Parts One & Two, recognised for best costume design.

“This is an unbelievable honour. I am so thrilled,” said Mirren as she 
accepted the award she had been favourite to win. With a Tony, Emmy and an 
Oscar, she said she now had a Grammy in her sights for recorded material. “I 
have to do an audio book,” joked the actor.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Ftony-2015-honours-go-to-fun-home-and-the-curious-incident-of-the-dog-in-the-night-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433767156120%2F87e7d78a-6fa1-459d-9c19-c8b135e9721b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Awards%3A%20Fun%20Home%20and%20The%20Curious%20Incident%20of%20the%20Dog%20win%20big&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Ftony-2015-honours-go-to-fun-home-and-the-curious-incident-of-the-dog-in-the-night-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Awards%3A%20Fun%20Home%20and%20The%20Curious%20Incident%20of%20the%20Dog%20win%20big&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Ftony-2015-honours-go-to-fun-home-and-the-curious-incident-of-the-dog-in-the-night-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433767156120%2F87e7d78a-6fa1-459d-9c19-c8b135e9721b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Richard McCabe accepts his best actor Tony for The Audience from actors Anna 
Chlumsky and Debra Messing. Photograph: Lucas Jackson/Reuters 
Tony awards 2015: winners list in full
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/08/tony-awards-winners-list-2015> 
The musicals An American in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/13/an-american-in-paris-christopher-wheeldon-new-york-review>
 andThe King and I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/17/the-king-and-i-review-a-glorious-siamese-dream>
 took four awards each in a three-hour ceremony presented by previous Tony 
winners Kristin Chenoweth and Alan Cumming, who opened the show with a song 
medley.

Former presenter and crowd favourite Neil Patrick Harris – who has since moved 
on to host the Oscar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/23/neil-patrick-harris-oscars-host-fails-deliver>
s – returned to award Kelli O’Hara her best actress in a musical award for The 
King and I on her sixth nomination.

Among those nominees who left empty-handed on the night were Bradley Cooper 
for The Elephant Man, which recently opened in the West End in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/07/elephant-man-review-haymarket-london-bradley-cooper>
, and Carey Mulligan, Elisabeth Moss and Ruth Wilson, all beaten by Mirren in 
the leading actress in a play category.

Broadway legend Tommy Tune received his 10th Tony, a special lifetime 
achievement award, during the ceremony, which began with a musical number from 
Something Rotten! The awards cap a record-breaking season onBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> in which audience numbers topped 
13.1 million and ticket sales rose to $1.36bn.
 