
A $200,000 donation from the businessman and philanthropist Graeme Wood to 
Tony Windsor <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-windsor> has 
helped the former independent MP top the list of individual recipients of 
donations for the 2016 election.

The election disclosures <http://electiondisclosures.aec.gov.au/>, released by 
the Australian Electoral Commission on Monday, show that Windsor received a 
total of $488,000 in donations.

Because the vast majority of political donations are made to political parties 
that file separate annual returns disclosed in the new year, Monday’s 
disclosure relates mostly to the finances of independents.
Top 10 graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-19T04:20:22/embed.html>
Windsor spent a total of $604,000 in his unsuccessful bid to recapture his 
seat of New England in a high-profile contest against the deputy prime 
minister, Barnaby Joyce. AsGuardian Australia reported in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/17/election-funding-major-parties-scoop-507m-of-628m-total>
, Windsor also collected about $73,000 in public funds.

The independent MP Cathy McGowan, who was re-elected in Indi, received 
$203,750 in donations from 1,490 donors. The independent MPAndrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>, who was re-elected 
in Dennison, collected $98,460.

The parliamentarians from the major parties with the highest individual 
donation totals were the South Australian Liberal senatorsCory Bernardi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cory-bernardi> ($92,226) and David 
Fawcett ($78,940).

Political donations and party funding: which industries give the most?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/dec/07/political-donations-and-party-funding-which-industries-give-the-most>
Bernardi’s total came from 731 individual donors, third behind only Windsor 
and McGowan. The conservative senator has developed a political infrastructure 
separate to the Liberal party including the Conservative Leadership Foundation 
and itsorganising initiative, the Australian Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/06/cory-bernardi-establishes-rightwing-movement-australian-conservatives>
, which he launched this year, and which he chairs.

The donations to individual candidates and Senate groups are dwarfed by 
donations to parties.

In the 2014-15 annual returns, released in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/01/australian-political-donations-2014-15-resource-tycoons-and-unions-among-top-donors>
, the Liberal party declared a total of $75.9m in donations and other receipts. 
The Labor party declared $65.8m, the National party $11m and the Greens $9m.

In December, the Greens calculated that, between 1998 and 2015, declared 
donations andpayments to Australian political parties topped $1bn 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-07/political-donations-top-$1b-thanks-to-big-business/8097030>
.

Wood, the Wotif founder and internet entrepreneur, is responsible for the 
largest political donation in Australian history in 2010,when he gave $1.6m to 
the Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/graeme-wood-and-duncan-turpie-each-backed-victorian-greens-with-500000>
. He also provided a loan for the launch of Guardian Australia.
 