
The 2015 Tony awards was not a show fit for a queen. Most of the production 
numbers fell flat. A startling number of celebrities couldn’t read the 
teleprompter. The hosts, Kristin Chenoweth andAlan Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-cumming>, seemed occasionally 
embarrassed and deliberately underdressed. Actually, the underdressed part was 
pretty terrific: Cumming crushed it in multiple pairs of formal shorts and, at 
one point, the gown from The King and I.

Tony awards 2015: winners list in full
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/08/tony-awards-winners-list-2015> 
However, while most of the awards were about as surprising as a $5 pack of 
Twizzlers from aBroadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> 
concession, it was a very good night for women, for royalty and for subjects of 
a certain constitutional monarchy.

There were big wins for The Audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/09/the-audience-review-helen-mirren-queen-broadway-gerald-schoenfeld-theater>
,Skylight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/03/skylight-review-bill-nighy-carey-mulligan>
 andThe Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/06/the-curious-incident-of-the-dog-in-the-night-time-review-broadway>
. But the night really belonged toFun Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/20/fun-home-review-childhood-trauma-revisited-with-songs-alison-bechdel>
, a small American musical that was originally an unlikely candidate, even for 
a Broadway transfer.

The Tonys has two jobs: to honour the best talent on Broadway and to sell 
Broadway to the rest of the US and the world. This year, it succeeded quite 
well at the former and failed epically at the latter. Then again, Broadway 
grosses last year broke new records, despite a middling season artistically, so 
one lousy Sunday night on network television probably won’t dim too many 
marquees.

At the beginning, the co-hosts greeted the crowd: “Good evening, ladies and 
gentlemen, and those of you who don’t identify as either,” a second-rate joke 
for a show that still segregates by sex. The duo then segued into an 
astonishingly lacklustre medley and never really improved, especially for those 
who recall recent emcees Neil Patrick Harris and Hugh Jackman hosting with such 
dash and aplomb.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Ftonys-2015-a-good-night-for-women-but-not-a-show-fit-for-a-queen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433739799253%2Faf5eae58-8b9e-4ff9-9580-8308131896af-2060x1401.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tonys%202015%3A%20a%20good%20show%20for%20women%20but%20not%20quite%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Ftonys-2015-a-good-night-for-women-but-not-a-show-fit-for-a-queen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tonys%202015%3A%20a%20good%20show%20for%20women%20but%20not%20quite%20fit%20for%20a%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Ftonys-2015-a-good-night-for-women-but-not-a-show-fit-for-a-queen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433739799253%2Faf5eae58-8b9e-4ff9-9580-8308131896af-2060x1401.jpeg>
 Sydney Lucas, the 11-year-old star of Fun Home, was the highlight of the show. 
Photograph: Theo Wargo/Getty Images 
Chenoweth and Cumming are both superlative performers given the right 
material, but their banter seemed strained, and some of the bits, like 
following the devastating song from Fun Home (performed by the 11-year-old 
Sydney Lucas, easily the highlight of the broadcast) with a wildly lame ET 
joke, made you die inside a little.

Tony awards 2015: red carpet arrivals and winners – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/jun/08/tony-awards-2015-red-carpet-arrivals-in-pictures>
Helen Mirren was expected to win best actress for The Audience and, of course, 
she did, looking fittingly majestic. This is a lady who can make riding the 
subway appear glamorous. All curtsy. Her co-star Richard McCabe deservedly won 
the award for featured actor, but another royal entry,Wolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/10/wolf-hall-review-hilary-mantel-winter-garden-theater-new-york>
, didn’t fare as well, collecting only a single award – for design.

Among the other British imports, The Curious Incident of the Dog in the 
Night-Time scored a win for best play, best actor, best director and picked up 
several design awards, too, while David Hare’sSkylight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/03/skylight-review-bill-nighy-carey-mulligan>
 won for best revival of a play.

Best revival of a musical was a hotly contested category with the prize going 
deservedly toThe King and I, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/17/the-king-and-i-review-a-glorious-siamese-dream>
 whose lead Kelli O’Hara, already a five-time nominee, whistled a happy tune 
when, in another tight group, she finally won for her effortless portrayal of 
the governess Anna. Ruthie Ann Miles also won for her portrayal of Lady Thiang 
and her acceptance speech, which she read from her iPhone and which began with 
a blurted, “Please recycle!”, was adorable.

The Tonys has two jobs: this year, it succeeded quite well at one and failed 
epically at the other

But the big story of the night – aside from the impossibly awful Finding 
Neverland number and the camera angle during the in memoriam segment (yes, Josh 
Groban can sing pretty well but, no, he’s not dead yet) – was Fun Home.

While some prizes were expected to go to An American in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/13/an-american-in-paris-christopher-wheeldon-new-york-review>
,which took home awards for choreography and design, Fun Home just about swept 
the board, with awards for the book, the score, the direction, its leading 
actor and, the big one, best musical. A show about a lesbian cartoonist and her 
closeted father may have seemed to small and too niche for the Tony voters, but 
they moved right in.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj7Z4QJh_Kro&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj7Z4QJh_Kro>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj7Z4QJh_Kro&media=>
 Watch Jeanine Tesori and Lisa Kron acceptance speech – video 
To make room for more production numbers, the awards to Lisa Kron for book and 
lyrics, and Jeanine Tesori for score weren’t part of the broadcast. You’ll have 
to go to YouTube to see their heartfelt speeches. And you should.

Their win was historic, marking the first time women have won for both words 
and music. It was also quite a good year for women in other mixed categories 
like the design awards, also left out of the broadcast in favour of more 
excerpts from non-winners like It Shoulda Been You and Gigi.

Just as the producers of Fun Home were giving their acceptance speeches, they 
were shooed off stage so that a replacement cast of Jersey Boys could sing 
December 1963.

Oh. 

What a night?
 