
Say “Scotland”, say “Freedom!”, and you probably have an instant vision of Mel 
Gibson with blue paint on his face in the film Braveheart. Erase that image (if 
you can), and the next picture to swim into focus might well be Saltires in 
George Square, as September 2014 seethed with sunshine and debate on the 
Scottish referendum on independence. Or the words might conjure an empty glen 
with a vast blue sky, a stately stag on a distant purple mountain, an open road 
on which to walk.

When I wrote my novel Rise, I wanted to take all these images together and 
have Braveheart ride a deer through the shopping precinct of Sauchiehall 
Street. Well not quite, but you get the picture. By setting Rise among the 
standing stones of Argyll, but focusing on the run-up to the independence 
referendum, I was aiming to splice the ancient and the contemporary, and trying 
to capture a cresting wave in Scottish history. What I didn’t realise at the 
time was that a wave can herald a sea change, which continues to shape and 
redefine today.

Rise begins with a young woman called Justine, who is fleeing the city to the 
freedom of a new start – anywhere but the city will do. She hasn’t the 
slightest interest in politics; she reckons “normal folk” don’t. Life has 
taught her not to care, nor to root herself too deeply in any place or thing. 
But, hiding out in a small community, she realises it’s far harder to be 
anonymous than in a big city. In a country taking stock of itself, looking at 
the layers of its past and the blank page of its future, everything is up for 
being questioned, and Justine begins to think about freedom not in terms of 
escape, but in terms of living in a way that’s true to yourself.

Here are some of the books that I think Justine might have taken with her:

1. Sunset Song 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/365270/> by Lewis 
Grassic Gibbon

The story of Chris Guthrie, a quine from the Mearns of Kinraddie, is a 
Scottish classic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/24/james-naughtie-the-lost-scotland-of-sunset-song>
. A bright and passionate girl whose life is limited by circumstance, Chris is 
also a metaphor for Scotland herself, for the struggles between the dirt of the 
land and the shine of the city, between cultural cringe and bone-deep 
belonging, and all the torn and multiple identities we hold inside.

2. Nineteen Eighty-Four 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nineteen-eighty-four-10.html> by George Orwell

Another classic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/10/1984-george-orwell> – but 
classics are classics for a reason. Freedom of thought, freedom of assembly, 
freedom of movement: imagine living in a world where such fundamental liberties 
were curtailed by the ruling class of the day. Imagine the notion of Big 
Brother, of state surveillance, of doublethink and doublespeak. Oh, wait … 
Well, at least we’ve still got the Human Rights Act.For now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/02/plan-to-scrap-human-rights-act-delayed-again>
.

3. Joseph Knight <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/joseph-knight.html> by 
James Robertson

“No man is by nature the property of another.” So ran the argument in Knight v 
Wedderburn. Based on the true but little known story of an 18th-century African 
brought to Scotland as a slave, Joseph Knight illuminates a court case which 
essentially found that slavery was not recognised by Scots law. In Robertson’s 
hands, historical facts are woven lightly around a powerful piece of fiction.

4. A Room of One’s Own 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/room-of-one-s-own.html> by Virginia Woolf

It’s ironic that four walls and a closed door might be the most liberating 
thing of all. But, argues Woolf, to be intellectually free one requires 
financial and emotional independence too. In her wonderful, expansive 
rumination on what it takes to be a writer – and, God forbid, a woman – Woolf 
loops and soars through gardens, libraries and gleaming ivory towers; flitting 
in and out of minds as diverse as theFour Marys 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mary_Hamilton> and Shakespeare’s unfortunate 
sister <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/may/02/extract.greatspeeches1>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ftop-10-books-about-freedom-george-orwell-virginia-woolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cfdc264600b3c23f783222ed6eb4c1ba47b1691%2F0_0_2735_1641%2F2735.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ftop-10-books-about-freedom-george-orwell-virginia-woolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ftop-10-books-about-freedom-george-orwell-virginia-woolf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cfdc264600b3c23f783222ed6eb4c1ba47b1691%2F0_0_2735_1641%2F2735.jpg>
 John Hurt (centre) as Winston Smith in the film Nineteen Eighty-Four. 
Photograph: MGM/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
5. How to Be Both 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281596/s/how-to-be-both/>
 by Ali Smith

There are two narratives here: a story about a modern girl coping with her 
mother’s death, and the tale of a forgotten 15th-century Italian artist. 
Playing with language and time, Smith explores which comes first: surface or 
depth; what we see or what we feel? Bending genders, stretching the limits of 
liberation, Smith plays with the concept of freedom so intensely that she frees 
the novel form itself, rendering it entirely arbitrary which story – and 
therefore which ending – comes first. And last.

6. The Last Act of Love 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/309942/s/the-last-act-of-love/>
 by Cathy Rentzenbrink

If you love someone, set them free. A profound and honest account of the 
struggle that the writer and her family endured after her brother was seriously 
injured in a road accident. Never mawkish but deeply moving.

7. Germinal <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/germinal-4.html> by Émile Zola

I read this in English at university when I was meant to be reading it in 
French. Given my bad French, I’m glad. The sense of claustrophobia, and how 
vividly and humanely Zola writes about the instinct that every creature has to 
break free from traps, has stayed with me. It’s the story of a mining family in 
19th-century France. As you read, you can feel roots tugging you down, the 
weight of the earth above, and the push of seeds, reaching for the sun.

8. What I Talk About When I Talk About Running 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/what-i-talk-about-when-i-talk-about-running.html>
 by Haruki Murakami

This meditation on the freedom of the open road also shows how your mind is at 
liberty to wander to strange and lovely places precisely when you’re engaged in 
repetitive, mindless rhythm. Having recently started running (again), I can 
relate to the experience of plodding perseverance interspersed with wee bursts 
of joy, and I love how Murakami uses it to reflect on his creative philosophy 
and the rhythms of his own writing life.

9. Suite Française <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/suite-francaise-2.html> 
by Irène Némirovsky

An incomplete novel set in occupied France, written by a woman whose voice was 
extinguished by the Nazis – yet lives on in an unfinished masterpiece. There 
can’t be any more poignant or eloquent tribute to freedom of expression than 
that.

10. The Poor Had No Lawyers 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/307570/> by Andy 
Wightman

There has been a whole slew of new political classics arising from the 
Scottish independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence>: Iain Machhirter’s 
Disunited Kingdom, Lesley Riddoch’s Blossom, Common Weal’sBook of Ideas 
<http://allofusfirst.bigcartel.com/product/a-book-of-ideas>. The Poor Had No 
Lawyers, which outlines the social and historical reasons why millions of acres 
of common land lie in private and often unaccountable hands, is a bible for the
land reform movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/scotland-blog/2015/oct/19/what-next-for-land-reform-in-scotland>
, and reflects the current sense of enquiry and engagement in Scotland. Again 
and again, the same question is being asked: who holds the power and for whose 
benefit is it used?

 * Rise by Karen Campbell is published by Bloomsbury priced £8.99. It is 
available from the Guardian bookshop,priced £7.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377315/https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377315/>
.  