
Apartments are always going to beat hotel rooms when it comes to space, but 
people often assume that it requires a mass mobilisation to get your money's 
worth. Not so. More and more apartments are catering for couples and small 
families on city breaks, usually working out cheaper than a hotel, but with 
kitchens, sitting rooms, prime locations and considerably more independence 
chucked in for good measure. And, of course, other than staying in someone's 
spare room, renting an apartment is as close as you'll get to living like the 
locals. Here are 10 apartments in great locations, ideal for a city break from 
the UK.

1. Friends Main Market Square, Krakow

Few cities in Eastern Europe can match Krakow's buzz; best experienced during 
term time when its large student population swell the bars and cafes. Krakow's
Old City Apartments <http://www.oldcityapartments.eu/en/> are a little hit and 
miss, but the curiously-named Friends Main Market Square  
<http://www.oldcityapartments.eu/en/?ap=20&id=ap> digs stand out as a clear 
best in show: overlooking the Rynek Glowny Square and the arcaded Renaissance 
Cloth Hall in the city centre, and with the increasingly bohemian Jewish 
Quarter ofKazimierz <http://www.cracow-life.com/poland/krakow-kazimierz> within 
walking distance. For a fun, occasionally idiotic guide to the city's 
night-time options, peruse theKrakow pages 
<http://www.cityspy.info/welcome/kra_welcomepage.htm> at the ever-entertaining 
Spy Maps.

̭ From €70 (£56) a night based on two sharing

2. Maison La Vallette, Valletta

One of the most splendid apartments in one of Europe's most underrated cities, 
theMaison La Vallette <http://www.maisonlavallette.com/> sits on a undulating 
side street in Malta's UNESCO Heritage capital city. Like most of the buildings 
bound by Valletta's fortified walls, the house is built of white stone; a 
perfect canvas which the MLV team have created a masterpiece. In the bedroom, a 
king size bed resides under exposed beams and a gilded chandelier, surrounded 
by paintings and photographic interpretations of Malta's belle époque past. By 
night, this quarter of the city has plenty of cozy restaurants and bars, 
includingTrabuxu <http://www.kaizenlog.com/2007/12/29/trabuxu/>, a candlelit 
wine bar in a white-walled cellar.

̭ From €570 (£457) a week based on two sharing

3. Chillida Apartment, San Sebastian

Friendly Rentals <http://www.friendlyrentals.com/> have a superb collection of 
apartments across Spain, but the views from their one-bedroomChillida Apartment 
<http://www.friendlyrentals.com/en/apartments/sansebastian/apartment-73-5.htm> 
in San Sebastian are difficult to beat. The windows in the kitchen and bedroom 
look out over San Sebastian's sweeping bay and the sculptures ofEduardo Chillida
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eduardo_Chillida> - a footballer turned sculptor 
after whom the apartment is named - at the foot of Mount Igeldo. But a wander 
in the opposite direction is just as worthy; with the old town, the gardens of 
the Palace of Miramar and the famous San Telmo aquarium all nearby. And, of 
course, this is the culinary capital of Spain - with plenty ofgastro bargains 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2006/oct/01/travelfoodanddrink.sansebastian>. 

̭ From €130 (£104) a night based on two sharing

4. OSTEL, Berlin
 One of Berlin's more peculiar fascinations is ostalgie  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ostalgie> - an ironic/unironic (it's a grey area) 
fascination with the GDR days of east Berlin, sometimes referred to as "Soviet 
Chic". The "chic" bit comes from the fact that it isn't the historians leading 
this nostalgic revival, it is Berlin's young, forward-thinking creatives. Thus, 
along with the curious trend of Mitte bars adorning their walls with photos of 
old commie thinkers, and the revival of the Trabant 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2007/jan/31/travelnews.germany.germany>, the 
city now has its very own ostalgie hotel,the OSTEL 
<http://www.ostel.eu/ostelen/index.html>, boasting eight GDR-style holiday 
apartments, "lovingly decorated with the best furniture the GDR had to offer". 
The apartments sleep six, and are located in the lively Friedrichshain district.
̭ From €35 (£28) per person a night, sleeps four

5. Home Apartments, Reykjavik

You know you're not staying in the average apartment when your coffee table is 
sound-sensitive, and designed by French electro-rockers Daft Punk. Agnar 
Agnarsson is an award-winning Icelandic architect whose complex offive 
apartments <http://this.is/home/> just off Laugavegur 
<http://www.grapevine.is/default.aspx?show=paper&part=fullstory&id=964>, 
Reykjavik's main promenade, is a design enthusiast's dream. The interiors 
combine the traditional earthiness of granite headboards, stone floors and 
wood-panelled bathrooms with hi-tech TVs and sound systems, and the walls are 
hung with a rotating collection of local art, some of which is by the hand of 
Agnarsson himself. Somewhat predictably, these apartments aren't cheap 
(especially the penthouse apartment with the aforementioned coffee table), but 
then again, such is Iceland.

̭ Studios with kitchen from £121 a night based on two sharing

6. Off-Soho Suites, New York

The Off-Soho Suites <http://www.offsoho.com/> have been around for a while - 
long before the Lower East Side became the most exciting neighbourhood in 
Manthattan. The collection of suites is relatively no frills, but compared to 
what you'll get for the same money in a local hotel, they are huge. At the end 
of the alley opposite, you'll findFreemans 
<http://nymag.com/listings/restaurant/freemans01/>, one of New York's 
in-the-know restaurants. But if you can't get a booking, fear not, there are 
dozens more in Soho, Nolita, Chinatown and Little Italy... all within walking 
distance.

̭ From £110 a night sleeping two, £130 sleeping four

7. Apartment Blanc, Paris

As a general rule, if i-escape <http://www.i-escape.com/home.php> gives 
somewhere the nod, you can take their word for it. Of their Parisian offerings, 
theApartment Blanc <http://www.i-escape.com/minihotel.php?hotel_key=PA002>, 
hidden within an 18th-Century apartment block is the best value; with two 
bedrooms, an open plan kitchen/diner and a roof terrace. Guests also have the 
added perk of being in the heart of the 11th arrondissement, with the boutiques 
of the Marais and the excitable cafes and bars of Oberkampf within walking 
distance. For the best of both, flick through the clothes rails atMademoiselle 
Vegas 
<http://www.parismarais.com/shopping-guide/melle-vegas/mademoiselle-vegas.htm> 
andGaspard Yurkievich <http://www.gaspardyurkievich.com/>, then push on through 
to the wee hours at club du jourNouveau Casino 
<http://www.frommers.com/destinations/paris/N28418.html>.

̭ Apartment from €140 (£112) a night sleeping four

8. Coltbridge Holiday Apartment, Edinburgh

The walk from Edinburgh's Princes Street to the Coltbridge Holiday Apartment 
<http://edinburghholidayapartment.co.uk/> in the residential area of 
Murrayfield is one of the city's best urban strolls, passing rows of houses 
framed in Georgian and Victorian stone and rich woodland around the local golf 
course and Murrayfield Stadium. But if you're looking for a walk with more 
natural surrounds, the house also backs on to the city stretch of theWater of 
Leith Walkway <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_of_Leith_Walkway>, a footpath 
and cycleway that runs from Balerno to Leith. The apartment is converted from a 
100-year-old building and has a large dining room focused around an original 
fireplace and a modern kitchen clad in granite work surfaces.

̭ From £500 a week in low season, sleeping up to eight 

9. Diputacion Apartment, Barcelona

Destination BCN <http://www.destinationbcn.com/>'s apartments are all of a 
similar high standard, and all excellently located in Barcelona. The cheapest 
among their number is the Diputacion  
<http://www.destinationbcn.com/diputacio.htm>; a loft conversion in a 
19th-century building with a huge open plan living room under wooden rafters 
connecting to a small sun terrace. Walk in one direction from the apartment and 
you'll find theboutiques 
<http://www.timeout.com/barcelona/shopping/area/382/eixample/> and fountains of 
the Eixample district and Gaudi's spectacular Pedrera building with its famous
rooftop terrace <http://www.gaudiclub.com/ingles/i_vida/pedr_pict.html>. In the 
other direction are the medieval streets of the Barri Gòtic and the city's 
famous thoroughfare, La Rambla.

̭ €125 (£100) a night based on two sharing

10. Boulevard Leopold, Antwerp

The biggest city in Flemish Belgium is home to only 500,000 inhabitants, but 
could be one of the best shopping trips you never expected. Forged from a 
tradition laid down by theAntwerp Six 
<http://www.beneluxguide.com/belgium/antwerp-six-belgian-city-of-fashion-makers/>
 fashion designers, there are hundreds ofboutiques 
<http://www.10best.com/Antwerp/Shopping/Best_Shopping/index.html> scattered 
around the city, from avant-garde offerings on Nationalestraat to the 
streetwear of Kammenstraat. The apartments on the top floor of theBoulevard 
Leopold <http://www.boulevard-leopold.be/> hotel are a perfect base of 
operations, in a 19th-century house in Antwerp's Jewish quarter. For a bit of 
post-splurge relaxation, the Koning Albertpark is at one end of the road, and 
the City park, with a tranquil lake at its heart, is at the other.

̭ From €120 (£96) a night, sleeping two to four
 