
What is Alaska? Rugged homeland of resilient Native Americans, former Russian 
colony, site of the only battle of the second world war to take place on US 
soil … wait a minute, second world war battlefield? Believe it. The blind spot 
most of us have about Alaska is nearly as vast as its geography – it's about 
seven times the size of the UK. In 1943, one of the toughest and least-known 
American battles of the war took place in Alaska's Aleutian Islands. 
Discovering this little-known historical fact compelled me to study Alaska's 
remarkable history and eventually write my second novel, a tale of wartime 
survival and devotion, The Wind is Not a River.

Alaska is a place at the very limits of the American drive to "Go West, young 
man, and grow up with the country" – the exhortationmade famous by the 
19th-century author Horace Greeley 
<http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/g/horace_greeley/index.html>
. Greeley's advice soon came to be understood in the popular culture as: "Go 
West, young man, and find your fame and your fortune." Alaska is a place apart 
from the contiguous United States, and it shares more in common with Canada's 
Yukon territory and British Columbia. It is a place of big dreams and harsh 
realities, astounding landscape, curious politics (including a long-standing 
independence party), midnight summer sun, and shockingly brief winter days. 
Alaska also offers the increasingly rare opportunity to live in close proximity 
to vast tracts of wilderness. The following shortlist includes books I 
discovered while living (briefly) in Alaska, and through gathering research for 
my novel. This collection of fiction, nonfiction, and verse has found a 
permanent home on my bookshelf.

1. Coming Into the Country 
<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/79.Coming_Into_The_Country> by John McPhee


This book, more than any other I have read, accurately reflected back to me 
the stark realities and wide-ranging possibilities facing Alaska near the close 
of the 20th century, while offering insight into what the state might become. 
McPhee is a grand master of narrative nonfiction. Required reading for anyone 
who wants to know about the grand themes and petty politics of the largest 
state in the US.

2. Into the Wild 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330351690>
 by Jon Krakauer


A bestselling book and critically acclaimed movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/120870/into.the.wild>, Into the Wild 
tells the tale of one young man's search for meaning in wilderness that ends in 
an abandoned bus in Alaska. The book is about so much more than the state 
itself. It's also about what people bring to Alaska – disaffection, idealism, 
the search for reinvention and redemption – that ends up being swallowed by one 
of the wildest places in North America.

3. Where the Sea Breaks its Back 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/corey-ford-2/where-the-sea-breaks-its-back/>
 by Corey Ford


This is an extraordinary and compelling account of a 1741-1742 Russian 
expedition. Ford vividly recounts the story of naturalist Georg Wilhelm 
Steller's voyage to the Aleutian Islands and what would eventually become the 
colony ofRussian America <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russian_America>. 
Wonderful writing and gripping tales of the Russian discovery of the new world.

4. Travels in Alaska 
<http://www.sierraclub.org/john_muir_exhibit/writings/travels_in_alaska/> by 
John Muir


The Scottish-American naturalist and explorer showed up in Alaska 138 years 
after Steller, just a dozen years after the US purchased Alaska from the 
cash-strapped Russians for about two pennies per acre. This insightful, 
enthusiastic and closely observed travelogueoffers description and language as 
grandiose as the place itself 
<http://www.sierraclub.org/john_muir_exhibit/writings/travels_in_alaska/chapter_2.aspx>
. "To the lover of pure wildness, Alaska is one of the most wonderful countries 
in the world … it seems as if surely we must at length reach the very paradise 
of the poets, the abode of the blessed."

5. Songs of a Sourdough 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780713650815>
 by Robert Service


Service, a British-Canadian poet and writer, was known as "the bard of the 
Yukon". OK, so it's not Alaska proper, but the state and Canada's Yukon 
territory are kissing cousins, and share much in the way of folklore and 
culture. And most prospectors had to travel through Alaska to get to the 
Klondike goldfields. Service wrote colourful and compulsively entertaining 
verse about gold rush life in the north. Alaskans try and claim him as their 
own. As a graduate of Robert Service High School in Anchorage, Alaska, I made a 
point of memorising Service'sThe Cremation of Sam McGee 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174348>. I still have several verses 
rolling around inside my head.

6. White Fang 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099582625>
 by Jack London


One of the most popular books by American writer Jack London also happens to 
be set in the Yukon during the time of the Klondike Gold Rush. The story 
follows the life story of a wolf-dog hybrid that finds its way from the chaos 
of famine and violence, in both the natural world and at the jagged edge of 
human society, to a kind of redemption in a life of domesticity in the care of 
one gentle man. Brutal and gripping.

7. The Thousand-Mile War: World War II in Alaska and the Aleutians 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Thousand-Mile-War-Aleutians-Classic-Reprint/dp/0912006838/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1394033377&sr=1-1&keywords=The+Thousand-Mile+War%3A+World+War+II+in+Alaska+and+the+Aleutians%2C+Brian+Garfield>
 by Brian Garfield


There are numerous nonfiction accounts of the war in Alaska; first and 
foremost among those is Garfield's excellent – and compulsively readable – 
military history of what some call the "forgotten war." Richly detailed and 
deeply researched, it deserves a far wider audience.

8. Moments Rightly Placed: An Aleutian Memoir 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Moments-Rightly-Placed-Adventures-Epicenter/dp/0979047072>
 by Ray Hudson


A sensitive and insightful account of 28 years living in the Aleutian Islands 
from the perspective of an outsider. I believe the best reportage is the kind 
that involves a writer immersing himself or herself in a place, culture and 
time. These days, being still and letting the story reveal itself is difficult 
to accomplish and increasingly rare. Ray Hudson offers personal and enriching 
insight into Aleut culture in this fine memoir.

9. Call of the Wild 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099582625>
 by Jack London


A novella that preceded White Fang, London's Call of the Wild tells a 
similarly engrossing tale of sled dogs and men set in the Klondike. Unlike 
White Fang, with its ultimate redemption, Call of the Wild details a fall from 
a civilised to a primitive state. Influenced by both Charles Darwin and 
Friedrich Nietzsche, London's most famous work is rich in symbolism and 
imagery, a blend of allegory and fable about the "survival of the fittest". 
This classic and enduring tale of the mythic north secured London's place in 
the cannon of American literature.

10. Passage to Juneau 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Passage-To-Juneau-Sea-Meaning/dp/0330346296> by 
Jonathan Raban <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathan-raban>


The British-born journalist and novelist takes readers on an involving 
personal and physical journey through fascinating history and waterways to the 
state that bills itself as "the last frontier". So much about what Alaska 
really is can only be understood through what it takes to get there. Before the 
advent of regularly scheduled air service, what one had to do to reach this 
place profoundly affected its literature. Alaska was one of the last places in 
North America to be mapped and explored. As Raban well knows, the journey to 
Alaska can still be transformational.

• Read more top 10 books, as chosen by authors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/toptens>
• Brian Payton <http://www.brianpayton.com> is the author of The Wind Is Not a 
River (Mantle/Pan Macmillan)
 