
1. Idiosyncratic luxury

Boulevard Leopold <http://www.boulevard-leopold.be> is a B&B in a truly grand 
style: the main apartment comes with a sitting room larger than most London 
flats and a spare bedroom for extra guests. This 19th-century mansion in 
Antwerp's traditional Jewish quarter has been renovated with a light but 
idiosyncratic touch - owners Vincent and Bert wanted it to feel like the home 
of a beloved grandparent. Above the original inlayed flooring, the vintage 
sideboards groan with religious statuary, art books and minor taxidermy. While 
some of the style has been influenced by Vincent's work with renowned fashion 
designers such asAnn Demeulemeester 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ann_Demeulemeester>, the kitchen is Bart's domain 
- a chef by training, he bakes the bread fresh every day for breakfast.

• Double rooms from €100 a night.

2. Sophisticated shoppers

The owners of Boulevard Leopold have just opened a pair of apartments right in 
the heart of the St Andries shopping district in the city centre. Equipped with 
kitchen and lounging space and accessed by separate front doors within a 
stairwell, the flats are perfect for longer stays or intimate shopping trips. 
Again the style here is a mix of vintage and contemporary, but this time with a 
lighter, more monochromatic atmosphere, reminiscent of the décor favoured by 
Antwerp favourite, MaisonMartin Margiela 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Margiela>. On nearby Nationalestraat 
you'll find some of Belgium's finest boutiques, includingDries van Noten 
<http://www.driesvannoten.be/movie.html>, one of the "Antwerp Six 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antwerp_Six>" collective who put Antwerp on the 
fashion map in the 80s.

• Enquiries via the Boulevard Leopold <http://www.boulevard-leopold.be> 
website. Doubles from €120-€150 a night.



3. Discreet business

Antwerp doesn't really have a brilliant five-star hotel: perhaps it simply 
attracts travellers who don't much care for gyms and hotel restaurants. Instead 
the city's strength is its small independent establishments, many of which look 
after frazzled frequent travellers. With an orientally-inspired balance of 
interior and exterior spaces, and discreet use of natural materials,Hotel Julien
 <http://www.hotel-julien.com> is a favoured bolthole for fashion industry 
types such asDirk Bikkembergs <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirk_Bikkembergs>, 
who stays here when visiting his Antwerp headquarters. Accessed from a small 
backstreet, the atmosphere is quiet, low key and unfussy, and the location is 
dead central.

• Doubles from €165 to €270, weekend "fashion special" from €244 for two 
nights.



4. Old money, modern glamour

On one of the most beautifully proportioned streets in Antwerp, a couple of 
doors up from theRockox House Museum <http://www.rockoxhuis.be/>, the 11-room 
De Witte Lelie <http://www.dewittelelie> is set inside three 17th-century 
houses grouped around a paved courtyard. This spacious hotel recently changed 
hands, and after 15 years of classic white interiors is now receiving a 
striking overhaul, with distinctly contemporary furniture that contrasts with 
its architectural style. Duplex rooms come with a central spiral staircase 
leading up to platforms under the eaves.

• Doubles from €245 a night



5. Shop and run

Strung out on three floors next door to the MoMu 
<http://www.momu.be/en/index_momu.jsp> fashion museum, Room National 
<http://www.roomnational.com> was originally created by designer sisters 
Violetta and Vera Pepa, who until recently had a shop downstairs. The Pepas 
have departed, but the rooms remain; one 1960s-inspired double room (€95 a 
night) at the back and two studio apartments (€135 a night) at the front. The 
top floor studio gets the best light through its high windows, and has a 
Japanese-style wooden bathtub. The suites also come with a kitchenette for 
longer stays.



6. Shop and linger

Directly opposite Room National, M0851 <http://www.M0851.be> is a classic 
designer B&B attached to the accessories shop on the ground floor. The shop is 
a Canadian leather-goods company that favours clean, neutral lines, natural 
dyes and materials that patinate with age. If the thought of that tickles, it's 
likely that the rooms will too - all are simply furnished and decked out with 
good linens and thoughtful detailing. There's a DVD and book library for 
guests, and breakfast is served around the corner in Het Dagelijks Brood, the 
Flemish incarnation of the Belgian chain Le Pain Quotidien.

• Doubles from €140 a night, inclusive.



7. Good mixers

The owners of the Cocktails at Nine bar have expanded into the 18th-century 
building above to createLinnen <http://www.cocktailsatnine.be>, three guest 
suites almost touching distance from the roof of the vastCathedral of Our Lady 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cathedral_of_Our_Lady,_Antwerp>. The warm-toned 
rooms are decked out with contemporary lounge-style furniture and smart modern 
bathrooms, but the architecture retains its period detailing. Perfect for 
cocktail-sipping mini-breakers.

• Doubles from €130 a night, breakfast not included.



8. Old-fashioned service

A 29-room privately run hotel near the waterfront in the old city centre, 
Hotel t'Sandt <http://www.hotel-sandt.be> has an airy interior and good-sized 
rooms done up with neutral good taste. A comfortable hotel in traditional 
style, what sets it apart for most travellers is the friendly, helpful attitude 
of those who work here. It's a relaxing base from which to explore Antwerp's 
Cathedral quarter and the Sunday antiques market on the neighbouring Sint 
Jansvliet. For those doing business in the city, the hotel has five reception 
rooms accommodating 12 to 120 people.

• Doubles from €170 a night, special packages available for weekend stays.



9. Modest budgets

Save the price of a new designer outfit, (or at least your museum tickets) 
staying in theInternational Youth Hotel <http://www.youthhotel.be>. The 
cheapest deal - €15 a night - is for those under the age of 26 sleeping in an 
eight-bed dorm with their own sleeping bags. Otherwise rooms are offered with 
two, three, and four beds. One child under the age of seven can stay for free 
in their parents' room. Included in the price of a room are WiFi, hot showers 
and a buffet breakfast.

• Doubles from €49 a night.



10. Industrial chic

Hotel Banks <http://www.hotelbanks.be> is only a few months old and has had 
definite teething troubles - no TVs, a non-functioning café, no check-in after 
8pm - so be sure to enquire whether these have been resolved before booking. 
Basic rooms are relatively small and somewhat stark (as opposed to Starck) in 
style, although once one ascends to the height of a suite, the size and view 
are impressive. Banks has two things going for it: its location, which is 
peerlessly central, and its size, making it one of the few decent, central 
hotels able to accommodate large groups. If you were, say, a dozen young 
fashion stylists on a research trip, it's probably where you'd want to stay. 
They also claim to have adjoining rooms suitable for families, which is worth 
knowing in a city short on family accommodation.

• Doubles from €125 a night

• Hettie Judah is editor at large at The Word Magazine 
<http://www.thewordmagazine.be>, Belgium
 