
Golden Cap, between Bridport and Charmouth

It's a bit of a climb to the summit of Golden Cap, at 191 metres the highest 
point on the south coast. But once you and the family are up there, stand back 
and admire the view. On a clear day you can see across Lyme Bay to Dartmoor and 
spectacular views east to Bridport and Chesil Beach. There are 25 miles of 
footpaths around the estate, which is National Trust-owned, and you can do as 
much or as little as you like. An all-ability circular trail takes you through 
the woodlands of Langdon Hill Wood. Years ago, this was a notorious haunt for 
smugglers and you can follow in their footsteps by downloading a new 
family-friendly trail.
• nationaltrust.org.uk/golden-cap <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/golden-cap>

Charmouth Heritage Coast Centre
 Charmouth Heritage Coast Centre, Dorset 
Charmouth is the best place to explore the Jurassic Coast, England's first and 
only natural World Heritage Site (jurassiccoast.com 
<http://www.jurassiccoast.com>). Rocks along the 95 miles of shore record 185 
million years of the Earth's history. On the beach you can pick up belemnites 
and ammonites but keep your eyes peeled, as bigger monsters have been found in 
among the pebbles. Entry to the Charmouth Heritage Coast Centre is free and 
it's packed with interactive displays and fun things to do. Book in for a 
fossil hunting walk or rock pool ramble, led by one of the centre's friendly 
and enthusiastic experts. Be warned, the cliffs around Charmouth are very 
unstable and there are mudflows and landslides all the time so make sure you 
follow thefossil hunters' code 
<http://www.jurassiccoast.com/285/visiting-the-coast-31/be-safe-along-the-coast-151/safety-and-the-fossil-code-378.html/>
.
• 01297 560772, charmouth.org/chcc <http://www.charmouth.org/chcc>. Open daily 
from Easter to October and Wed to Sun at other times, 10.30am-4.30pm. Fossil 
walks: adults £7, children £3, under-fives free. Rock pool rambles: adults £4, 
children £3, under-fives free

Maiden Castle, near Dorchester
 Photograph: Last Refuge/Robert Harding World Imagery/Corbis 
Pretend to be ancient Britons battling Roman soldiers as you work off your 
picnic and march along the ramparts of this ancient earthwork on the outskirts 
of Dorchester. The largest iron age hillfort in Europe, Maiden Castle dominates 
the skyline in these parts and once protected hundreds of residents. 
Excavations have revealed occupation began more than 6,000 years ago in 
neolithic times. In AD43 it was taken by the Romans and its inhabitants moved 
to the new town of Durnovaria, modern Dorchester. From its summit you can now 
see Poundbury village, Prince Charles' pet project, with its mix of 
architectural styles that locals invariably love or hate. Afterwards, head off 
to the pretty village of Martinstown for a cup of tea and cake at Stevens Farm 
Shop (stevensfarmshop.co.uk <http://www.stevensfarmshop.co.uk>) where children 
can see pigs, goats, sheep and rabbits in the animal corner.
• english-heritage.org.uk 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/daysout/properties/maiden-castle/>. Open 
all year round. Entry free

Mapperton Gardens, near Beaminster
 Photograph: Alamy 
One of the loveliest stately homes in Dorset, where ancient, rolling 
countryside tumbles into the golden stone wall formality of the Italianate 
garden and Elizabethan manor house. It's the lushest of spots and children love 
it too. After the more formal bits, they can whizz around the "wild" part of 
the garden as it descends into a hidden Dorset combe. They might even bump into 
the lord and lady of the manor, the Earl and Countess of Sandwich. Indian 
runner ducks and bantams patrol the estate while families enjoy picnics in the 
car park or wander around the gift shop, with its Fairtrade global products, 
locally-made items and plants grown in the garden. Lunches and teas are also 
served at the Sawmill Café.
• 01308 862645, mapperton.com <http://www.mapperton.com>. Gardens open 1 
April-31 Oct daily except Saturday, 11-5pm. Adults £5, under-18s £2.50, 
under-fives free

Bridport and West Bay
 Photograph: Alamy 
This pretty little town has a real busy and buzzy feel to it, especially on 
Saturdays and Wednesdays when market stalls line the wide pavements. It's free 
to go into the museum (bridportmuseum.co.uk <http://www.bridportmuseum.co.uk>) 
where you can see some of the weird and wonderful things in the collection, 
including dolls, ancient Roman artefacts and an example of The Bridport Dagger 
– the hangman's noose. Bridport was at one time the rope and net-making capital 
of the world. At nearby West Bay (pictured), a fishing trip is recommended on a 
sunny day. There's a fun, nine-hole pitch and putt course at the local golf 
club (bridportgolfclub.org.uk <http://www.bridportgolfclub.org.uk>) and the 
near-vertical East Cliff is a challenge for any family. Round it off with fish 
and chips from one of the kiosks around the harbour, an ice-cream from the 
esplanade or a seafood snack from the easy-going Watch House Café (
watchhousecafe.co.uk <http://www.watchhousecafe.co.uk>).
• bridportandwestbay.co.uk <http://www.bridportandwestbay.co.uk>

Lyme Regis
 Photograph: Alamy 
No trip to the county is complete without a visit to the "Pearl of Dorset". 
Set on a hillside, the town is impossibly pretty from the vantage point of the 
Cobb, the historic harbour wall which took on iconic status in The French 
Lieutenant's Woman. There are echoes of St Paul's Cathedral's whispering 
gallery at one point – if you go just beyond the set of double steps where the 
wall starts to curve and get someone else to go a bit further along near the 
steps known as Granny's Teeth, you can have a secret conversation. Streetlamps 
with an ammonite design reflect the town's location on the Jurassic Coast. The 
town has a cinema, amusement arcade and crazy golf.
• lymeregis.com <http://www.lymeregis.com>

The Kingcombe Centre, near Dorchester
 Photograph: Alamy 
Nestling at the heart of a peaceful hamlet, the centre has an array of natural 
history, archaeology, craft and art courses throughout the year. It's 
surrounded by 457 acres of Dorset Wildlife Trust's Kingcombe Meadows Nature 
Reserve, a landscape untouched by modern agricultural practices. As well as 
offering weekly activity holidays, the centre also has activities, such as pond 
dipping and nature walks, for families and children. Among its charitable aims 
is to provide a safe space for children and young people, including those with 
learning difficulties, to explore and gain knowledge about the outdoor world.
• 01300 320684, kingcombe.org <http://www.kingcombe.org>. Cafe is open every 
weekend and most days from Easter– 30 September (11.30am–5pm) and October 
-Easter (11.30am-3.30pm)

Tout Quarry, Portland
 Photograph: Gregory Davies/Alamy 
This abandoned quarry has been turned into an amazing sculpture park, with 
lots of carvings hidden around it, including a fish, a Viking boat and the 
famous "falling man" by Antony Gormley. It's a really atmospheric place, with 
lovely views out over Chesil Beach and Lyme Bay, and just great for children to 
explore. Entry is free (learningstone.org <http://www.learningstone.org>, see 
alsogeoffkirby.co.uk <http://www.geoffkirby.co.uk/Portland/680725/>). 
Afterwards, head out to Portland Bill, the most southerly part of Dorset, to 
see the red and white lighthouse and watch the waves crashing around dramatic 
Pulpit Rock. Round off the adventure by driving along the coast to West 
Bexington – a road of twists and turns and glorious vistas, and enjoy afternoon 
tea in the garden of the Manor Hotel (manorhoteldorset.com 
<http://www.manorhoteldorset.com>).

Kingston Maurward gardens and animal park, near Dorchester
 Photograph: Alamy 
This well-established tourist attraction welcomes more than 30,000 visitors a 
year. But there is so much space, it doesn't feel that busy. The grade 
II-listed gardens are set around a large Georgian English country house (now an 
agricultural college) and tended with help from students on horticultural 
courses. Children will especially love the animal park, with its pigs, alpacas, 
cows, ponies, sheep, ducks and hens and plenty of room to play and have a 
picnic. Watch out for the goats though, they might try to nibble your 
sandwiches. The park has recently become a member of the Rare Breeds Survival 
Trust and is extending its range of rare breeds and breeding programmes.
• 01305 215003, kmc.ac.uk/kc/gardens_animal_park 
<http://www.kmc.ac.uk/kc/gardens_animal_park>. Open daily from 10am-5.30pm. 
Adults £6, children £4, under-threes free, OAPs £5.50, family ticket £21 (two 
adults and up to three children)

Sherborne Castle
 Photograph: Alamy 
Built by Sir Walter Raleigh in 1594 and the stately home of the Digby family 
since 1617, Sherborne Castle captures 400 years of English history. There are 
no guided tours – you go around the castle on a "free flow" basis following 
from room to room in your own time, with stewards on hand to answer questions. 
The castle plays host to a variety of events, from country fairs to classic car 
rallies, throughout the year. After taking in the sumptuous old masters, suits 
of armour and tapestries, head for The Toy Barn (toy-barn.co.uk 
<http://www.toy-barn.co.uk>) and hire a pedal-powered go-kart at £5 per hour. 
Based on a farm, the go-karting track starts inside the barn and runs out into 
the farmyard. In poor weather it's possible to have a mini-race inside the barn.
• 01935 812072, sherbornecastle.com <http://www.sherbornecastle.com>. Castle, 
gardens and tearoom open daily 1 April to 28 October, except Mondays and 
Fridays (open on bank holiday Mondays), 11am-4.30pm. Gardens £5 for adults, 
children free; castle and gardens £10 for adults, children free

• Maddie Grigg writes about life in a Dorset village at 
worldfrommywindow.blogspot.co.uk <http://worldfrommywindow.blogspot.co.uk/> 
 