
David Cameron's aides found themselves performing an unusual damage-limitation 
exercise when they were forced to deny claims that the Conservative leader's 
wife,Samantha Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/samantha-cameron>, 
might be voting Labour.

The unlikely allegation came from Ed Vaizey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-vaizey>, the Tory arts spokesman and – 
at least until yesterday – a trusted member of the Cameron inner circle.

One insider said last night that Vaizey was "in the doghouse".

Vaizey made his comment in a Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> programme about Cameron being 
broadcast tomorrow night which also identifies Samantha as the person who 
coined the phrase used frequently by Cameron: "There is such a thing as 
society, it's just not the same thing as the state."

In an interview for the film, made by the Observer columnist Andrew Rawnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewrawnsley>, Vaizey said that Samantha 
might have voted for Tony Blair. He then went on: "She would be going into this 
poll thinking 'Is Cameron the real deal or should I stick with Brown?'"

After finding out that his remarks were the basis of the front-page splash in 
the Mail on Sunday, Vaizey issued a statement saying: "I am very embarrassed by 
this. I had no justification for what I said."

Samantha, a successful businesswoman with a bohemian streak who is credited 
with helping her husband understand the importance of making the Conservative 
party less stuffy, also issued her own denial: "I did not vote for Tony Blair 
in 1997 and I have never votedLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>," she said. According to Danny 
Kruger, a former Cameron speechwriter, Samantha came up with the phrase about 
there being such a thing as society – a slogan seen as a riposte to Margaret 
Thatcher's famous comment about there being no such thing as society.

"She heard [Cameron] speaking, knew what he believed and said 'What you're 
actually saying is this'," Kruger then clarified. The Vaizey gaffe coincided 
with mixed news for theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> in opinion polls published 
today.

A BPIX poll in the Mail on Sunday gave the Tories (on 36%) a lead of just two 
points over Labour (34%).

But YouGov in the Sunday Times put the Tories at 38% and Labour 33%, giving 
Cameron a five-point lead, rather than the two-point lead recorded by YouGov in 
the Sunday Times the week before. ICM in the News of the World today put the 
Tories at 40%, nine points ahead of Labour.

The Conservatives also described as "complete rubbish" a report yesterday 
claiming that the party has chosen a "famous five" – Cameron, Kenneth Clarke, 
William Hague, Michael Gove and Jeremy Hunt – to front the election campaign 
and that other figures, such as shadow chancellor George Osborne, were being 
sidelined.

A source said that figures such as Osborne and Theresa May would also have a 
high profile.
 