
And the Oscar may go to: 30 movies we've already seen which could win big
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/30-movies-possible-oscar-winners-2015>
The first looks at those films which will be vying for Oscars next year have 
already happened, at Sundance and Cannes. But while those festivals this year 
supplied a surprisingly scant selection of contenders, Tuesday’s programme 
announcements for this year’sToronto film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival> suggests a flood is 
coming.

Although history demands a degree of scepticism over which titles will emerge 
as actually Oscar-worthy, this initial batch of titles suggest the festival is 
seeking to regain its reputation as a premier launchpad, following a year where 
they ceded some ground to their rivals.

The new Gravity? Tiff will screen Ridley Scott’s sci-fi adventure The Martian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/jun/09/the-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video>
, which has Matt Damon stranded on Mars and Chiwetel Ejiofor and Jessica 
Chastain trying to save him. The new Fahrenheit 9/11? Michael Moore’s 
previously unannounced new documentary, Where to Invade Next. The new Milk? 
Roland Emmerich’sStonewall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/22/roland-emmerichs-gay-rights-drama-joins-the-race-for-the-oscars>
, which covers the fight for gay rights in 1960s New York and stars Jonathan 
Rhys Meyers and Jeremy Irvine.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fthe-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433860441641%2FKP_267418_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Martian%20trailer%3A%20Matt%20Damon%20makes%20Mars%20home%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fthe-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Martian%20trailer%3A%20Matt%20Damon%20makes%20Mars%20home%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fthe-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433860441641%2FKP_267418_crop_640x360.jpg>
Stonewall is one of three major LGBT dramas set to show at the festival. 
Julianne Moore will be hoping for a second best actress Oscar in a row for
Freeheld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/23/freeheld-julianne-moore-ellen-page-trailer-drama-gay-rights>
, in which plays a real-life police officer who was diagnosed with terminal 
cancer and hired a charismatic attorney (played by Steve Carell) to help fight 
for her domestic partner (Ellen Page) to be entitled to her benefits.

Still Alice premiered at the festival last year, as did the film which won 
Eddie Redmayne <https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddie-redmayne> his best actor 
Oscar, The Theory of Everything. Redmayne will also be trying for back-to-back 
awards glory with The Danish Girl, which reunites him Tom Hooper director of 
Les Misérables and The King’s Speech. The film is one of the first mainstream 
movies to tackle transgender issues; it focuses on the life of Einar Wegenar, 
who underwent a sex-change operation in the early 1920s.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Flady-in-the-van-trailer-maggie-smith-alan-bennett-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425050938390%2Fcrop_KP_107654_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van%20trailer%3A%20Maggie%20Smith%20plays%20the%20woman%20who%20lived%20in%20Alan%20Bennett's%20front%20yard%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Flady-in-the-van-trailer-maggie-smith-alan-bennett-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van%20trailer%3A%20Maggie%20Smith%20plays%20the%20woman%20who%20lived%20in%20Alan%20Bennett%27s%20front%20yard%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Flady-in-the-van-trailer-maggie-smith-alan-bennett-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425050938390%2Fcrop_KP_107654_640x360.jpeg>
'The Krays were glamorous guys'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/22/legend-krays-film-tom-hardy-brian-helgeland-interview>
Other British films screening at the festival include Nicholas Hytner’s 
adaptation of Alan Bennett’s hit playThe Lady in the Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/feb/27/lady-in-the-van-trailer-maggie-smith-alan-bennett-video>
, with Maggie Smith reprising her much-lauded performance as eccentric homeless 
woman who lived in Bennett’s drive for 15 years. Jeremy Irons and Dev Patel 
play maths geniuses in The Man Who Knew Infinity, and Terence Davies returns 
with his first film since 2011’s The Deep Blue Sea, an adaptation of Lewis 
Grassic Gibbon’s Sunset Song starring Peter Mullan and Agyness Deyn.


Ben Foster is already building buzz for his performance as Lance Armstrong in 
The Program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/11/first-trailer-for-lance-armstrong-drama-the-program>
, Stephen Frears’s look at the cyclist’s much-documented downfall, which 
premieres at Tiff. Also vying for the prize with not just one but two roles in 
the same movie is Tom Hardy, who plays both Ronnie and Reggie Kray inBrian 
Helgeland’s underworld biopic Legend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/22/legend-krays-film-tom-hardy-brian-helgeland-interview>
. Following acclaim at Sundance last year for Frank, Irish director Lenny 
Abrahamson will be hoping for a similarly warm reception for Room, an 
adaptation ofEmma Donoghue’s bestseller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/21/emma-donoghue-room-book-club> 
about a woman held captive alongside her five-year-old son.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fthe-program-lance-armstrong-ben-foster-cycling-trailer-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434034334345%2FKP_270363_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Program%3A%20Lance%20Armstrong%20biopic%20gets%20shot%20by%20Stephen%20Frears%20%E2%80%93%20trailer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fthe-program-lance-armstrong-ben-foster-cycling-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Program%3A%20Lance%20Armstrong%20biopic%20gets%20shot%20by%20Stephen%20Frears%20%E2%80%93%20trailer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fthe-program-lance-armstrong-ben-foster-cycling-trailer-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434034334345%2FKP_270363_crop_640x360.jpg>
Kate Winslet’s hit rate with Toronto debuts has been patchy over recent years, 
following schlocky potboiler Labor Day and gardening curio A Little Chaos. This 
time, she’ll be hitting the red carpet in aid ofThe Dressmaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/jul/13/the-dressmaker-trailer-kate-winslet-liam-hemsworth-video>
, as a woman out for revenge in a small Australian town. Other international 
productions with major roles for British talent include German thrillerColonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/29/emma-watson-daniel-bruhl-colonia-florian-gallenberger>
, starring Emma Watson, and Beasts of No Nation, produced by Netflix, directed 
by True Detective’s Cary Fukunaga, and starring Idris Elba as amercenary in 
charge of child soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/sep/03/fiction.alismith> in an unnamed 
African country.

Meanwhile, Bryan Cranston takes on his first major movie role since the end of 
Breaking Bad withTrumbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/18/bryan-cranston-dalton-trumbo-biopic-2016-oscars>
, a drama about the 1940s screenwriter Dalton Trumbo, blacklisted for his 
political beliefs. A diversion into serious subject matter for Austin Powers 
and Meet the Parents director Jay Roach, the film co-stars John Goodman, Diane 
Lane, Elle Fanning, Helen Mirren and Louis CK.

Toronto will this year play host to a raft of directors making a comeback. 
Michael Moore is to premiere his first documentary since 2009’s Capitalism: A 
Love Story. His new film, called Where To Invade Next, is shrouded in secrecy 
but the title suggests another polemical take on US politics.
Michael Moore (@MMFlint) 
#W2IN <https://twitter.com/hashtag/W2IN?src=hash> #TIFF15 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/TIFF15?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/u5mTq4VgFN 
<http://t.co/u5mTq4VgFN>
 <https://twitter.com/MMFlint/status/626043289666457600> July 28, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/MMFlint/status/626043289666457600> 
Tiff will also welcome back Charlie Kaufman, quiet since 2008’s Synecdoche, 
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/15/synecdoche-new-york>. 
His latest,Anomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/19/charlie-kaufman-anomalisa-crowdfunding-record>
, is a stop-motion comedy about a man bored with his life, featuring the voices 
of David Thewlis and Jennifer Jason Leigh.

Meanwhile real-life drama Spotlight hopes to return director Tom McCarthy to 
the heights ofThe Station Agent <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i8MrVBMsBYQ> 
and away from the lows of The Cobbler, which screened to unconvinced critics at 
Toronto last year. Michael Keaton, Mark Ruffalo and Rachel McAdams star in the 
story of a team ofBoston Globe journalists who uncovered child molestation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/11/catholic-church-abuse-drama-mark-ruffalo-rachel-mcadams-cast>
 within the Catholic church.

The Toronto festival, which turns 40 in 2015, has a long history of 
championing Canadian cinema; this year it offers a spot to Atom Egoyan 
following his misjudged double bill of festival flops (2013’sThe Devil’s Knot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/15/devils-knot-review-frustration-dramatisation-west-memphis-murders-egoyan>
 in Toronto;The Captive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/16/the-captive-cannes-2014-review-ryan-reynolds>
 at Cannes last year) forRemember <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vFxXCoprNqc>
, a revenge thriller starring Christopher Plummer. An 1980s dream cast of Demi 
Moore, Kiefer Sutherland and real-life father Donald Sutherland come together 
for Canadian western Forsaken, about an estranged paternal relationship.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvFxXCoprNqc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvFxXCoprNqc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvFxXCoprNqc&media=>
And the opening night spot, previously filled by Robert Downey Jr drama The 
Judge and Benedict Cumberbatch’s Julian Assange movie The Fifth Estate, goes to 
Demolition, marking Jean-Marc Vallée’s third return to the festival in three 
years, following 2014’sWild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/09/wild-a-two-hour-hallucinatory-montage-toronto-film-festival-review>
 and 2013’s The Dallas Buyers Club. The film, which is ineligible for awards 
next year as it doesn’t open until March, stars Jake Gyllenhaal as a grieving 
husband helped by Naomi Watts.

Female directors are not entirely absent at the festival, with Julie Delpy 
following up 2012’s Two Days in New York with Lolo, a comedy in which she plays 
a woman returning to France and finding a new relationship threatened by her 
difficult son. Writer/directorRebecca Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/jul/05/rebecca-miller-arthur-private-lives-of-pippa-lee>
 also returns after a six-year absence with Maggie’s Plan, which has Greta 
Gerwig treading apparently familiar territory as a New Yorker struggling to get 
her life on track. Julianne Moore heads the supporting cast, alongside Ethan 
Hawke and Maya Rudolph.

The initial batch of announced films include a few key foreign-language titles 
including Desierto, from Gravity co-writer Jonás Cuarón, about a group of 
people crossing the border from Mexico who uncover a racist patrol officer, and 
from France, a Jean Dujardin comedy called Un plus une, directed by 77-year-old 
Claude Lelouch.

Danny Boyle's Steve Jobs film to be 'centrepiece' at New York film fest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/27/danny-boyle-steve-jobs-new-york-film-fest>
Tuesday’s announcement takes in many of the year’s big awards contenders, but 
some are still unaccounted for. Quentin Tarantino’s The Hateful Eight, David O 
Russell’s Joy, Steven Spielberg’s Bridge of Spies, Angelina Jolie’s By the Sea, 
Derek Cianfrance’s The Light Between Oceans, Ben Wheatley’s High Rise, Oliver 
Stone’s Snowden, and the Hank Williams biopic I Saw the Light are just a few 
titles whose premieres are yet to be confirmed.

But Toronto will announce further films over coming weeks, and Venice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> (2-12 September) is set 
to release its first major batch of premieres on Wednesday. That festival has 
already announced a couple of titles in selection –opening night movie Everest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/everest-open-venice-film-festival-movie>
, Black Mass starring Johnny Depp as infamous mobster Whitey Bulger – and it’s 
possible to infer a few of its picks from the status of some of Tiff’s 
screenings.The Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/27/eddie-redmayne-transgender-lili-elbe-first-picture-danish-girl>
 has a North American premiere, for instance, leading many to suspect it may 
not head to Telluride (4-7 September), but is likely to show up in Venice. 
Meanwhile Beasts of No Nation, Anomalisa, Room and Spotlight are Canadian 
premieres, suggesting they could screen in Colorado a few days before – and 
potentially at Venice too.

The 2015 Toronto film festival <http://tiff.net/> runs from 10-20 September.


 * Full lineup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/toronto-film-festival-2015-full-lineup> 