
Household dust harbours a cocktail of toxic chemicals that have been linked to 
an increased risk of a range of health hazards, from cancer to problems with 
fertility, researchers in the US have found.


The chemicals are shed from a host of common products, from flooring to 
electrical goods as well as beauty and cleaning products.


“We think our homes are a safe haven but unfortunately they are being polluted 
by toxic chemicals from all our products,” said Veena Singla, co-author of the 
study from the Natural Resources Defense Council in California.

Seven deadly poisons – and a law that won't protect you fast enough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/27/poison-chemical-health-law-toxic-regulation-harmful-substances>
The scientists cautioned that children were particularly vulnerable to the 
health effects of contaminated dust as they often play or crawl on the floor 
and frequently touch their mouths. “They end up having a lot more exposure to 
chemicals in dust and they are more vulnerable to toxic effects because their 
brains and bodies are still developing,” said Singla.

Writing in the Environmental Science and Technology 
<https://www.nrdc.org/resources/not-just-dirt-toxic-chemicals-indoor-dust> 
journal, Singla and colleagues described how they analysed 26 peer-reviewed 
papers, as well as one unpublished dataset, from 1999 onwards to examine the 
chemical make-up of indoor dust. The studies covered a wide range of indoor 
environments, from homes to schools and gymnasiums across 14 states.

“What emerged was a rather disturbing picture of many different toxic 
chemicals from our products that are present in dust in the home and [are] 
contaminating the home,” said Singla.

While, perhaps confusingly, homes that are too clean have been linked to an 
increase in allergies and asthma in children, potentially due to a lack of 
exposure to various microbes, the presence of toxic chemicals in dust raises 
separate concerns.


The researchers highlighted 45 toxic chemicals in indoor dust, 10 of which 
were present in 90% or more of the dust samples – these included flame 
retardants, fragrances and phenols.

Research lags on the health risks of women's exposure to chemicals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/05/osha-health-women-breast-cancer-chemicals-work-safety>
 Among them is the flame retardant TDCIPP that is known to be cancer-causing 
and is frequently found in furniture foam, baby products and carpet padding, as 
is TPHP, another flame retardant in the top 10 list that can affect the 
reproductive and nervous systems.

“They are just a bunch of letters – a lot of people might not recognise what 
those chemicals are, or what they mean, but they are really a number of bad 
actor chemicals,” said Singla.

Other toxic substances found in almost all of the dust samples include 
chemicals known as phthalates that are often found in vinyl flooring, food 
packaging, personal care products and have been linked to developmental 
problems in babies, hormone disruption, and are also thought to affect the 
reproductive system.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftoxic-chemicals-household-dust-health-cancer-infertility%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd893e9ae927da576085bf266140e23428472935%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Toxic%20chemicals%20in%20household%20dust%20linked%20to%20cancer%20and%20infertility&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftoxic-chemicals-household-dust-health-cancer-infertility%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Toxic%20chemicals%20in%20household%20dust%20linked%20to%20cancer%20and%20infertility&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftoxic-chemicals-household-dust-health-cancer-infertility%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd893e9ae927da576085bf266140e23428472935%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Children are particularly vulnerable to health problems associated with 
contaminated dust as they often play on the floor. Photograph: Hero/Getty 
While some chemicals on the list have been banned from use in childcare 
products, or are being more widely phased out, Singla says many remain 
widespread in the home. “Especially for building materials there is not as much 
turnover of a lot of those products, like flooring,” she said, adding: 
“Unfortunately even though some of these phthalates have been banned from kids 
products, they are not banned from other kinds of products.”

In a separate, unpublished, analysis, Singla compared the levels of chemicals 
found in household dust with soil screening levels used by the Environmental 
Protection Agency in the US. “What we found – and we were shocked by it 
actually – is that the dust levels exceed those EPA screening levels for a 
number of the chemicals and again it is the phthalates and flame retardant 
chemicals that are standing out as the bad offenders here,” said Singla.


Toxic chemicals in outdoor products of leading brands, Greenpeace study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/26/greenpeace-finds-brands-like-north-face-using-toxic-chemicals-in-outdoor-products>
But, she adds, there are steps that can be taken to reduce exposure to 
contaminated dust. As well as vacuuming floors, hands should be washed with 
plain soap and water before eating, while cleaning with a wet mop and dusting 
with a damp cloth can help to reduce household dust levels.

While a wider policy change on the use of toxic chemicals is needed, Singla 
added, consumers could also take action by making careful choices about the 
products they buy. “It is really important for companies and regulators to get 
the message that people care about this and want and need safer products for 
their families.”

Stuart Harrad, professor of environmental chemistry at the University of 
Birmingham, said the research backed up previous work on the hazards of indoor 
pollutants.


“This review of evidence for the presence of consumer chemicals in indoor dust 
from the US confirms the substantial evidence for the presence of the same 
chemicals in dust from UK cars, homes, and offices, as well as school and 
nursery classrooms,” he said. “This is pertinent as we and others believe the 
presence of these chemicals in consumer articles and dust leads to their 
presence in human milk and blood.”

Stephen Holgate, clinical professor of immunopharmacology at Southampton 
general hospital, described the research as important. He said though the study 
was US-based, the findings were also relevant in the UK.

The review, he added, showed “what we all have suspected – namely indoor 
exposure to household chemical and personal products accumulate in house dust, 
which serves as a Trojan horse when inhaled carrying these chemicals into the 
body”.

Holgate raised concerns over the findings that high levels of phthalates and 
replacement flame retardants appear to be ubiquitous, given their health 
impacts. Together with evidence from other studies, “there is an urgent need to 
consider the indoor environment as a crucial source of chemical pollutant 
exposure”, he said.
 