
For many football fans, Dennis Green will be remembered for one thing. His 
rant after a 2006 game <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SWmQbk5h86w> when his 
Arizona Cardinals lost to the Chicago Bears on Monday Night Football is 
probably one of the 10 best coach blow-ups of all time. Most mentions of his 
name are quickly followed by the refrain: “The Bears are what we thought they 
were.”

But to recall Green, who died of a heart attack on Friday at 67 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/22/dennis-green-former-minnesota-vikings-head-coach-dies-67>
, as a caricature from a video clip is unfair. He was far more than a guy who 
got mad after a nationally televised loss in a football game. He was an 
essential coach at an important time for the NFL. He made one of the most 
cherished and lucrative destination jobs in professional sports – NFL head 
coach – a possibility for many African-American men who never thought such a 
chance was real.

Dennis Green, former Minnesota Vikings head coach, dies aged 67
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/22/dennis-green-former-minnesota-vikings-head-coach-dies-67>
Only two black men had ever coached an NFL team when the Minnesota Vikings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/minnesota-vikings> hired Green in 1992. One 
of those men, Fritz Pollard, was a player-coach in the 1920s. The other was Art 
Shell, who was hired by the Raiders in 1989. Unlike Shell, who lasted six 
seasons, Green became an institution in Minnesota, coaching there for a decade. 
He turned the Vikings into consistent winners, going to the playoffs in eight 
of those 10 seasons.

In January 1999, he narrowly missed becoming the first African-American coach 
to take a team to the Super Bowl when Vikings kicker Gary Anderson, who hadn’t 
missed a kick in two years,came up short on a 38-yard field goal 
<http://www.nfl.com/videos/nfl-videos/0ap3000000497721/Gary-Anderson-misses-field-goal>
 that would have sealed the NFC championship game. Two years later, his Vikings 
lost another conference title game, this time in New York.

He won’t be remembered as the most successful black coach. Both Tony Dungy and 
Mike Tomlin have won Super Bowls. But Green went 113-94 in his career, his 
record undercut by three years as coach of the then-moribund Cardinals. He won 
four NFC Central titles at a time when manyNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> owners and general managers were 
hesitant to hire black coaches. He may not have gone to that elusive Super Bowl 
as a head coach but he made it easier for men like Dungy, Tomlin, Jim Caldwell 
and Hue Jackson to be hired.

The NFL is a better place because of Dennis Green.

Part of his success was that he embraced 49ers coach Bill Walsh’s West Coast 
Offense, working with Walsh as an assistant after a failed run as head coach at 
Northwestern. For three years he was Jerry Rice’s position coach, taking the 
lessons of his work with Rice to Stanford where he was head coach for three 
seasons and then the Vikings where he managed Cris Carter and Randy Moss, 
helping turn both into NFL stars.

Instead, most people will think of Green and remember him shouting about the 
Bears. That was in the last season at Arizona, when the Cardinals’ dysfunction 
was in bloom. Hopefully he will be remembered for more than a video clip. He 
was a very good head coach at a time when football needed him to be one.
 