
Lazy days

Thailand's Apichatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul> showed his 
experimental, hour-long filmMekong Hotel. It's set by a long quiet river and 
features a man chatting aboutPob ghosts and Bangkok floods with a young woman 
and her mother on a hotel terrace overlooking the water. Occasionally, it cuts 
to one of them eating entrails, or hearts, like vampires or wild dogs. 
Throughout, a man plays a gentle blues on an acoustic guitar. It contains the 
literally immortal line: "I will be reborn as a horse and then several kinds of 
insect." It was screened after lunch in the hot Salle Bazin. On screen, the 
flies buzzed, the river flowed, the music played and the sun shone – I looked 
around and counted nine people blissfully asleep in my vicinity. Only for this 
Zen master director could one say that this reaction should be taken as some 
kind of compliment.

They shoot, he scores

If one theme dominates this Cannes it is Alexandre Desplat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2011/jan/05/film-weekly-alexandre-desplat>
. The prolific composer's name – he's done scores forThe King's Speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137858/king-s-speech>, The Tree of Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/139929/tree-of-life>, Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter?INTCMP=SRCH>, The Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/114297/queen> - flashes up on the 
credits of a record-breaking five films in theselection 
<http://www.festival-cannes.fr/en/archives/2012/inCompetition.html>: Audiard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jacques-audiard>'s Rust and Bone, Garrone's 
Reality, the Polanski <https://www.theguardian.com/film/romanpolanski> 
documentary,Moonrise Kingdom and Gilles Bourdos's Renoir which will close Un 
Certain Regard 
<http://www.festival-cannes.fr/en/archives/2012/unCertainRegard.html> next 
week. You'd think they'd get his name right by now, at least, then? "I've been 
nominated for four Oscars and they alway read my name out wrong," he tells me. 
"It'sDay-plah, I say, no S, no T, and yet every time they read the nominations: 
Alexander Dessplatt." Maybe they're waiting till he actually wins one to get it 
right, I venture? "In that case, I will be very forgiving."

Yes to Yentob

BBC creative director Alan Yentob was nearly ejected from the opening night 
ceremony, for incorrect attire. TheImagine 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007ght1> presenter wore a silver-striped tie 
and trainers to the strictly black tie (noeud papillon) event and was promptly 
blocked by bouncers. Only the glamorous head of BBC FilmsChristine Langan 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbcfilms/> saved him, with a last ditch appeal to Cannes 
boss Thierry Frémaux who was standing at the top of the red carpet steps. Just 
as well – Yentob gets a little name check in the opening night film,Moonrise 
Kingdom, when Bill Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bill-murray> and 
Frances McDormand lie awake discussing their legal cases. "Did you get the 
approval on Yentob versus Crawford?" asks Murray. Did Alan know about this? 
"No, I didn't, but it's definitely me," he told me at the film's after-party, 
still smarting from the bouncers' clench. "And had I not got in, there might 
well have been another lawsuit with my name on it." A glass of bubbly and a 
couple of canape skewers later, though, he was all smiles.
 