
Once a sports photographer on the Telegraph <http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/>
 newspaper,Trent Parke <http://adelaidebiennial.com.au/artists/trent-parke/> is 
now feted by the worlds of art and photojournalism. He’s the only Australian to 
be a full member of the illustriousMagnum agency <http://www.magnumphotos.com/>
, and next year will see the entire basement of theArt Gallery of South 
Australia <http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/> given over to a work he is still 
developing, called Black Rose.

Nevertheless, Parke is refreshingly unpretentious. Originally from Newcastle, 
NSW, he turns up the Art Gallery of South Australia in thongs, threadbare jeans 
and a T-shirt. You can see how he’d blend into the background while 
photographing passers-by.

Street photography was Parke’s first love from first picking a camera up aged 
12, and one he has revisited in his remarkable new show, exhibited as part of
Dark Heart 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2014/visual_arts/adelaide_biennial_of_australian_art-dark_heart>
, the 2014 Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art.

Shown in a darkened room, the Camera Is God (street portrait series) 
<http://www.stillsgallery.com.au/exhibitions/index.php?obj_id=upcoming> 
features a wall of grainy black-and-white pictures of faces arranged in a grid 
pattern. On each of the other three walls hangs a single portrait, blown up to 
such a size that you need to stand well back before the dots resolve themselves 
into a recognisable image. It’s a very painterly treatment of a mundane 
subject: people crossing the road on a corner of King William Street, Adelaide, 
which Parke shot between March and Christmas last year.


He’d set up his tripod on the pedestrian crossing, and as the lights would 
change and people would start crossing the road, he would press the remote 
control shutter, which would automatically take about 30 pictures over a 
four-to-eight second period. “I was showing a friend in the initial stages and 
he said, ‘So the camera is actually playing God’ and that’s how the title came 
about,” says Parke. “It also has this sort of spiritual feel to it I guess. I 
wanted to represent the transience of the street, where you’re there for a 
split second and then you’re gone. Or when you have a dream about someone you 
don’t know, and when you wake up and try to remember them, you can’t grasp that 
hard outline of a person’s face.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F14%2Ftrent-parke-camera-play-god-street-portrait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F13%2F1394698257922%2F607d6e3e-c2bd-46d8-9d17-86c7e82e6332-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trent%20Parke%20lets%20his%20camera%20play%20God%20in%20inspired%20new%20street%20portrait%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F14%2Ftrent-parke-camera-play-god-street-portrait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trent%20Parke%20lets%20his%20camera%20play%20God%20in%20inspired%20new%20street%20portrait%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F14%2Ftrent-parke-camera-play-god-street-portrait%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F13%2F1394698257922%2F607d6e3e-c2bd-46d8-9d17-86c7e82e6332-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Trent Parke: ‘I find happiness in sadness.’ Photograph: Art Gallery of South 
Australia. 
Parke is intrigued about the way some of the portraits have a familiar 
quality, despite being totally anonymous. “When people are looking at it they 
go ‘Ah yeah, that’s Leonardo da Vinci’ and that’s also what I love about 
memory. I only ever photograph in Australia because the things that I’ve 
experienced over my lifetime have a way of coming up in my photographs. It’s 
those sorts of things – a person that you think you might almost know, that I 
might have seen in a dream – that attracts me looking through the negs. Or in a 
way that normal pop culture has just made certain faces visible I reckon on the 
wall there must be 40 there that people go ‘Oh yeah, that’s so and so’ and 
that’s what interests me as well. Those images that are already embedded in 
people’s minds that you can manipulate.”

The portraits are also somewhat melancholy. “That comes from my mum dying when 
I was young,” says Parke, adding that the mood has influenced the pictures he 
has taken ever since. “I find happiness in sadness in a strange way – there is 
something that uplifts me and keeps me waiting, looking for the next thing.”

His work is also characterised by its use of chance. Parke never shoots 
digitally, preferring the surprise of developing a film and seeing what he has 
captured. He’s also aware that his training as a sports photographer has made 
him good at anticipating things that are going to happen, which has proved 
invaluable in the rest of his photography.

Magnum is famous for its photojournalism, but Parke is certain that his work 
belongs in an art context more than a journalistic one. Besides, he says,Magnum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/magnum> now represents two types of 
people – “the artists and the photographer” – and he is the former. “I’ve 
always seen myself working in a way that was just personal. Yes, I document, 
there’s no digital manipulation to the images, they’re a single moment in time. 
But once they come into my world, I take 30, 40, 50 pictures, I sequence them 
in a way that then tells a completely different story and it’s my story. You 
can see them as a document or you can see the whole thing as a fiction and 
that’s what I really love – it’s about imagination.”

• 2014 Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art: Dark Heart 
<http://www.adelaidebiennial.com.au/> is on until 11 May 

 