
England’s and India’s cricketers landed in Chennai on Tuesday before the final 
Test of the series, just 24 hours after the city was battered by Cyclone 
Vardah, the storm that has claimed a reported 18 lives and wreaked devastation 
across the south‑east coast of the country.

The Tamil Nadu Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Association, which is hosting the fifth Test from Friday, has already said it 
expects the match to go ahead despite the power cuts and transport problems in 
the city caused by fallen trees. Both teams have been forced to cancel training 
on Wednesday as repairs are carried out at the Chepauk Stadium.

“The pitch and the outfield has not been affected by the cyclone. But the 
sightscreen has been damaged and bulbs have blown off [the floodlights],” the 
TNCA secretary, Kashi Viswanathan, said. “There have been hundreds of tree 
trunks lying in the road leading up to the stadium. Our challenge is to set 
everything in order. I am confident we will be able to.”

England are 3-0 down in the series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/ashwin-takes-six-wickets-as-india-clinch-series-against-england>
, which comes after a disappointing1-1 draw in Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/bangladesh-beat-england-draw-test-series>
, but the team’s head coach, Trevor Bayliss, has described the atmosphere in 
the squad as “upbeat” as they look to salvage some pride in what has been a 
gruelling pre-Christmas schedule.

High time England utilised judgment of the highly paid Trevor Bayliss | Vic 
Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/england-trevor-bayliss-india-alastair-cook-selection-county-cricket>
Bayliss also issued his latest endorsement of Alastair Cook’s continuation as 
captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/the-spin-alastair-cook-england-captaincy>
 beyond the current series, describing questions on the subject as a “pain in 
the backside”. Cook, who has previously stated a desire to return to the 
playing ranks, will discuss the matter with Andrew Strauss, the director of 
England cricket, in the new year during their usual end-of-series debrief.

While defeat away against the world’s No1 side was not unexpected – and the 
causes going beyond Cook’s on-field tactics – the pair must decide if he 
remains the right man to lead the current side into the Ashes tour next winter 
or whether it would be better for him to concentrate on his batting, hand over 
to his vice-captain Joe Root, and empower a new generation of senior players 
such as Ben Stokes andJonny Bairstow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-bairstow>. Publicly at least, 
Bayliss’s preference is for the status quo. The head coach said: “Since I’ve 
been with the team – and it’s not a secret we’re looking to develop some new 
young players – the job [Cook has] done pulling all of that together has been 
pretty good.

“From my point of view, and I think every other person in the changing room, I 
would be surprised and disappointed if he wasn’t captain [next year]. If [Cook 
and Strauss] want to have a chat between themselves, a couple of old opening 
partners, I’m more than happy with that. Strauss has been a bit of a mentor to 
him over the years. I’m sure at some stage after that I will know the results 
of what they have chatted about.

Alastair Cook backs Root for captaincy but will not rush decision to stand down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/alastair-cook-england-captaincy-joe-root-india-series-defeat>
“Out on the field, it would be easier if we had the five best batters in the 
world and the five best bowlers, but we’re going through a transition period 
with younger guys coming into the team and it’s difficult, away from home in 
foreign conditions, to be successful. When we aren’t, there are always these 
questions.”

Of the less experienced players in the side, Bayliss was keen to talk up Adil 
Rashid’s 22 wickets in the series, stating the leg-spinner had “gone up a 
level”, while enthusing about Ben Stokes’s all‑round performances and Jos 
Buttler’s return to the side as a specialist batsman.

The openers Haseeb Hameed and Keaton Jennings, who were also listed as pluses 
by the head coach, have been named in the England Lions tour of Sri Lanka in 
February, with Hameed expected to have recovered from a broken finger and 
Jennings named as captain.

The wicketkeeper Jonny Bairstow, meanwhile, goes into the fifth Test needing 
62 runs to pass Michael Vaughan’s England record of 1,481 runs in a calendar 
year. “That would be amazing but I can’t be thinking about 62 runs,” he said. 
“Having got an 89 already on this trip [in Mohali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-india-third-test-day-one-match-report>
], and past 50 a couple of times, I want to try and get a hundred in this 
series. So if I achieve that objective and the record is a byproduct of that 
then fair enough, it’ll top off a fairly decent year.”
 