
Trevor Bayliss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss> is not 
writing off England’s chances in India despite their struggles to get to grips 
with subcontinent conditions as they were humbled by Bangladesh in the second 
Test on Sunday.

Bangladesh open for business and ready to take on world after England win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/31/bangladesh-england-mushfiqur-rahim-test-win>
England had won all nine of their previous Tests against the Tigers but lost 
10 wickets in a session on day three in Dhaka to crash to a 108-run defeat. The 
series finished all-square with one win apiece.

The challenge of a five-Test series against the world No1, India, now looms 
large andeven the England captain Alastair Cook admitted they would be “pretty 
heavy underdogs” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/defeat-by-bangladesh-not-toughest-had-to-bear-england-alastair-cook>
.

Their batsmen were consistently troubled by the spinners, who comfortably 
outperformed their England counterparts, with the 19-year-old Mehedi Hasan 
taking 19 wickets in his first Test series.

While Bayliss is not underestimating the threat posed by India, he remains 
optimistic England can bounce back, having responded well to defeats in the 
past.

“It’s going to be difficult, that’s for sure,” the England coach told Sky 
Sports. “We’re going to have play some very good cricket but we’ve got that in 
us.

Alastair Cook: Defeat by Bangladesh is not the toughest I’ve had to bear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/defeat-by-bangladesh-not-toughest-had-to-bear-england-alastair-cook>
“We’ve shown in previous series we’ve been able to come back after losses and 
win. We’ve got to dig deep and be able to play a very good team playing in 
their home conditions. We always knew it was going to be tough here but our 
toughest assignment was always going to be India.”

Bayliss admitted there is “still a bit of a question mark” over a few places 
in the side, with Gary Ballance under considerable pressure after four-single 
figure scores. The Yorkshire batsman was retained despite averaging less than 
30 in four Tests against Pakistan last summer and failed to justify that faith 
as he was undone by Bangladesh’s spinners.

Bayliss added: “I’m sure he’s more disappointed than anyone else. He’s a guy 
that practises very hard, is very intense and he wants to do well so badly. 
That’ll be a discussion point, I’m sure.

“We’ve got two or three options in the batting but also in the bowling as 
well, so there will have to be some soul-searching in the next few days. Cook 
and I will sit down in the next two, three or four days and discuss that. Some 
have cemented a spot and others there’s still a bit of a question mark over.”
 