
Films based on popular toys are a dime a dozen. The quality of the end 
product, however, often varies wildly.

The Transformers franchise, while popular with audiences (a fifth installment 
is currently in the works), was a critical flop. The Lego Movie, meanwhile, 
exceeded all expectations, proving itself to be a surreally innovative animated 
comedy.

So where does Trolls – DreamWorks Animation’s big-screen gamble on the popular 
dolls with the candy-colored hair – fall on the spectrum? Based on footage 
previewed at theCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> on Wednesday, it could 
very well land at the top of the heap.

Welcome to the sausage party! Why we're about to see a new golden age of rude 
cartoons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/29/why-were-heading-into-a-new-age-of-r-rated-animated-films-seth-rogen-sausage-party>
Jeffrey Katzenberg, making what’s likely to be his last public appearance as 
DWA’s chief after selling the studio to Comcast for $3.8bn, introduced the 
scenes, while praising Cannes director Thierry Frémaux for embracing animation. 
Since Frémaux came into power at Cannes, DWA has done well by him. The studio’s 
defining film, Shrek, was included in the main competition in 2001. In total, 
as Katzenberg proudly pointed out, 16 DWA films have screened or debuted 
footage at the festival.

Trolls doesn’t look to be as groundbreaking as Shrek, which along with Toy 
Story shepherded in a new age of animated films with jokes geared towards 
adults. But it stands to be just as big a hit – and DWA desperately needs one.

 The studio’s recent slate of films, including Kung Fu Panda 3, Home and 
Penguins of Madagascar, have performed only moderately well, failing to hit the 
box-office heights set by Disney’s Frozen and Zootopia, and Universal’s 
Despicable Me franchise.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtDnRVKPjj8k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtDnRVKPjj8k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtDnRVKPjj8k&media=>
Like Frozen, Trolls has a strong musical backbone, with Anna Kendrick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anna-kendrick> singing her way through as 
Poppy, the head of Troll Village, where everyone is perpetually happy. So happy 
in fact that the trolls all wear a watch that rings every hour to remind them 
to hug the nearest troll.

In the clips, Poppy sang in every scene, much to the annoyance of Branch 
(voiced by Justin Timberlake), the only troll who doesn’t love life in Troll 
Village. The scenes showcased a relatively seamless fusion of popular songs 
like True Colors by Cyndi Lauper and Clint Eastwood by Gorillaz, with new 
originals written by Timberlake, who serves as executive music producer on the 
film.

The plot is simple, centering on Poppy and Branch’s dangerous mission to save 
Poppy’s friends after they’re kidnapped by troll-eating beasts. Directors Mike 
Mitchell and Walt Dohrn teased that as the odd couple’s journey progresses, 
their plight grows increasingly grim, causing the pair to lose their 
neon-colored hue. “Hopelessness doesn’t get more hopeless than when a Troll 
loses hope,” according to Mitchell.

Story-wise, Trolls is no doubt slim. Its charms lie in the lush animation 
(every character and object in the film have a fabric-like quality), kinetic 
energy, and an abundance of giggle-inducing sight gags (the audience at the 
Debussy theater especially enjoyed a bit where a scared troll pooped out 
cupcakes).

At the after-party, key industry players not affiliated with the picture went 
so far as to say the sophistication on display recalled Inside Out, the film 
that brought Pixar back to the creative fore following a rare crop of critical 
misfires. Trolls looks likely to follow in its footsteps.
 