
Troye Sivan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/troye-sivan> says the people at 
his record label A&R saw him play live only two weeks ago – despite signing the 
pop artist in 2013. “I know that 15, 20 years ago, record labels used to go and 
see artists play live 30 times before they even thought about signing them,” he 
says, down the line from Perth. “It’s definitely a sign of the changing times.”

Troye Sivan: Blue Neighbourhood review – immaculate doses of three-minute 
emotion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/04/troye-sivan-blue-neighbourhood-review->
Born in Johannesburg, Sivan moved to Australia with his family when he was 
two. The 20-year-old is a textbook case study of how to become a star in the 
21st century. He kicked off his acting career with a role in X-Men Origins: 
Wolverine and starred opposite John Cleese in the Spud film trilogy, but it was
YouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> that served as the 
foundation for his music career.

Dig a little and you can find a babyfaced Sivan singing covers of Justin Bieber
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JJs2JEfq3E0> and Amy Winehouse 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8L0tQUOqUpA>. Three years ago, he began to 
post more regularly. His slick, two-minute talking head vlog is a door into the 
world of pop and internet culture, sex, fashion and celebrity obsession that 
make up contemporary teenage life.

One of his more popular videos, Coming Out 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoL-MnXvK80>, from 2013, has clocked more than 
6m views. With beguiling simplicity, he tells the story of how he came to take 
his first nervous shuffles out of the closet (at 14 he confessed to his best 
friend he “might be” bisexual, which “opened up this thing” in his head, and 
culminated in telling his parents he was gay several months later). In the 
video, he says it “feels weird” to have to pronounce his sexuality, “but I feel 
like a lot of you guys are real, genuine friends of mine and I share everything 
with the internet”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJoL-MnXvK80&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJoL-MnXvK80>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJoL-MnXvK80&media=>
Sivan’s hometown of Perth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/perth-news>, a city of 2 million 
people on the far western coastline of Australia, can feel a world away from 
the epicentres of Western pop culture. Growing up, he assumed he would one day 
need to relocate to pursue a music career. “For me, even Sydney seemed so far 
away,” he says.

Taylor Swift and Troye Sivan: what their love-in means for Australian music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/09/taylor-swift-and-troye-sivan-what-their-love-in-means-for-australian-music>
But when comments in Italian, Portuguese and Chinese started appearing beneath 
his YouTube videos, Sivan realised he was reaching some pretty far-flung 
corners of the planet. His online popularity helped bolster the release of his 
EPs Trxye (2014) and Wild (2015). Both came in at No 5 on the US Billboard 
chart and earned the praise of namessuch as Taylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/09/taylor-swift-and-troye-sivan-what-their-love-in-means-for-australian-music>
 and Sam Smith. Not bad for a kid who still lives with his parents in the 
suburbs.

These days, Sivan is just as likely to be in London, New York or Paris. The 
main difference between his life now and two years ago is that he is “waking up 
in a lot more places than ever before”.

“As soon as I catch myself being a little too blase – ‘oh yeah I got to pack 
for London’ – I kind of want to slap myself a bit and be like: ‘hey dude, this 
is the most insane thing in the world’.”

He’s been “sick as a dog” for the past four days, the result of a particularly 
intense period of overseas touring. But a short spell at home, sweltering under 
an early spell of 40-degree weather, has proved the best medicine. “I’d gone 
from New York City to London to my little grocery store [in Perth] ... barefoot 
with my dad buying cordial so we could have ice-cold cordial by the pool. I 
literally felt like I was 10 years old again.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftroye-sivan-i-came-into-the-music-industry-as-an-out-person%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5da71c9b738d5e8a6456830d78d55fd381798b76%2F0_0_4800_7200%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Troye%20Sivan%3A%20I%20came%20into%20the%20music%20industry%20as%20an%20out%20person&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftroye-sivan-i-came-into-the-music-industry-as-an-out-person%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Troye%20Sivan%3A%20I%20came%20into%20the%20music%20industry%20as%20an%20out%20person&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftroye-sivan-i-came-into-the-music-industry-as-an-out-person%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5da71c9b738d5e8a6456830d78d55fd381798b76%2F0_0_4800_7200%2F4800.jpg>
 Troye Sivan: ‘Growing up, I was super, super aware and conscious of LGBT 
people and how singers and actors dealt with it.’ Photograph: EMI Music 
Perth is his “blue neighbourhood”, he says – the evocative and slightly 
enigmatictitle of his debut album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/04/troye-sivan-blue-neighbourhood-review->
. Blue is a nostalgic colour that makes him feel “happy-sad”. He associates the 
city with warm weather, the beach, his family and friends, and when he’s away 
touring it triggers a kind of bittersweet emotion. “It’s like you’re looking 
back on stuff that’s really, really changed and really, really different now. 
But you’re looking back on it, hopefully, with some real fondness.”

That nostalgia, I suggest, seems pervasive in youth culture today – from Lana 
del Rey’s dreamy, tragedy-streaked obsession with 1950s and 60s Hollywood, to 
the Tumblr cut-and-paste fetishisation of decades gone. “I’ve never thought 
about it like that before,” Sivan muses. “It’s kind of scary. I hope I’m 
enjoying everything that is happening and not just trying to make it look 
vintage on Instagram.”

If he were to remain in Perth, he would feel “suffocated”, he says. “I have a 
little bit of a complex relationship with home where I’m really, really 
obsessed with it – it’s my paradise – but at the same time I know that I’m 
thankful to live the life that I live where I get to go home for two weeks and 
then leave again before I get sick of it.”

I hope I’m enjoying everything that is happening and not just trying to make 
it look vintage on Instagram

The intricate, whispery electronica of Blue Neighbourhood draws on Sivan’s 
love of hip-hop and pop, from Kanye West to Lily Allen. But he has actively 
resisted the temptation to blindly follow trending sounds, no easy feat for a 
young artist still growing into his skin. “About a week before we were about to 
master the album, I was in America and I heard the Weeknd on the radio so many 
times that I was like, ‘well shit I need to go back and scrap everything and we 
need to make trap music’,” he says. His management team suggested he “just calm 
down and wait a little while”. He did, and realised he didn’t need to sound 
like the Weeknd; he just needed to sound like Troye Sivan.

His glossy trilogy of music videos drenched in indigo tones, also called Blue 
Neighbourhood <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fdXNNveYOfU>, tells the tale of 
two childhood friends and their budding teenage romance, ultimately torn apart 
by family dysfunction and repressed sexuality. Sivan says the project came 
about after watching the 2014 filmThe Imitation Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-imitation-game>, starring Benedict 
Cumberbatch as the mathematician Alan Turing, who “saved millions of people”, 
says Sivan, but who was persecuted for his sexuality, with fatal consequences.

“I left the cinema so frustrated and so distraught. I thought so much about 
all of the lives we’ve already lost and the potential we’ve already lost to 
LGBTIQ suicide and how much we’re still losing every single day and I just 
wanted to try doing something about it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfdXNNveYOfU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfdXNNveYOfU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfdXNNveYOfU&media=>
Much has changed since Turing’s time, he says, noting the marriage equality 
laws passed in the US in June, but there remains a lot to be done. “I think 
it’s really narrow-minded to push it to the side and say ‘yup, it’s all 
sorted’.” Trans children still have “an astronomically higher suicide rate and 
homelessness rate” compared with the general populace, he says, and in many 
countries around the world, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and 
queer people continue to face threats of physical violence.

Marriage equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/same-sex-marriage-australia> in Australia is 
“inevitable”, Sivan says. “It’s going to happen and it’s just about making it 
happen as soon as possible. I have a couple of years to wait – I don’t plan on 
getting married anytime soon, but I feel for the 90-year-old lesbian couple 
that have been dating for the last 60 years – one of them wants to put a ring 
on the other one. It’s just really, really sad that it’s taking this long.”

I note that for all the advances made in increasing the visibility of the 
LGBTIQ people, it is still unusual to see queer romances in popular culture.


Greg Gould tells his fans: I'm gay and I'm backing marriage equality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/31/greg-gould-im-gay-and-im-backing-marriage-equality>
“So, the main goal [of Blue Neighbourhood] was to speak about LGBTIQ suicide 
but then within the video there was a lot of little mini goals, one of them 
being putting a teenage gay relationship on TV or in music,” Sivan says. 
“Again, it wasn’t necessarily some big statement I was trying to make. I’m gay 
and I wrote the songs, so they’re about boys.”

Was he conscious of the history of LGBTIQ musicians who have omitted their 
sexuality from their music? “Growing up, I was super, super aware and conscious 
of LGBT people and how singers and actors dealt with it,” he says. “I saw a lot 
of covers of People magazine that said: ‘I’m gay’ and people having full-on 
photo shoots for it and I was like, ‘OK, that’s going to have to be me one 
day’, and it just seemed really, really terrifying to me.”

But Sivan’s budding musical and acting career was incubated in the YouTube 
fishbowl. As a teenager struggling to come to terms with his sexuality, the 
internet became “such an important resource” and the natural place to declare 
it. “Then I kind of realised that I’d bypassed that whole awkward ‘oh no, now 
I’m a singer and I have to come out’ thing – I came into the professional music 
industry as an out person.

“It’s always been really, really empowering and nice to write whatever I want 
to write and hopefully it will also inspire some other people.”

 * Blue Neighbourhood 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/album/blue-neighbourhood-deluxe/id1048237328> is 
out now on EMI
 