
At the end of the American civil war, before Reconstruction 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reconstruction_Era> could plant its feet solidly 
in the south, white people in the region fought to “redeem” their states from
freedmen <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freedman>, whom they saw as corrupt and 
ignorant, and northern rulers, whom they deemed to be corrupt opportunists. So 
bloody was the campaign that ultimately returned black people to near-slavery 
that one writer, Nicholas Lemann, described theredemption period 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redeemers>, from 1876 to the mid-1890s, as the 
last battle of the civil war. I remind you of this because the 
president-elect’s selection ofJeff Sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/jeff-sessions-racism-retaliation-donald-trump-douglas-wicks-thomas-figures>
 as attorney general suggests, perhaps more than any other appointment, that 
the redeemers have once again triumphed.

In the 20th century, after the successes of the civil rights movement, 
eventually a reincarnated redemption movement diminished the force of the 1960s 
civil rights laws and led to racialised mass incarceration. The prospect that 
the combined voice of a Sessions justice department and an altered supreme 
court may cut deeply into legal protections upon which minorities have relied 
since the civil rights movement deserves close analysis. Far more frightening, 
however, is the real possibility that the current regime will usher in an era 
of sustained political violence, reminiscent, in purpose if not precisely in 
kind, of what was experienced in the original redemption.

This sounds far-fetched, to be sure, but as we prognosticate over what the 
Trump presidency will mean, it would be a mistake to ignore how the US once 
legitimated and then paved over this long era of state-organised racial 
violence. Here is where traditional law-making, partisan politics and racial 
violence have historically intersected. If political violence was the fuel of 
the redemption machine, new disenfranchising laws comprised its chassis and the 
Democratic party was its engineer. What, then, can be learned from history that 
might help us stave off the most ruthless reactions to the two previous 
reconstructions?

Jeff Sessions as attorney general: a terrifying prospect for black Americans | 
Bakari Sellers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/jeff-sessions-terrifying-prospect-black-americans>
The presidential election of 1876, which brought to power Rutherford Hayes and 
led to the ejection of the Republican party in the south, marked the 
entrenchment of political terror against the newly emancipated citizens. In the 
aftermath, the freedom dreams of African Americans and their allies were 
replaced with an apartheid from which the nation has really never recovered.

After a political flowering in the wake of the civil war, the likes of which 
the country would not witness again for more than a century – about 2,000 black 
elected officials in the former Confederate states (including two US senators 
and a governor), a commitment to public education, agrarian reform and economic 
development in the south, a federalised civil rights regime – black people were 
stripped of legal protections and whipped, raped, lynched and defrauded back 
into submission.

Researchers have estimated that in the presidential election of 1880 black 
voter turnout in North Carolina <http://www.umich.edu/~lawrace/votetour5.htm> 
was 81%, a figure that dropped to 1% by the 1912 election. And while ablack 
North Carolinian was elected to Congress in 1897 
<http://history.house.gov/People/Listing/W/WHITE,-George-Henry-(W000372)/>, a 
second would not serve in thatbody until 1992 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eva_M._Clayton>. Literal, collectively enacted 
and virulent, the violence of the redemption was not distinct from its politics 
but rather the product of complex relations among actors aiming to redefine the 
political community.

Since the 1960s historians have termed the civil rights movement a second 
reconstruction. The second redemption, just as with the first, rested on the 
myth that white racial attitudes had so moderated that minority groups no 
longer needed protection; on this reading affirmative action policies and 
protections against disfranchisement were not only unnecessary but also 
unAmerican.

A casual study of the American past makes two things clear: first, racial 
progress proceeds in zigzag fashion – whether because, as thelegal theorist 
Derrick Bell <http://professorderrickbell.com/> argued, the white majority 
supports minority rights only if they converge with white interests, or because 
a full mapping of the US’s racial history has never been undertaken; and 
second, partisan politics both constructs and reflects distinct racial 
categories. In other words there is no racial nirvana ahead of us; rather, what 
we will have, given the US’s troubled history and disinclination to tackle it, 
is permanent contestation and contingency. Indeed, its political salience is 
precisely what renders race so reliably non-perishable.

White nationalists? Alt-right? If you see a Nazi, say Nazi | Lindy West
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/white-nationalists-alt-right-nazi-language-trump>
Barack Obama championed incremental change, perhaps because he believed that 
nothing else was possible in American politics. They may not have been 
earth-shattering but Obama’s successes – including the fact of his election – 
reflected a sort of third reconstruction, the antithesis of which is breathing 
heavily on the backs of people’s necks. That the Trump regime will aim to 
augment the voting power of its core rural constituency by expanding voter 
suppression laws and launching a full-throttled effort to repeal what is left 
of the Voting Rights Act is a given. Trump promised as much when he recently 
complained that“millions” of votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-scam-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton>
 were fraudulently cast, and Sessions has denied that restrictive laws have 
hurt black citizens in his home state of Alabama.

Also vulnerable are civil rights measures that were passed on commerce clause 
grounds, such as the equal employment opportunity provisions of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964, known asTitle VII 
<https://www.eeoc.gov/laws/statutes/titlevii.cfm>. Tea Party 
constitutionalists, echoing arguments by libertarian legal scholars such as the 
Hoover Institute’s Richard Epstein, claim that the supreme court has, since the 
1930s, improperly enlarged the scope of that clause to the detriment of 
individual liberties. While libertarian jurists may have aligned with 
traditional liberals on same-sex marriage, some of them also think that the 
commerce clause does not confer on Congress the power to forbid racial or 
gender discrimination by private companies. This seemed a preposterous 
position, but if it gains momentum in academic circles and adherents on the 
court, Title VII is one of scores of measures that could end up on the chopping 
block.

Redemption number three may bring us more than just the formal rollback of 
1960s-era civil rights laws. One thing is pretty certain: the resistance to 
this president is likely to be fierce and militant. And in response, the 
federal government, led by the Sessions justice department, may well launch a 
low-intensity war against the insurgents. Also to be expected is that poor and 
marginalised communities will be subjected to increased state violence in the 
form of police brutality, mass criminalisation and incarceration, and other 
forms of violence, both attritional and lethal.

The line between legal and extra-legal violence could fade as it typically 
does in times of heightened political or racial conflict – and as it did in the 
first redemption, when even moderate white people kept silent in the face of 
the Ku Klux Klan’s butchery because they sought a speedy return to white rule 
in the south.

Trump’s demonising 
<https://thinkprogress.org/trump-vows-to-beat-up-black-lives-matter-protesters-if-they-try-to-speak-at-his-campaign-events-deaac9b8d006#.jymnma6tl>
 of theMovement for Black Lives <https://policy.m4bl.org/> (a coalition of US 
groups representing black communities, including Black Lives Matter) has 
reinforced the perceptions of many white people that they are a distinctive 
community threatened with extinction by “black” crime. One can expect that 
white racial solidarity, mobilised by economic anxiety, prejudice and Trump’s 
“Make America Great Again” nation-building project, will incline white people 
to justify extra-legal violence and incorporate it into beliefs about what the 
law actually permits. The president-elect’s campaign, which mixed fear and 
stereotypes to generate violence, created the kind of climate in which 
vigilantism thrives, and nothing in the post-election weeks has changed this 
picture.

Trump’s tribe: any colour as long as it’s white | Rula Jebreal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/24/donald-trump-white-latino-america>
Clearly this will not be redemption redux, and one would hope that the rule of 
law would hold, but it is also true that, notwithstanding the horrors of the 
20th century, we don’t really understand what persuades ordinary people to 
butcher their neighbours and co-citizens. Americans are just as human as 
Rwandans, Germans and Serbians; no more, no less.

The first reconstruction opened, for an exhilarating moment, a window through 
which former slave communities could envision a new political life. The 
post-reconstruction counter-revolutions suggest that such instants of 
transformation can be quickly subverted, and that the challenge of recapturing 
what was lost is arduous and protracted.

The myth that racism is dead has been variously styled “separate but equal”, 
“colourblindness” and “post-racialism”. Whatever the term, it is the duty of 
all of us who fear for the US to remember that though racial attitudes are not 
unalterable or homogeneous, race will always register and resistance will 
always resurface. Revolutionaries holding alternative understandings of what 
ails America as a nation – “it’s the ‘class struggle’, stupid” – who want to 
win elections, or transform power relations more fundamentally, would do well 
to examine the politics of the redemption – and that 95-year gap in North 
Carolina.
 