
Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> has taken a £745m 
hit from its TSB branch network, denting profits at the bailed-out bank in the 
first three months of the year.

But shares in the bank jumped more than 7% to above 83p as analysts considered 
whether to upgrade their profit and dividend forecasts.

 António Horta-Osório, the Lloyds boss, who was paid £11.5m in 2014, said in 
February the bank would pay a dividend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/27/lloyds-pays-antonio-horta-osorio-11m-resumes-dividend-after-six-years>
 for the first time since the 2008 bailout. An increase in the bank’s capital 
cushion during the first three months of the year has helped fuel expectations 
that the size of the payout could rise rapidly in the future.

The 11% fall in profits to £1.2bn in the first three months of this year was 
largely caused by Lloyds being forced to sell off its 631-strongTSB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tsb> branch network, imposed as a 
condition of its 2008 taxpayer bailout.

Lloyds said it would take no further charges from TSB, which is being sold to 
the Spanish bank Sabadell. The £745m hit includes the cost of running the bank 
and a £660m charge for helping the buyer build new IT systems.

 The government originally took a 43% stake in Lloyds but this has fallen to 
20.95% through a series of share sales. The stake could drop another percentage 
point in the coming days under the terms of a sell-off plan being adopted by 
the government, which breaks even when the share price is above 73p.

Profits were also boosted by the lack of any further provision for payment 
protection insurance compensation, which has cost the bank £12bn since 2011, 
and a fall in bad debt charges which were just £177m, down by 59%.

RBS warns of tough times ahead after setting aside £856m for charges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/30/rbs-makes-loss-after-setting-aside-856m-for-fines-and-charges>
The finance director, George Culmer, was careful not to rule out any further 
PPI charges and pointed out the bank still had £1.7bn set aside for 
compensation payments. “A number of risks and uncertainties remain, in 
particular the total expected future complaint volumes,” the bank said.

The bank also signalled the bad debt charge would rise through the rest of the 
year but less quickly than it had anticipated, and it would remain in sharp 
contrast to the first year of its bailoutwhen the bad debt charge was £13.4bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/aug/05/lloyds-blames-hbos-for-debts>.

Horta-Osório focused on a 21% rise in underlying profits to £2.1bn. “We have 
made a strong start to the next phase of our strategy to become the best bank 
for customers and shareholders, as we continue to support and benefit from UK 
economic growth,” he said.

Analysts at Shore Capital said the reduced guidance on future bad debt charges 
and an improvement in the bank’s net interest margin – a measure of 
profitability – indicated that profit forecasts may need to be raised.

“Unlike peers that have reported so far, there were no further legacy 
charges,” Gary Greenwood at Shore Capital, said. Royal Bank of Scotlandset 
aside £856m for more conduct-related matters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/30/rbs-makes-loss-after-setting-aside-856m-for-fines-and-cha>
, while Barclaysset aside nearly £1bn for PPI and other conduct issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/29/barclays-sets-aside-further-1bn-forex-rigging-ppi-mis-selling>
.
 