
This year’s $1m AM Turing Award goes to a pair of cryptographers whose ideas 
helped make internet commerce possible, and who now argue that giving 
governments a “back door” into encrypted communications puts everyone at risk.

Whitfield Diffie, a former chief security officer of Sun Microsystems, and 
Martin Hellman, a professor emeritus of electrical engineering at Stanford 
University, introduced the ideas of public-key cryptography and digital 
signatures back in 1976. The concepts are still used today to secure all kinds 
of communications and financial transactions.

Their award, from the Association for Computing Machinery and mostly funded by 
Google, is named for the British mathematician Alan Turing and is one of the 
most prestigious prizes in computing. The honor comesamid a pitched battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/27/apple-fbi-congressional-hearing-iphone-encryption>
 between the FBI and Apple, which is resisting government pressure to help the 
government hack into a terrorist’s iPhone.

Crunch time for Apple as it prepares for face-off with FBI
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/27/apple-fbi-congressional-hearing-iphone-encryption>
Hellman told the Associated Press that he’s sympathetic to the plight of FBI 
director James Comey and those investigating theDecember attack in San 
Bernardino, California, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-bernardino-shooting> where an Islamic 
extremist couple killed 14 people before dying in a gun battle with police.

But Hellman said that giving the FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> 
what it wanted would unleash “huge” consequences that could not be contained.

“The problem isn’t so much with this first request, it’s the precedent that it 
would set and the avalanche of requests that would follow,” Hellman said, 
adding that many would likely come from less democratic governments such as 
China, Russia and Saudi Arabia.

Hellman said he would sign on to one of the many friend-of-the-court briefs 
backing Apple in the case. Tech giants such as Google, Microsoft, Facebook and 
Twitter havepledged to participate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/29/apple-fbi-encryption-battle-supporters-technology-politics>
 as well.

Diffie also has advocated against giving “back doors” to law enforcement, 
coauthoring a paper with other prominent cryptographers last year that urged 
the US government to carefully consider the risks.

Hellman, now 70, said the encryption technologies he and Diffie invented in 
the 1970s did not make them popular with the government. Before their research, 
encryption had mainly been the realm of government entities such as the NSA. 
Their work allowed it to spread to the private sector.

Hellman said it was nice to be recognized with the award, one of a handful he 
has received for his work in encryption over the years. He plans to use his 
$500,000 share to fund the publication of a book he is writing with his wife of 
nearly 49 years that looks at what goes into a successful marriage and how 
those same principles can be applied to creating a more peaceful and 
sustainable world.

“Holistic solutions are what we need to get past our narrow visions and get to 
something that works for everyone,” he said.

Past recipients have included Douglas Englebart, who developed the mouse and 
other computing technologies, and Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn, who developed the key 
communications technology behind the internet.


 