
According to data by CEB 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/uk-job-vacancies-fall-700000-in-the-week-after-brexit-data-shows-a7124686.html>
, job adverts fell by 700,000 in the week after the British people voted to 
leave the European Union. So if you were thinking of changing jobs, you may be 
thinking you should put your CV on ice. No one likes uncertainty and until 
there is more clarity about our future relationship with the EU and the impact 
of a Brexit on the jobs market, the outlook is uncertain.

However, we need to focus on the positives. It may not be as bad as we fear – 
the UK is still the sixthlargest economy 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/06/24/france-overtakes-uk-as-fifth-largest-economy-as-pound-plummets-5964746/>
 in the world; plus, findings from aBank of England survey 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/2016/jul.aspx> 
of its nationwide agents revealed that two thirds of firms are pressing on with 
hiring plans as normal.

Now is actually the time to start thinking how you can turn the current 
situation to your advantage and get ahead of the game.

Don’t think everyone has stopped recruiting

The news would certainly have us believe that employers are not hiring, but 
actually it is likely that firms who put recruitment on hold pre-Brexit now 
need to fill the vacancies they froze until the EU referendum result was 
announced.

Do your research and check whether the industry you are interested in is 
advertising. And be proactive by sending out tailored applications to the 
companies you want to work for – they might just arrive in a recruiting 
manager’s inbox at the right time. Remember that August is always a bit quieter 
on the job front but the autumn will see an increase in recruitment, so be 
ready.

Odds of getting a job may improve as others give up

Competition for jobs may be reduced post-referendum, as many job hunters 
assume it’s not a good time to apply for jobs, and there may be fewer EU 
nationals applying for roles in the UK.

Prepare and get ready to be proactive

If you feel more cautious or your industry is more affected by the referendum 
result, as is financial services for example, then you may decide to put your 
job search on hold. If you do, then use the time you have to prepare.

Investing time in crafting a really strong CV and updating your LinkedIn 
profile will reap benefits. Again, do your research and think about what you 
can bring to a company – what changes might a potential Brexit cause in your 
industry, and how can you contribute? You can drill down even further and 
consider what leaving the EU will mean to your profession and what new skills 
or knowledge you could focus on developing to be able to deal with future 
challenges.

Work after Brexit: the biggest winners and losers for UK jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/may/23/work-after-brexit-the-biggest-winners-and-losers-for-uk-jobs>
Make sure you highlight these areas in your applications – it demonstrates you 
are thinking strategically and are commercially aware.

Attend networking events and schedule lunches

 Employers will continue to recruit using non-traditional routes, so building 
a sound network and letting your contacts know that you’re looking for a job 
can be an effective way to hear about potential vacancies. It is also a good 
way to find out what employers will be looking for post-Brexit. Be clear about 
your message and how you can add value.

Re-evaluate and reach out to recruiters

Similarly, taking time to develop strong relationships with recruiters is a 
good investment of your time. Find out which agencies your industry respects 
and uses, and work hard to get to meet them so you can talk about what you have 
to offer and what you want to get from your next role. Sometimes the small 
boutique agencies can offer a more personalised service, and also give you 
useful feedback on the market trends and what employers are looking for.

Stay positive

Having an optimistic outlook will be attractive to potential employers. When 
times are tough, employers want team members who help maintain morale rather 
than contributing to the office moans. Make sure at interviews that you show 
how resilient you are and how you can cope with adversity. These will be 
valuable and sought-after traits in the coming months.

Sarah Archer is a career coach and co-founder of CareerTree 
<http://www.careertree.org.uk/>.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 