
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has begun calling the five lower house independents who could decide who forms 
the next Australian government, despite arguing throughout the election 
campaign that minority government would be chaotic and a disaster for the 
nation.


Facing the real possibility of falling short of the 76 seats he needs to form 
a majority government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/jul/02/live-australian-election-results-track-the-votes>
, Turnbull began contingency planning, making calls on Sunday morning that 
Tasmanian independent Andrew Wilkie said were aimed at ensuring “channels of 
communication” were open.

Australia's double-dissolution election backfires badly with likely Senate 
makeup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/australias-double-dissolution-election-backfires-badly-with-likely-senate-makeup>
Liberal strategists agreed it was possible Turnbull would fall short of a 
majority. Labor sources said on Sunday they believed a hung parliament was now 
the most likely outcome. TheCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> suffered a nationwide 
3.7% swing and has lost 11 seats to Labor, with at least six more in doubt. 
Results will not be known until counting resumes on Tuesday.

A hung parliament would leave each leader seeking to form a government with 
some degree of backing from the five lower house independents –Cathy McGowan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cathy-mcgowan>, Andrew Wilkie, Bob 
Katter and the new Nick Xenophon Team MP, Rebekha Sharkie. Greens MP Adam Bandt 
has said he could not support the Coalition.

It opens the prospect of a repeat of 2010 when Australia waited 17 days while 
Julia Gillard and Tony Abbott sought to form a government.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Faustralian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20federal%20election%3A%20what%20just%20happened%2C%20and%20what%20comes%20next%3F%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Faustralian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20federal%20election%3A%20what%20just%20happened%2C%20and%20what%20comes%20next%3F%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Faustralian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video&media=>
Australian federal election: what just happened, and what comes next? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/jul/03/australian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video>
But this time neither leader would be able to secure formal agreements from 
many on the crossbench, as Gillard did.

Wilkie and Victorian independent Cathy McGowan have said they will do no 
formal deal with either party, but have left open the prospect of agreeing to 
pass supply and allowing a government to function unless the parliament saw 
reason to pass a vote of no confidence.

Even if Turnbull wins, he loses. And even if Shorten loses, he wins | Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/even-if-turnbull-wins-he-loses-and-even-if-shorten-loses-he-wins>
Speaking to reporters in Tasmania, where he easily retained his seat of 
Denison, Wilkie said: “The prime minister called me this morning, and there is 
actually no remarkable substance of that discussion to recount to you. It was 
ensuring that the channels of communication are open and I took the opportunity 
to tell him of my election commitment to the community about no deals, and he 
was quite understanding about that.

“I want to make it absolutely clear again today that I went to this election 
with a position that I would not enter into any form of agreement with any 
party to allow them to form government and nothing has changed,” he said.

“And no informal agreement either. To be absolutely clear, I will approach 
every item of parliamentary business on its merits, including budget supply, 
including confidence. That’s not to say that there isn’t a negotiation over 
every vote, over every bill, over every motion. There has to be.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Felection-results-the-story-of-australias-federal-election-night-vid&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Election%20results%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Australia's%20federal%20election%20night%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Felection-results-the-story-of-australias-federal-election-night-vid>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Election%20results%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Australia%27s%20federal%20election%20night%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Felection-results-the-story-of-australias-federal-election-night-vid&media=>
Election results: the story of Australia’s federal election night – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/03/election-results-the-story-of-australias-federal-election-night-vid>
Turnbull also called Cathy McGowan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cathy-mcgowan> on Sunday to 
congratulate her on her victory, telling her he still thought he could get a 
majority.

She told him she would do no formal deal. She has said she would look at every 
piece of legislation that comes up as she has done for the past two and a half 
years and consult her community.
Cathy McGowan (@Indigocathy) 
I will not be making any deals with any party. The prime minister is confident 
he will form majority government#indivotes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/indivotes?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Indigocathy/status/749417124917940224> July 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Indigocathy/status/749417124917940224> 
Greens leader senator Richard Di Natale said on Sunday the Greens would now 
have to “sit down and have constructive negotiations with the Labor party to 
see what multiparty government looks like.”

South Australian senator Nick Xenophon said he also thought Turnbull would 
“just get across the line”, but if there was a hung parliament he and his party 
would “sit down in good faith from the perspective of the political centre to 
talk to both sides of politics”.

He said a “big factor” in deciding who to support would be which party had won 
the most seats. “You would be silly to ignore the weight of arithmetic,” he 
said.

Bob Katter <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bob-katter>, who was 
part of the 17 days of negotiations in 2010 when Gillard and Abbott sought the 
support of the independents but ultimately did not do a deal, said he was 
“already working on a list of demands”.

“There will definitely be a very powerful position for Xenophon and myself to 
play and forAndrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>,” he said.

Katter’s demands in 2010 were sweeping 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/special-features/bob-katters-list-of-demands/story-fn5ko0pw-1225913732845>
 and covered almost every aspect of government policy.

Gillard eventually signed agreements with the Greens, and independents Rob 
Oakeshott, Tony Windsor and Andrew Wilkie. But the reality was not much 
different to a major party governing with only the basic assurances of supply 
and confidence. Wilkie ended the deal in 2012, the Greens ended theirs in 2013 
and the government continued.

During the election campaign both leaders signed a “solemn pledge” drafted by 
the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/federal-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-pledge-to-never-repeat-gillardgreens-experiment/news-story/c62ed14911e5c4b4933934586416adb6>
 ruling out a “deal or alliance” with the Greens, but neither entirely ruled 
out seeking to govern in the event of a hung parliament if enough of the 
crossbench agreed to the two basic prerequisites – to support the money bills 
needed for the government to function and not to support a no-confidence motion 
moved by the other side.
 