
As anyone who has ever bought avocados will know, the ripeness window for the 
fruit is around 17 minutes. Before that, it’s solid and nutty. After, brown and 
mushy. So-called “ripe and ready” products are a lie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/feb/19/my-quest-perfectly-ripe-avocado>
. Once sliced or pulped, it’s a matter of seconds before smooth, fresh green 
flesh becomes musty and oxidized.


Avocado shortage fuels crime wave in New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/15/avocado-thieves-shortage-crime-fruit-black-market-new-zealand>
To remove the guesswork from this pear-shaped ticking time bomb, an Australian 
company has developed an “avocado time machine”. The Natavo Zero is an enormous
Bertha-esque <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=coZfzTcv4bA> contraption that 
slows down the browning process of the fruit without using chemicals. It does 
this by “switching off” the enzyme responsible for the browning (called
polyphenol oxidase 
<http://www.compoundchem.com/2014/08/03/why-do-avocados-turn-brown-the-chemistry-of-avocados/>
) using pressure fluctuations generated by steam. In doing this, the machine 
also eliminates disease-causing bugs.

The Natavo Zero, designed for pre-sliced or mashed avocado used in products 
like guacamole, can process about 4,000 avocados an hour. The end product then 
no longer needs additives, preservatives or processing aids to retain its green 
vibrancy. It also leads to less wastage and spoilage, meaning a higher yield 
for farmers and more avocados to have on the side of, well,everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/02/avocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked>
. This is welcome news to anyone concerned about this year’s Great Avocado 
Shortage, which hasfuelled a crime wave in New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/15/avocado-thieves-shortage-crime-fruit-black-market-new-zealand>
.

Ripe and ready: how ‘evil geniuses’ got us hooked on avocados
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/02/avocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked>
“By understanding the avocado’s lifecycle and the complex correlation of 
enzymes involved in the browning process, we have made it possible for the 
world to enjoy 100% natural, ready-to-eat avocado slices, dices, chunks or 
pulped products while retaining the flavour and fresh taste of avocado, without 
browning,” said Jeff Hastings, director ofNaturo 
<http://www.naturotechnologies.com/>, the company that makes the Natavo Zero, 
in a statement.

It’s not the only system developed to keep tabs on avocado ripeness. 
California-based avocado distributor Calavo uses acontraption called ProRipe VIP
 <http://calavo.com/storepdfs/ProRipeVIP-Brochure.pdf> that measures how ripe 
the fruits is by “listening” to it. The machine taps the side of the avocado 
and then uses sensors to measure the acoustic response – that is, the way the 
fruit vibrates. This indicates overall firmness and freshness and allows Calavo 
to determine the ripeness of the tricky-to-judge flesh.

Unfortunately for avocado aficionados, these technologies are only available 
at an industrial scale. You’ll have to make do with rubbing lemon juice on the 
exposed flesh or wrapping the fruit tightly with cling film. Or perhaps it’s 
time to accept that theavocado is overcado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/05/the-avocado-is-overcado-how-culture-caught-up-with-fashion>
.
 