
It is feared that millions of TV viewers across the world will not be able to 
see live images of the 70th anniversary celebration of D-Day because of a 
decision by the French to charge international news agencies for access.

Two French broadcasters - the public service, France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> Televisions, and the private station 
TF1 - have been granted exclusive live rights to Friday's commemoration.

The two companies are seeking nearly €200,000 (£163,000) from Agence 
France-Presse, theAssociated Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-press>, Reuters and ENEX (a 
global network of private TV outlets), for the rights to re-transmit the 
ceremonies live, including online.

All four companies have challenged the proposed fees, insisting that access to 
ceremonies should be free. They will be attended by 19 heads of state, 
including the Queen and US presidentBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>.

The agencies have pointed out that D-Day veterans who are unable to travel to 
Normandy could be among those who will be deprived of the opportunity to watch 
ceremonies intended to celebrate their heroism and the sacrifice of their 
comrades.

"The commercialisation of this historic event is shocking," said Philippe 
Massonnet, AFP's global news director.

It is claimed that the decision to charge for access was made in the office of 
French presidentFrançois Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande>.

AP's executive editor, Kathleen Carroll, accused the French of charging 
"prohibitive sums". She said: "We are dismayed that the Élysée Palace is 
denying the Associated Press and other international news agencies fair access 
to live broadcast coverage of D-Day commemorations."

The agencies have lodged a formal protest with the French presidency and are 
continuing to lobby for a last-minute change of policy.

Both TF1 and France Television insist that the fee is reasonable. Yannick 
Letranchant of France Televisions said access for an agency would cost about 
€32,000 (£26,000) for the day.

TF1's deputy news director, Catherine Nayl, explained that the channels would 
have to spend "several hundreds of thousands of euros" to cover the event.

"Active discussions" are reportedly being held between the French broadcasters 
and the agencies are reported to be continuing in the hope of agreeing a 
last-minute deal.

The decision will not affect the BBC's coverage because it is a member of the 
European Broadcasting Union, which represents public service media.

The Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen> will attend the principal 
international D-Day ceremony on Sword Beach, where thousands of British 
soldiers went ashore on 6 June 1944. She will then make a state visit to Paris.

Sources: Private information/Yahoo News 
<http://news.yahoo.com/news-agencies-cry-foul-over-tv-rights-d-203527318.html>/
Daily Express 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/world/479453/France-accused-of-profiting-D-Day-anniversary-commemoration>
 