
A new instalment of Katie Price's ITV2 documentary series covering the model's 
turn on I'm a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here! and romance withAlex Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alex-reid> attracted nearly 1.4 million 
viewers last night, Thursday 11 February.

What Katie Did Next attracted 1.38 million viewers and a 5.8% share in the 9pm 
hour, according to unofficial overnights.

The ITV2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/itv2> show was the most-watched 
multichannel programme of the day by some margin and not far off the 9pm 
offering on Channel Five, Extreme Fishing with Robson Green, which had 1.583 
million and a 6.6% share.

Multichannel competition in the 9pm hour included new episodes of US sitcom 
imports The Big Bang Theory and How I Met Your Mother on E4, with 533,000 
(2.2%) and 353,000 (1.5%), respectively.

A new episode of US legal drama The Good Wife brought 218,000 (0.9%) to More4 
in the same slot, while BBC3 entertainment series Dancing on Wheels debuted 
with 518,00 (2.2%), and BBC4 documentary series The Great Offices of State 
continued with 454,000 (1.9%).

In a slot with plenty of competition from first run multichannel programmes, 
Bill Bailey's Birdwatching Bonanza had 75,000 (0.3%).

Repeats rated well for ITV3, ITV4 and More4 at 9pm. Wycliffe on ITV3 attracted 
475,000 (2%), while Arnold Schwarzenegger movie Commando had 499,000 (2.4%). 
Another film repeat, The Godfather Part II, drew 313,000 over nearly four hours 
on More4 from 9pm.

In the 10pm hour, Skins continued on E4 with 670,000 (3.7%), up against BBC3's 
narrative repeat of EastEnders, watched by 925,000 (4.5%). A new episode of 
More4's US drama Brothers & Sisters attracted 246,000 (1.3%) in the same slot.

ITV1's The Bill came out on top in the 9pm hour, attracting 4.017 million 
viewers and a 16.8% share.

In the same slot a Silent Witness on BBC1 had 3.659 million (15.3%), while 
Channel 4 documentary Leaving Home at Eight attracted 1.904 million (8%). 
Another 193,000 (1.1%) watched an hour later on Channel 4 +1.

BBC2's Thursday night comedy offering began with Mock the Week, watched by 
2.769 million (11.4%) in the half hour from 9pm. Then Rab C Nesbitt attracted 
1.721 million (7.3%) and from 10pm Bellamy's People had 929,000 (4.5%).

The second episode of the third series of Alan Carr: Chatty Man was watched by 
1.317 million (6.9%) on Channel 4 in the 10pm hour. A further 109,000 (1%) 
watched on Channel 4 +1.

In the 8pm hour BBC1 comedy drama Material Girl improved slightly on last 
week's 2.4 million, attracting 2.584 million (10.4%).

Simon King's Shetland Diaries continued with 2.803 million (11.3%) in the same 
slot, with Channel 4's My Dream Farm watched by 1.259 million (5.1%), plus an 
extra 225,000 (0.9%) on Channel 4 +1.

ITV1's soaps have taken a firm hold of the 8pm Thursday hour since last year's 
scheduling switch created an Emmerdale/Coronation Street double bill.

Last night Emmerdale led off at 8pm with 8.038 million (33%), followed by 
Coronation Street on 9.231 million (36.2%).

Five's Build a New Life in the Country brought up the rear in the 8pm hour 
with 973,000 (3.9%).

Earlier, EastEnders was the most-watched show of the day, attracting 9.447 
million (41%) in the buildup to next week's live episode to celebrate the BBC1 
soap's 25th anniversary.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 