
UCAS <http://www.ucas.com/> has released it's official 2012 application 
figures. Home student numbers are down by almost 10% in the wake of the fees 
increase to £9,000 per year.

But how do the stats break down by age and socio-economic group? And is this a 
temporary blip? Applications fell dramatically when fees of £3000 per year were 
introduced, but climbed back up again over time. So what might the future hold?

The Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2093836/Tuition-fees-increase-Middle-class-priced-university-applications-fall-nearly-10.html>
 and Telegraph writers are particularly concerned about the "squeezed middle 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/universityeducation/9049985/University-applications-drop-amid-fears-over-student-debt.html>
." Applications from the middle classes fell by slightly more than those from 
the poorest households. The Telegraph's Graeme Paton put this down to the 
"generous system of grants and fee-waivers established to insulate poorer 
candidates from the fee hike."

But in her regular Reality Check column the Guardian's Polly Curtis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/reality-check-with-polly-curtis/2012/jan/31/higher-education-tuition-fees>
 pointed out that "there are some caveats. The first is that far fewer students 
from the poorest backgrounds applied to university even before higher fees: 
more than half of the richest students apply, while fewer than one in five of 
the poorest do.

Even children from those families in the middle of the income curve are around 
75% more likely than those at the bottom to apply to university."

Jeevan Vasaga 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2012/jan/30/uk-university-applications-drop-ucas>
r threw a population quirk into the pot: there are 1.4% less 18 year-olds this 
year than in 2011.

The average fall across the UK was 8.7%, but applications from students based 
in England – who pay the highest fees – fell the most with a drop of 9.9%.

Scottish students numbers – where tuition remains free – fell by just 1.5%. 
The number of Welsh youngsters applying fell by 1.9%. (Remember that population 
decline ... of 1.4%)

It appears that mature students – those over 21, were most put off by the 
increased fees.

In England 2,417 (14.7%) fewer 21-year-olds applied to university this year, 
and 1,300 (15.3%) fewer 23-year-olds. While the number of applicants aged from 
25-29 fell by 2,399 (12.2%) and from 30-39 by 2,102 (10.8%). And this is 
despite a massive 2009-2010 spike of over half a million redundancies.

Tellingly, the number of mature students applying to go to universities in the 
rest of the UK this year is almost identical to the number who applied in 2011.

In Wales the number of 30-39 year olds applying increased slightly, from 980 
to 984, while the number of 25-29 year olds fell by just 76.

For younger students, NUS president Liam Burns thinks that the story might 
change when clearing comes around.

His suspicion is that many who didn't apply because they were put off by fees 
will have changed their mind by the time clearing comes around.

"Clearing will be really interesting this year," he told the Guardian, "Anyone 
who has actively said 'I'm not going because of fees', very quickly might think 
'Well, what other opportunities have I got? Youth unemployment is sky 
rocketing, the Future Jobs Fund has been cut, college isn't anywhere near as 
accessible as it used to be, what are my other options?' "

Burns says the NUS is particularly interested in seeing what type of student 
goes to what type of university – for example how the coalition's HE policy 
affects were poorer students go to study"that's when we'll see the effect of 
tuition fees."

"What I think is you will see poorer students going to 'less' prestigious 
institutions, and those from more privileged backgrounds getting access to the 
more prestigious institutions because the whole system is set up to protect 
them."

"I don't want to fall into the trap of saying that applications will bottom 
out in terms of numbers, I think it will be different types of students going 
to different types of universities."

"I think we can get distracted by application numbers. Core and Margin is 
going to massively destabilise the sector. We will find out who the winners and 
losers are," he said.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 