
Britain has blocked European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
efforts to establish an independent international inquiry into the war in 
Yemen, prompting dismay among human rights groups.

The Netherlands had hoped to garner broad support for its proposal that the UN 
Human Rights Council (HRC) in Geneva set up an inquiry to examine civilian 
deaths inYemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, where the Saudi 
Arabia-led coalition is accused of committing war crimes.

Instead, with the UK refusing to give its backing, the Netherlands’ proposal 
for an international inquiry – submitted on Friday by Slovakia on behalf of the 
EU – was replaced with a much weaker one that the office of the UN high 
commissioner for human rights (OHCHR) dispatch a mission “with assistance from 
relevant experts, to monitor and report on the situation ... in Yemen”. This 
falls far short of what human rights groups and the OHCHR had wanted.

In an open letter to the HRC, Human Rights Watch and other campaign groups 
claim an international inquiry would help to “establish the facts, collect and 
preserve information related to violations and abuses with a view to ensuring 
that those responsible for crimes are brought to justice in fair trials”.

Foreign secretary Boris Johnson last week rejected the need for such an 
inquiry, arguing that the UK was “using a very, very wide variety of 
information sources about what is happening to acquaint ourselves with the 
details” about Yemen.

But the revelation that the UK neutered EU attempts to bring about such an 
investigation is likely to raise questions about its motives. Since the 
conflict began, the UK has sold more than £3bn worth of weapons and military 
equipment to the Saudis and defence contractors hope more deals are in the 
pipeline.

“Blocking attempts to create an international inquiry is a betrayal of the 
people of Yemen who have suffered so much during this conflict,” said Polly 
Truscott of Amnesty International. “It’s shocking. The UK ought to be standing 
up for justice and accountability, not acting as a cheerleader for arms 
companies.”

Andrew Smith of Campaign Against Arms Trade said: “For 18 months now, UK arms 
have been central to the destruction of Yemen. The aid that is being given 
amounts to a small fraction of the damage that has been caused and pales in 
comparison to the£3.3bn worth of arms that have been licensed. 
<https://www.caat.org.uk/campaigns/stop-arming-saudi> Theresa May and Boris 
Johnson must end the arms sales and put a stop to the uncritical support that 
the UK provides for the Saudi regime.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fyemen-britain-human-rights-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3588e7c92aa60c4049c012f2c00397959a0ba241%2F1385_0_2624_3280%2F2624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20accused%20of%20blocking%20UN%20inquiry%20into%20claim%20of%20war%20crimes%20in%20Yemen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fyemen-britain-human-rights-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20accused%20of%20blocking%20UN%20inquiry%20into%20claim%20of%20war%20crimes%20in%20Yemen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fyemen-britain-human-rights-inquiry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3588e7c92aa60c4049c012f2c00397959a0ba241%2F1385_0_2624_3280%2F2624.jpg>
 International trade secretary Liam Fox has received a demand from 200 doctors 
to halt arms sales to Saudi Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
Amnesty and Human Rights Watch claim that, since the Saudi-led coalition 
entered the conflict in March 2015, 3,799 civilians have been killed and more 
than 6,700 wounded, including at least 1,444 civilian deaths since the HRC 
failed to create an international inquiry a year ago. The groups have 
documented more than 70 “unlawful” coalition airstrikes – on homes, hospitals, 
markets, civilian factories and schools – some of which, they say, may amount 
to war crimes, and which have killed at least 913 civilians.

An airstrike on a Doctors Without Borders hospital in August, the fourth 
during the war, prompted the group to withdraw its staff from six hospitals in 
northern Yemen and declare a “loss of confidence in the coalition’s ability to 
avoid such fatal attacks”.

At least 30 civilians were killed when Saudi-led airstrikes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/20/bombing-vital-port-yemen-children-serious-risk-un-warns>
attacked a civilian neighbourhood in Yemen’s central port city of Hodeida last 
Wednesday.

Human Rights Watch also claims that the Houthi armed group and forces allied 
to it, including those loyal to the former president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, have 
committed numerous violations and abuses of international human rights and 
humanitarian law.

Growing disquiet about the UK’s policy on Yemen has seen more than 200 doctors 
and health professionals sign an open letter to the international trade 
secretary, Liam Fox, himself a doctor, calling for the UK to suspend arms sales 
to Saudi Arabia. Fox has been touring Gulf states looking to boost UK exports. 
He is due soon inSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, 
where there are hopes he will broker a new deal for British-made Typhoon jets.

The letter, co-ordinated by the campaign group Medact 
<http://www.medact.org/campaigns-actions/open-letters/end-uk-arms-sales-yemen/>
, states: “As health professionals, we have a duty to speak out against all 
causes of ill health in Yemen. This must include the sale and export of UK 
weaponry that is fuelling the conflict.”

A Foreign Office spokeswoman said: “The UK is working closely with all parties 
to secure agreement on a resolution that will help the situation on the ground 
in Yemen. We remain deeply concerned about the human rights situation in the 
country, and a political solution to the conflict remains the priority.”
 