
The pay deals handed to the bosses of Britain’s biggest banks will be in focus 
this week when they report their results for 2015, at a time when bank shares 
have been hit by fears of renewed financial crisis.

Investors will be scrutinising the bonuses handed out staff – it has already 
been calculated the major high street bankscould hand out £5bn  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/uk-banks-expected-to-pay-out-5bn-pounds-in-bonuses>
between them – and the dividends paid out to shareholders.

Time for the annual bank results bust-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/21/bank-results-bust-up-reporting-season>
The results are being published at a time when bank shares have been under 
pressure over fears that a slowdown in China could have severe knock-on effects 
for global growth, while sustained low or negative interest rates are harming 
banks’ long-term profitability. Scandals such as the payment protection 
insurance mis-selling and the subprime mortgages in the US continue to weigh on 
the sector.

Bailed out Royal Bank of Scotland will report the full extent of an eighth 
successive year of annual losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/rbs-royal-bank-scotland-chief-executive-announces-clean-up>
 and is expected to disclose higher pay for its chief executive, Ross McEwan, 
of around £3m.


British bank annual results – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2016/feb/23/british-bank-annual-results-interactive>
HSBC, which last week confirmed it would keep its headquarters in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/14/hsbc-to-keep-its-headquarters-in-the-uk>
, kicks off the reporting season on Monday, followed by Standard Chartered, 
Lloyds Banking Group and RBS, with Barclays the week after.

António Horta-Osório, chief executive of Lloyds Banking Group, is in line for 
a maximum payment of around £7.5m if all the performance criteria attached to a 
long-term scheme he was handed three years ago are met. This includes a £1m 
salary and other payments. He received£11.5m the previous  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/27/lloyds-pays-antonio-horta-osorio-11m-resumes-dividend-after-six-years>
year when the bank reintroduced its dividend for shareholders for the first 
time since the banking crisis.

The Lloyds results might have been used to signal a sale of shares to the 
public which was promised in the run-up to last year’s general election but C
hancellor George Osborne said last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/george-osborne-postpones-sale-sell-off-last-publicly-owned-lloyds-bank-shares>
this would be postponed because of the volatility in global stock markets.

Any news of dividends could help bolster the shares - trading at 61p, below 
the 73p price paid by the taxpayer - amid reports that a special dividend could 
be planned.

RBS is expected to confirm that it is continuing to make payments to its 
former chief executiveStephen Hester, who under the terms of his departure in 
June 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/12/rbs-ceo-stephen-hester-quits> 
was allowed to keep some of his performance-related shares. Now chief executive 
at insurer RSA, Hester could receive up to £500,000.

Hester’s bonuses were flash point during his tenure at the bank, and prompted 
McEwan to ditch annual bonuses for himself and his senior executives.

Credit Suisse chief asks for 'significant reduction' to annual bonus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/08/credit-suisse-chief-asks-for-significant-reduction-to-annual-bonus>
However, a  a three-year performance plan 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/royal-bk-scot-grp-/rns/director-pdmr-shareholding/201303081657366371Z/>
 put in place for McEwan is due to mature although is unlikely to reach the 
maximum £1.7m once all the criteria are assessed.

McEwan also receives a £1m salary, £350,000 for his pension, a relocation 
allowance which in 2014 reached £100,0000 and a £1m “role-based allowance” – 
which last year hegave to charit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/26/rbs-chief-executive-to-hand-back-1m-pay-incentive>
y. These so-called allowances were introduced by the banks after the EU capped 
bankers’ bonuses to a maximum of double their salary. In last year’s annual 
report, the bank disclosed his total pay at £1.8m.

Such allowances mean that Stuart Gulliver, the chief executive of HSBC, will 
have received £2.7m a year before any bonuses because his £1m salary comes 
alongside a £1.7m a year fixed allowance. Histotal pay for the previous year 
was £7.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/23/hsbc-chief-paid-7m-pounds-last-year-profits-slide-tax-avoidance-apology>
. Last week he discussed the prospect of boardroom change at the bank, amid 
expectations chairman Douglas Flint will be first of the two to step aside.

Standard Chartered, which analysts warn could struggle to report any profits 
for 2015, will publish details of pay for Peter Sands,who resigned as chief 
executive a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/26/standard-chartered-ceo-and-chairman-to-leave-peter-sands-bill-winters-john-peace>
, and his deputy Mike Rees,who will leave later this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/10/standard-chartered-veteran-mike-rees-set-for-500k-a-year-pension>
. Before the latest details are announced,calculations by Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-03-26/standard-chartered-s-deputy-ceo-rees-out-earned-goldman-s-cohn>
 show that Rees had been paid £50m in the six years since the financial crisis.

Analysts will be looking for signs of distress inside the banks, given the 
current volatility in the market. Some argue that the recent concern about the 
state of the sector is overdone. “We doubt that another credit crunch is on its 
way unless the economy takes a significant turn for the worse,” said Vicky 
Redwood at Capital Economics.
 