
Imports of sweet chestnut trees from areas affected by a fungal blight will be 
banned to prevent a repeat ofthe disease that is devastating the UK's 
ashÂ population <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ash-dieback>.

Sweet chestnut blight (Cryphonectria parasitica) is usually fatal and killed 
3.5bn trees in 20 years across Europe and northern America, where it was first 
detected in the 1930s. There are an estimated 44m sweet chestnuts (Castanea 
sativa) in the UK.

The environment secretary, Owen Paterson, indicated in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/20/trees-pests-disease-skills-gap>
 he would like to implement the ban to prevent infected saplings reaching the 
UK, and on Fridayconfirmed they will be banned before the end of September 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/sweet-chestnut-import-ban-to-fight-tree-disease>
.

"I'm taking action to protect our sweet chestnut trees by bringing in rules to 
ban the import of trees from areas in Europe where they have sweet chestnut 
blight ahead of the planting season," he said.

More than 18,000 sweet chestnuts were imported to the UK in the first four 
months of 2013.

The blight was detected in the UK in 2011 in about half of 300 trees planted 
for nut production in Warwickshire and later at a site of 30 trees in East 
Sussex. All the trees were subsequently destroyed.

The Country Land and Business Association and Horticultural Trades Association 
welcomed the import ban.

Sweet chestnut blight is one of the diseases on a new risk register of 
diseases and pests threatening the UK's trees and plants,which is in the 
process of being setup after the recommendation of an independent tree health 
taskforce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/20/trees-pests-disease-skills-gap>
.

The government has admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/26/ash-dieback-landowners-restock-woodlands>
 that ash dieback, which was found in the UK last year, cannot be stopped and 
the most that can be hoped for in the short and medium term is to slow the 
spread of the fungus that causes it.
 