
AIM

This act 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2007/ukpga_20070030_en_1#Legislation-Preamble> 
is "part of a package 
<http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/ld200607/ldbills/068/en/07068x--.htm>
 of measures to underpin the Border and Immigration Agency which consists of 
new powers, a substantial increase in enforcement resource and exploitation of 
identity technology, in particular to tackle illegal working".

MAIN PROVISIONS

• Introduces the power to impose compulsory biometric identity documents for 
non-EU immigrants and grants the secretary of state wide-ranging powers to 
retain and share biometric information (and any other immigration information). 
These powers go beyond those established in theIdentity Cards Act 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/15/identity-cards-act>
.
• Enables the government to require children under the age of 16 to carry a 
biometric identity card.
• Allows automatic deportation of some foreign nationals in two circumstances: 
if they are imprisoned for specific offences or they are imprisoned for more 
than one year.
• Equips immigration officers with police-like powers, including increased 
detention, entry, search and seizure powers.
• Allows additional reporting and residency conditions to be imposed on 
immigrants granted limited leave to remain. This could mean reporting regularly 
to the UK Border Agency or residing at a specific address. Other conditions 
could mimic the reporting requirements of the Identity Cards Act, for example 
that the foreign resident may be required to report changes of address.

BACKGROUND

Immigration minister Liam Byrne characterised the UK Border Act as a part of 
the government's commitment to overhaul the immigration system and an 
opportunity to "give immigration officers 
<http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/Nl1/Newsroom/DG_066141> vital new powers to do 
their job better, to secure our borders, tackle the traffickers and shut down 
illegal working".

The act grants extensive powers to the  Borders and Immigration Agency 
<http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/aboutus> (now known as the UK Border 
Agency), which is responsible for securing the United Kingdom's borders and 
controlling migration, including visa, citizenship and asylum applications.

The government's decision to make it easier to deport foreign criminals 
followed a number of high-profile crimes committed by foreigners including the
murder <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/dec/18/ukguns.ukcrime> of PC Sharon 
Beshenivsky in Bradford in 2005 and a scandal in which the home office were 
forced to admit they hadfreed 1,023 foreign prisoners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/may/05/publicservices.localelections2006>
 who should have been considered for deportation.

CRITICISM

NO2ID described the act's title as a misnomer, calling it an identity card 
bill and "a stepping-stone <> to the introduction of the National Identity 
Scheme". Liberty argued that the act's extradition and automatic deportation 
measures would be "likely to unfairly sweep up non-violent offenders". The act, 
it said, marks an "unwelcome departure 
<http://64.233.183.132/search?q=cache:As5cHT8CuMYJ:www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/publications/pdfs/liberty-human-rights-legislation-audit.pdf+%E2%80%9CAlthough+the+Act+specifies+that+such+deportation+will+not+take+place+where+it+would+breach+a+person%E2%80%99s+ECHR+rights+or+the+UK%E2%80%99s+obligations+under+the+Refugee+Convention,+these+provisions+are+nevertheless+likely+to+unfairly+sweep+up+non-violent+offenders.+It+also+marks+an+unwelcome+departure+from+the+traditional+approach+in+both+criminal+and+immigration+matters+of+judging+each+case+on+its+particular+merits.%E2%80%9D&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=1>
 from the traditional approach in both criminal and immigration matters of 
judging each case on its particular merits."

Civil liberties groups also expressed disquiet over the new police-like powers 
granted to other government agencies. Liberty's briefing to parliament argued 
that the "new powers may also prove socially and racially divisive".
 