
Britain will contribute £1.1bn to a global aid fund to help fight Aids, 
tuberculosis and malaria, but will attach a set of “demanding” performance 
targets,Priti Patel <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel> has 
announced.


The international development secretary, who last week said too much of the 
UK’s aid budget wasstolen or wasted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
, announced the three-year pledge alongside the Canadian prime minister,Justin 
Trudeau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>. The investment in 
theGlobal Fund <http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/> of about £366m a year will 
help the organisation’s efforts to save eight million lives.

There's no magic wand - creating jobs won't simply solve the world's problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/17/priti-patel-job-creation-dfid-poor-countries-aid-budget>
It will, however, be subject to a performance agreement, the first of its 
kind, which will see Britain monitor the fund’s work and withhold 10% of the 
money if targets are not met.

Patel said: “This latest round of UK investment demonstrates that Britain is 
keeping the promises it has made to the world’s poor while underlining the 
government’s commitment to tackle the great global challenges of our time, 
including disease, which is in the national interest. But even some of the best 
performing international aid institutions can improve and deliver better value 
for taxpayers and those in need.

“That is why we are using this investment in the Global Fund to secure a 
demanding performance agreement to make sure UK aid achieves the maximum 
possible impact. Performance agreements will become the norm for the Department 
for International Development’s engagement with international institutions.”

The money will fund 40m bed nets to tackle malaria, provide enough 
antiretroviral therapy for 1.3 million people with HIV and support the 
treatment of 800,000 people with tuberculosis. A proportion of the investment 
will be used to leverage £100m from the private sector specifically to tackle 
malaria.

Kate Osamor, the shadow international development secretary, said: “We welcome 
the government’s pledge of £1.1bn to the Global Fund, which has a remarkable 
record and powerful model for fighting Aids, TB and malaria across the world. 
However, it’s perplexing it comes at a time when we’re still waiting for the 
government to publish the multilateral and bilateral aid reviews, which are 
long overdue.”
 