
Members of the public are being asked to spot the "six most unwanted" pests 
and diseases threatening UK trees, as part of a citizen science survey starting 
on Thursday.

Recent outbreaks of the oak processionary moth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2013/may/03/oak-trees-caterpillar-england>
 andash dieback disease <http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/ash-dieback> 
have added to the increasing number of pests and diseases that have been 
attacking trees in the past few years, leading to a decline in tree health and 
in some cases tree loss.

In order to manage the threat, Open Air Laboratories (Opal) researchers, 
together with experts from the Food and Environment Research Agency (Fera) and 
Forest Research, are asking the public to get involved in their national tree 
health survey which runs from May to September when trees are in leaf.

Survey activities include identifying trees, measuring their girth and height, 
examining the trunk, branches and leaves for signs of poor health and recording 
the presence of pests and diseases.

The survey includes a guide to six of the most unwanted pests and diseases 
that could spell disaster for trees and forests if they spread across the UK, 
such as Chalara dieback of ash (Chalara fraxinea) and pests like the oak 
processionary moth (Thaumetopoea processionea).

The findings will contribute to a national research programme that is 
investigating the health of Britain's trees and the spread of pests and 
diseases.

Joan Webber, principal pathologist at Forest Research, said: "Input from 
across Great Britain will help us to develop a comprehensive picture of tree 
health and contribute to the database of information that we are building."

Last week the Forestry Commission urged the public to help stop the spread of 
the oak processionary moth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2013/may/03/oak-trees-caterpillar-england>
 that devastates oak trees and whose caterpillars can cause serious health 
problems. A native of southern and central Europe, the species has become 
established in south-west London and parts of the home counties since being 
found in England in 2006. The commission is planning to use a helicopterto 
blanket-spray woodland with insecticide 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2013/may/06/pest-caterpillars-helicopter-blitz-insecticide>
.

Britain's 80 million ash trees remain at deadly risk from ash dieback caused by
Chalara fraxinea, a virulent fungal disease that has swept across Europe. 
Scientists havesuccessfully unravelled the genetic code of the fungus that 
causes the disease <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-21433466>, 
which causes the crown of the tree to die back and leaves to turn brown.Latest 
figures from the Forestry Commission <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/chalara> 
reported a total of 490 sightings in nurseries, plantations and established 
woodland around the UK.

More than half a million people have joined the Open Air Laboratories (Opal) 
citizen science project, designed to get people outdoors and involved in 
scientific research, since its launch in 2007.

Six most unwanted

Pests and diseases that could have a serious impact on the UK's trees

Asian longhorn beetle (Anoplophora glabripennis)
 Asian Longhorned Beetle, 2012. Exact date unknown. Photograph: Scott 
Camazine/Alamy 
Not yet established in the UK, but would be a major threat to a wide range of 
broadleaved trees. Beetles are black and shiny with long antennae. Larvae 
tunnel internally through trunks and branches. A major outbreak in Kent in 2012 
saw 2,000 trees felled.

Citrus longhorn beetle (Anoplophora chinensis)

Black with variable markings and long antennae, looks like the Asian longhorn. 
Not present in the UK, but a few that reached the UK on trees imported from 
China, Japan and South Korea were intercepted before reaching the wider 
environment. Would cause a major threat to broadleaved trees.

Chalara dieback of ash (Chalara fraxinea)
 A young ash tree infected with Chalara dieback is seen on a Woodland Trust 
Site near Framlingham, south-east England November 8, 2012. Photograph: Darren 
Staples/Reuters 
 Limited distribution in the UK since being found in 2012 but has already 
infected large numbers of ash trees across Europe.Affected trees 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/interactive/2012/nov/02/britain-ash-tree-dieback-crisis-interactive?INTCMP=SRCH>
 have diseased leaves, trunk lesions and thinning crowns.

Emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis)
 Evidence of an emerald ash borer infestation at the Fort Snelling Golf Club 
course was confirmed today by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture. A dead 
emerald ash borer on a piece of bark bearing the s-shaped galleries made by 
larva on the grounds of the club in Minneapolis, August 15, 2012. Photograph: 
Jeff Wheeler/Alamy 
Metallic green beetle with burrowing larvae that causes thinning and yellowing 
of foliage and fissures in the bark. Not present in the UK, but the increase in 
the global movement of wood and wood packaging poses a significant risk of its 
accidental introduction. Affects ash trees.

Oak processionary moth (Thaumetopoea processionea)
 Oak processionary moth (Thaumetopoea processionea), caterpillars feeding on 
oak leaves, Germany. Photograph: Alamy 
First found in oak trees imported from continental Europe in west and 
south-west London in 2006. By July 2012, it had been found in south London and 
Berkshire. The caterpillars march in nose-to-tail processions when feeding and 
can strip trees bare. They are covered in toxic hairs that can lead to skin 
irritation and allergic reactions.

Pine processionary moth (Thaumetopoea pityocampa)
 Processional pine caterpillar tent, near Benimaurell, Alicante Province, 
Comunidad Valenciana, Spain. Photograph: Alamy 
Caterpillars have orange brown backs with blueish-grey bands and build nests 
that form white silken clumps near the tops of pine trees. Since the 1990s the 
pest has been moving north through France and is now breeding near Paris; it 
could spread to the UK. Also covered in toxic irritating hairs.

â€¢ You can download or request your free survey pack, including tree 
identification guide, field notebook, field guide and "six most unwanted" card 
fromOPALexplorenature.org <http://www.OPALexplorenature.org>
 