
An incredibly rare Penny Red has become the UK’s second most valuable stamp 
after being sold to to an unnamed British collector for £495,000.


The sale was arranged by London-based dealers Stanley Gibbons, which said the 
Plate 77 Penny Red is one of only five used examples known to the world of 
philately – another of which is held in the British Museum.

Plate 77 Penny Reds, which date from 1863, are viewed by collectors and 
investors as the holy grail of philately because Plate 77 stamps were not meant 
to exist. The stamps were created but never sold by post offices after they 
were not considered to be of good enough quality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fplate-77-penny-red-uk-second-most-valuable-stamp-495000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc141155676166cf43006fe6918827b045c6c6a%2F0_0_1028_1177%2F1028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%E2%80%99s%20second%20most%20valuable%20stamp%20sells%20for%20%C2%A3495%2C000&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fplate-77-penny-red-uk-second-most-valuable-stamp-495000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%E2%80%99s%20second%20most%20valuable%20stamp%20sells%20for%20%C2%A3495%2C000&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fplate-77-penny-red-uk-second-most-valuable-stamp-495000%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc141155676166cf43006fe6918827b045c6c6a%2F0_0_1028_1177%2F1028.jpg>
 The Plate 77 Penny Red that has sold for £495,000. Photograph: Stanley Gibbons 
Stanley Gibbons enters the internet age with stamp auction site
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/14/stanley-gibbons-launches-online-marketplace-stamps>
The original printing plate was destroyed, but a tiny handful made their way 
into circulation. As a result they are highly prized by collectors – far more 
so than the fabled Penny Black beloved of school children.


Keith Heddle, managing director of investments at Stanley Gibbons, said: “This 
is one of the most desirable and iconic of British stamps for collectors 
worldwide, highly sought after for more than 100 years. It is testament to the 
strength of the market for rare stamps that we have managed to sell not just 
one, but two Plate 77 Penny Reds in the last four years. With the last one 
having been sold to a client in Australia, I’m delighted this one has found a 
home in Britain.”

Heddle said this latest stamp has been bought by an anonymous British buyer, 
who he said was both a collector and someone who expected an investment return 
on the item.

The previous Plate 77 Penny Red sold in 2012 for £550,000, making it the UK’s 
most expensive stamp. Heddle said its higher price reflected the fact that it 
was in significantly better condition.

As an investment, Heddle said, the Penny Red still had some way to go before 
it troubles the world’s most expensive stamp. This remains the British Guiana 
1c Black on Magenta, which was sold in 2014 in New York for $9.48m (£6.7m).

The 1856 stamp is thought to be the only one in the world. It was one of three 
created by a local postmaster whose expected delivery of stamps had been 
delayed by storms, forcing him to ask local printers to produce an emergency 
issue.

Stanley Gibbons said despite the huge volatility seen in financial markets 
since the turn of the year, the market for rare stamps and coins remained 
resilient. Last month, the dealer sold one of Britain’s rarest coins, an Edward 
VI “boy king” gold sovereign of 30 shillings, for £250,000 to an investor in 
Asia. However, collectors say that prices for mid-range stamps have fallen, hit 
by a general decline in philately  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/apr/13/stamp-collectors-catalogues-philately-clubs>
as a hobby.



 