
When Charles Bronson <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/charles-bronson>, 
the man the tabloids caricature as "Britain's most dangerous prisoner", took 
the prison art teacher Phil Danielson hostage in February 1999, Danielson 
believed he was a dead man. "Charlie retied me in a different way," he later 
told his rescuers. "He tied my left arm to my body and then tied my wrists 
together. I was still convinced I was going to die. Charlie found a snooker cue 
and then with a bandage he began to bind the handle of the knife to the end of 
the cue. The result was a spear. Charlie held the spear by his side and then 
began marching up and down like a soldier. It was as if he was in some kind of 
trance. I thought I was going to be sacrificed on the snooker table."

Danielson's 44-hour predicament turned into the longest hostage siege in 
British prison history, and it provides some of the most harrowing and poignant 
scenes in Nicolas Winding Refn's film about the convict, Bronson. The action is 
set in a games room in a secure unit deep inside the prison. Prisoners' 
artworks adorn the walls. It is a creative, thoughtful place, an oasis of peace 
in the midst of a troubled landscape. That peace is shattered when the teacher, 
mild-mannered and hesitant, suddenly finds himself trussed up like a turkey by 
the crazed, shaven-headedBronson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bronson> for 
offering a gentle, constructive word of criticism in relation to one of the 
prisoner's drawings.

Tom Hardy, who expends almost preternatural energy in his authentic portrayal 
of Bronson (and gained three stone of muscle for the part), expresses the 
prisoner's outrage. "Speak when you're fucking spoken to," he screams. The 
music grows louder as he paints eyes on the teacher's eyelids so they resemble 
those of a sad clown when closed. Then he stuffs an apple in his captive's 
mouth. "You talk too much," he says. Whimpering and humiliated, the gagged 
teacher is at the mercy of his assailant.

It is hard to watch this episode and not be reminded of the scenes in Stanley 
Kubrick'sA Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange> when Alex, leader of the 
droogs, attacks a disabled man while Beethoven's Ninth builds to a shattering 
crescendo. Kubrick withdrew his film for a number of years after accusations 
that the "ultraviolence" it portrayed was being copied by a generation of young 
people. However, John Trevelyan, then chairman of the British Board of Film 
Classification, described it as "an important social document of outstanding 
brilliance and quality". The same, and more, will be said about Bronson.

But there is something more to Winding Refn's film than there was to A 
Clockwork Orange. What makes it far more disturbing than Kubrick's film is that 
what we are seeing is based on what happened to real people. And the violence 
is ultra-ultra.

Though the film represents the experiences of Mickey Peterson, who changed his 
name to that of the tough-guy film star on the advice of a fight promoter 
during a short spell as an unlicensed boxer, Bronson is no biopic. Rather, it 
tells of a profound tragedy, of a failed system and a failed human being. It is 
the tale of a man fighting the toughest fight imaginable, but unsure of his 
cause, uncertain of his motivation. "All my life I wanted to be famous," 
Bronson tells a theatre audience in the film as he recounts his life story from 
a velvet-curtained stage. Dressed in a fine suit and sporting white make-up and 
a painted spangle over one eye, his mood changes as different thoughts dance 
into his shining, bald head and agitate his mind like angry fireflies. "I knew 
I was made for better things," he says. "I just didn't know what as."

By all accounts, Mickey Peterson had a warm and loving upbringing. His parents 
were law-abiding. Both his brothers have done well in their lives. But the boy 
who would one day become the most infamous prisoner in Britain showed signs of 
dysfunction from an early age: beating fellow pupils at school and battering a 
teacher senseless. His teenage years were relatively uneventful - a bit of 
fighting, working on building sites, some petty thieving and a spell of 
hitchhiking. He was self-employed as painter for a while and earned good money. 
At 18, he got married, and later had a son. But life - ordinary life - was not 
enough for Mickey Peterson.

At 21, he went on what he has called "a week-long mission of madness", during 
which he robbed a post office of a little more than Â£20. He was caught, 
convicted of armed robbery and jailed for seven years. In 1974, he entered the 
gates of his "personal hell". Since then he has known just a few months of 
freedom.

Before I saw the film I was sceptical of its merits. During my own 20-year 
prison journey I crossed paths with Bronson on a number of occasions, though we 
never met face to face. His time was spent mostly in punishment blocks, 
segregation units, close supervision centres - or in the back of prison vans on 
the way from one prison to another, always accompanied by at least six prison 
officers in riot gear. The closest we came to meeting was when I was moved to 
Long Lartin high-security prison, near Evesham in Worcestershire. Some days 
before I landed, Bronson had run amok on one of the landings. Naked, 
blacked-up, wearing only a bandana around his head and wielding a spear, he had 
single-handedly taken control of most of the wing. (The depiction in the film 
is no exaggeration.) The carnage he had caused was in evidence all around. They 
put me in his old cell; it was surprisingly clean. To be honest, I was glad he 
had been moved. Doing serious time, trying to make sense of the system, the 
culture of aggression, and acceptance of failure is hard enough without having 
to cope with demented and unpredictable neighbours going berserk.

A prison officer once said to me, regarding one high-security prison: "It 
would be great here if it wasn't for the cons." He wasn't making a joke. The 
stress of his job had long since extinguished his sense of humour. What he 
meant was that while the prison had some superlative facilities, such as a 
high-tech gym, a well-resourced and fully equipped education department - and, 
it has to be said, a particularly motivated team of staff - the nature of the 
prison's convict clientele, some serving 40 or more years, was so disparate 
that it was impossible to overcome the daily conflicts and tensions to the 
satisfaction of anyone.

How can a man like Bronson achieve such notoriety? What is it that creates the 
conditions in which he can wreak havoc? One of the problems, I believe, is the 
mechanism of the "dispersal system". Introduced in the 1960s, the idea was 
that, in order to avoid the most dangerous prisoners forming alliances, the 
Category A highest-risk prisoners would be dispersed among the most secure 
prisons in the country. The truth is that most people in prison just want to 
get their head down and get on with what they have to do. But often it can take 
just one particularly disruptive prisoner - someone who has been "dispersed" - 
to upset a whole landing. Mad antics by a single prisoner, such as smashing up 
the office or "shitting up" a prison officer or a governor (accumulating a full 
bucket of excrement over a few weeks and then letting a member of staff have it 
over his or her head), would lead to lockdowns and mass searching and cause no 
end of trouble for the rest of the wing. In his heyday, Bronson could upset a 
whole prison.

The common currency in a prison is fear. It is what drives most interaction 
between convicts in those places. But Bronson claims to fear no one. "Violence 
just makes me madder and stronger," he said. If so, he is, or was, a deeply 
disturbed individual. I'd guess that the persona took over his character, and 
he didn't know how to escape it.

Few people in prison are strong enough to "be themselves". Everybody on a 
prison landing is a play actor - show your softer side and you could end up 
maimed, or dead. Charlie Bronson has been acting the part of Britain's toughest 
prisoner for more than 25 years. It is a role, I am sure, that gave him a sense 
of purpose, once. But it was an exhausting path to embark upon. An old-timer 
once told Bronson: "If you are not prepared to die fighting the system, then 
don't fight." But what is clear is that Bronson's prison journey has been much 
more profound than simply a fight against the system. This is a man who needed 
serious and sustained help a long time ago. The best the authorities could do 
was section him and try to banish him, first to Rampton and then to Broadmoor, 
both "special hospitals" for the criminally insane. He spent a total of seven 
years in the asylums, the majority of the time subdued by drugs. But he needed 
care, not control. In his frustration, he took to the roof of Broadmoor and 
caused more than a quarter of a million pounds worth of damage. The response 
was to send him back to prison, back to the blocks and the seg units. He must 
have had a steel-like psychological constitution not to have faded into 
oblivion due to the sustained effort surviving his experiences would have 
demanded.

When I was a prisoner, I was suspicious of what drove Bronson. To my mind, it 
took courage to stay on the landings and cope with the stresses and strains. By 
contrast, living in punishment blocks or being confined to other isolated 
sections is a relatively peaceful way to do "big bird". Long-termers routinely 
request a few weeks "in the block", just to get some respite from the madness. 
Bronson, it seemed to me, couldn't do his bird.

But the film made me think a little deeper about the real Charlie Bronson. We 
have had some correspondence recently. His first letter made me want to cry. 
"It has been nine years since I caused anyone any harm," he wrote. "Surely it 
must be time now to give me a chance?" I was touched by his vulnerability. 
Having been a prisoner with little hope once, I wanted to reach out and 
reassure him. For all the pain he has caused - in his prison career he has 
taken 11 hostages and staged nine rooftop protests - he has had an abundance of 
grief in return. The film, he says, has given him a new impetus for life. "It 
has brought me a great feeling of inner strength and self-worth. I actually 
feel human again." All he wants to do now is get out and concentrate on his 
art. "I'm a born-again artist," he says. "Through all this mad journey of 
institutions, I have found myself in art."

Bronson was cleared of causing actual bodily harm to Phil Danielson, the 
teacher he held hostage, but was found guilty of false imprisonment and jailed 
for life. Almost 10 years on, he is being held in a specially constructed cage 
deep in the bowels of Wakefield high-security prison. He lives in total 
isolation, is fed through a hatch and spends his time exercising, writing and 
drawing (his cartoon art, disturbing yet insightful, sells well on internet 
auction sites, and much of the money he makes from his art he gives to 
children's charities). When he goes before the parole board for "progress 
hearings", he is made to sit behind a glass screen, chained hand and foot. His 
decades of uncontrolled behaviour have turned him into a prisoner of his past. 
It is likely that he has backed himself too tightly into a corner for the board 
to feel confident enough to grant him parole when the next hearing takes place. 
"My dream now," he said in his last letter to me, "is to be free, have a 
cottage miles away from anywhere. I'll paint all the colours of the rainbow, in 
Rainbow Cottage. There I will create my art and live out my life in peace." His 
earliest date of release is 2010. I hope he makes it.

â¢ Bronson is in cinemas on 13 March. An exhibition of Charles Bronson's 
artwork, Here Comes Charlie!, runs at the Amuti Gallery and Bookshop, London, 
from 14-28 March
 