
An Aids memorial <http://nycaidsmemorial.org/> is being unveiled in New York 
City today. While it is fitting to have right here in Greenwich Village a grand 
Jenny Holzer-designed, Walt Whitman-inscribed memorial to the35 million 
<http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/> people who have died from Aids and the 37 
million <http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/> people currently living with HIV, 
there is little to celebrate locally or globally.

Just across the street, St Vincent’s hospital – an epicenter of the epidemic 
in its early years – has died, just as so many gay men did within its walls in 
the 1980s. It is being converted into luxury condos. That a hospital which 
served the most marginalized would be replaced by real estate for the super 
wealthy is a fitting metaphor in the age of a real estate 
developer-turned-president. Indeed,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is set to preside over a 
newly harmful period in HIV history.

The reinvention of radical protest: life on the frontline of the Aids epidemic 
| David France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/act-up-aids-new-york-spencer-cox>
HIV/Aids is no scourge of the past in the US. The Centers for Disease Control 
estimates 
<http://www.cdc.gov/nchhstp/newsroom/2016/croi-press-release-risk.html> that 
one in two black men who has sex with men will become HIV positive,despite 
<http://www.aidsmap.com/Black-gay-men-run-higher-risk-of-HIV-infection-despite-fewer-partners/page/2588998/>
 having “fewer partners and lower rates of recreational drug use than other gay 
men”. While the drug PrEP (which can greatly reduce the likelihood of becoming 
HIV positive) is often heralded as some kind of panacea, it cannot address some 
of the biggest epidemiological factors fanning modern HIV: access to 
employment, housing and healthcare. Indeed, in cities like Atlanta, half of HIV 
diagnoses havealready progressed to Aids 
<http://news.wabe.org/post/half-atlantas-newly-diagnosed-hiv-patients-have-aids-grady-testing-finds>
 – precisely because people most likely to be exposed to HIV don’t have 
healthcare.

And this is why my mind drifts uptown to Trump Tower.

It’s not just that Trump literally doesn’t mention 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/health-care/> HIV/Aids in his healthcare 
policy, nor that he’s generally anti-science. It’s not even just that every 
single Trump cabinet pick so far has some kind ofanti-LGBT record 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2016/11/29/every-single-trump-cabinet-member-so-far-opposes-lgbt-rights/>
. I am terrified that two of his most important picks – vice-president elect 
Mike Pence and Health and Human Services secretary nominee Tom Price – know 
exactly how to harm Americans (disproportionately black and/or LGBT Americans) 
by way of HIV/Aids. If Reagan was remembered for his inaction on the plague, 
Trump may be remembered for explicitly dismantling the Aids safety net and for 
enacting policies that will make the virus move more freely between people. As 
Carolyn Guild Johnson, director of prevention of services at St Louis Effort 
for Aids, recently told me: “I’m not only worried about our clients, but also 
the public health emergency that will result from the increased community viral 
load.”

After waging war on Planned Parenthood in congress, Pence presided over one of 
the fastest HIV outbreaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/26/indiana-hiv-outbreak-scott-county-public-health-emergency>
 in US history as governor of Indiana. Pence believes inabstinence-only 
education 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/andrewkaczynski/mike-pence-in-2002-condoms-are-a-very-very-poor-protection-a?utm_term=.qw56rVJjX#.unJp3B2RV>
, which is known to foster higher rates of sexually transmitted diseases. And 
Pencewrote in 2002 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/andrewkaczynski/here-is-mike-pences-questionable-2000-proposal-on-hivaids-fu?utm_term=.vm54A6XKg#.qhzn8lKzb>
 that “Congress should support the reauthorization of the Ryan White Care Act,” 
the main federal support for combatting HIV/Aids, “only after completion of an 
audit to ensure that federal dollars were no longer being given to 
organizations that celebrate and encourage the types of behaviors that 
facilitate the spreading of the HIV virus.” A large component of the important 
work organizations like Gay Men’s Health Crisis and St Louis Effort for Aids do 
to tackle HIV precisely means combating homophobia and stigma. (Pence instead 
believed that “resources should be directed toward those institutions which 
provide assistance to those seeking to change their sexual behavior,” for 
example dangerous so-calledconversion therapy 
<http://www.vice.com/video/gay-conversion-therapy-part-1-195>.) 

Meanwhile, Price, the potential HHS secretary, has supported 
<http://www.advocate.com/politics/2016/11/28/trump-nominate-antigay-antichoice-rep-tom-price-hhs-secretary>
 a constitutional amendment against same-sex marriage and voted against hate 
crimes legislation. He also is also vehemently opposed to the Affordable Care 
Act. In guaranteeing coverage for people with pre-existing conditions such as 
HIV who had been locked out of insurance, covering HIV testing and funding 
prevention efforts, the ACA has earnedits claim 
<https://www.aids.gov/federal-resources/policies/health-care-reform/> to be 
“one of the most important pieces of legislation in the fight against HIV/Aids 
in our history”.

When I reluctantly made the decision to vote for Hillary Clinton, I didn’t 
want to focus on being anti-Trump, but to think of ways I could be excited 
about her despitemy many reservations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/this-was-the-election-of-disillusionment>
. The moment I picked was when she boldly denounced the criminalization of HIV 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bThbZwZQmq0>, whereby individuals can be 
prosecuted for exposing someone else to the virus (while corporations and 
governments, which fan transmission on much larger scales through malfeasance 
and neglect, elude punishment). Her finest moment, to me, never registered in 
the media – and yet, she is calm, medically sensible and ethically admirable.

What a contrast with Trump and his team. 

As we remember today the tens of millions who have died from Aids and who live 
with HIV, we must recommit ourselves to fighting a virus which will likely be 
allowed to flourish by a the incoming administration.


 * Comments on this article will be premoderated
 