
The debate won't go away, but the situation remains roughly the same. UCAS has 
scrapped plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/mar/28/university-admissions-changes-scrapped>
 to introduce a post-qualifications application (PQA) system for universities.

The Schwartz Report 
<http://www.admissions-review.org.uk/downloads/finalreport.pdf> recommended a 
move to PQA in 2004. Now that the idea has been shelved once again, discussion 
will not stop.

That said, the likelihood of anything coming to fruition has disappeared for 
now. The UCAS proposals were not perfect. Giving applicants only two choices 
would be too limiting, for instance. UCAS admitted this and wanted views â€“ 
after all, that is the purpose of a consultation. This was an opportunity to 
iron out cracks and, if necessary, consider alternative proposals. Instead, the 
closest we have to change appears to be a promise to improve some aspects of 
the clearing system.

Widening participation and greater fairness are among the arguments for moving 
to PQA. Sir Peter Lampl, chairman of the Sutton Trust, said: "Moving to a 
system where pupils apply to university with their actual grades is essential 
for improving social mobility." However, at theinaugural seminar of the Bridge 
Group <http://www.thebridgegroup.org.uk/evidence/Seminar.pdf>, an association 
promoting social mobility through HE, members acknowledged that "whatever 
system is in place, the university application process will continue to pose 
challenges for disadvantaged students and those from non-traditional 
backgrounds". PQA is clearly not a magic pill to solve all inequalities. But 
with discussion over changes falling at the first hurdle, we have lost an 
opportunity to at least attempt a more reasonable approach to applications.

Liberal Democrat MP Simon Hughes 
<http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource-library/hughes-report> reported in 
July 2011 that PQA could allow universities to "target better students who 
perform well and come from difficult backgrounds or from areas which do not 
usually send young people to university". Hughes looked to universities in the 
US for inspiration, including Harvard University, which wrote "to every top 
performing 'minority' student in the country asking them to consider applying 
to Harvard".

Now they're being placed at the heart of the system, do students see PQA as a 
fairer way to process applications? Not all of them. Impact Magazine, run by 
students at the University of Nottingham, published a leadarticle by Ben James 
<http://www.impactnottingham.com/2012/02/ucas-is-changing-and-probably-not-for-the-better/>
 suggesting that PQA would lead to an increase in "quickly and poorly made 
decisions". It suggested that change was needed to "make the system more 
representative", but PQA was a false trail.

Nevertheless, it is wrong to assume that all decisions would be made with more 
haste under PQA. Importantly, the run up towards the application process would 
be spent under potentially less stress than the current system, because 
students could apply after getting their grades, rather than relying upon 
predictions. Instead of failing to secure a conditional place, they would have 
the opportunity to apply to institutions on actual grades.

As it stands, predicted grades are not always used with necessary caution. 
Some of those with good grades who happen to miss their conditional places by a 
whiskerstruggle to find a place at all 
<http://www.corporate.salford.ac.uk/leadership-management/martin-hall/blog/2012/02/why-not-me/>
. As areport from BIS 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/higher-education/docs/i/11-1043-investigating-accuracy-predicted-a-level-grades.pdf>
 last year found, only half (51.7%) of all predicted grades were accurate, 
while 41.7% were worryingly over-predicted.

The Higher Education Policy Institute (HEPI), in response to the government 
White Paper 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/466-1987/Higher-Education--Students-at-the-Heart-of-the-System.-An-Analysis-of-the-Higher-Education-White-Paper-.html>
, pointed out that applicants from comprehensive schools "were more than twice 
as likely to have had a predicted grade lower than they achieved", 11.2% of 
those who achieved an A grade not having been predicted to. HEPI concludes: 
"Even if PQA proves to be impracticable, a better understanding of the 
relationship between predicted and actual achievement would be valuable to 
those making decisions as to whether to make an offer as well as to those 
making the predictions."

The debate over admissions is here to stay, even if PQA seems fated never to 
appear.

Perhaps HEPI is on to something. Is there, perhaps, a future for the best of 
both worlds? Might we find the current system working better with more detailed 
analysis around predictions and other variables? A halfway house may be a step 
in the right direction to greater accuracy. A better grasp of where applicants 
would be best suited to further themselves would be heartily welcomed. Most of 
us strive for this and will continue to do so, no matter what application 
system is in place.

Martin Hughes is a writer, specialising in higher education policy and the 
student experience. He has been writing for students atTheUniversityBlog 
<http://theuniversityblog.co.uk/> since 2007 and is on Twitter as @universityboy
 <http://twitter.com/universityboy>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free tobecome a member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php> of the 
Higher Education Network.
 