Which UK former prime minister did not go to university?  Neville Chamberlain  
John Major  Margaret Thatcher  Winston Churchill Around how many apprenticeship 
applications were made last year?  600,000  1m  1.4m  1.4bn Which of these jobs 
requires a degree?  Dental hygienist  Police  Teacher  Doctor What was the 
average amount of student loan someone in England paid back per year during 
2012-2013?  £610  £860  £997  £1,150 Which of these celebrities has a degree?  
Mark Zuckerberg  Ashton Kutcher  Coco Chanel  Steve Jobs What was the average 
hourly rate for someone on a work-based training scheme in 2013?  £4.35  £6.50  
£7.80  £11.10 Which university was set to be the most expensive place to study 
for a degree in the UK in 2011?  Edinburgh University  Oxford University  
Cambridge University  City University London Which of these companies does not 
offer an apprenticeship scheme?  Kennedys law firm  National Space Academy  BBC 
 Waterstones Which sector had the highest number of apprenticeship vacancies in 
2012-2013?  Hospitality and catering  Business and administration  IT and 
technology  Customer service  You got…  All 'A*s': you're well prepared to 
decide whether university or an apprenticeship is the best option for you.  'A' 
grades all round: you're in the know about your options after leaving school.  
'A' grades all round: you're in the know about your options after leaving 
school.  'B' grade: you have a good knowledge, but there's still more to learn. 
 'B' grade: you have a good knowledge, but there's still more to learn.  'C' 
grade: There is still more research you can do to find out about 
apprenticeships and getting a degree.  'C' grade: There is still more research 
you can do to find out about apprenticeships and getting a degree.  More 
revision needed, try better next time.  More revision needed, try better next 
time.  More revision needed, try better next time.  Challenge your friends 
Submit answers  