
The undying reign of vampire films looks set to continue as Universal Pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/universal-pictures> acquires the movie rights 
to Anne Rice’s Vampire Chronicles series of 13 novels.


Rice’s son Christopher is also involved, with the deal including the 
screenplay he adapted from his mother’s book Tale of the Body Thief. Alex 
Kurtzman and Roberto Orci, producers of the recent Transformers and Star Trek 
movies, will oversee the series.


It follows an impressive number of vampire book series that have been adapted 
for film or television over the past decade, trying to cater to an audience 
whose thirst is seemingly insatiable. The flurry of vampire flicks include the
Twilight <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/twilight> saga, 30 Days of Night 
(2007) and Van Helsing (2004), as well as the forthcoming Dracula Untold movie. 
The television series The Vampire Diaries and True Blood have also had strong 
followings in recent years.


Rice’s debut novel in the series, Interview With the Vampire, was adapted into 
a dramatically gothic film directed by Neil Jordan in 1994, starring Tom 
Cruise, Brad Pitt and a young Kirsten Dunst – it grossed $224m globally.


However, in 2002, Rice’s book Queen of the Damned, also part of the Vampire 
Chronicles, was adapted into a film starring Aaliyah and Stuart Townsend. It 
has become something of a cult hit in the wake of Aaliyah’s death, but the film 
underperformed at the box office and has a measly 17% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.


Universal is investing heavily in the supernatural genre at the moment, and 
recently embarked ona project with Kurtzman and Chris Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/17/universal-pictures-movie-monsters-frankenstein-invisible-man>
 to breathe new life into classic movie characters such as Dracula, the Mummy 
and Frankenstein’s monster. The Mummy is up first, with a film scheduled for 
release on April 22, 2016.

 