
Few visitors would argue that Aberystwyth's main campus has one of the most 
spectacular locations in Britain. Established in 1872, the university's prime 
position on Penglais Hill offers panoramic views of Aberystwyth, the coast and 
the Irish Sea.

The university's reputation as a top centre for research is equally impressive 
- enhanced by the number of research organisations who are making the 
university their home. The Institute of Grassland and Environmental Research, 
the British Geological Survey and the Centre for Advanced Welsh and Celtic 
Studies are all based at Aberystwyth.

 The Institute of Geography and Earth Sciences, which offers masters 
programmes in space, place and politics and practising human geography, has 
earned research training recognition by the Economic and Social Research 
Council (ESRC).

This means that postgraduate students can apply for ESRC funding for these MAs 
and also for future PhD work. The ESRC will pay maintenance costs and full 
fees. The institute also offers its own discretionary bursaries which will meet 
some of the cost of fees.

The MA in space, place and politics aims to provide a masters degree embracing 
the broad sphere of political geography, focusing on a series of concerns 
including urban, regional and rural politics, local economic development and 
social exclusion.

It addresses a range of theoretical and applied themes and issues of relevance 
- but also keeps an eye on the wide range of employment opportunities in the 
public and private sectors.

 The MA programme also takes an in-depth look at a number of the current 
debates within social sciences including the globalisation of the economy, 
theories of regulation, welfare delivery and consumption and, in the aftermath 
of Iraq, political identity and expression.

Aberystwyth's Centre for Performance Research (CPR) delivers a masters in 
theatre and the world and one in television studies, plus an MPhil/PhD.

All applications for postgraduate study must be made on the university's 
dedicated application form.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> must submit two copies of the 
form with two copies of all other supporting documents.

Application forms are available from the Postgraduate Admissions Office, The 
University ofWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, Aberystwyth, Old 
College, King Street, Ceredigion, Aberystwyth SY23 2AX.

Â· nick.pandya@theguardian.com <>
 