
For some it has been down to a new strategy. For others it has been a new 
course, or teaching method. But one consistent theme emerges from the 
departments that have performed particularly well in this year's Guardian 
subject tables â€“ the importance they place on human relationships.

Take business and management at the University of Sunderland, the biggest 
climber in the subject tables this year, having gone from 95th to 14th. It has 
recently implemented a new academic strategy putting the student experience at 
its heart. This has involved looking at teaching and learning from the 
students' point of view, listening to what they have to say, making sure they 
have the resources they need, noticing and following it up if they fail to 
attend seminars, and improving feedback.

"I would like to think that over the last couple of years there has been a 
step change in how we do things," says Viv Kinnaird, the university's dean of 
business and law. She says staff have worked hard at being organised and giving 
out information. "Students cannot feel that no one cares."

John Evans, head of chemistry at the University of Southampton, suggests that 
his department's position at the top of the tables, up from ninth last year, is 
a result of academic staff being "phenomenally approachable". "There is a 
really good open-door policy to students here," he says. "Students are deeply 
involved in giving us their feedback about what works for them and what 
doesn't."

One of the things that seems to be working is recruiting a teaching fellow 
from a secondary school, David Read. He has helped to develop different 
approaches to teaching, including incorporating video snippets of lectures, 
using electronic voting systems to check instantly on students' understanding, 
and producing pre-lab video sessions to prepare students for lab work.

Another success has been asking students over their summer vacations to come 
up with new ways of teaching the modules they have just completed to succeeding 
cohorts, while the department also has a strong parenting or buddy system 
between year groups. "People say when they come through the door what a 
welcoming atmosphere it is," says Evans.

At the University of Essex, a 100% satisfaction rating in the National Student 
Survey has helped to push thedepartment of philosophy, which came 22nd last 
year, to fourth in the tables, after Oxford, UCL and Cambridge.

Wayne Martin, head of the department, thinks this could be partly explained by 
changes to the first-year curriculum, introduced over the last two years. In 
one voluntary course, new students agree to "work obscenely hard" in return for 
equally hard work from their supervisors.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are expected to write an 
assignment a week on difficult material, in exchange for getting their work 
returned with detailed comments within 24 hours in a weekly two-on-one 
tutorial. The course has proved extremely popular in spite of, as Martin puts 
it, "a workload that could feel like slavery". Also popular is a course called 
Death, God and the Meaning of Life designed to meet directly the concerns that 
lead many students to choose philosophy in the first place.

The department's low student-staff ratio of less than 15:1 is likely to be 
another reason for students' satisfaction, but Martin suggests there may also 
be a more philosophical explanation. The department is unusual for the way it 
combines the Anglo-American analytic tradition and continental European 
philosophy. "The world is in crisis now and the particular kind of philosophy 
we do people find to be relevant," says Martin. He says one of the central 
themes of the continental tradition is anxiety "and it is an anxious time now 
in the world". This outlook appears to have affected Martin himself. "I 
sometimes think you should be miserable in order to do philosophy," he says. 
"So perhaps it's a problem if our students are all so happy."

John Harvey, professor of art at Aberystwyth, is certainly happy that his 
department has shot up from 43rd in the tables last year to ninth this year. 
Were he applying for art school himself he would put his university high on his 
list, he says.

The reason? The opportunity it gives for students both to perfect their 
practical artistic skills and to develop a strong theoretical knowledge of the 
subject, while having a taste of new research fields.

"We are a fairly traditional art school, with the life schools open every 
day," says Harvey. "But we also hold on to what is cutting edge. What appeals 
to students is that we aren't selling out traditional skills and we are not 
avoiding issues raised by the contemporary arts."

One of the university's most recent research initiatives, for example, is 
audiovisuology, which combines sound and music with the visual arts.

He says the department is also careful to find out what students want of their 
degree, and support them in whatever direction they choose to go, whether it is 
becoming an artist or using art in another field.

The department is one of the smallest in the country, and the staff-student 
ratio is high, at around 29:1. But Harvey says it remains committed to 
one-to-one tutorials. "We work well as a team and represent a wide diversity of 
interests," he says. Their general ethos, he says, is "informed kindliness 
towards the students".

A similar ethos informs nursing and paramedical studies at Staffordshire 
University, which has leapt from 40th to third in this year's tables. Hilary 
Jones, dean of the faculty of health, says the jump is partially explained by a 
new paramedic course, which takes a small group of highly motivated ambulance 
technicians who want to become paramedics. Key to its success, says Jones, is 
the partnership of the ambulance service, and the enthusiasm and commitment of 
students and staff.

Partnership is also an important part of the nursing degree, where the 
relationship between academic staff and the organisations where students do 
practical placements is considered essential. Practitioners, and even patients 
where possible, are actively involved in recruiting students, and both students 
and their mentors are given support during the placements.

Jones feels that having the right value base has been a boon for the 
department. Its recent appointment of a professor specialising in dignity of 
care for older people, she suggests, encapsulates its caring principles.
 