
University College London produced 200 tonnes of clinical waste in 2008, some 
of it so hazardous it had to be burned at the highest temperatures.

But in 2009, UCL questioned whether all of its waste had to be dealt with in 
the same way.

It started drawing up a comprehensive new waste strategy and went in 
partnership with facilities and waste management company, Mitie, to implement 
it.

The aim was to introduce recycling, better waste packaging and changes to the 
university's internal culture. It also decided that some laboratory wastes 
could be reclassified and diverted to a municipal energy from waste plant â€“ an 
industry first.

UCL has cut its carbon emissions by more than a quarter. Now that waste is 
segregated, the average disposal cost has gone down by 14% per tonne and the 
process produces 27% less carbon per tonne.

UCL is London's leading multi-disciplinary university, with 8,000 staff and 
22,000 students. In 2008-2009, getting rid of clinical waste generated about 
32.5 tonnes of CO2 emissions.

To shift its waste strategy from the cautious to the radical, it launched an 
intranet-based waste portal, training and poster campaign. The procurement 
department brought in new packaging for laboratory waste to reduce plastic sent 
for incineration, eliminated double bagging of waste and now uses cardboard 
where appropriate.

The reclassification of laboratory wastes to be sterilised by autoclave has 
allowed 16% of the annual total to be diverted from high temperature 
incineration, saving 5.5 tonnes of CO2. The cost saving was 57% per tonne.

Improved collections cut 28 tonnes of CO2 from waste transport and saved 11% 
in costs. Laboratory recycling of non-contaminated packaging saves 
approximately a tonne of CO2 a year.

The UCL/Mitie partnership has shown the healthcare waste industry that 
disposing of autoclaved laboratory wastes in this way is legal, safe, 
sustainable, financially beneficial and needs no investment by waste producers.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 