
It is a disappointing fact that there remains a huge gulf in the university 
participation of pupils depending on their background or the school they went 
to. Yet despite what many think, the issue here is not aspiration –research 
suggests <http://www.ifs.org.uk/wps/wp1015.pdf> that around half of students in 
the poorest quintile of the socio-economic status distribution aspire to go to 
university at age 14, even though only around 13% go on to do so.

A recent report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/206994/FINAL_Higher_Education_-_The_Fair_Access_Challenge.pdf>
 from the government's social mobility taskforce suggests that one way to 
increase the number of students from poor backgrounds inRussell Group 
<http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/> universities is to make greater use of 
contextual data in university admissions – in other words the background of 
students should be taken into account by university admissions officers when 
considering their applications, giving those from less advantaged backgrounds a 
better chance of admission.

On the surface this seems like a good plan. There is good evidence 
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/economics/staff/academic/naylor/publications/obes2001.pdf>
 to suggest that once they get into university, pupils from state schools 
perform better than those from independent schools . So why not give them an 
equal chance of getting in? As the report argues, there is certainly evidence 
that students from poor backgrounds who have the same A-level scores as their 
private school counterparts are less likely to get into a Russell Group 
university, even conditional on applying.

However, once we add in the subjects that these students study at A-level as 
well as the grades they achieve,the picture becomes rather more murky 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1468-4446.12021/full, table IV, 
pp356>; social class disparities in the likelihood of an offer from a Russell 
Group university largely disappear – though school type disparities still hold 
– perhaps evidence that privately educated kids are coached into making better 
applications.

Meanwhile, there is plentiful evidence that students from poor backgrounds 
simply don't study subjects 
<http://www.ipsos-mori.com/DownloadPublication/1505_sri-education-dfore-effects-of-english-baccalaureate.pdf>
 that enable them to get into university. While the majority of pupils in 
selective schools study towards the Ebacc group of highly academic GCSE 
subjects, less than half do so in comprehensive schools, and even fewer in 
schools with high proportions of free-school meals pupils. Without a grounding 
in these important subjects, these pupils are unlikely to ever get near to 
attending an elite university.

It is hard to see how using contextual information would solve this 
fundamental problem. Even if they were accepted to a Russell Group institution 
based on contextual factors, students would still have to have achieved the 
right combination of subjects and grades to allow them to do well on the course 
– pupils without decent maths and physics A-levels would struggle to pass a 
physics degree course, for example.

So the students most likely to benefit from this are those who have gained the 
right A-levels in the right subjects for their chosen degree, but were rejected 
in favour of a candidate from a better background. For the small number of 
students falling into this category, contextual data would be a good way to 
ensure they are treated fairly.

But if we are to dramatically improve the participation chances of our poorer 
students, do we need to first hold to account the schools that fail to put them 
on the right paths?

Gill Wyness is a researcher in education policy at LSE 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/home.aspx> and the thinkthank CentreForum 
<http://www.centreforum.org/> – follow it on Twitter @CentreForum 
<https://twitter.com/centreforum>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/higher-education/>.
 