
Build a relationship with an applicant ahead of results day

"Clearing is always an unpredictable affair, but what we've learned from the 
past is that there's a real value – both to the student and the university – to 
building a relationship with an applicant well ahead of results day. Last year 
we had filled almost all our places by the second day. If they have a great 
results day, they'll know we reward good performances with scholarships; if 
they don't, that isn't necessarily the end of the story.

"We're not expecting the challenges around Clearing this year to be so very 
different from 2013. It's a crowded scene with a lot of universities trying to 
attract the best students, so inevitably it's about highlighting your own 
strengths and helping students make an informed decision. Students are 
saturated with information these days and they'll be using social media more 
than ever to get a feel for which institution might be right for them, so the 
universities that recognise the importance of engaging with prospective 
students on Twitter and the like may see more interest. I think next year is 
where the big change will be, as the removal of the student number control is 
likely to makeClearing <https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> a 
different ball game." (Ian Denning, recruitment communications manager at 
Coventry University)

Tell students about the option to trade up their university place

"We found adjustment – where students who get higher-than-expected grades can 
trade up and go to what might be perceived to be a more prestigious university 
or course – more useful than Clearing because few of our students needed to use 
Clearing last year. That worked out very positively for us. Our team manager 
was pretty much entirely deployed, not on helping out students who didn't get 
in, but ringing and contacting those successful students and saying: 'Are you 
aware that you can reconsider, that you have a window in which to see if you 
can secure a place at a more prestigious university?'

"The challenge for us comes earlier, at the application stage, and we will 
challenge students quite strongly if we think they are either underselling or 
overselling themselves. I think the skill really should be in doing that 
because if you do that job well with students, then Clearing doesn't really 
come into it. I think there is something going wrong in a school or college 
which is generating a high number of Clearing referrals – they need to be 
looking at the advice and guidance that they are providing students with at the 
application stage.

"This is the first year that there have been no January exams and we are all 
crystal ball-gazing on what the impact of that will be on results. It could be 
the first year where we have more cause to use Clearing because it is really 
difficult to predict what students' grade profile is likely to be."(Chris 
Sherwin, principal of Long Road Sixth-Form College, Cambridge)

Making unconditional offers isn't necessarily a good idea

"We wonder if, in the future, the model adopted by some universities – where 
candidates are made unconditional offers regardless of their A-level 
performance – could make students' GCSE profiles the determiner when it comes 
to admission decisions. If lots of universities do it, and you as a parent know 
that your son or daughter is going to get an unconditional offer on the basis 
of what their GCSEs look like, then you would really hammer them in terms of 
those exams. The worry is that the student would get a wonderful crop of GCSEs, 
then think: come end of Year 12 I will get my unconditional offer and that's it.

"From an institution's perspective, if you have a really good applicant who is 
predicted three As and they have applied to universities that aren't going to 
make unconditional offers – if you make an unconditional offer you will always 
be the insurance choice. You'll find that you're the second bite of the cherry, 
completely reliant on them failing to get into another institution. If someone 
puts you down as conditional firm, you as the institution have the control – 
and probably 60-70% will get the conditions of the offer. If you're the 
insurance choice, probably only 10% will convert." (Richard Broom, head of 
admissions at City University London)

We need to adjust our offers to reflect recent dips in A-level performance

"A lot will depend on what happens with A-level grades. Over the last couple 
of years, grades have dipped very slightly, and if that continues to happen 
there will probably be a period of recalibration with offers and grades in 
general. We've seen it happen the other way – as students have got better, 
offers have increased. It would be natural, and inevitable, for the reverse to 
happen, because what we're looking at is something that is quiet comparative."
(Lynsey Hopkins, head of admissions at Sheffield University)

Students know which universities they want to approach

"What is clear from last year is that students understand the Clearing and 
adjustment opportunity better than ever, and will make carefully-considered 
choices about which universities they will approach during this period. It is 
therefore extremely important that through our website and videos, students can 
get a full picture of what life at Surrey University will be like and whether 
it is the right choice for them."(David Ashton, vice-president and registrar of 
the University of Surrey)

Five things we learned from last year's (2013) admissions cycle 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCIQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ucas.com%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2Fucas-2013-end-of-cycle-report.pdf&ei=1lvWU4L-O8XX7AbKmIHAAQ&usg=AFQjCNHHnI3R7qcZewEzA0hlNsDRL1IFDw&sig2=2JQSQJcaglRJmlqOX4GKvw&bvm=bv.71778758,d.ZGU&cad=rja>
:

1) More people than ever before went into higher education, up 6.6% on 2012.

2) Institutions increased the number of offers they made to applicants by 9% 
to 1.7 million – over half of applicants had four or more offers to choose 
between.

3) 18-year olds from the UK and EU were 10% more likely to get an offer than 
in 2011.

4) Women were 32% more likely to enter higher education than men.

5) Higher-tariff institutions increased acceptances by 10%, with a 4% increase 
to young applicants who were holding ABB+ qualifications by the end of the 
cycle and a 9% increase to those with lower attainment levels.

What's the one thing you learned from Clearing last year? Share your 
experiences in the comments below.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 