
By 2015, English universities will be spending a projected £300m on bursaries 
and scholarships in order to fulfil part of theOFFA access agreement 
<http://www.offa.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/Access-agreement-2012-13-tables-with-intro.pdf>
. OFFA's goal is to encourage people from lower income backgrounds to apply to 
university in the face of higher tuition fees.

The problem is this: there is little evidence that offering disadvantaged 
students bursaries will offset the negative effect of higher fees on university 
participation. If the number of poorer students put off by spiralling debt is 
higher than the number tempted by the offer of a bursary, then bursaries may 
not be the most effective way of attracting poorer students.

With so much being spent on bursaries and scholarships – up to 51% of 
universities' additional fee money in 2015 – it begs the question what's better 
for student participation: smaller fees, with smaller bursaries, or big fees 
and big bursaries?

Cutting both would certainly be regressive. Reducing tuition fees would 
benefit high earning graduates while cutting bursaries would directly penalise 
poorer students. But these students are already in the door. What if higher fees
stop some disadvantaged young people from applying at all? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/nov/28/university-applications-uk-students-fees>

Indeed, it has been shown that increases in tuition fees do have a negative 
impact on participation (Dearden, Fitzsimons and Wyness, 2011 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/wps/wp1117.pdf>), although this research could not 
differentiate between students from different backgrounds and therefore whether 
disadvantaged students are more likely to be deterred from applying than those 
who are better off.

Research into the impact of bursaries is indicative, but again not conclusive. 
The only UK study examining the impact of bursaries on participation (Corver, 
2010 
<http://www.offa.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Have-bursaries-influenced-choices-between-universities-.pdf>
) found that bursaries fail to attract poorer students into university. In 
fact, the analysis showed that most of the increase in participation of 
disadvantaged young people was to universities offering lower bursaries.

This is not particularly surprising. Bursaries vary widely by institution (at 
the upper end, Oxford University will spend 51% of its fee income on bursaries 
and scholarships in 2015; at the lower end, Middlesex will spend 17%; in the 
middle, London Metropolitan will spend 35%), and there is no centralised means 
by which students can find out what bursary they will receive. Instead, they 
must visit each university website, hunt down information expressed in a 
variety of formats, and decide if they are eligible. Here is whereconsumer 
champions such as Which? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/oct/22/which-magazine-value-degrees> 
can help, by making information more easily available to students and allowing 
them to compare universities' entire offering.

If, after liberating this information, we find that disadvantaged students are 
no more likely to apply to universities offering high bursaries than to those 
offering lower bursaries, we can deduce that bursaries are ineffective at 
attracting students.

And universities could easily do something about it. The University of 
Manchester plans to charge all students £9,000 per year in fees and is 
projected to spend almost £14m on bursaries in 2015. So at the extreme, the 
university could cut fees for all students by £560 per year and get rid of 
bursaries altogether.

Of course, it may well be the case that awarding bursaries to disadvantaged 
students has other merits. They may not have to work during term time, for 
example, and could stand a better chance of completing their degrees. If so, 
bursary spending might be worth the money.

The government would do well to find out.

Gill Wyness is a higher education researcher at liberal think tank CentreForum 
<http://www.centreforum.org/>.

This blog was corrected on 1 December. The line "with no fee waiver for 
disadvantaged students" was removed to acknowledge that the University of 
Manchester does offer fee waivers for disadvantaged students.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 