
High in the Usambara Mountains of northern Tanzania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tanzania>, a woman prepares to give birth in 
the pitch black. Her family clusters around her. With no electricity at the 
birthing clinic, someone shines a mobile phone above the midwife’s head.

The baby is the last to be born in near darkness at the Zahanati ya Tema 
clinic. The next day, a local solar company brings access to clean electricity 
in the form of asolar home system <http://www.ashden.org/solar>. The initiative 
was made possible by solar finance business, SunFunder, which aims to bridge 
the funding gap between investors and up and coming solar businesses in east 
Africa.



Across the world some 1.2 billion people lack access to electricity 
<http://www.unfoundation.org/what-we-do/issues/energy-and-climate/clean-energy-development.html>
, and a further 1bn struggle with unreliable service. When the sun goes down, 
millions of families spend their limited household income on costly kerosene 
oil to light lamps, exposing their children to noxious fumes and inadvertently 
contributing to atmospheric warming.

Solar technology can transform this. It’s becoming more affordable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/26/solar-panel-costs-predicted-to-fall-10-a-year>
, and it’s a viable investment proposition for investors. Yet solar businesses 
are struggling to get the cash they need to scale up and reach more off-grid 
communities. Why?
 Solar home system Photograph: Ashden 
Dennis Tessier of ARTI Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>
, the company that brought solar-powered light to the birthing clinic, 
explains: “Access to finance is the biggest hurdle we face as a small solar 
company. Grant funding from donors has helped us make some progress, but 
interest rates are high, and we haven’t managed to secure any loans from banks.”

Banks are often cautious about lending money to solar businesses as they lack 
specialist knowledge of the sector, according to SunFunder’s Lais Lona. Other 
types of investors would like to invest, but it’s simply not cost effective to 
vet each individual loan.

The trouble for companies such as ARTI is they need working capital to cover 
upfront costs like importing more solar lights or expanding distribution 
networks. Without it, they face sluggish growth, while the huge market 
opportunity for solar products, such as lamps, home systems and mini-grid 
connections, goes untapped.

“Just last year, we took over responsibility for running the SunnyMoney 
<http://sunnymoney.org/> [a social enterprise founded by charity SolarAid] 
distribution network in Tanzania, but the transition required investment,” says 
Tessier. “We had the database and call centre all set up. But we had no lights 
to sell as we’d exhausted our funds. SunFunder provided us with a loan to 
import the first 3,000 lamps.”

Accessing the money

Founded in 2012, SunFunder has bold aims to unlock billions of dollars of 
investment for solar energy inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
and beyond. It has already raised more than $30m and provided $12m of loans to 
25 solar businesses, helping some 300,000 off-grid households gain access to 
solar electricity.

The company, based in San Francisco and Tanzania, has just won clean energy 
charityAshden’s  <https://www.ashden.org/awards/2016>International Gold Award 
and Innovative Finance awards for the “game- changing” nature of its work.

What is holding back the growth of solar power?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/31/solar-power-what-is-holding-back-growth-clean-energy>
“There’s a lot of capital available, but it’s hard to access,” says 
SunFunder’s chief executive, Ryan Levinson. “We’re getting close to the solar 
industry in east Africa to really understand its financing needs. We aim to 
minimise the risk of default and offer low risk investment opportunities with 
attractive returns.”

SunFunder focuses on supporting solar businesses with a proven track record 
that need funding to scale up. Its Tanzania-based team conducts a thorough 
check of their finances, sales pipeline and technical abilities with the aim of 
providing a clean bill of health to show investors. Monitoring continues 
throughout the term of the loan, and to date and the company says its loan 
default rate stands at 1%. Currently $3.8m has been repaid and $8.3m is 
outstanding.

Meanwhile, SunFunder’s finance team in San Francisco seeks out potential 
investors, offering them the opportunity to invest in a “solar note” – a big 
pot of cash that the company then divides between diverse solar businesses and 
countries. This helps keep the risk low for investors, who receive quarterly 
interest payments of up to 9% and see their original contribution returned 
after a pre-defined period.

The current solar note, the company’s largest to date, aims to raise $50m by 
the end of the year. Investors include the US government’s development finance 
arm, Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC), which has provided $15m.

While SunFunder’s venture is commendable, it’s important for investors to 
enter this type of investment with their eyes open, says Philip Bazin, 
renewables investment expert at Triodos Bank.

“It stands to be high impact, but could also be high risk. Investors need to 
consider how ... they will get their money back if the solar businesses are 
unable to repay the loans, particularly if they are waiting several years to 
see their original investment returned.” Bazin adds: “It’s important to look at 
which countries the money is going to – are they suffering from political 
instability or civil unrest? A lot rests on the quality of the vetting 
completed by SunFunder. This needs to be as transparent as possible.”

Back in Tanzania, the team tailors loans to companies’ needs – ranging from 
$50,000 to $2m – and loan terms span six to 36 months. With its $73,000 of 
SunFunder loans, ARTI has been able to increase its purchases of solar lights, 
freeing up cash to open a new distribution hub, hire three new employees and 
buy a delivery truck. In 2015, the company achieved solar lighting sales of 
$75,000, a 222% year-on-year increase.
 