
James Wood, professor of the practice of literary criticism at Harvard and a 
regular reviewer in the New Yorker, is the critic I most admire, and I disagree 
with him on a great many points. We did, however, concur in our high estimation 
ofHilary Mantel <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel>'s novels 
about Thomas Cromwell; even though the opening paragraph of his review seemed 
to be designed to make me bristle. Wood writes:"Both this new book and its 
predecessor, Wolf Hall, are mysteriously successful historical novels, a 
somewhat gimcrack genre not exactly jammed with greatness." 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2012/05/07/120507crbo_books_wood> 
My initial response was that the statement was pure phooey. As usual with 
Wood's work, my second response was that something needed unpicking here, that 
there were ideas curled inside the provocation. What exactly is the "historical 
novel"?

Of course, there are historical novels that are truly great: from Sir Walter 
Scott'sThe Heart of Midlothian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780748605705/the-heart-of-midlothian>
, Charles Dickens'sA Tale of Two Cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780141196909/a-tale-of-two-cities>
, Leo Tolstoy'sWar and Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780140447934/war-and-peace>
, Hermann Broch'sThe Death of Virgil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780141181622/the-death-of-virgil>
, Thomas Mann'sJoseph and his Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9781857152876/joseph-and-his-brothers>
, Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa'sThe Leopard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-fiction/9781846553912/the-leopard>
, Marguerite Yourcenar'sMemoirs of Hadrian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780140181944/memoirs-of-hadrian>
 right up to AL Kennedy'sDay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099494058/day>, David 
Mitchell'sThe Thousand Autumns of Jacob de Zoet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780340921562/the-thousand-autumns-of-jacob-de-zoet>
 or Thomas Pynchon'sMason & Dixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099771913/mason-and-dixon>
. There are, equally, formulaic, cliche-ridden and preposterous historical 
novels. But is this a difference of genre or talent?

The Walter Scott prize for historical fiction defines historical novels as 
those set at least 60 years in the past, a neat nod to the subtitle of Scott's 
Waverley, 'Tis Sixty Years Since. It's also moderately problematic: George 
Eliot'sMiddlemarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780199536757/middlemarch>
, for example, is set only 40 years in the past. (Then again, Middlemarch isn't 
normally described as a historical novel.) My little list of historical novels 
also shows that the form seemed to be in abeyance during the modernist period: 
Virginia Woolf'sOrlando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780857862587/orlando> and
Flush <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780199539291/flush> 
are both technically historical novels, but they're "more than" historical 
novels.

I think that "historical novel" is rather too broad a term to encompass, say, 
Ellis Peters'sA Morbid Taste for Bones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/referenceandlanguages/9780194230407/a-morbid-taste-for-bones-headwords>
 and Antony Burgess'sNothing Like the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780749079697/nothing-like-the-sun>
. It's instructive to compare Scott with his most successful heir, Alexandre 
Dumas. Dumas inveigles his characters into historical situations, usually with 
them just failing to change the course of history (the musketeers kidnap 
Charles I's executioner, only for Milady's son, Mordaunt, to do the deed). 
Scott, as the Marxist scholar György Lukács understood, aligns his protagonists 
to the tide of history: Edward Waverley may dally with Jacobitism, but ends up 
a loyal Hanoverian. Fiction set in the past – in any past – is profoundly 
predestined: when Scott wrote one very weird novel,Redgauntlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780199599578/redgauntlet>
, about a fictitious historical event – Charles Edward Stuart attempting to 
rally a final Jacobite putsch in the 1780s – he systematically showed how the 
whole thing could never have happened. Incidentally, Redgauntlet would be 
ineligible for the Walter Scott prize.

Although modernism may have been sceptical about historical fiction, 
postmodernism adored it, since it was about stories. It also looked at 
metahistorical novels, novels that turned on how history was written. John 
Barth'sThe Sot-Weed Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781903809501/the-sot-weed-factor>
, for example, is an homage to 18th-century novels about an 18th-century poet. 
AS Byatt'sThe Children's Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099535454/the-childrens-book>
 is a devastating engagement with how stories overwrite family narratives.John 
Henry Days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781841155692/john-henry-days>
 by Colson Whitehead exactly dissects how historical legends arise.

There is also the detail of detail. Scott's penchant for detail was satirised 
in his lifetime: William Maginn, who wrote a lovely and odd novel describing 
present day events as though they were historical events, skewered the use of 
food and clothes as an easy way to evoke the past. Mantel herself is very 
cautious with detail – an almond here, a specific silk there – while Edward 
Bulwer-Lytton or Rafael Sabatini swell the periwig and collops quotient. In 
some respects, writers wedded to the idea of contemporary relevance are as 
guilty in this respect: Blahniks and iPads both date as well. Robert Louis 
Stevenson used the word "tusherie" to describe that particular form of 
detail-rich, psychology-light fiction, and his own oeuvre encompasses both the 
high literary (The Master of Ballantrae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781846970603/the-master-of-ballantrae-and-weir-of-hermiston-with-weir-of-hermiston>
) and tusherie (The Black Arrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780141441399/the-black-arrow>
). There is an element of truth in Thomas Carlyle's claim that Scott wrote his 
characters from the clothes in, not the heart out.

The question of detail is part of a wider question about the form, 
encapsulated in the famous opening of LP Hartley'sThe Go-Between 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780141187785/the-go-between>
: "the past is a foreign country: they do things differently there". Wood 
praises Mantel for her "cunning universalism", a slicker version of CS Lewis's 
unchanging human heart. But there are great historical novels that insist on 
the past's fundamental difference: William Golding'sThe Inheritors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780571273584/the-inheritors>
, for example. Variations in behaviour in that book are not merely a matter of 
social constraint, as in Kazuo Ishiguro'sThe Remains of the Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780571258246/the-remains-of-the-day>
 or Margaret Atwood'sAlias Grace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9781860492594/alias-grace>.

It may be that the historical novel genre is as unjammed with greatness as the 
crime genre, the science fiction genre, the romance genre and the "literary 
fiction" genre (come on,On Chesil Beach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099512790/on-chesil-beach>
 seemed to berated by David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/apr/27/thebrandingofianmcewan>
 and most book reviewers, but precious few readers). I rather suspect that 
Wood's frustration is with "historical romance" in the true 19th century sense, 
rather than any of the novels mentioned above. Whatever differences we have, I 
always agree with Wood that the great is rare and precious.
 