
It's been 21 years since the BBC last did Lady Chatterley's Lover, so isn't it 
time fora new one <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-27143894>? No 
doubt it will be very good, with the lovemaking scenes a bit more explicit than 
before, and perhaps poor old Sir Clifford getting a bit more sympathy. But 
should we be going back to the well quite as often as we do? True, Lady 
Chatterley, which has been remade only four or five times, is well behind Pride 
and Prejudice, which the BBC first did on radio in 1924, and which has had as 
many as 20 retellings, depending how many foreign versions and loose 
interpretations you count. Andrew Davies 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/wales/5025200.stm>, dean of classic adaptations, 
and the man who had Darcy rise up from the waters of Pemberley, once said: "You 
have to get sex into the spine of the story." That surely isn't necessary in 
the case of Constance and Mellors. The rationale of many reworkings of classic 
novels has indeed been to make more explicit what authors in the past left 
implicit, not only in romance but in politics and economics as well. Reviving 
and refreshing the literary canon in this way is not wrong in itself. After 
all, we routinely look forward to new interpretations in music and new stagings 
of plays. But in film and television the remake for the nth time has too large 
a place, squeezing new work and adaptations of books not so far, or not often, 
translated to the screen. Look in the direction, say, ofJoseph Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/25/emperors-tomb-joseph-roth-review>
, Conrad, Balzac, Naipaul,Elizabeth Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/07/elizabeth-jenkins-obituary> â€“ 
everyone will have their own list. Otherwise we will soon be watching the first 
Harry Potter remake.
 