
Lawyers for the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration>, arguing for their 
ability to kill an American citizen without trial in Yemen, contended that the 
protection of US citizenship was effectively removed by a key congressional act 
that blessed a global war against al-Qaida.

Known as the Authorization to Use Military Force (AUMF), the broad and 
controversial 2001 law played a major role in the legal decision to killAnwar 
al-Awlaki <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, the former 
al-Qaida propagandist and US citizen, in 2011, according to a redacted 
memorandum made public on Monday.


"We believe that the AUMF's authority to use lethal force abroad also may 
apply in appropriate circumstances to a United States citizen who is part of 
the forces of an enemy authorization within the scope of the force 
authorization," reads the Justice Department memorandum, written for attorney 
general Eric Holder on 16 July 2010 and ostensibly intended strictly for 
Awlaki's case.

Among those circumstances: "Where high-level government officials have 
determined that a capture operation is infeasible and that the targeted person 
is part of a dangerous enemy force and is engaged in activities that pose a 
continued and imminent threat to US persons or interests."

The 2nd US circuit court of appeals in Manhattan released the memo on Monday 
in response to a lawsuit from the American Civil Liberties Union and the New 
York Times.

The AUMF is unbounded by geographic or time limitations, indicating the wide 
berth the Obama administration provides for understanding its powers for the 
potential targeting of US citizens. The administration's official policy is 
that the AUMF ought to be "ultimately repeal[ed]", as Obama said in May. The 
administrationdoes not support immediate repeal 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fmay%2F21%2Fhouse-vote-measure-america-post-9-11-powers&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHTCkykj3EAF9KLlj8hV5i5TqES5g>
, which already faces a difficult congressional road.


Barely over a year after the memo was issued, Awlaki was dead 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.wired.com%2F2011%2F09%2Fawlaki-dead-yemen%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEu2HFKvNarTL3R-dBycy0OjFfMoQ>
, following a US drone strike – the first such lethal strike known to have 
deliberately targeted an American citizen. Yet an earlier US assault on Awlaki, 
inDecember 2009 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fonline.wsj.com%2Fnews%2Farticles%2FSB10001424052748703992704576307594129219756&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGrKfL2--VBmLWGaoVPV2J2EahMtw>
, predated the memo.


While Obama administration officials have for years insisted that Awlaki was 
an operational leader of al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, which in 2009 and 
2010 attempted unsuccessfully to detonate bombs inside the US, they have also 
fought lawsuits seeking to reveal their case against Awlaki.


But for the case against Awlaki, hinted at in a Justice Department "white 
paper" summarizing it that leaked last year, the administration leaned 
significantly on the broad leeway for counter-terrorism the AUMF established.


"Just as the AUMF authorizes the military detention of a US citizen captured 
abroad who is part of an armed force within the scope of the AUMF, it also 
authorizes the use of 'necessary and appropriate' lethal force against a US 
citizen who has joined such an armed force," reads the memo, written by former 
Justice Department lawyer David Barron, who also analyzed and rejected 
arguments that killing Awlaki would be tantamount to murder.


"It is true that here the target of the contemplated actions would be a US 
citizen," reads the memo.


"But we do not believe al-Aulaqi's citizenship provided a basis for concluding 
that section 1119 would fail to incorporate the established public authority 
justification for a killing in this case."

The release of the memo, as ordered Monday by a federal appeals court, ended a 
legal battle that has stretched for years, intended to prevent the 
administration from killing Awlaki or any other US citizen without trial. After 
losing an April appeal and confronting a challenge by Republican senator Rand 
Paul todeny 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fpaul-derail-obama-judicial-nominee-drone-david-barron&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFbZE1OkMap7cotpOfayiE8ML-a1Q>
 Barron a federal judgeship, the Obama administration agreed not to fight the 
document's disclosure.

"The release of the legal memorandum follows the administration’s decision 
last month not to appeal the court’s decision. The material being released is 
consistent with the administration’s previous statements on this issue," said 
Justice Department spokesman Brian Fallon.


But its suppression challenge took various forms and arguments over the years, 
despite repeated official confirmations about the drone strikes, including from 
the president; despite the confirmed killing of four Americans, three of whom 
are claimed to have been killed accidentally, including Awlaki's 16-year-old 
son; and despite the2013 leak 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.wired.com%2F2013%2F02%2Fobama-imminence%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFXFxHn6DM5jLGYGdPlhNTeb_0YUQ>
 of a memo summarizing the Justice Department's arguments about so-called 
"targeted killing" for Congress.


The redacted version of the memo released Monday does not reveal much of the 
factual basis for the government's claims that Awlaki represented an imminent 
threat to the United States.


In the disclosed portions, Barron's memo does not explicitly vouch for the 
government's case against Awlaki, referring instead to "the facts represented 
to us". It refers instead to Awlaki as a "leader" who was "continuously 
planning attacks" against the US, without providing an evidentiary basis for 
claims central to the extraordinary circumvention of normal due process 
procedures. Nor do the public sections explain why capturing Awlaki was not 
feasible, nor why the Justice Department believes it need not have provided 
Awlaki with judicial process.

The CIA, which along with the military's special operations forces sought 
authority for the strike, declined to comment. Barronwas confirmed by the Senate
 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.msnbc.com%2Fmsnbc%2Fdavid-barron-confirmed&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFIS4dC84EDESZXewrg2b8ZLt4dXw>
 to the federal bench on 22 May.


The Justice Department memo "confirms that the government’s drone killing 
program is built on gross distortions of law", said Pardiss Kebriaei, a lawyer 
with the Center for Constitutional Rights who challenged the Awlaki killing, 
who added that the "forced transparency comes years late".


Rejecting a government argument that the release of the memorandum would chill 
attorney-client communications, the court wrote on Monday: "If this contention 
were upheld, waiver of privileges protecting legal advice would never occur. … 
We need not fear that OLC will lack for clients."


Several of the government's appeals for secrecy have been overtaken by the 
public record, the court found. Among them: the "identity of the country in 
which al-Awlaki was killed", which wasreported as being Yemen 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.wired.com%2F2011%2F09%2Fawlaki-dead-yemen%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEu2HFKvNarTL3R-dBycy0OjFfMoQ>
 on the day of the lethal strike; and the involvement of the CIA, which in 
addition to being an open secret for years wasconfirmed by former director Leon 
Panetta 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cbsnews.com%2Fvideos%2Fthe-killing-of-anwar-al-awlaki-50119125%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGgYDdgaGANGfjdmn63tBkWkqhPiQ>
.


"We recognize that in some circumstances the very fact that legal analysis was 
given concerning a planned operation would risk disclosure of the likelihood of 
that operation, but that is not the situation here where drone strikes and 
targeted killings have been publicly acknowledged at the highest levels of the 
Government," the court explained.

The ACLU, which sought along with the New York Times to compel the release of 
the memo, vowed to fight the government's additional arguments for secrecy 
around other legal foundations of what it calls its "targeted killing" program.


“We will continue to press for the release of other documents relating to the 
targeted-killing program, including other legal memos and documents relating to 
civilian casualties," said deputy legal director Jameel Jaffer.


"The drone program has been responsible for the deaths of thousands of people, 
including countless innocent bystanders, but the American public knows 
scandalously little about who is being killed and why.”


In May 2013, Obama raised his standards 
<http://www.wired.com/2013/05/obama-drone-speech/> for launching drone attacks 
or other so-called "targeted" lethal military action against terrorist 
suspects. American drones struck last week in bothYemen 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.aljazeera.com%2Fnews%2Fmiddleeast%2F2014%2F06%2Fdrone-strike-kills-armed-fighters-yemen-2014614141848870796.html&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNH2fmi8pvF0VnTKR-_f9q2a8V8gdQ>
 andPakistan 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cnn.com%2F2014%2F06%2F19%2Fworld%2Fasia%2Fpakistan-drone%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGLNafXvnHGwcL5cbALxINQVlWQ9A>
, though no Americans are suspected of being killed.

US senator Ron Wyden praised the memo's release and called for more 
transparency on Monday. "For example, how much evidence does the president need 
to determine that a particular American is a legitimate target for military 
action? Or, can the president strike an American anywhere in the world? What 
does it mean to say that capturing an American must be ‘infeasible’? And 
exactly what other limits and boundaries apply to this authority?" he said.

"I urge the executive branch to build on today’s disclosure and start 
answering these additional questions."
 