
The US government is deporting undocumented immigrants back to Central America 
to face the imminent threat of violence, with several individuals being 
murdered just days or months after their return, a Guardian investigation has 
found.


The migrants who fled violence for the US only to be sent back to their deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/12/deportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador>
The Guardian has confirmed three separate cases of Honduran men who have been 
gunned down shortly after being deported by the US government. Each was 
murdered in their hometowns, soon after their return – one just a few days 
after he was expelled from the US.

Immigration experts believe that the Guardian’s findings represent just the 
tip of the iceberg. A forthcoming academic study based on local newspaper 
reports has identified as many as 83 US deportees who have been murdered on 
their return toEl Salvador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/el-salvador>, 
Guatemala and Honduras since January 2014.

Human rights groups warn that deterrent measures taken by the Obama 
administration after last year’s“surge” in arrivals at the border of 
unaccompanied children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/20/us-immigration-central-america-texas-detention>
 from Central America have triggered a series of powerful unintended 
consequences across the region.

The number of migrants crossing the US border with Mexico unlawfully has 
declined sharply this year. But the increasingly militarized surveillance and 
patrol of the southern frontier has forced migrants to take ever greater risks 
in the routes they choose. And although fewer people are attempting to enter 
from Mexico, the death rate among those trying has gone up, activists say.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fobama-immigration-deportations-central-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70aa898da01b5e72c515bc0a2d824cbc365b340f%2F0_61_2500_1498%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20government%20deporting%20Central%20American%20migrants%20to%20their%20deaths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fobama-immigration-deportations-central-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20government%20deporting%20Central%20American%20migrants%20to%20their%20deaths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fobama-immigration-deportations-central-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70aa898da01b5e72c515bc0a2d824cbc365b340f%2F0_61_2500_1498%2F2500.jpg>
 Mothers from Honduras traveling with their children prepare to get into a US 
Border Patrol truck after crossing the Rio Grande near McAllen, Texas. 
Photograph: Rodolfo Gonzalez/AP 
Side effects of the crackdown can also be seen in Mexico, where authorities 
have alsostepped up security across the  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/mexico-immigration-crackdown-fewer-child-migrants-central-america>
across the south of the country.

This has caused migrants to make lengthy detours, making journeys to ever more 
remote and perilous routes where they face a heightened risk of robbery, rape, 
abduction and death.

Human rights experts warn that in its haste to expel or deter undocumented 
immigrants, the US government is scrimping on its obligation to provide asylum 
to those genuinely in peril in violation of international law.

The collateral damage of America’s increasingly unforgiving deportation 
process is that people are being returned to extremely dangerous situations in 
Central America, which has some of thehighest murder rates in the world 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/04/10/world/un-world-murder-rates/>. 

Based on reporting from northern Honduras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/honduras> and freedom of information 
requests in the US, the Guardian has compiled the stories of three young 
Honduran men who were all killed soon after deportation. Two of them had 
originally fled to the US after their brothers were violently attacked by 
gangs, one of them fatally.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmigrants-minutemen-dead-bodies-mexico-arizona-usa-border-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F20%2F1421773342256%2Fcrop_KP-72404_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Migrants%2C%20Minutemen%20and%20dead%20bodies%20on%20the%20Mexico-Arizona%20border%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmigrants-minutemen-dead-bodies-mexico-arizona-usa-border-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Migrants%2C%20Minutemen%20and%20dead%20bodies%20on%20the%20Mexico-Arizona%20border%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmigrants-minutemen-dead-bodies-mexico-arizona-usa-border-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F20%2F1421773342256%2Fcrop_KP-72404_640.jpeg>
Watch The Guardian’s film ‘Migrants, Minutemen and dead bodies on the 
Mexico-Arizona border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/jan/21/migrants-minutemen-dead-bodies-mexico-arizona-usa-border-video>
’ 
José Marvin Martínez was 16 when he fled from the town of San Manuel in the 
north of Honduras to the US. A few months earlier his brother Rigoberto had 
been shot and killed by suspected gang members, relatives said.

Deportation papers obtained under freedom of information rules show that 
Martínez was apprehended in Laredo, Texas in May 2013 having worked for a while 
as a masons’ assistant in Houston. A border patrol agent had come across him in 
a Dairy Ranch store.


In April 2014 he was ordered to appear before an immigration review court but 
failed to show. He was then issued with adeportation notice 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2451047-doc00305520151006163754.html> 
and was eventually tracked down and sent back to Honduras in August of that 
year.


On 14 December – four months after he was deported – Martínez, who was known 
locally as El Chele or “Blondie”, was sitting outside a corner shop back in San 
Manuel when a gunman opened fire from a drive-by truck, killing him. “If a 
deportee can’t find a place to feel safe, surely he’ll be killed,” said Jaime 
Coto, a Honduran detective.

Another of the cases tracked down by the Guardian was that of Ángel Díaz, 26, 
who was sent away to the US by his father after his brother was kidnapped by a 
Honduran gang and beaten almost to death. In April this year Díaz was arrested 
by police following a domestic dispute and – with no visa papers to show – was 
sent directly to a detention center for deportees.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTM9kKVyOajI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTM9kKVyOajI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTM9kKVyOajI&media=>
 The Killing Fields of Texas: Beyond the Border Pt.1 
He was removed to Honduras in July. Days later was shot dead on a local bus, 
it is assumed by local gang members.

In the third case, Juan Francisco Díaz was deported back to his hometown 
Choloma in Honduras in March, having lived under the radar in the US for three 
years. Four months after deportation he was found lying dead in an alleyway in 
his parents’ neighborhood.

Elizabeth Kennedy, a social scientist at San Diego state university, has 
compiled a comprehensive estimate of US deportees who have been murdered on 
their return to Central America since January 2014 based on local newspaper 
reports. Her forthcoming research identified 45 such cases in El Salvador, 
three inGuatemala <https://www.theguardian.com/world/guatemala> and 35 in 
Honduras.

“These figures tell us that the US is returning people to their deaths in 
violation of national and international law. Most of the individuals reported 
to have been murdered lived in some of the most violent towns in some of the 
most violent countries in the world – suggesting strongly that is why they 
fled,” Kennedy said.


Government officials told the Guardian that they could not comment on 
individual cases. But a Department of Homeland Security spokesman, SY Lee, said 
that the US offers protection for those who fear harm in their home countries 
through a variety of channels. “Each year, thousands are admitted to this 
country as part of the overseas refugee program or granted asylum by the DHS or 
by the Department of Justice.”


Lee pointed out that criminal activity back home was not sufficient grounds to 
claim asylum, unless it were connected to five specific grounds for fear of 
harm - race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group, or 
political opinion. Those facing deportation – including expedited removal – 
“are permitted the opportunity to seek asylum and/or other forms of protection”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgBqP1XDN2wU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgBqP1XDN2wU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgBqP1XDN2wU&media=>
 ‘I sent the bodies home’: Beyond the Border Pt.2 
 The reality that undocumented immigrants are being returned to danger in 
Central America stands in stark contrast to the heightened rhetoric around 
migration in the US – stoked in part by Republican presidential hopefuls. Led 
by Donald Trump, the contestants have focused almost exclusively on the need to 
evict more “illegal immigrants” –Trump wants to deport all 11 million of them 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-saying-illegal-immigrants-have-to-go-targets-obama-orders-1439738967>
 – or tobuild a wall 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/donald-trump-i-would-force-mexico-build-border-wall>
 all along the Mexican border.

But the statistics paint a very different picture. According to the latest 
figures from US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 
<http://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/southwest-border-unaccompanied-children> the 
number of unaccompanied children apprehended at the Southwest border so far 
this year is steeply down from the high of 66,000 in last summer’s surge.

Clara Long, an immigration researcher for Human Rights Watch, said that in the 
wake of the 2014 surge there had been a “generalized crackdown” across the 
immigration service. “Detention has been expanded and people are increasingly 
being put into fast-track deportation procedures in which their claims for 
asylum are not being properly considered.”

A recent Human Rights Watch report 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2014/10/16/us-migrants-returned-danger> concluded 
that the increasing use of so-called “expedited removals” of people picked up 
by US officials along the Mexican border was returning many to potential danger 
even though they had expressed fears of returning home. “This comes down to our 
regard for the dignity and lives of others,” Long said. “Part of the identity 
of the US is that we adhere to international law, and that says that when 
people flee for their lives, states are obligated to provide them with 
protection. We are putting people through an increasingly criminalized 
detention-based system that risks returning people to their deaths.”

Mexican authorities are also returning migrants in immediate danger, the 
Guardian has found. Gredis Alexander Hernández fled Honduras with his sister 
after witnessing the murder of her boyfriend. Fearing for their own lives, the 
two siblings crossed into Guatemala heading for the US, but were apprehended as 
they tried to enter Mexico.

Two days after they were returned to their home town, Hernández was shot twice 
in the head while he lay in his bed. He was 14 years old.


Human rights groups contest that, as architects of the crackdown, the US 
government must share some of the responsibility for such tragedies.

As Maureen Meyer of the Washington Office of Latin America put it: “The Obama 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> has 
found a way to hide the so-called crisis of Central American migrants at the 
border. But at what cost?”

Additional reporting by Jo Tuckman in Ixtepec and Rory Carroll in Altar
 