
The US state department halted the planned sale of 26,000 assault rifles to 
the Philippines’ national police amid concerns abouthuman rights violations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/philippines-senator-calls-for-duterte-to-face-crimes-against-humanity-inquiry>
 there, Senate aides told Reuters on Monday.

Aides said Senator Ben Cardin, the top Democrat on the Senate foreign 
relations committee, said he would oppose the transaction with the long-time 
ally of the US.

Philippines secret death squads: officer claims police teams behind wave of 
killings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/philippines-secret-death-squads-police-officer-teams-behind-killings>
The relationship between the two countries has been complicated lately by 
President Rodrigo Duterte’s angry reaction to Washington’s criticism of his
violent and controversial war on drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/duterte-says-children-killed-in-philippines-drug-war-are-collateral-damage>
.

Duterte said last month that innocent people and children were “collateral 
damage” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/duterte-says-children-killed-in-philippines-drug-war-are-collateral-damage>
 in his war on drugs because police use automatic weapons when confronting 
criminals.

In an interview with al-Jazeera he gave a hypothetical example of an officer 
using anM16 rifle <https://global.britannica.com/technology/M16-rifle> when 
dealing with a “gangster” who wields a pistol. “When they meet, they exchange 
fire. With the policeman and the M16, it’s one burst, brrr, and [he] hits 1,000 
people there and they die.”

 More than 2,300 people have been killed in police operations or by suspected 
vigilantes in connection with the anti-narcotics campaign since Duterte took 
office on 30 June.

Philippine president calls for removal of all US troops
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/philippine-president-calls-for-removal-of-all-us-troops>
 The US state department informs Congress when international weapons sales are 
in progress. Aides said foreign relations committee staff informed the 
department that Cardin would oppose the deal during the department’s 
pre-notification process for the sale of 26,000-27,000 assault rifles, stopping 
the deal.

 State department officials did not comment.

 Earlier this month, Duterte told President Barack Obama to “go to hell” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/philippines-rodrigo-duterte-tells-obama-go-to-hell>
 and said the US had refused to sell some weapons to his country, but he did 
not care because Russia and China were willing suppliers.

 According to some US officials, Washington has been doing its best to ignore 
Duterte’s rhetoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/philippine-president-calls-for-removal-of-all-us-troops>
 and not provide him with a pretext for more outbursts.

 An open break with Manila could create problems for the US in a region where 
China’s influence has grown.
 