
The aftermath of what appears to be widespread election fraud in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> may cost the imperilled nation 
its American backing, the United States is warning.


As Afghanistan awaits the threatened announcement of a government by the 
ostensible losing presidential candidate – who may actually be the winner – the 
US secretary of state warned that taking power "illegally" would "cost 
Afghanistan the financial and security support of the United States and the 
international community."

The fledgling Afghan government is almost entirely underwritten by the United 
States, which built, trained and equipped its hundreds of thousands of soldiers 
and police, all while withstanding a persistent insurgency from the Taliban, 
which continues to hold territory in the south and east. Losing US support will 
leave either presidential victor with the strong possibility that his 
governance will be untenable.

Ashraf Ghani, a former World Bank official, was declared on Monday to hold a 
million-vote lead under strong dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/07/ashraf-ghani-afghanistan-presidential-vote-lead>
 over rival Abdullah Abdullah, an ex-foreign minister. Ghani was said to have 
received more than double the votes from the first round, 4.5 million, or 56% 
of all valid ballots. Abdullah's supporters question how he achieved such a 
decisive victory. They are rallying in Kabul to demand the formation of a 
cabinet to thwart what his campaign is calling acoup 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/afghanistan/10952827/Afghan-presidential-candidate-rejects-election-coup-and-plans-parallel-government.html>
 to install Ghani, who is not yet the certified winner.

While explicitly calling out neither Ghani nor Abdullah, the US secretary of 
state, John Kerry, said he viewed "protests and suggestions of a 'parallel 
government' with the gravest concern", and added that there was no 
justification for "extra-constitutional measures or threats of the same" – 
indicating a particular concern with Abdullah's next moves in the unfolding 
crisis.

Kerry, en route to China for a wide-ranging diplomatic parley, called on the 
Afghan security forces to remain neutral and warned against either candidate 
using them to his advantage.

"The apolitical role of the security forces must be respected by all parties. 
We call on all Afghan leaders to maintain calm in order to preserve the gains 
of the last decade and maintain the trust of the Afghan people," Kerry said in 
a late Monday statement.

The US is at a turning point in Afghanistan, the inconclusive scene of its 
longest-ever war. Current president and former US allyHamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai> has refused to sign a 
long-term basing deal for US forces, which both of his aspiring successors 
support. Without that agreement, the US will lack critical legal protections 
for ongoing counterterrorism operations, to include using Afghan territory as a 
launchpad for drone strikes in neighbouring Pakistan.

President Obama, who escalated a war that has claimed the lives of about 2,200 
US troops, announced in May that he willextend the war another two years ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/27/obama-us-afghanistan-force-2014> 
of a significant troop drawdown timed for the end of his presidency. Despite 
his escalation, since the beginning of his presidency, Obama has faced 
criticism for a perceived rush for the exits in Afghanistan because of his 
series of timetables – not always substantively met – for withdrawing troops.

Yet the existential peril facing Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/03/kurds-independence-referendum-iraq-massoud-barzani>
, the scene of a 2011 US pullout, has led legislators topredict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/12/crisis-in-iraq-insurgents-take-major-cities-live-blog#block-5399c77ae4b06fa6efefb4b4>
 that the Taliban will overrun Afghanistan in the face of a similar US 
withdrawal. Kerry's statement, notable in its lack of caveats for illegal 
behavior costing US support, is likely to fuel speculation in Washington, Kabul 
and beyond that the Obama administration is looking to wash its hands of a 
conflict that has thwarted US warplanners.

On Thursday, the Army vice-chief of staff tapped to run the war, General John 
"JC" Campbell, will testify to the Senate about his plans for managing the 
remainder of US involvement in the conflict – now amidst deep and rapidly 
unfolding uncertainty about who will become the Afghan president, and how.
 