
The Swedish energy company Vattenfall is pushing ahead with a £300m windfarm 
off the coast ofAberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> despite last 
month’s EU referendum vote.

The offshore windfarm has been dogged by years of legal battles between Donald 
Trump and the Scottish government over its impact on his golf course,which the 
tycoon ultimately lost in the courts last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/05/donald-trump-defeat-wind-farm-aberdeen-green-campaigners>
.


But on Thursday Vattenfall announced its final investment decision on the 
European Offshore Wind Deployment Centre, which sees it buying out Aberdeen 
RenewableEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Group’s 25% 
share for an undisclosed sum.


The 11 turbines in the development will send clean energy back to the grid, 
but will also be a key testing ground for bringing down the cost of the 
technology, which is around twice as expensive as turbines on land. Ministers
made clear last year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/amber-rudds-speech-on-a-new-direction-for-uk-energy-policy>
 that offshore was “still too expensive” and further subsidies would be 
conditional on the industry cutting cost.


Donald Trump’s defeat over windfarm welcomed by green campaigners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/05/donald-trump-defeat-wind-farm-aberdeen-green-campaigners>
The 92.4MW project in Aberdeen Bay is all about trying experimental 
technologies to drive down the costs, Vattenfall said.


“It’s all geared to a cost reduction,” said Gunnar Groebler, the senior vice 
president at Vattenfall. “We expect a lot of findings, a lot of options to 
further reduce the cost. If you look inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the cost is clearly going 
south. This windfarm will help us get to the next level.”


Among the cost-cutting measures is a means of attaching the turbines to the 
seabed using technology that uses less material and higher voltage cabling that 
loses less of the electricity generated.


But the investment decision is also a vote of confidence in the industry, 
after the vote to leave the EU. Siemenssaid Brexit could freeze its offshore 
wind plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/siemens-freezes-new-uk-wind-power-investment-following-brexit-vote>
 in the UK, though itlater rowed back on the remarks 
<https://next.ft.com/content/4529f98c-4786-11e6-8d68-72e9211e86ab>.


Groebler said Vattenfall was in the UK to stay. “We’ve repeatedly said the UK 
is a fundamentally interesting market for us, especially in wind, both onshore 
and offshore, and we have no reason to change that opinion. The best proof is 
the decision we are making, this is not something we do lightly.”


He added that it was too early to say what the new UK government’s approach 
would be towards the industry, but he had seen no signs it would differ from 
government strategy under David Cameron.


Groebler dismissed claims made on Wednesday by the former energy minister 
Brian Wilson <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-36842758> that “offshore 
wind in Scotland is pretty much dead” after a court upheld a legal challenge 
against several projects over their impact on wildlife.


“I think we prove him wrong, right? This is not a specific Scottish thing 
[issues around birds and planning consent], it can happen with any windfarm you 
develop.”

Paul Wheelhouse, the Scottish energy minister, welcomed the investment 
decision. “This project will keep our nation at the forefront of innovation by 
allowing energy companies to identify new ways to reduce operating costs,” he 
said.

WWF Scotland’s climate and energy policy officer, Fabrice Leveque, said: “This 
is very positive news and provides a welcome boost to Scotland’s offshore wind 
sector.Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> has 25% of Europe’s 
offshore wind resource and this new development provides a great opportunity to 
progress on capturing the benefits at lowest cost and least impact to the 
environment.”


Vattenfall said the windfarm will be operational by 2018.
 