
The new director of the Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> has promised a "more 
sober, less glitzy" event for the 69th edition later this year.

Artistic director Alberto Barbera, who was appointed in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/28/venice-film-festival-alberto-barbera>
, has revealed plans to cut the number of films showing on the Lido. There will 
be fewer than 50 films in total at this year's festival, with only 18 showing 
in competition,he told Italian reporters 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/venice-international-film-festival-alberto-barbera-brian-de-palma-terrence-malick-330071>
.

"We're starting a change in Venice's skin, in which within two or three years 
we will have a nice rebirth," Barbera told Italian journalists. "The festival 
is like a grand old lady, a refined lady, but one in need of being freshened 
up. I believe a festival should take responsibility for its choice, and not to 
simply select dozens and dozens of titles."

US film-makers being considered for a turn at the world's oldest international 
film festival include Brian De Palma,Terrence Malick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terrence-malick> and Paul Thomas Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-thomas-anderson>, Barbera said. Italian 
directors such as Silvio Soldini, Marco Bellocchio and Gabriele Salvatores were 
also being examined, along with emerging artists from countries such as 
Colombia, Indonesia, Burma, Costa Rica, Argentina and Thailand. As well as the 
18 in-competition films, this year's event will see 18 in the Horizons sidebar 
and another 12 play out of competition. The Controcampo Italiano sidebar, which 
supports local film-makers, has been excised altogether,prompting criticism 
from the Italian media 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/venice-festival-s-decision-eliminate-286914>
.

The Venice film festival, the first of its kind, appeared in 1932, when Count 
Giuseppe Volpi founded the event as the Esposizione Internazionale d'Arte 
Cinematografica. Last year's Golden Lion for best film went toAlexander Sokurov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-sokurov>'s Faust.

Barbera replaced Marco Mueller as Venice artistic director, the latter having 
taken charge of events on the Lido for eight years. Mueller has now moved to 
the rivalRome international film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/romefilmfestival>. The Venice film festival 
runs from29 August to 8 September 
<http://www.labiennale.org/en/cinema/festival/festival.html> 2012.
 