
Paramedics responded to several dozen calls from people with breathing 
problems as thunderstorms swept acrossVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> for the second time in a 
fortnight.

Temperatures peaked at 37C in Kyabram on Sunday, reaching 32C in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> before a band of storms 
rolled across the state.

The high temperatures and windy conditions had authorities worried that it 
could bring a repeat of thunderstorm asthma attacks, two weeks aftera freak 
storm hit Melbourne, killing eight people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/30/thunderstorm-forecast-prompts-warning-to-victorians-with-asthma>
.

An Ambulance Victoria spokesman said paramedics responded to multiple calls 
from people with breathing problems across the afternoon.

Thunderstorm asthma: more health warnings as former police chief examines 
response
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/04/thunderstorm-asthma-more-health-warnings-as-top-cop-examines-ambulance-response>
“It’s unclear if they were weather related,” the spokesman said.

The National Asthma Council Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/australia> says thunderstorm conditions 
combined with high pollen counts can lead to breathing problems for people with 
asthma and hay fever.

“As we have seen with the recent events in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/melbourne>, any serious asthma attack can 
be life-threatening and have tragic consequences,” Dr Jonathan Burdon said on 
Saturday. “Act quickly if you start to have symptoms such as shortness of 
breath or wheezing.”

Tim Cartwright, who was acting Victoria police chief commissioner in 2015, 
will review Ambulance Victoria’s response to the storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/04/thunderstorm-asthma-more-health-warnings-as-top-cop-examines-ambulance-response>
.

The results of Cartwright’s review will be given to the inspector general of 
emergency management, who is doing a review of the health system’s response to 
the storm.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thunderstorm%20asthma%3A%20what%20causes%20it%20and%20why%20is%20it%20so%20dangerous%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thunderstorm%20asthma%3A%20what%20causes%20it%20and%20why%20is%20it%20so%20dangerous%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer&media=>
Thunderstorm asthma: what causes it and why is it so dangerous? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/nov/26/thunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer> 