
Those who watched TV over the festive period could be forgiven for thinking 
that people in the past barely bothered to get dressed. InAnd Then There Were 
None 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/26/dickensian-agatha-christie-and-then-there-were-none-review>
, the BBC’s adaptation ofAgatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie>’s classic murder mystery, we 
were treated to Aidan Turner, playing one of the chief suspects, naked and 
deliciously slippy in nothing but a bath towel. This weekend, in Andrew 
Davies’s version of Tolstoy’s War and Peace, brother and sister Hélène and 
Anatole Kuragin will be seensnuggling incestuously in bed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/29/incestuous-affair-bbc-war-and-peace-helene-anatole>
.

Incestuous affair 'crucial' to BBC's War and Peace series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/29/incestuous-affair-bbc-war-and-peace-helene-anatole>
Purists get cross about such crass “sexing up” of our literary classics. It’s 
sad evidence, they say, of the way that we can no longer consume culture unless 
it comes wrapped – or unwrapped – in the trappings of soft porn. Plot, 
characterisation, musings on mankind’s moral frailty are no longer enough to 
keep our attention. Instead, the opportunistic screenwriter feels compelled to 
scribble all over the hallowed source material, adding dirty drawings, rude 
words and scenes where someone – a very hot someone – gets their kit off.

But how fair is this? For if you go back to those original classic texts and 
read them closely, you’ll find that they’re hardly blushing virgins. Rather, 
they are sexually knowing, and quiveringly alert to all the things that we like 
to think that only modern people dare to talk about: menstruation, alcoholism, 
miscarriage and deep, throbbing desire. That’s the reason why so many texts 
that we now think of as blameless, mild-mannered stories suitable for family 
consumption – Jane Eyre, or Madame Bovary – were received with horror by some 
contemporaries as disgusting, wicked, the sort of filth that you would never 
give your daughters.

Take menstruation, so often assumed to be absent from fiction until you get to 
Doris Lessing’s taboo-bustingThe Golden Notebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/06/100-best-novels-golden-notebook-doris-lessing>
 of 1962. In fact, it’s there a hundred years earlier in George Eliot’s Adam 
Bede of 1859, where Hetty, the milkmaid who has been seduced and abandoned by 
the young squire, waits in agony for her period to arrive. Not convinced? What 
else could Eliot have meant when she describes the girl, 12 weeks after her 
last tryst, hoping “something would happen to set her free from her terror”?

And when it comes to sex, in all its variations, Victorian writers – who 
tended to be drawn from the more progressive bit of the middle-class – were 
determined to explore the full range of experience. InCranford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/dec/17/classics.kathrynhughes> 
(1851-53) – so often seen as a bit of classic bonnet nostalgia – Elizabeth 
Gaskell provides a graphic account of female sexual frustration. When elderly 
spinster Matty Jenkyns is reminded of her failure to marry her great lost love, 
her body is convulsed by seizures of shivering and shaking in a kind of phantom 
orgasm.

You could go on and on. Anne Brontë, usually seen as the meekest of the 
literary sisters, provides a harrowing account of brutal alcoholism in The 
Tenant of Wildfell Hall, based on her experience of living and working 
alongside her brother Branwell. Dickens’s cast of grotesques with their 
repetitive character tics and verbal tics are, surely, forensic examinations of 
a whole spectrum of maladies familiar to us as OCD, autism and dementia.

And while Jane Austen may not in fact be responsible for the figure of “the 
masturbating girl” 
<http://criticalinquiry.uchicago.edu/uploads/pdf/Sedgwick,_Jane_Austen_and_the_Masturbating_Girl.pdf>
, as one American avant-garde scholar famously opined in the 1990s, you’ve got 
to take notice of the easy familiarity with which the novelist discusses the 
fact that Harriet Smith, the heroine’s best friend in Emma, is a “natural” 
child – illegitimate and with no clue as to her parentage – but entirely able 
to take her place in polite society.

Andrew Davies has defended his decision to show the Kuragin siblings in bed by 
saying fact that Tolstoy hints at their incest but was prevented by convention 
from writing the bed scene. Critics say Davies has missed the point – Tolstoy 
gave the Kuragins a creepy relationship in order to make larger points about 
how feeble, inward-looking and corrupt the Russian aristocracy had become as it 
tried to repel Napoleon’s army.

But perhaps what really gets the critics’ goat is the way that Davies always 
sounds so damn gleeful about his provocations. If he could drop the smutty 
satyr act and talk sensibly about what he believes he found buried in the many 
textual folds of War and Peace, then we might be able to have a proper, 
grown-up conversation about what the great literary classics can, can’t and 
might be trying to tell us.
 