
Adrian Chiles's big mouth has got him in trouble after he promised £5 to 
viewers who were watching a boring FA Cup tie. The ITV4 presenter was covering 
a replay between Fulham and Sheffield United, which resulted in a 0-0 draw at 
full time. At half time in extra time, Chiles said that any viewers who hadn't 
fallen asleep could to write in and he would send them a fiver. However, 
Sheffield went on to win 1-0, and several viewers tweeted to request their 
cash. One viewer wrote: "Hi @ITV Adrian Chiles said if anyone was watching 
they'd get £5 sent out to them. How do I go about claiming this? Cheers", while 
another added: "Adrian Chiles promises everyone still watching @itv4 £5. There 
are four of us watching here... ;)". Another went even further: "Adrian Chiles 
owes me £5 for sticking with this game as promised then... I'll also claim 
£4.38 for having to listen to Clarke Carlisle #zzzz" Another viewer, Peter 
Hyam, even got as far as emailing ITV, writing: "I'm currently watching Fulham 
v Sheffield United on ITV4. It's an awful game. Possibly the worst I've ever 
seen. But I'm still persisting. At half time in extra timeAdrian Chiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adrian-chiles> said 'if you're still 
watching, write in and we'll send you a fiver each'. This is obviously a stupid 
thing for any presenter to say – and I doubt it was on the cue cards. However, 
I'd like my fiver please. If not then I shall formally complain about your 
dreadful presenter lying to the one viewer. I'd prefer it in cash or cheque … 
Alternatively a signed photo of Holly Willoughby and Philip Schofield would 
do." Time for Chiles to put his money where his mouth is?
 