
Ten days before 15-year-old schoolboy Will Cornick stabbed his Spanish teacher 
Ann Maguire to death in front of his classmates, one of her former students, 
teen novelist Anthony McGowan, celebrated the launch ofa film based on his novel
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/23/the-knife-that-killed-me-review-kickstarter-school-drama>
 The Knife that Killed Me. Cornick, who had planned a murder spree, told 
psychiatrists afterwards that he “couldn’t give a shit … everything I’ve done 
is fine and dandy”. And in a chilling case of art anticipating life,McGowan’s 
novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/07/booksforchildrenandteenagers>, 
which was nominated for numerous awards including theGuardian children’s 
fiction prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/guardianchildrensfictionprize>
, tells the story of a fatal stabbing in a school based on Corpus Christi 
College in Leeds where he, too, had once beentaught by Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>.

Meanwhile another teen author, Alan Gibbons, also hit the headlines appearing 
alongside the mother 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/sophie-sylvia-lancaster-haslingden-high-6909523>
 of Sophie Lancaster, in a launch event at the murdered woman’s Lancashire 
school. Gibbons’snovel Hate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/may/13/review-hate-by-alan-gibbons1>
, which is based on Sophie’s murder, offers an unflinching portrait of hate 
crime amongst young people.

Figures released recently by the charity Citizens Report UK 
<http://www.citizensreportuk.org/reports/teenage-murder-london.html> reveal 
that 163 young people have been lost to violent crime since 2005 in London 
alone – so can books like these make any difference or are authors just cashing 
in on headline-grabbing issues? This was one of the topics that was debated in 
the summer at the inauguralYA Literature Convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/07/young-adult-literature-conference-yalc-2014>
, chaired by children’s laureate Malorie Blackman.

Far from glamorising violence, Gibbons believes fiction can play a role in 
combating it. “Young people respond to a narrative and I hope this book will 
help tackle hatred.”

But not everyone agrees. Some critics believe that teen fiction is to blame – 
along with films and computer games - for promoting youth violence. Novels such 
as The Hunger Games, with its dystopian fights to the death have been 
criticised for desensitising young people to acts of brutality.The third film 
in the series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/11/the-hunger-games-mockingjay-part-one-film-review>
 opens in UK cinemas on 20 November, reigniting a debate that came to a head 
recently when Elliot Rodger,son of one of the movie’s directors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/27/elliot-rodger-father-shooting-california>
, killed six people in a gun rampage in California. This led to renewed calls 
for tighter censorship of what young people are reading, targeting YA fiction 
in particular.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fviolence-teen-fiction-ya-novels-glamorise-crime-catherine-bruton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415879916190%2F18f075f9-8c6a-43ff-8692-99b67f854144-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Violence%20in%20teen%20fiction%20goes%20in%20the%20dock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fviolence-teen-fiction-ya-novels-glamorise-crime-catherine-bruton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Violence%20in%20teen%20fiction%20goes%20in%20the%20dock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fviolence-teen-fiction-ya-novels-glamorise-crime-catherine-bruton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415879916190%2F18f075f9-8c6a-43ff-8692-99b67f854144-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dangerous woman? Jennifer Lawrence as Katniss in The Hunger Games Photograph: 
Moviestore Collection/REX 
I have a dual perspective on this issue: my latest teen novel, I Predict a Riot
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/18/review-catherine-bruton-i-predict-a-riot>
, explores gang culture, knives and gun crime, but I’m also a secondary school 
English teacher. I’ve worked with kids from many different backgrounds – from 
gang members in south London to street kids in South Africa, and the families 
of politicians and pop stars – and I passionately believe that fiction has a 
responsibility to address the most difficult issues teens are facing. I’ve seen 
how books can open up dialogue and challenge dangerous stereotypes in a way 
that no other medium can.

“An important difference between film/TV and books is the immersion 
experienced by the reader,” says Helen Thompson, chair of the Youth Libraries 
Group national committee, and head judge of theCILIP Carnegie medal 
<http://www.carnegiegreenaway.org.uk/home/index.php>, the UK’s oldest and most 
prestigious children’s book award. “This is essential to build empathy, and we 
know that people who read (fiction in particular) when they are young are more 
likely to develop empathy. This translates into a society that is emotionally 
intelligent.”

The Carnegie ran into its own storm in the summer with the award of its medal 
to Kevin Brooks’s The Bunker Diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/24/carnegie-medal-the-bunker-diary-kevin-brooks>
, a story of six people held captive in a cellar, which was described by one 
critic as “a uniquely sickening read”. Thompson is in no doubt that young 
readers need to be allowed to engage with difficult material. “By protecting 
young people from unpleasantness, we make it more dangerous for them to enter 
the real world,” she explains. “It is important that they see a reflection of 
themselves and the society they live in, and that means looking at the problems 
as well as the good stuff.”

“I never enter a dark room unless I think I can light the way out,” explains 
Gibbons. He was inspired to write Hate after meeting the mother of Sophie 
Lancaster, who was attacked while walking through a park with her boyfriend in 
2007. Five teenage boys were later arrested and charged with her murder. The 
police said the attack may have been linked to goth clothes the the couple were 
wearing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fviolence-teen-fiction-ya-novels-glamorise-crime-catherine-bruton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415880073464%2Fd3875aed-d93f-4d9d-9999-6f4caf54eee4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Violence%20in%20teen%20fiction%20goes%20in%20the%20dock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fviolence-teen-fiction-ya-novels-glamorise-crime-catherine-bruton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Violence%20in%20teen%20fiction%20goes%20in%20the%20dock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fviolence-teen-fiction-ya-novels-glamorise-crime-catherine-bruton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415880073464%2Fd3875aed-d93f-4d9d-9999-6f4caf54eee4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sylvia Lancaster holds a banner with supporters outside Preston Crown Court, 
after the sentencing of two teenagers for the murder of her daughter, Sophie 
Photograph: Dave Thompson/PA Wire/PA Photos 
“Meeting Sophie’s mother graphically spelled out to me that when a human life 
is lost in such brutal circumstances, there is a tear in the fabric of human 
life,” says Gibbons. “When violence is ubiquitous in film and on TV and we 
routinely see tens, hundreds of people mown down in computer game-style, it is 
easy to become desensitised. By focusing on a single family and a single 
destroyed life, I wanted to contribute to a process of re-sensitising.”

Gibbons believes that fictional depictions of violence need to be, “revelatory 
rather than exploitative”. But how is this achieved on the page? “I detest the 
vogue for resurrection in fiction,” Gibbons says. “Young people constantly 
encounter choreographed fights in which people suffer repeated blows and yet 
turn up fully recovered within minutes.

“If writers describe violence, it must be responsibly. By this, I mean that 
there should be clear and realistic consequences. Even in works of fantasy, 
violence should incur a recognisable cost. If writers and artists fail to 
demonstrate the results of human actions, they are lying to their audiences.”

Do those who have experienced at first hand the effects of youth violence 
agree? Mark Prince is an ex-professional boxer whose 15-year-old son, Kiyan, 
was fatally stabbed outside his school gates in Edgware as he tried to prevent 
another boy picking on his friend. “I believe that anything that brings the 
discussion of knife/gun crime to the forefront is a good thing,” says Mark, who 
now runs the Kiyan Prince Foundation, which aims to educate young people about 
the consequences of knife crime. “However, I am uncomfortable with the titles 
of some of the teen books out there – The Knife that Killed Me, I Predict a 
Riot – there’s a danger of buying into the glamorisation of crime.”

One might also question what experience of youth violence most authors have. 
Anthony McGowan admits that the difference between the school he attended 30 
years ago, and the one in whichAnn Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> was stabbed is that “no one 
ever carried knives in my day”. He wrote the book to illustrate the 
consequences of teens getting “tooled up”, on the grounds that “if kids are 
carrying knives, any violent altercation is now potentially deadly”.

Faced with the horror of recent events, does McGowan believe that fiction can 
do anything to combat teen violence and knife crime?

“Art can certainly reflect society; at times it may influence it, but not in 
ways that can be easily controlled or predicted,” says McGowan. “What I can’t 
do – what no book can do – is to fix the fundamental ills in our society – the 
poverty, the inequality, the coldness, the lack of love. The best I can hope 
for is that the book will become part of a conversation, part of a wider 
movement, nudging us in a more humane and enlightened direction. But I’m not 
holding my breath.”

McGowan is concerned that books simply don’t reach the kids most affected. ‘”I 
don’t doubt that reading novels increases empathy. Novels make us live in other 
minds … However the kind of young people who get involved with street violence 
and knife crime aren’t, on the whole, big readers.”

So how do we ensure this kind of eye-opening fiction reaches a wider audience? 
I wrote I Predict a Riot in response to a discussion in a GCSE lesson about 
Lord of the Flies and the UK riots of 2011. Alarmed and saddened by some of 
their assumptions, I wrote a book to make my Year 10s think, make them ask 
questions about the world they live in and the choices they make.

So why doesn’t the UK government put titles like Hate and The Knife that 
Killed Me on the new GCSE syllabus rather than obsessing over Jane Austen and 
Thomas Hardy? As Helen Thompson points out: “No one who reads The Knife that 
Killed Me is ever going to carry a knife – ever. In fact, they’ll probably eat 
with a spoon for the rest of their lives.”
 