
Virat Kohli has brought a more aggressive edge to India’s Test team than his 
predecessor, Mahendra Singh Dhoni, and in the aftermath oftheir crushing 
victory against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/india-england-second-test-day-five-match-report>
 in Visakhapatnam this translated into a bullish critique of the tourists’ 
approach to the fourth innings.

By attempting to block their way through 4½ sessions and a minimum of 150 
overs, Kohli felt Alastair Cook’s side “lacked intent”. While chasing a target 
of 405 on a wearing pitch may have been fanciful, however, the India captain 
was nevertheless surprised to see England drop anchor on their way to being 
bowled out for 158 in 97.3 overs.

India’s spinners send England tumbling to 246-run defeat in second Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/india-england-second-test-day-five-match-report>
Rewind to the first Test in Rajkot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/england-india-virat-kohli-second-test>
 and it wasKohli successfully staving off defeat on the final day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/india-draw-england-first-test-cricket>
 with an unbeaten, assertive 49. Here, despite showingfrustration during the 
three hours that Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/india-england-second-test-day-four-report>
 andhis opening partner, Haseeb Hameed, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/20/england-haseeb-hameed-test-natural-india>
 batted on the fourth evening, Kohli felt victory was effectively guaranteed by 
the pair going at just 1.5 runs an over.

“We thought they would come out with more intent,” Kohli said. “And to see the 
approach they had obviously gave us assurance that once we get a couple of 
wickets it will crumble pretty quickly because there wasn’t much intent from 
the batsmen.

“It is only if you have intent that you will be able to play the ball 
accordingly because you are looking to play with the bat. If you don’t have 
intent, and you are looking to control the ball, and if it does something, then 
you are in no position to control it and the edges fly off.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Falastair-cook-says-england-behind-the-pace-after-india-take-1-0-series-lead-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alastair%20Cook%20says%20England%20'behind%20the%20pace'%20after%20India%20take%201-0%20series%20lead%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Falastair-cook-says-england-behind-the-pace-after-india-take-1-0-series-lead-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alastair%20Cook%20says%20England%20%27behind%20the%20pace%27%20after%20India%20take%201-0%20series%20lead%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Falastair-cook-says-england-behind-the-pace-after-india-take-1-0-series-lead-video&media=>
Alastair Cook says England ‘behind the pace’ after India take 1-0 series lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/21/alastair-cook-says-england-behind-the-pace-after-india-take-1-0-series-lead-video>
“If you are looking for runs, you defend well because your head is on the ball 
as well. It is a pretty basic thing to do, to be honest, and if you don’t have 
intent in the fourth innings, it is tough to play out four-and-a-half sessions.”

Cook, who made 54 before falling in the final over of the fourth day in what 
was a crushing blow to England’s already slim hopes of pulling off the 
rearguard action, made no excuses for this tactic,citing the 143.1 overs South 
Africa resisted in Delhi last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/07/india-beat-south-africa-fourth-test-report>
 – the record fourth innings in India in terms of balls faced, albeit in a 
losing cause – as the template. “We set our stall out pretty clearly to take it 
as deep as possible [like South Africa],” the England captain said.

“Often you say ‘just play’ and see where that gets you, but we made a 
conscious effort to play that [South Africa] way. It’s not everyone’s natural 
way, but do that, lose four wickets and the lower order start digging in, [and 
maybe then] you feel you could have been more positive. We made a decision as a 
captain and a leadership group but we came up short.”

What can England do to trigger a third-Test fightback against India?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/england-third-test-fightback-india-mohali>
Should England have taken Kohli’s approach? It certainly fits the description 
of the cricket Trevor Bayliss wants overall and beyond Cook and Hameed, 
grinding it out fully was asking a lot of Joe Root, Moeen Ali and Ben Stokes. 
Whichever the preference, England were snookered anyway.

Kohli was also speaking as a batsman in glowing form, with his 167 runs in the 
first innings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/england-india-second-test-day-one-match-report>
 and the81 in the second that transcended the conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/india-england-second-test-day-three-report>
. He demonstrated that any hold England’s bowlers thought they had over the 
right-hander – he averaged only 20 from nine previous encounters before the 
series – is gone in an ominous sign for the third Test starting on Saturday.

The tactical side of his leadership, which in the two years since replacing 
Dhoni has returned 11 wins and two defeats from 19 Tests, remains in its 
infancy and did not go without criticism in Visakhapatnam. Nasser Hussain, the 
former England captain, described Kohli as still being “naive”.

His style is certainly a frenetic one and sits in contrast to the way Dhoni 
would at times let passages of play drift, with constant tinkering to fields 
that can look curious from the outside. His early defensiveness may even have 
been complicit in the England approach that so baffled him.

Sitting 1-0 up with three Tests to play in the series after a textbook home 
victory, his batting on a different plane and his bowlers already starting to 
worm their way into England minds, this brooding, intense captain is the one 
speaking from a position of strength right now.
 