
When he was a child, people called Desalegn Bogale "doctor". "That's what I 
wanted to be when I grew up," says the 24-year-old with a beaming smile. A few 
months ago, he completed a month's training to qualify as an integrated 
eye-care worker (IECW). Bogale has since saved 10 people's eyesight in as many 
operations, either at the health centre in the southern Ethiopian highland town 
of Zada, or when visiting patients in surrounding villages.

Bogale previously assisted former IECWs, who are trained nurses, in Dita, a 
woreda (administrative zone) in southern Ethiopia. "I was so interested and 
inspired that I asked my boss to put me forward for training to cure people 
from trachoma trichiasis. The biggest challenge is walking up the hills with my 
medical kit to reach the patients, who can live as far as 30km away in villages 
inaccessible by road. Sometimes it can take me eight hours to get there."

Trachoma, caused by the bacteria chlamydia trachomatis, is spread by flies, 
and consequently by human contact or infected towels and clothes. Directly 
linked to poverty and poor hygiene, it causes red eyes, weeping, itching and 
sensitivity to light in the initial stages. Repeated infections over several 
years can progress to trachoma trichiasis, which causes the eyelashes to turn 
inwards and scratch the cornea, eventually leading to irreversible blindness. 
Mothers, children and those living in very close-knit communities are 
particularly vulnerable. Until the early 20th century, trachoma was a serious 
concern in London and New York.

"As Dita is mountainous, our biggest problem is the supply of safe water and 
it's why we have high instances of diseases like malaria, typhoid, typhus and 
trachoma," explains Abebe Zeleke, head of Dita Woreda Health. Sitting in his 
one-room office on Zada's wet and muddy high street, he calmly explains the 
consequences: "The economic impact of trachoma here is great. If mothers have 
it no one will care for them. If men are affected, they can't work in the 
fields. And if students suffer, they drop out of school. So it causes economic 
loss in the household, the town and the area."

Government health funds are insufficient, so non-governmental organisations 
(NGOs) have moved in, including Orbis, a charity dedicated to ending avoidable 
blindness. Since 2007 it has been implementing the four pillars of the World 
Health Organisation's Safe strategy (surgery, antibiotics, facial cleanliness 
and environmental change) for the elimination of trachoma in the Gamo Gofa 
Zone, and two administrative areas of Derashe and Konso further south.

Fifteen doctors serve the region's 2.2 million people, so Orbis has trained 
nurses to perform sight-saving surgery. But the regional government's small 
budget limits the number of paid staff it can employ. In the Bonke area, which 
has 178,000 inhabitants, 58% of health jobs are vacant. "We just don't have the 
money," says Arebe Mitsa, health office head.

The antibiotic azithromycin has been distributed to, and taken by, 97% of the 
region's population in a bid to counter trachoma. This is a logistics success 
in a hilly, rural area where heavy rains can make roads temporarily unusable 
and where only 10% of the population are urban dwellers – four-wheel-drive 
vehicles or donkeys are required to reach the rest, who live up to 2,000m above 
sea level.

But while drugs and surgery have helped thousands, education has prevented far 
more from requiring either. Religious leaders, respected elders, health workers 
and school teachers have all been trained to teach communities how to avoid 
trachoma and where to seek treatment. As a result, many people don't fear it 
like they did in the past. "I wasn't scared I would go blind with trachoma 
because I knew where to get help," says former patient 55-year-old Kalle Kampa, 
sitting in the shade in Dokotu village.

Although nurses are critical for the surgery, much funding and energy is now 
spent on the facial cleanliness and environmental change elements of Safe. 
"This region has a scarcity of water and with more water we can prevent 
trachoma," says Alemu Ashale, co-ordinator of disease prevention and health, in 
Konso.

NGOs such as Orbis and WaterAid Ethiopia have teamed up in the most deprived 
areas, tapping natural underground springs for safe water all year round, and 
they are building more latrines in villages, schools and public places. 
Providing facilities, however, is only part of the challenge. The rest is 
encouraging the people, who are mostly farmers and have traditionally practised 
open-field defecation, to use them. "We need to help them change their 
attitudes and behaviour," says Ashale.

Water is essential, as Dr Gabremaskal Habtemariam, acting country head of 
Orbis in Ethiopia, stresses: "The water supply needs a huge investment but it 
must be maintained to be sustainable."

While the scale of the situation means trachoma won't be eradicated in the 
next few years, NGOs consider reducing active trachoma in one- to 
nine-year-olds to 10% or less, and trachoma trichiasis in 1% of the whole 
population, to be achievable goals compared to the present averages of 33% and 
3% respectively for the region. Orbis programme director Dr Alemayehu Sisay is 
convinced this can be accomplished by 2015 and says trachoma can eventually be 
controlled throughout the whole country.

Dr Paul Emerson of the US-based Carter Center – an NGO that specialises in 
disease prevention – is also optimistic. After a recent field trip to northern 
Ethiopia, he believes the country has the motivation and the capability but 
needs extra resources and money to succeed. "Ethiopia is ground zero for 
trachoma but we know what we're doing and how to do it. It will be challenging 
but I believe the country can be free of trachoma if programmes are scaled up 
and accelerated."

Back in Zada in the rainy season, Bogale is preparing to save the sight of two 
women by carrying out minor 20-minute operations. "I want to change the fate of 
the town," he says.

New attitudes

Like many adults in Ethiopia, Gocho Gollo doesn't know exactly how old he is 
but estimates he is 80. Sitting outside Gerese Health Centre in the Ethiopian 
highlands, he recalls how he struggled before receiving trachoma trichiasis 
surgery seven months earlier. "Before the operation my eyes were so bad I 
couldn't even distinguish members of my family. I tried to continue working 
with difficulty because I was a farmer. I lived in hope that I would not go 
completely blind."

In the past, many people trusted traditional healers for treatment, but 
village elders and religious leaders have convinced communities to seek modern 
medicine. "I don't believe in traditional healers now and I only visit the 
health centre," Gollo explains. "My neighbours told me where to get treatment. 
It took me two hours to walk here for the operation and afterwards, once I 
could see, just 20 minutes to walk home."

Amavech Gulbeta heard from a town crier that her eyes could be cured. "I 
wrongly believed that I could hold a flame to my eye to get rid of trachoma," 
she says. "I was suffering for years, but my husband worked in the fields and 
my children were too young to care for me. My eyes are fine now except for a 
refractive error. Now everyone in my community knows where to get help."

Wash and brush-up

Like many adults in Ethiopia, Gocho Gollo doesn't know exactly how old he is 
but estimates he is 80. Sitting outside Gerese Health Centre in the Ethiopian 
highlands, he recalls how he struggled before receiving trachoma trichiasis 
surgery seven months earlier. "Before the operation my eyes were so bad I 
couldn't even distinguish members of my family. I tried to continue working 
with difficulty because I was a farmer. I lived in hope that I would not go 
completely blind."

In the past, many people trusted traditional healers for treatment, but 
village elders and religious leaders have convinced communities to seek modern 
medicine. "I don't believe in traditional healers now and I only visit the 
health centre," Gollo explains. "My neighbours told me where to get treatment. 
It took me two hours to walk here for the operation and afterwards, once I 
could see, just 20 minutes to walk home."

Amavech Gulbeta heard from a town crier that her eyes could be cured. "I 
wrongly believed that I could hold a flame to my eye to get rid of trachoma," 
she says. "I was suffering for years, but my husband worked in the fields and 
my children were too young to care for me. My eyes are fine now except for a 
refractive error. Now everyone in my community knows where to get help."

Mike Pini's assignment in Ethiopia was hosted by Orbis
 