
It was a small, chivalrous gesture by Vladimir Putin: draping a shawl around 
the Chinese president’s wife at the chilly opening of the Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (Apec) summit in Beijing.

But it was enough to make China’s censors swing into action, removing footage 
of the Russian president placing the wrap around Peng Liyuan from news sites. 
They were apparently prompted by jokey comments portraying Putin’s solicitude 
as improper – a no-go in a country where coverage of leaders’ families is 
strictly controlled.

Beijing is also highly sensitive about major events such as summits. Officials 
stopped Chinese websites and smartphone apps from publishing US embassy data 
that showed embarrassingly high levels of pollution on Monday, and placed 
activists such as Hu Jia and Ni Yulan under house arrest.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fvladimir-putin-shawl-xi-jinping-wife-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F11%2F1415710433971%2FVladimir-Putin-wraps-shaw-004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vladimir%20Putin%20wraps%20shawl%20around%20Xi%20Jinping's%20wife%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fvladimir-putin-shawl-xi-jinping-wife-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vladimir%20Putin%20wraps%20shawl%20around%20Xi%20Jinping%27s%20wife%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fvladimir-putin-shawl-xi-jinping-wife-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F11%2F1415710433971%2FVladimir-Putin-wraps-shaw-004.jpg>
Peng, who swiftly jettisoned Putin’s wrap for a jacket offered by her 
assistant, has played a more prominent role than the wives of recent Chinese 
leaders. As a famous military singer, she used to be far better known than her 
husband.

Putin’s gallantry was one of the more comfortable and spontaneous moments he 
shared at the conference: talks with Barack Obama and the Australian prime 
minister were frostier.

As Apec host, Xi Jinping <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping> set 
out his vision of an “Asia-Pacific dream”; a Chinese alternative to the US, 
with Beijing at the heart of greater regional cooperation.

China has resumed dialogue with Japan and “substantially” concluded a free 
trade deal with South Korea. Xi also announced on Tuesday that Apec had agreed 
to begin work towards the possible establishment of the Chinese-promoted Free 
Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific. Obama said the US priority was the rival 
Trans-Pacific Partnership, a smaller grouping which does not includeChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

Despite growing tensions in the US-China relationship, Chinese television 
showed Obama and Xi chatting cheerfully as they walked through the grounds of 
the Zhongnanhai leadership compound before a private dinner following the end 
of the Apec meeting. They are due to meet again on Wednesday as Obama concludes 
his state visit.

The two sides had already announced that they would offer visas lasting up to 
10 years to each other’s citizens. The US also said there had been a 
breakthrough in talks to eliminate duties on IT products.

Though there were no obvious clashes, the US president’s public encounters 
with his Russian counterpart at the summit were far less warm.

As they walked into a meeting room with Xi, Putin said: “It’s beautiful, isn’t 
it?” in the general direction of Obama.

“Yes, it is,” said the other man, addressing his response to no one in 
particular and avoiding eye contact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fvladimir-putins-gallantry-cold-shoulder-chilly-apec-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F11%2F1415729952864%2F26eede96-a924-4249-b9b8-0b62f87afaa2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vladimir%20Putin%E2%80%99s%20gallantry%20gets%20cold%20shoulder%20at%20chilly%20Apec%20summit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fvladimir-putins-gallantry-cold-shoulder-chilly-apec-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vladimir%20Putin%E2%80%99s%20gallantry%20gets%20cold%20shoulder%20at%20chilly%20Apec%20summit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fvladimir-putins-gallantry-cold-shoulder-chilly-apec-summit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F11%2F1415729952864%2F26eede96-a924-4249-b9b8-0b62f87afaa2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Vladimir Putin and Barack Obama at the Apec summit in Beijing. Photograph: 
TASS / Barcroft Media 
Putin reached out to give Obama a slap on the back as the men halted, but 
appeared to miss as the US president turned in another direction. The White 
House said the men spoke three times on Tuesday, discussing issues including 
Ukraine, Syria and the nuclear talks with Iran.

Australia’s prime minister, Tony Abbott, reportedly called for an apology and 
compensation for the downing of MH17 at a 15-minute meeting with Putin. He had 
initially promised to “shirtfront” Putin over the shooting down of the Malaysia 
Airlines flight over Ukraine, but later said merely that they would have a 
“robust” conversation.

Thirty-eight Australians were among the 298 dead when the plane was shot down. 
Abbott told Putin that Australia possessed information clearly pointing to 
Russian involvement in the rebel attack and said that if true it “would be a 
very serious matter”, according to a summary from the prime minister’s office.

“Those types of meetings on the edges of summits, and the ways they are 
presented, are about sending a message for public consumption – and that 
message is:Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is isolated,” said 
Nicholas Kitchen, editor in chief of LSE Ideas and an expert on US foreign 
policy.

“Russia is very isolated following the crisis in Ukraine and many observers 
have been surprised both by how strong the sanctions regime is and how much the 
US and the other countries have stayed together on it … The messages at Apec 
are about reinforcing that reality.”

He added: “The show of it won’t bother the Kremlin one bit; it’s quite happy 
to present itself to its people as the great resistor against American 
imperialism.”

But its underlying problem is real: sanctions and the falling oil price are 
forcing Russia to use its reserves to prop up the rouble.

On Monday Xi and the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, engaged in a notably 
frosty encounter, shaking hands without smiling. The two men were meeting for 
the first time since they became leaders in 2012, signalling a thaw in 
relations that have been at their worst for years.

“My guess is that both sides agreed they could not continue as they were 
doing, but [neither wants] to be seen as the one who capitulated. They need to 
play it cool,” said Shogo Suzuki, an expert on Sino-Japanese relations at the 
University of Manchester.

“Both sides see each other as the focal point of [their country’s] 
nationalisms.”

Obama and several other Apec attendees will meet again at an Asean meeting in 
Burma and then the G20 in Brisbane at the weekend.
 