
It was a warm gesture on a chilly night when Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> wrapped a shawl around the 
wife of Xi Jinping while the Chinese president chatted with Barack Obama. The 
only problem: Putin came off looking gallant, the Chinese summit host gauche 
and inattentive.

Worse still were off-colour jokes that began to circulate about the real 
intentions of the divorced Russian president – a heart-throb among many Chinese 
women for his macho, man-of-action image.

That was too much for the Chinese authorities.

The incident, at a performance linked to this week’s Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (Apec) summit, was originally shown on state TV and spread online 
as a forwarded video. But it was soon scrubbed clean from the internet inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, reflecting the intense control 
authorities exert over any material about the country’s leaders while also 
pointing to cultural differences over what is considered acceptable behaviour 
in public.

“China is traditionally conservative on public interaction between unrelated 
men and women, and the public show of consideration by Putin may provide fodder 
for jokes, which the big boss probably does not like,” said the Beijing-based 
historian and independent commentator Zhang Lifan.

Xi’s wife, Peng Liyuan, was once a popular folk singer more famous than her 
husband, and in contrast to her predecessors she has taken on a much more 
public role, prominently joining her husband on trips abroad as part of China’s 
soft power push to seek a global status commensurate with its economic might.

Propaganda officials have built the image of Xi and his wife as a loving 
couple. Photos of Xi shielding his wife from rain on a state visit, picking 
flowers for her, or simply holding her hand have been circulated widely on 
China’s social media.

“When the president personally held up the umbrella for the madam, it complies 
with the international norm of respecting women,” blogger Luo Qingxue wrote on 
the news site for the party-run newspaper People’s Daily last year after the 
couple were pictured on a state visit to Trinidad and Tobago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fputin-gallant-gesture-chinese-leader-wife-censored%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F11%2F1415705601185%2F5ec73f66-9e55-4811-93b7-104506a90fe3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vladimir%20Putin%E2%80%99s%20shawl%20gesture%20to%20leader%E2%80%99s%20wife%20covered%20up%20by%20Chinese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fputin-gallant-gesture-chinese-leader-wife-censored%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vladimir%20Putin%E2%80%99s%20shawl%20gesture%20to%20leader%E2%80%99s%20wife%20covered%20up%20by%20Chinese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fputin-gallant-gesture-chinese-leader-wife-censored%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F11%2F1415705601185%2F5ec73f66-9e55-4811-93b7-104506a90fe3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Putin’s gallant gesture came as Peng’s husband, Xi Jinping, chatted to Barack 
Obama. Photograph: AP 
But Putin’s intervention messed up the script on Monday night while Xi chatted 
with the American president.

In the video, Peng stood up, politely accepted the grey shawl offered by 
Putin, and thanked him with a slight bow. But she soon slipped it off and put 
on a black coat offered by her own attendant.

It spawned a flurry of comments on China’s social media before censors began 
removing any mention of the incident.

Li Xin, director of Russian and central Asian studies at the Shanghai 
Institute for International Studies, said Putin was just being a proper Russian 
and did nothing out-of-line diplomatically.

“It’s a tradition in Russia for a man of dignity to respect ladies on public 
occasions, and in a cold country likeRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, it is very normal that a gentleman 
should help ladies take on and off their coats,” Li said. “But the Chinese may 
not be accustomed to that.”
 