
Much has been made of the possible sale by Vodafone of its stake in US joint 
venture Verizon Wireless.

Recently its partner Verizon was even said to be considering an offer of 
$100bn or so to buy outVodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup>.

Now analysts at Citigroup, one of the UK mobile phone group's joint brokers, 
have taken a look at what Vodafone could do with the proceeds of any deal. One 
of the possibilities Citi considers is a bid for US group Liberty Global, 
itself in the throes of buying Virgin Media, for some £49bn-£53bn. Citi admits 
it puts only a 20% chance on this happening but nonetheless says:

For Vodafone, Liberty Global could have strategic advantages giving it a 
strong portfolio of northern European cable assets, rebalancing the group away 
from Southern Europe and providing it with a high speed broadband offering, 
cost synergy, an upgrade path for its own broadband customers and network 
backhaul options.

With an estimated £64bn to £85bn net proceeds from any Verizon Wireless deal - 
even after capital gains tax - Citi said Vodafone could still return a hefty 
sum to shareholders even if it does buy Liberty Global.

Vodafone lost 0.65p to 196.2p.

Overall leading shares slipped lower ahead of the week's key central bank 
meetings. Markets have been lifted in recent days by hopes of further action to 
stimulate the global economy, in particular an anticipated interest rate cut by 
the European Central Bank on Thursday. Poor European unemployment figures and 
mixed US data suggested further moves could be made, but also prompted some 
profit taking after the rally. Miners were also lower on weaker metal prices.

So the FTSE 100 finished 27.90 points lower at 6430.12. Despite the dip the 
leading index still managed its 11th straight monthly gain, albeit by less than 
19 points.

There was a good response to results from BP, 9.65p better at 466.4p, and 
Lloyds Banking Group, up 0.83p at 54.33p, while Royal Bank of Scotland rose 
12.3p to 306.3p ahead of its own update.

Arm added 17p to 996p after the chip designer was reportedly more represented 
in the Samsung Galaxy S4 than in previous models. In a buy note Bank of 
America/Merrill Lynch said:

Teardowns of the Samsung Galaxy S4 published over the week-end by iFixit, 
TechInsights and Chipworks confirm our views on Arm (rising content versus GS3).

But Unilever lost 19p to £27.86 after it offered to pay up to $5.4bn to raise 
its stake in its Indian business to 75% from 54.48%.

Whitbread fell 56p to £25.55 after it unveiled new expansion plans for its 
Premier Inns and Costa Coffee businesses, including the creation of 12,000 jobs 
over the next five years.

The news came as the leisure group reported an 11% jump in full year profits 
to £356.5m, with Premier sales rising 13.1% and Costa growing by 22.6% to £1bn.

Centrica closed 8.6p lower at 371p after Credit Suisse downgraded the British 
Gas owner from neutral to underperform and cut its target price from 325p to 
320p, ahead of an update on 13 May. Analyst Mark Freshney said:

Our 2013-16 earnings per share estimates are now around 3% to % below 
consensus. British Gas is more important forCentrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/centrica> than the upstream energy 
division, and we think trading conditions for British Gas have deteriorated.
Business Energy and Home Services are still losing customer accounts, in part 
owing to ongoing weak high street conditions and fiscal austerity. It is 
possible negative pricing impacts follow.

Given Centrica stock has performed well in the past 18 months, we downgrade 
the shares.

An extension of the £500m or so share buyback, or new measures to reinvigorate 
British Gas would be potential upsides.

Elsewhere Carphone Warehouse climbed 31.25p to 235p as it finally extricated 
itself from its joint venture with US group Best Buy.

The mobile phone retailer is paying £471m to take full control of the 
partnership, which owns 2,400 stores across Europe, ending a five year 
relationship. Carphone will pay £341m in cash and £80m in shares, with £50m 
deferred. In addition Carphone will place 47m shares to help fund the deal.

Engineering group Invensys, buoyed on Monday by renewed takeover speculation, 
climbed another 5.5%.

Its shares finished 19.9p lower at 384.7p after Societe Generale moved from 
hold to buy. The bank raised its target price from 330p to 415p, and estimated 
it could be worth 460p in any takeover deal.

SocGen's analysts said the planned disposal of its rail business - due to be 
completed in the second quarter of the year - provided investors with a near 
pure-play on process automation which is 72% of sales.

They said the company would have substantial cash balances of around £518m 
after the rail deal, which even after any acquisitions, could lead to a 
distribution to shareholders of some £300m or 37p a share:

In our view the existing cash surplus could also precipitate interest from 
remaining suitors who may be keen to control its use.

Lonmin shares lost 16.3p to 269p after the platinum miner reported growing 
production problems.

It has shut down a key furnace after an incident, which fortunately did not 
lead to any injuries. ButLonmin <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lonmin> 
estimates it could take 30 to 40 days for a full repair. This follows the 
closure of another furnace for a planned upgrade.

On top of that, operations at its K3 shaft have been suspended following a 
fatality last week.

Meanwhile there was better news from Aquarius Platinum, which added 3p to 
42.25p after it reported higher production figures and an improving cash 
position.
 