
As markets fell back on a number of factors, Vodafone lost ground following 
reports it could be interested in Liberty Global, which is Europe's biggest 
cable operator.

According to Bloomberg Vodafone said that Liberty - which owns Virgin Media - 
could be a good fit at the right price. Liberty, controlled by billionaire John 
Malone, is currently valued at around $33bn whileVodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> is worth around £50bn 
(87bn).

But investors seemed taken aback by the idea, worrying that the "right price" 
may be too high and sending Vodafone shares down 1.6p to 203.45p.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 30.49 points lower at 6799.62. The fall 
accelerated in the afternoon after higher than expected US weekly unemployment 
claims, ahead of Wednesday's Federal Reserve meeting.

There was continuing uncertainty about the Scottish referendum, despite a new 
poll showing a majority against independence. The poll for the Daily Record 
helped Scottish linked shares recover some ground. Energy groupSSE added 40p to 
£14.85, helped by RBC analysts raising their target price from £15 to £15.80.

Standard Life climbed 6p to 413.4p, Royal Bank of Scotland rose 3.8p to 346p 
andLloyds Banking Group was lifted 0.85p to 74.08, despite both banks saying 
they might move their headquarters south of the border in the event of a yes 
vote.

Investors were also unsettled by the fact that new EU sanctions against Russia 
over its role in Ukraine were due to come into effect on Friday, while weaker 
than expected Chinese inflation figures rekindled fears about the country's 
economic growth. With China a key consumer of commodities, mining shares were 
lower, withFresnillo falling 23p to 819p and Antofagasta down 12p at 767p.

Next fell 215p to £69.50 despite a 19.3% rise in first half profits to £324m 
and confirmation of its July guidance of a full year profit of £775m to £815m. 
But the figures, impressive as they were, came in slightly below some 
expectations, and the retailer said part of its strong performance had come 
from external factors - such as the improving economy, low interest rates and 
availability of credit - which may not last into next year.

But ITV added 4.4p to 216.8p after Credit Suisse moved its target price from 
250p to 270p, with an outperform rating.

On a busy day for retail results, Argos and Homebase owner Home Retail dropped 
13.6p to 174p after like for like sales came in below expectations.

Ashmore fell 17.9p or 5% to 327p as the emerging market money manager reported 
a 34% fall in full year profits to £87.3m, hit by currency fluctuations.
 