
At first glance, it’s all chiffon and glamour: Kate Moss in a huge hooped 
skirt, photographed by Mario Testino in 2008;David Hockney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney> posing with a sequin-clad 
Maudie James in 1968, as captured by Cecil Beaton; Anne Gunning, swathed in 
pink in Jaipur in the 50s, looking away from Norman Parkinson’s lens.

But the National Portrait Gallery’s major spring exhibition, celebrating 100 
years of British Vogue, will argue that it is much more than a style magazine.

“As well as the fashion bible it has now become, it is a cultural record of 
the times,” said current editor Alexandra Shulman at a launch event for Vogue 
100, A Century of Style, on Monday. The exhibition, opening on 11 February next 
year, will launch the magazine’s centenary celebrations, which also includea 
behind-the-scenes BBC2 documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/20/bbc-british-vogue-documentary-simon-chinn>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuMa1OpirRwk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuMa1OpirRwk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuMa1OpirRwk&media=>
 A preview of the exhibition 
British Vogue first hit newsstands in 1916 and – as with many desirable 
fashion brands – the ability to leverage this illustrious heritage has been key 
to the magazine’s success.

The exhibition will highlight British Vogue’s work with “the greatest 
photographers in modern history”, said curator Robin Muir, including Edward 
Steichen, Helmut Newton, Man Ray and Irving Penn, and will include portraits of 
Marlene Dietrich, Henri Matisse, Francis Bacon and Fred Astaire.

The show will also incorporate moments of recent fashion history, such as the 
1990 Peter Lindbergh cover – featuringNaomi Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/naomi-campbell>, Linda Evangelista, 
Tatjana Patitz, Christy Turlington and Cindy Crawford – widely regarded as 
defining the supermodel era, and the notorious 1993 Corinne Day shoot that 
helped introduce Kate Moss, and so-called “heroin chic”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fvogue-centenary-exhibition-national-portrait-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2b40a3adf8ecb51f64f47c883378dc728170afd%2F41_38_1773_2421%2F1773.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vogue%20centenary%20exhibition%20styles%20fashion%20bible%20as%20cultural%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fvogue-centenary-exhibition-national-portrait-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vogue%20centenary%20exhibition%20styles%20fashion%20bible%20as%20cultural%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fvogue-centenary-exhibition-national-portrait-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2b40a3adf8ecb51f64f47c883378dc728170afd%2F41_38_1773_2421%2F1773.jpg>
 Photograph by Cecil Beaton titled The Second Age of Beauty is Glamour. 
Photograph: Cecil Beaton/Conde Nast Publications 
Tellingly, as printed magazines fight to underline their relevance in the 
digital age, Vogue 100 will begin in the present day, with a room devoted to 
digital fashion film. Visitors will then “travel back in time to the 90s, with 
Herb Ritts and Corinne Day; to the 80s with Bruce Weber and Peter Lindbergh; to 
the 70s with Helmut Newton and Guy Bourdin,” said Muir.

Finally, they will reach “the year zero and the quieter, beautiful, more 
meditative vintage masterworks of photographers such as Steichen and Man Ray,” 
he said.

Dr Nicholas Cullinan, director of the National Portrait Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-portrait-gallery>, said that 
the show would represent “a panoramic image of the last century”.

That view is, however, undeniably well-heeled and overwhelmingly white. 
Questioned about a lack of racial diversity, Shulman said: “[British Vogue] has 
been a reflection of our culture for 100 years and it has been predominantly 
white culture. I think we just have to accept that. Though there certainly are 
a number of non-white people in the exhibition.”

As Britain became a more multicultural society, that shift was reflected in 
the photography, Cullinan said.

“Something we should be very proud of, and which I have included in the 
exhibition, is that British Vogue was the first mainstream magazine to have a 
black cover model, Donyale Luna, shot byDavid Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/david-bailey> in 1966,” said Muir. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fvogue-centenary-exhibition-national-portrait-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0558644ab142a0d6632815ea9d961d907bc2cf%2F0_0_2480_2438%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vogue%20centenary%20exhibition%20styles%20fashion%20bible%20as%20cultural%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fvogue-centenary-exhibition-national-portrait-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vogue%20centenary%20exhibition%20styles%20fashion%20bible%20as%20cultural%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fvogue-centenary-exhibition-national-portrait-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0558644ab142a0d6632815ea9d961d907bc2cf%2F0_0_2480_2438%2F2480.jpg>
 David Hockney, Peter Schlesinger and Maudie James appear in the major 
exhibition celebrating 100 years of British Vogue. Photograph: Conde Nast 
Publications 
“It’s not all rarefied clouds of pink chiffon,” said Muir, adding that 
unexpected exhibits would include “extraordinarily graphic depiction of war” 
taken during the 1940s by Lee Miller.

“Those are not the sort of images anyone ever expected to be commissioned by a 
magazine like Vogue – but Vogue did have its own war photographer,” he said. 
“Real life intrudes – particularly at the magazine’s start, during the first 
world war, and during the second world war and the 1960s, when you can see 
class barriers being broken down in its pages.”

Muir added that Vogue was as much about creating magic and fantasy as it was 
about reflecting reality. “Cecil Beaton once said, ‘when I die I want to go to 
Vogue’ – and without wishing to dismiss the competition, saying ‘when I die I 
want to go to Marie Claire’ does not have the same kind of resonance.”
 