
Never go ‘event’ shopping

Having to buy something for a particular occasion is everything that shopping 
for clothes shouldn’t be. The clue is in the words “having to”. As soon as the 
search for something to wear becomes a necessity rather than a treat, it loses 
90% of the appeal. What should be an opportunity to indulge morphs into a task 
where the odds are stacked against you. Either you will have a specific vision 
of what you are looking for in your role as the bride’s mother, or for an 
appearance at an ex-boyfriend’s 30th, or your best friend’s second wedding in 
Warsaw – or you will have no idea at all of what you want.

Both situations are unsatisfactory. The first is unlikely to succeed, since 
invariably the piece that you have fixed on in your mind will be impossible to 
track down, or if you do manage to discover your vision, there is a good chance 
it won’t look the way you thought it would. The alternative condemns you to 
trailing round websites or stores in a state of increasing desperation, faced 
with the multitude of choice and product, and becoming more confused and hot 
and bothered as the hours pass.

Experience has taught me to avoid this, but even so, just before the round of 
fashion shows, when I am away for a month with engagements day and night in a 
world where everyone is looking at each other’s clothes, I often get caught 
short and end up wandering in a daze around a department store on a Saturday 
afternoon.

If you love it, buy it

This leads on from the above. Sometimes you walk into a shop and see something 
that you know is right for you. You don’t even have to try it on. Buy it. It 
may have no immediate use, whether it be yet another pair of black trousers, or 
a flimsy summer holiday dress when holidays are a million months distant. But 
no matter. You won’t regret it, and when the time comes that you do need a new 
pair of trousers and you have exactly that hanging in the cupboard, or when you 
are packing for a holiday and have something you have never worn ready for the 
sun and sea, you will simply be happy.

If I buy things on impulse, rather than need, I have a different emotional 
relationship with them. They are for pleasure

If I buy things on impulse, struck by a coup de foudre rather than need, I 
have a different emotional relationship with them. They are for pleasure, 
rather than for work. Most of my favourite clothes have been bought like this – 
often when travelling.

There is little that gives more pleasure than snapping up something you know 
you will love wearing when you didn’t expect to. Last spring, I bought a navy 
coat when I had two others in my wardrobe at home, both tired and faded, and it 
seemed an erratic extravagance. Now the days are shortening and the temperature 
has dropped, it’s a relief I don’t have to schlep out and find a new coat when 
I’ve got no time. There’s one already there, just waiting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Falexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57f769457cf57f7af747deb79ac3b4f9abe9b3ae%2F119_34_1798_2935%2F1798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vogue%20editor%20Alexandra%20Shulman's%20fashion%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Falexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vogue%20editor%20Alexandra%20Shulman%27s%20fashion%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Falexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57f769457cf57f7af747deb79ac3b4f9abe9b3ae%2F119_34_1798_2935%2F1798.jpg>
 Alexandra Shulman at the Business of Fashion gala dinner, London. Photograph: 
David M Benett/Getty Images 
Heel height is key

The look of an outfit is transformed by heel heights. This is one of the areas 
of fashion in which I am the least comfortable playing around. Although I can 
see the way varying heights will make an outfit more contemporary, I find it 
hard to move away from my comfort zone of slim 85-90mm heels. Any higher and I 
think I look ludicrous: towering platforms on me have the whiff of a mutton 
alert, even if they have fashion kudos. Ever since, aged 12, when I opened the 
front door to the shortest girl in the class and realised she was taller than 
me, I have abandoned flat shoes.

Even so, the success of the simple pairing of a skirt and sweater is often to 
do with those heels. One of the things fashion does to move on is alter 
proportions, which means that, for example, the calf-length sunray pleated 
skirt, currently in every high-street store, worn with a pair of mid-height 
courts will now look Princess Di 1980s (and not in an ironic fashion way). The 
same skirt with substantial wedges, or hefty flatforms, or high skinny heels, 
will be on trend. It is up to you whether that is your intention, or whether 
you are happy to adopt the style of a female scout leader at a garden party. In 
which case, to perfect the look, add a blazer that covers your bottom.
 At a magazine shoot in 1980. Photograph: alexandravogue/instagram 
You will always be tempted to replicate what you wore at 17. This is not 
always a mistake

There is a maxim that you should not wear again a look that you are old enough 
to have worn first time around, but that is nonsense. It’s perfectly possible 
that something that suited you then will also suit you now, although it may 
need a careful recalibration. If you feel at home, that will go a long way to 
making you look good.


Age and appearance are uncomfortable bedfellows, and I think when most of us 
look in the mirror, we still see ourselves through a forgiving filter that 
knocks off at least a decade, and in my case probably several more. This is 
nature’s way of letting us down gently, and is supported by the way we view old 
friends and family through a similar lens. So long as you bear this in mind, 
there is no reason not to make a beeline for the kind of look you adopted at 17.

My tie-dye is just about acceptable if I fling a well-cut jacket over a 
tie-dye shirt

I was a teenager in the mid-1970s, and I have only to glimpse a high-waisted, 
flowing hippy gown, a Biba-style suede boot or a rainbow stripe to get a 
craving. My complete weakness is for tie-dye, and I find it almost impossible 
to resist; I can spot a tie-dyed fabric from several hundred metres. There was 
a satisfactory moment a couple of years back when there was lots of graded 
colour around – referred to as ombre – which ticked my tie-dye box in a 
sophisticated and subtle way, but sadly it seems to have disappeared for now. 
It doesn’t take a therapist to understand the Proustian hit I get eyeing the 
colourful patterns, which take me back to when I started going out with boys 
and suddenly the world seemed a much more exciting place. I spent hours with a 
plastic washing-up bowl and boxes of Dylon, tying and untying white T-shirts 
and leaving them to brew overnight, hoping for the perfect mixture of swirl and 
starburst.

If the 80s was your teen moment, it’s likely to be a bat-wing sleeve or padded 
shoulder and oversized jacket (veryVetements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vetements>, which makes it very now) that 
beckons you from across the shop. And if your personal style initiation was 
90s, it’s likely to be the grunge staples of a slip dress and check shirt that 
perform the same call to action.

It’s fine to keep buying whatever this might be; you just have to wear it 
differently. A head-to-toe retread of how you looked when you got your O-level 
results is probably not a wise route, but everything can be updated by mixing 
it up with more contemporary pieces. My tie-dye is just about acceptable if I 
fling a well-cut jacket over a tie-dye shirt, but looks tragic if I wear it 
with a khaki parka or, heaven forbid, the Afghan coat it would have been paired 
with back in the day.

Loose clothes don’t make you look slimmer

Loose clothes look best on beanpoles. If you are larger, huge amounts of 
material hanging around the place does no favours and won’t disguise the fact 
you are of a fuller figure. Tents are for sleeping in and not for wearing.

Don’t do the maths

You might think you can rationalise buys through calculating wear per pound, 
but it’s not worth the trouble. Like politicians, we can always find a way to 
massage the figures to come out with the result we want. The other day, I fell 
in love with a handbag in Milan. It was incredibly expensive. I spent three 
days doing the maths – adding in the cost of the coat, pair of shoes and book 
that I didn’t buy in the following days – so I could place this saving against 
the cost of the prospective bag. Then, naturally, I added in how many years I 
would carry this bag, and how, in 10 years, it would still be doing good 
service, while also converting euros into pounds (currently a profoundly 
depressing experience), and trying to work out whether there would be a price 
advantage to buying it in Italy, where it was produced, rather than back home. 
Doing the maths made what was a luscious indulgence into a balance sheet and 
made the notion of this bag an additional stress. I didn’t buy it, but I’m 
still not sure that was the right decision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Falexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e55f39d4c99abd244796562e03e0866297c21dd%2F34_23_1895_2809%2F1895.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vogue%20editor%20Alexandra%20Shulman's%20fashion%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Falexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vogue%20editor%20Alexandra%20Shulman%27s%20fashion%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Falexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e55f39d4c99abd244796562e03e0866297c21dd%2F34_23_1895_2809%2F1895.jpg>
 Kim Kardashian West and Alexandra Shulman at Vogue’s centenary gala dinner. 
Photograph: Dave Benett/Getty Images 
Black is a double-edged sword

We tend to think that black is the sensible choice: doesn’t show the dirt, 
teams with everything, doesn’t shriek in the way a colour does and so can be 
worn more often without everyone thinking you are wearing the same old thing. 
But it can be so dull. There’s a reason so many shop assistants, bank clerks 
and waitresses are told to dress in black, and that is so that they don’t 
shine. They merge, anonymously and unthreateningly, into the background.

You have to spend only a few days at the international fashion shows to go off 
black. While the catwalks are covered in wild and fantastic colour and fabric, 
the audience are likely to be wearing all kinds of expensive black that is 
certainly chic and fashionable, but looks as if everyone has turned up in 
school uniform.

Sometimes, though, black clothes are like a sartorial painkiller: they simply 
remove the pressure and get you through the day. Whenever buying black, spend 
the most you can afford. There’s something about better quality fabric that 
gives black a depth and richness the cheap stuff doesn’t have. Black velvet 
looks good on everyone, as does black cashmere; black nylon less so. And you 
can spin it either way. Go for glam with a red lip and let your jewellery do 
the talking, or go for the palely interesting, 
I-am-not-making-a‑fuss-about-how-I-look styling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Falexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52b9dcb240d43e28547f99b274420af44a6a8374%2F69_225_2032_2911%2F2032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vogue%20editor%20Alexandra%20Shulman's%20fashion%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Falexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vogue%20editor%20Alexandra%20Shulman%27s%20fashion%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Falexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52b9dcb240d43e28547f99b274420af44a6a8374%2F69_225_2032_2911%2F2032.jpg>
 Alexandra Shulman at the Vogue 90th anniversary party. Photograph: Richard 
Young/Rex Features 
You can’t beat a good dress

Having watched the catwalk shows for next spring/summer, one point I have 
taken away is that everybody was showing dresses. Some seasons it is trousers 
that win the day, but next year, hurrah, dresses rule. This is good news, 
because it is a fact (and when it comes to fashion, there are not many facts) 
that you can’t beat a good dress. I am amazed how many more compliments I get 
for dresses than for any other item in my wardrobe, in particular from people 
who wouldn’t normally notice. Dresses do the business in so many ways and, 
because you don’t have the trouble of teaming separates, they are easier to put 
on in the morning and cut the need for extra decisions.

Dresses come in many guises. I’m not particularly fond of the corporate power 
dress, but I understand why it has become popular: a body-skimming, 
block-colour item with a bit of helpful stretch has become a female alternative 
to a man’s suit. Think of those Silicon Valley powerhouse women such asMarissa 
Mayer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/marissa-mayer> and Sheryl Sandberg
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sheryl-sandberg>, who appear as 
beacons of magenta or cyan. Or, closer to home, any number of television 
presenters andLady Karren Brady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/karren-brady>.

But these dresses have no charisma and bind rather than free. A really great 
dress is likely to be in print, and while it may fit tightly, it is more likely 
to have flow and flare. It has its own movement and slides over the form 
without bandaging it. The perfect dress feels as if you are wearing nothing bar 
a skim of fabric on your skin. Clonk around in brogues and a buzz-cut if you 
don’t want to look too girly, but in a good dress you should feel liberated and 
– if I dare use such an old-fashioned and divisive adjective – pretty.

I have hundreds of dresses collected over the years that I find hard to get 
rid of, even when past their first flush of youth. I can be brutal with 
jackets, trousers and skirts, but dresses often carry with them a sense of 
promise I don’t want to lose. It’s usually of a life I don’t have, something 
that exists solely in bright days and gleaming sunsets, where there is always a 
party of friends to go to or a picnic on a lawn. Some, like the one in 
colourful, raw patterned linen fromMaria Cornejo 
<http://www.zeromariacornejo.com/>, get packed up from summer to summer, 
waiting for the heat to return; others, such as a pair of silk tea dresses I 
bought last May, will hang year round to be worn with sweaters and boots. This 
winter, I have two floral dresses that have seen me through the fashion shows 
and will now move away from their tour of duty to civvy life for years to come. 
At any rate, that’s the plan.

• Inside Vogue: A Diary Of My 100th Year, by Alexandra Shulman, is published 
by Penguin at 16.99. To order a copy for £13.93, go to theGuardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/inside-vogue.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
.
 