
The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, has made it 
clear he does not support legalising voluntary euthanasia, following 
declarations from several senior Victorian cabinet ministers that they would 
support the introduction of laws in that state.

According to Fairfax Media, more than half 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/euthanasia-debate-victoria-is-failing-the-dying-says-premier-daniel-andrews-20160915-grgw2x.html>
 the cabinet of the Victorian Labor premier, Daniel Andrews, now supports 
legalising euthanasia, prompted by the support declared for it by the health 
minister, Jill Hennessy, this week.


Hennessy is leading the state government’s response to a parliamentary 
committeereport tabled in June 
<http://www.parliament.vic.gov.au/file_uploads/LSIC_pF3XBb2L.pdf> that 
recommended changing criminal laws to allow doctors to euthanise terminally ill 
patients. The government’s response to the report is due by December, with any 
change to the legislation likely to be made through a conscience vote.

Philip Nitschke: I don’t judge people at all if they want to die
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/27/philip-nitschke-you-dont-have-to-be-sick-to-qualify-for-voluntary-euthanasia>
Turnbull told radio 3AW on Friday morning that he did not support the direction
Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> was headed in.

“If there was a vote on it again tomorrow, I would not vote for it,” he said.

If Victoria does change its laws, it would become the first state to adopt 
voluntary euthanasia. The Northern Territorybecame the first 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/27/philip-nitschke-you-dont-have-to-be-sick-to-qualify-for-voluntary-euthanasia>
 jurisdiction in the world to pass laws allowing a doctor to end the life of a 
terminally ill patient at the patient’s request in 1995, although this was 
overturned by the federal government.

In December, Andrews told Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/23/daniel-andrews-victorias-quiet-achiever-premier-steps-boldly-into-social-reform>
: “For me, voluntary euthanasia is a very big step, and not one that I’m 
convinced that we need to make.”


He said he was in favour of improving palliative care in the state, and 
ensuring that people could die at home rather than in hospitals. In April, his 
father died following a long illness from cancer. While Andrews stopped short 
of changing his views, he told Fairfax Media this week: “If you search your 
conscience, and you search your own personal experience, I think more and more 
Victorians are coming to the conclusion that we are not giving a dignified end, 
we are not giving the support, the love and care that every Victorian should be 
entitled to in their final moments.

Daniel Andrews, Victoria's quiet achiever premier, is bold on social reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/23/daniel-andrews-victorias-quiet-achiever-premier-steps-boldly-into-social-reform>
 “We are failing many, many people; we have to do better,” he said.

Guardian Australia has contacted the office of the premier for comment.

The Victorian Greens welcomed the support for voluntary euthanasia expressed 
by Hennessy and the ministers Tim Pallas, Lisa Neville, Lily D’Ambrosio and 
Richard Wynne this week.

“The Greens have begun drafting assisted dying laws for Victoria in accordance 
with the inquiry recommendations,” the Victorian Greens spokeswoman for health, 
Colleen Hartland, said.

“We are calling on members of parliament to join a cross-party working group. 
With community support for voluntary euthanasia at an all-time high, now is the 
time for leadership and action from all Victorian MPs.”

 The controversial euthanasia advocate and former doctor Philip Nitschke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/philip-nitschke> is preparing to 
hold Australia’sfirst rational suicide conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/27/philip-nitschke-you-dont-have-to-be-sick-to-qualify-for-voluntary-euthanasia>
 at the State Library of Victoria on 25 September. Nitschke believes anyone 
should have the right to make a “rational” decision to end their life, not just 
the terminally ill.

“Victoria has a strong track record in human rights legislation,” Nitschke 
said.

“Their forward-thinking in decriminalising abortion is a good example. 
Euthanasia fits into this category. I have no doubt Victoria will be the first 
state to pass a new dying with dignity law.”

If a conscience vote is held in the Victorian parliament and voluntary 
euthanasia laws passed, there will be an 18-month adjustment period before they 
are introduced.
 