
Volunteering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/volunteering> isn’t just 
about helping others; it can be about helping yourself too. Whether you want to 
gain skills, make contacts or just experience life in a different sector, 
volunteering can be a useful door into a new career.

Charities and fundraising organisations rely on a huge army of volunteers who 
work in all types of roles. In fact,government statistics 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-official-statistics-show-resurgence-in-volunteering-as-millions-more-give-their-time-to-help-others>
 now suggest that more than 70% of us volunteer at least once a year.

It may conjure up a picture of standing on street corners rattling a tin, but 
organisations need volunteers to cover almost every specialism you can dream up 
– from campaigners and social media experts, to education mentors and animal 
lovers. So whatever job you want to get into, volunteering can always be a 
helpful boost to your CV.

But finding the right voluntary role can be tricky; and finding the time can 
be even tougher. Employment law solicitor, Philip Landau, points out that you 
also need to be careful to choosegenuine volunteer roles, rather than 
exploitative unpaid internships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/legal-overview-internships>. 
And even for job hunters who have valuable voluntary experience in the bank, 
knowing how to impress employers with it can be a whole new challenge in itself.

So, if you’re thinking about using volunteering as a gateway into a new 
career, but need help along the way, join us onThursday 4 June from 1–3pm BST 
for a live chat with the experts. We’ll be discussing:

 * How volunteering can help your career 
 * What roles are available 
 * How to distinguish genuine voluntary roles from exploitative unpaid 
internships 
 * How to use volunteering to your advantage in job applications 
The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever:create a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, you can 
tweet us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your 
questions tocharlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
 who can post them for you.

Panel

Debbie Hill is head of volunteering at Marie Curie 
<https://www.mariecurie.org.uk/>. Hill is also a freelance assessor for BBC 
Children in Need and volunteers on the Alumni Network Group at The University 
of Exeter and as a trustee for Berkshire Youth. Previously, Hill managed the 
volunteer programmes at both The Children’s Society and CLIC Sargent.

Shaun Delaney is head of volunteering at Samaritans 
<http://www.samaritans.org/>, working with more than 21,000 volunteers across 
the UK and ROI. Shaun is also a trustee of Greater London Volunteering, 
London’s leading voice for volunteering, and a researcher on UK volunteering 
management.


Janet Thorne is the chief executive of Reach <http://www.reachskills.org.uk/>, 
a charity which connects people who want to volunteer their career skills with 
charities which are looking for volunteers with these skills.

Michael Mercieca is chief executive of Young Enterprise 
<http://www.young-enterprise.org.uk/>, the UK’s leading enterprise and 
financial education charity. Prior to this, Mercieca was director of finance 
and operations at The Prince’s Trust, and before this worked in media.

Chris Reed is head of volunteering at Barnardo’s <http://www.barnardos.org.uk/>
. Prior to this, Reed worked as head of volunteering at St John’s Ambulance, 
initially volunteering as a front-line ambulance crew and first aid trainer 
before managing volunteers for a range of charities.

Tim Reading is director of VIY <http://www.volunteerityourself.org/>, a social 
initiative which combines volunteering and DIY by helping young people learn 
trade and building skills by fixing local community buildings, supported by 
Wickes. Reading is also founder of Cospa, the social innovation agency that 
created and helps to deliver VIY.

Tom Laws is a careers adviser working with the National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>. He offers young 
people information and advice about education, employment, training and 
careers. He also represents the National Careers Service at school and college 
events, such as the Birmingham Skills Show.

Joelle Leader is volunteering director at Macmillan Cancer Support 
<http://www.macmillan.org.uk/>. She leads a national team coaching volunteers 
to support people affected by cancer. Leader previously worked in a variety of 
charities, including ChildLine (NSPCC) and Sure Start and is on the advisory 
panel for the charity Missing People.

Sarah Archer is a qualified career coach and co founder of CareerTree 
<http://www.careertree.org.uk/>. She specialises in career change and helping 
clients find new roles. She previously worked as an HR director in the 
voluntary sector, where she recruited and trained volunteers.

Jamie Fyleman has been head of volunteering at Tearfund 
<http://www.tearfund.org/>, and is acting head of that role as well as head of 
UK church relationships. Previously Fyleman led a charity in Nottingham which 
used hundreds of volunteers and achieved the ‘Investing in Volunteers’ standard.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 