
South Africans have delivered a stinging rebuke to the ANC, handing the party 
its first major election setback since it swept to power after the end of 
apartheid over two decades ago.

South Africa elections: ANC could lose key cities as support slips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/south-africa-elections-anc-takes-early-lead-but-may-lose-grip-on-cities>
Frustrated with a stagnant economy, a 25% unemployment rate and corruption 
allegations against Jacob Zuma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/this-is-when-we-break-the-mould-south-africa-at-a-political-crossroads>
, the president, voters in local elections turned away from the ruling party in 
their millions and it has been defeated in two of the three cities where it 
faced the strongest challenge.

The ANC is likely to claim a slim overall majority when final results are 
announced, but it has lost control of Port Elizabeth, an industrial city on the 
south coast, and Pretoria, the capital. It did manage to win narrowly in the 
municipality of Johannesburg, the nation’s economic hub, but failed to win an 
outright majority.


In the Nelson Mandela Bay area, which includes Port Elizabeth, the DA secured 
enough votes to promise that although they would need to govern in coalition, 
theywould not partner with the ANC 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/sundaytimes/stnews/2016/08/04/ELECTION-RESULTS-LIVE-Maimane-declares-victory-in-Nelson-Mandela-Bay-seeks-coalition-partner>
.

The three cities together are home to more than 8 million people, with annual 
budgets of about $10bn (£7.5bn). The loss of control, amid plummeting overall 
support for the ANC, will be a major psychological blow to a party so convinced 
of its right to rule that the general secretary recently declared it had a
mandate from God. 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/thetimes/2016/07/18/God-chose-ANC-to-lead>

As the scale of their advances became clear, opposition leaders were quick to 
claim their victory as a transformation not just of local councils but of the 
national political landscape. “We have shown some incredible growth,” Mmusi 
Maimane, the DA’s first black leader, told 702 radio. “We call this the change 
election because we felt that it was a referendum on Jacob Zuma as a national 
figure, but we also had a referendum about the future ofSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>.”

For decades the ANC has claimed an unshakeable dominance of South African 
politics, entering elections with an expectation of victory that critics say 
has contributed to stagnation and corruption.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fsouth-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d16fbc3ca6c6a25d71996ef3ac06f4d93d1fb61%2F0_6_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Voters%20deliver%20stinging%20rebuke%20to%20ANC%20in%20South%20African%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fsouth-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Voters%20deliver%20stinging%20rebuke%20to%20ANC%20in%20South%20African%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fsouth-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d16fbc3ca6c6a25d71996ef3ac06f4d93d1fb61%2F0_6_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 ANC and South African Communist party supporters dance and sing in celebration 
at Wembezi township near Estcourt around 215km west of Durban. Photograph: 
Rajesh Jantilal/AFP/Getty Images 
This election will be the first time that the party of the anti-apartheid 
hero, Nelson Mandela, has won less than 60% of the vote since country’s first 
multiracial poll in 1994.


Thursday’s vote sent a clear message that the years when South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> effectively operated as a one-party 
system are drawing to a close. A record number of voters, over 26 million, 
registered for the election, with rival parties apparently mobilising 
supporters to sign up and then attend polling stations far more effectively 
than the ANC.

The DA was particularly strong in more prosperous suburban areas around the 
cities, said election analyst Dawie Scholtz. But it also showed that a party 
once dismissed as the voice of the white middle classes could challenge the 
ruling party in its strongholds. “The DA did also make modest inroads into the 
ANC traditional township voter base,” he told the Guardian. “That point is 
important.”

There was also a small but significant challenge from a radical new party, the 
Economic Freedom Fighters, which has not taken control of any councils but 
claimed enough support to potentially serve as kingmaker in divided cities. Led 
by ex-ANC firebrand,Julius Malema 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-14718226>, it was contesting 
local elections for the first time on a platform that includes promises to 
nationalise mines and redistribute land without compensation.

The results will be damaging to Zuma. In a personal blow, the ANC also failed 
to take control of his home ward of Nkandla from the Zulu Nationalist Inkatha 
Freedom party (IPF).

“Jacob Zuma will go home to an IFP-run ward, go to parliament in a DA-run city 
and likely to work in a DA-run capital city,” said the DA’s spokesperson, 
Phumzile Van Damme in atriumphant tweet <https://twitter.com/zilevandamme>.

The results will increase pressure on Zuma, whose critics inside the party say 
he is irrevocably tainted and would like to see him step down before his term 
ends in three years, making way for a new leader to contest the 2019 general 
election.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fsouth-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7392d3ef27d5cbdc977a0a24497d57341829fc14%2F0_35_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Voters%20deliver%20stinging%20rebuke%20to%20ANC%20in%20South%20African%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fsouth-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Voters%20deliver%20stinging%20rebuke%20to%20ANC%20in%20South%20African%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fsouth-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7392d3ef27d5cbdc977a0a24497d57341829fc14%2F0_35_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 President Jacob Zuma casts his vote at Ntolwane primary school in the 
municipal elections in Nkandla, KwaZulu Natal, South Africa. Photograph: Elmond 
Jiyane/EPA 
They are likely to be shrugged off by a man who has weathered months of 
serious scandals with his power-base largely intact. Earlier this year he was 
ordered by the constitutional court to repay over a half a million dollars of 
state money spent on upgrades to his personal home, which has become a virtual 
byword for corruption.

Breaking the mould? South Africa at a crossroads as country goes to polls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/this-is-when-we-break-the-mould-south-africa-at-a-political-crossroads>
He has also been accused of allowing a family of businessmen, the Guptas, 
undue influence in national affairs. Several senior politicians have alleged 
that family members wereinvolved in deciding cabinet appointments. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/jacob-zuma-denies-outside-influence-in-south-african-cabinet>

Zuma’s handling of the economy has caused particular frustration. South Africa 
is plagued by stagnation and crippling unemployment, which affects over a 
quarter of working-age South Africans and disproportionately its young people.

There is also anger about widespread inequality. About 80% of South Africa’s 
54 million citizens are black, but most land and companies remain in the hands 
of white people who make up fewer than 10% of the population.

“While the middle classes are upset about government incompetence and 
corruption, the working classes are economically frustrated by the lack of jobs 
– good paying or not,” said Sebastian Spio-Garbrah, DaMina Advisors’ chief 
Africa frontier markets analyst.

The DA has capitalised on a reputation for efficient management in the one 
city it does control, Cape Town, to lure voters hoping for a revival in an 
economy that never fully recovered from the 2008 global economic crisis and 
which is still teetering on the brink of recession. It has promised to 
liberalise the economy, including cutting red tape and making it easier to hire 
and fire workers, and even modest urban victories for the DA are likely to be 
welcomed by markets and investors.
 