

One man and his dog ... Adam Mars-Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/adam-mars-jones>. Photograph: Sarah Lee

In an age where instant gratification never seems to come quickly enough, 
there is something to be said for those artists who steer clear of saturation 
point, who keep their fans hanging on. When it pays off - as it did when the 
writer-director Terrence Malick took two decades to followDays of Heaven 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0077405/> with The Thin Red Line 
<http://film.theguardian.com/Film_Page/0,,30896,00.html> - then it's worth the 
wait in gold. Some don't even get that far: I can't be the only person who will 
always feel ever-so-slightly incomplete until the Canadian singer-songwriter 
Mary Margaret O'Hara, whose perfect debut albumMiss America 
<http://ectoguide.org/artists/ohara.mary.margaret> was released 20 years ago, 
pulls her finger out and records a proper sequel.

Admirers <http://www.palimpsest.org.uk/forum/showthread.php?t=3303> of the 
short-story writer, critic and sometime novelist Adam Mars-Jones have rather 
been on tenterhooks in the 15 years since he publishedThe Waters of Thirst 
<http://theasylum.wordpress.com/2008/01/03/adam-mars-jones-the-waters-of-thirst/>
, his first full-length novel after a couple of short-story collections 
(Lantern Lecture,Monopolies of Loss <http://forcers.org.uk/nude_lit/mars.htm>). 
Not that there haven't been nutritious crumbs and snacks dispensed in the 
interim to keep hunger at bay, in the form of regular reviews and the 
occasional story. One fictional piece, Everything is Different in Your House, 
which appeared inGranta in 2001 <http://www.granta.com/extracts/1357>, touched 
on the amused, sensuous experiences of John Cromer, a gay man afflicted by an 
aggressive form or arthritis calledStill's Disease 
<http://www.stillsdisease.org/>, and who becomes a magnet for respect and 
curiosity in Tiruvannamalai, Tamil Nadu ("Here I am understood without being 
known, without needing to be known").

Out of this fertile terrain has sprung - if that's not too urgent a word for a 
work that's been so long coming - the writer's second novel,Pilcrow 
<http://theasylum.wordpress.com/2008/01/18/adam-mars-jones-pilcrow/>, a 
richly-textured prequel to Everything is Different in Your House that runs a 
generous 544 pages to the original story's 23. Pilcrow (which will be published 
in April) covers John Cromer's life from birth, in early-1950s Bourne End, to 
adolescence, and places the reader squarely inside his busy-bee mind and 
encumbered body. While the latter is inhibited by the onset of Still's Disease, 
a condition exacerbated by the prescription of bed-rest ("Those years in bed 
had been a sort of kiln slowly baking my joints into hardness"), John's 
loop-the-looping imagination renders him and his prose weightless; fantasies, 
conceits and word-games are woven from the humblest materials. And if you 
thought you knew the nooks and crannies of thecoming-of-age genre 
<http://books.theguardian.com/top10s/top10/0,,736165,00.html>, to which Pilcrow 
tentatively belongs (at least in its latter section), then the novel will prove 
especially refreshing. "Adolescent fumbling" doesn't cover the extent to which 
John's body, and the bodies of his various objects of desire, impede the course 
of true lust ("Because of the inflexibility of my wrists, there was no 
possibility of me turning my palms towards Julian's crotch. I would have to 
make do with the backs of my hands").

If one of the requirements of great fiction is to filter the world through 
authentically different eyes, then Pilcrow not only meets that challenge, but 
surpasses it, making us feel the world through another set of hands, and 
traverse it with a strange, uncooperative pair of legs. Mars-Jones's ability to 
restage recognisable emotional struggles within unfamiliar physical and mental 
frameworks is probably his most significant accomplishment here. But if that is 
a revelation, then the crisp language is not.

One of my fondest memories of my first writing job at the Independent in 1994, 
when Mars-Jones was the newspaper's chief film critic, was waiting each 
Wednesday for his column to materialize on the prehistoric computer system on 
press day for all to read. Those erudite, witty reviews were a priceless weekly 
tutorial - as a reader, they made you want to gorge yourself on the words; as a 
writer they made you want to write better. He could persuasively point out the 
good things inTank Girl 
<http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4158/is_19950622/ai_n13990113> as 
nimbly as he could dismantle the grotesque pretensions of an arthouse sacred 
cow likeUlysses' Gaze 
<http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4158/is_19960215/ai_n14032093>. About 
the much-respected, Jimmy McGovern-scripted Priest, he was spectacularlypithy 
<http://immunetoemotion.blogspot.com/2006_08_01_archive.html>: "Priest can only 
really be recommended to people who have never heard the phrases 'piss off' and 
'out of my diocese' in the same sentence, and are anxious to rectify the 
omission." Reading again his thorough analysis of Twister as ametaphor for 
satisfying the female libido 
<http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4158/is_19960725/ai_n14060047>, you 
can only mourn the fact that no other critics writing today are this audacious 
or funny.

And now Pilcrow confirms that Mars-Jones can sustain his penetrating insights 
over the (very) long haul. Come the autumn, a Booker shortlist that doesn't 
include this novel won't be worth the paper that it's printed on.
 