
Thank goodness the wait is finally over. On Wednesday, the Solicitors 
Regulation Authority (SRA) finally unveiled thefirst three businesses 
<http://www.sra.org.uk/sra/news/press/sra-authorises-first-abs.page> to receive 
analternative business structure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/alternative-business-structures> (ABS) 
licence. This was meant to have happened last October, and recently the SRA 
made itself a hostage to fortune by saying it would be by the end of February, 
but at last we've got there.

The regulator needed a big name to get the ball rolling, and the Co-operative 
obliged. Its reward was a visit on Wednesday from justice minister Jonathan 
Djanogly to mark the big day. The Co-op's ambitions to expand its legal 
offering have been far from a secret – in the past six years it has built a 
£25m-plus, 500-person legal business without needing to be an ABS, but the 
licence opens up more opportunities.

They include launching a fixed-fee family law service later this year, 
handling legal aid work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/nov/10/coop-move-into-family-division>, 
and offering face-to-face legal advice through the Co-op's bank network (it is 
currently done on the phone and online). If the Co-op succeeds in its bid for 
632 Lloyds branches, for which it is the preferred bidder, then that would give 
it around 1,000 possible locations from which to provide legal advice. That's a 
scary thought for high street solicitors, whose big selling point is the 
ability to give a personal, local service.

Then again, the other two new licensees are a high street firm in Oxfordshire, 
John Welch and Stammers <http:>, and a sole practitioner in Kent, Lawbridge 
Solicitors 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CFYQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lawbridgesolicitors.com%2F&ei=joV5T8_UOs7W8QPEhpTYDQ&usg=AFQjCNHLL5_ahgqe99UbkMC9KXV4SKLO7A>
. Both are bringing in non-lawyer partners as their practice managers (in the 
case of Lawbridge, the solicitor's wife).

These two licences show that ABSs are not just about enabling new competition 
and external investment, nor do they exclude the smallest legal practices. 
While the prospect of law firms accepting private equity cash or floating on 
the stock market consumes the media, the new regime also allows for more subtle 
but no less significant changes in the way law is practised.

A perfect example of this is Artesian Law <http://www.artesianlaw.co.uk/>, a 
recently opened SRA-regulated firm specialising in criminal law. Nothing 
unusual there, except that six of its seven partners are barristers and it is 
being run like a regular chambers (where traditionally the barristers are 
self-employed). Artesian is going to become an ABS so that the non-lawyer 
practice manager can become managing partner, while it has the flexibility to 
do the solicitor work involved in litigation and bid for legal aid contracts, 
should the partners wish to in future.

Partner Dan Jones says the change in status has not affected them: "We are a 
close knit bunch, and are enjoying pulling together – promoting Artesian is 
actually promoting each other with benefit for us all."

They will not be the last. The heavy pressures that legal aid reform is 
putting on the way criminal defence lawyers operate, particularly at the bar, 
are driving innovation. We can expect to see considerable changes to their 
business structures in the next year or two. More broadly, the government is 
putting its faith in ABSs as one way to ameliorate the effect of the legal aid 
cuts.

In a recent parliamentary debate 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201212/cmhansrd/cm120315/debtext/120315-0004.htm>
, Djanogly argued that while the legal aid, sentencing and punishment of 
offenders bill will probably mean a reduction in the number of firms and 
lawyers doing legal aid, the government is "creating the conditions that will 
allow legal aid providers to flourish". He said the significance of the ABS 
model, "and the commercial opportunity that it represents, cannot be 
overstated".

In the meantime, innovation continues from businesses that do not need to 
become ABSs to open up the legal market. QualitySolicitors (QS) – arguably the 
biggest talking point in the legal profession of the last two years – launched 
a £15m advertising campaign with a90-second John Lewis-style spot 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4knygiE7aAE&feature=youtu.be> just before the 
results of the Dancing on Ice final were announced last Sunday. It has booked 
no fewer than 8,000 adverts in May.

A fast-growing network of traditional law firms under the QS banner, the aim 
is to build the first national legal brand with straightforward service 
standards and Saturday opening. It took private equity investment last autumn – 
QS itself is not a law firm and so does not need to be an ABS – and aims to be 
in 1,000 locations by the end of the year.

The battle for the consumer legal market is well and truly on. Choice will not 
be a problem for the public and for lawyers it may stimulate more demand. It 
will be for the SRA and other regulators to ensure that, in the fight for 
market share, standards do not fall.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http:>
 