
It’s midday in New York, and the traffic on Broadway is pitched to a honking, 
blaring, strident roar. But inside the rehearsal studios ofAmerican Ballet 
Theatre <http://www.abt.org/default.aspx>, fairies dance and courtiers amuse 
themselves in a gentle game of blind-man’s buff, as choreographerAlexei 
Ratmansky <http://www.abt.org/education/archive/choreographers/ratmansky_a.html>
 directs his dancers through the second act of Marius Petipa’s Sleeping Beauty.

In many ways, this is business as usual for ABT, who have been dancing the 
popular 19th-century classic for decades. But it is a new production that they 
are working on, and what’s drawing the attention of the ballet world is not 
only the fact that its being staged by Ratmansky (one of today’s most 
interesting classical choreographers ) but that Ratmansky believes he’s got 
closer to aspects of the original 1890 choreography than any other contemporary 
production – reconstructing details and style which over the decades have been 
smoothed over, modernised, made more generically “ballet”.

He’s done so by using the notation with which Beauty was recorded in 1903 by 
the ballet master Nicholas Sergeyev. There are few choreographers alive who can 
even read this notation (which was developed by Vladimir Stepanov in the 
1890s). It’s idiosyncratic, sketchy, and nothing like the precisely codified 
system in use today. Ratmansky and his wife Tatiana spent months trying to 
figure out its language of musical notes and squiggled hieroglyphics. Even 
then, as he tells me, reading the entire text of Beauty was “like playing 
detective or like deciphering a lost language. It’s so sketchy in places but 
always so complex. You have to use all your knowledge to make the pieces of the 
puzzle fit together.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSCfYcvd8rrM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSCfYcvd8rrM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSCfYcvd8rrM&media=>
While the notation is very specific in certain respects, recording the height 
and positions of the legs, the direction of a phrase, the way the body is bent, 
it gives almost no information about the positions of the arms. Ratmansky 
speculates: “Perhaps they just used the port de bras that were conventional – 
the ones everybody knew – or perhaps the principals were given the freedom to 
do what they wanted.” Yet even without the mapping of the arms, Ratmansky was 
fascinated by the richness of the choreography, the concentration of steps and 
the surprising inventiveness with which they were put together. “The style was 
less athletic than today, the legs are lower, and not so many lifts, but there 
are many more steps in a phrase than we see now, the combinations are so fresh 
and so interesting, and there is so much detail.”

Watching the choreographer in rehearsal, it’s clear how much he honours that 
style. Even in a simple court dance, he’s emphatic about the precise musical 
beat on which the foot has to be placed flat on the ground, the accent of a 
plié, the height at which a pointed toe should be lifted, the twist or curve of 
a torso.

“I try to remove myself as a choreographer,” he says. “Even when it’s been 
difficult to decipher a passage or to make it work on today’s dancers, I still 
try to find a way to do it, according to the notation. From my experience, if 
you trust what is written, if you try and make it work, then you are rewarded 
by something that is suddenly so multi-dimensional and alive and more complex 
than what we see now.”

He admits that it has been quite difficult for ABT’s dancers; even if the 
movement is less athletic than most of the works they perform, it still 
requires “incredible stamina”. There are far fewer of the “natural breaks” 
between variations, or even within phrases, which normally allow the dancers to 
take breath. And for many of the cast a real effort of concentration is 
involved in over-writing the memories of other productions of Beauty they’ve 
previously performed.

Diana Vishneva <http://www.vishneva.ru/en/>, who is Ratmansky’s first-cast 
Aurora, reckons she’s danced at least six different productions of Beauty 
during the course of her career, but that stylistically “this is by far the 
most challenging. When you are used to taking your leg to a certain height in 
arabesque or passé or to having more amplitude in the arms, it is very 
difficult to adapt.”

Ratmansky is trying to overcome his cast’s problems by encouraging them to 
regard this Beauty almost as if they were approaching the work of a new 
choreographer, an experiment with a brand-new style. And that’s an interesting 
distinction, because for all his passionate interest in resurrecting the 
choreographic richness of Petipa’s ballet, he’s very far from demanding 
authenticity in every detail of the production.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmSvNjhEPh7I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmSvNjhEPh7I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmSvNjhEPh7I&media=>
This American Beauty will not look like the four-hour reconstruction that the 
Mariinsky (then Kirov) Ballet <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mariinsky_Ballet> 
mounted in 1999. Not only is this production more streamlined in terms of cast 
numbers and length, it is more eclectic in some of its sources. The Sergeyev 
records include snippets of material that were introduced during the first 
western productions, including the virtuoso fish dives in the Act 3 pas de deux 
and a solo variation for the Prince. Ratmansky has allowed these to remain, and 
at the same time has allowed his own 21st-century sensibility to colour the 
mime and the storytelling.

During rehearsals, he’s careful to insist that, within the limits of period 
etiquette, his courtiers and peasants behave like real individuals, rather than 
ballet ciphers. During the game of blind-man’s buff, when the Prince’s tutor 
Gallison grabs a lady-in-waiting with inadvertent lewdness, Ratmansky gives 
precise notes about how the woman needs to deliver her admonitory slap – “it 
must hurt a little bit, but do it with love”.

As for the look of his production, Ratmansky and his designer Richard Hudson 
have found a historical midpoint, taking inspiration from the production 
designed byLéon Bakst <http://www.vam.ac.uk/page/l/leon-bakst/> for Diaghilev’s 
Ballets Russes’ 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/d/diaghilev-and-the-ballets-russes/> 
London season in 1921. Rich visual records exist of this production and 
Ratmansky says, “To my mind, this design hasn’t been bettered. From what we can 
see on paper or in photographs or from the surviving costumes, it looks 
fantastic.”
 Richard Hudson’s costume designs for ABT’s Sleeping Beauty – based on work by 
Léon Bakst for Ballets Russes in 1921. Photograph: American Ballet Theatre 
It’s a good thing Ratmansky isn’t superstitious, for as gorgeous as Bakst’s 
designs may have been, the 1921 production came close to shutting Diaghilev’s 
company down. Today Sleeping Beauty might be one of the world’s most popular 
classics, but in 1921 it was virtually unknown outside Russia. And Diaghilev, 
ironically, had trained his audiences to expect innovation and avant-garde chic 
from his company. After the production’s London premiere, Lytton Strachey wrote 
that Tchaikovsky’s score had made him feel “sick”, and his fellow writer and 
critic Raymond Mortimer had poured equal contempt on the ballet’s “fancy dress” 
parade of costumes.

Diaghilev was bankrupted by the failure of his opulent production. However, 
the expense of this Beauty are being shared between ABT and its co-producers La 
Scala; and Hudson is not attempting an exact reconstruction of the designs. 
Modern fabrics will be used to lighten the expense of the costumes as well as 
their actually physical weight, and the tailoring will all accommodate the 
taller, leaner physiques of modern dancers.

It’s another instance of the spirit in which this Beauty has been mounted: 
it’s a production that attempts to capture the spirit of the past without 
slavishly re-creating it. Ratmansky believes he has discovered a life and 
energy in Petipa’s choreography that’s been suffocated over time. “Working on 
this Beauty I’ve learned more about Petipa, what a master he was, than I ever 
knew before.”

• Sleeping Beauty premieres at the Segerstrom Hall 
<http://www.scfta.org/events/detail.aspx?id=11607>, Costa Mesa, California, on 
3 March; then atNew York Metropolitan Opera 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/abt/the-sleeping-beauty>, opens 29 May
 