
Wales have not been prone to paradigm shifts in their nine years under the 
current management team but the manner of Saturday’s defeat to Australia has 
prompted radical changes for Saturday’s encounter with Argentina in Cardiff.

Jamie Roberts and Dan Lydiate, two key figures in the series-winning third Test
between the Lions and Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/06/british-irish-lions-roar-weekend>
 in Sydney three years ago, were dropped by Rob Howley, who is Wales’s interim 
head coach while Warren Gatland is taking a sabbatical toprepare for next 
summer’s Lions tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/warren-gatland-lions-wales-new-zealand-2017>
 to New Zealand.

Wales call up teenager Keelan Giles to squad for Argentina clash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/wales-keelan-giles-argentina> 
The centre Roberts has been a regular in Wales’s starting lineup since 2009, 
when he last appeared on the bench, renowned for his hard running and strong 
tackling. Lydiate made his reputation at blindside flanker through his tackling 
but, at a time when the international game is evolving, becoming more attacking 
and less structured, Wales have found standing still has taken them backwards: 
they have lost five consecutive Tests and won just three of the last 12.

“We were disappointed in the manner we lost to Australia,” said Howley, who 
said he had spoken to Gatland this week, but only about Ireland’s victory over 
the All Blacks. “We made a reaction in our selection. I have sat down with 
Jamie – he is the captain of our defence and there were a number of defensive 
errors in our game. That was not good enough and Scott [Williams] offers a 
different skill with ball in hand.

“Jamie was not the only player who made errors. He is disappointed and I am 
sure we will see a response from him if he gets on as a replacement. Dan misses 
out on the bench because James King gives us the extra No8 option we need. A 
difference this week from last is that Sam Warburton was back in the selection 
mix.”

Warburton missed the 32-8 defeat to Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/wales-australia-rugby-union-autumn-international-math-report>
 to play for Cardiff Blues after five weeks out with face and neck injuries. He 
returns to the side but not to the captaincy; the prop Gethin Jenkins – who 
will win a 133rd Test cap, a record for a front-row forward – retains the 
armband. Warburton will play out of position on the blindside, with Justin 
Tipuric continuing as openside.

While Gatland and Howley did not speak about Wales’s humbling by Australia, 
Ireland showed thatthe way to defeat New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 is substantially different to the method employed in the Australia series in 
2013. The role of inside-centre, in particular, is different, mixing defence 
and attack, while at forward there is greater emphasis on handling and 
athleticism – one reason why Wales have replaced Samson Lee at tighthead prop 
with Tomas Francis, who has yet to start a match for Exeter this season.

“There is no complacency in this group but the selection will have players on 
edge,” said Warburton. “Warren has always told us to play each Test as if it 
were our last and we never take our places for granted. Jamie has been a 
massive figure for us and he still has a big input this week. It has been a 
tough week and Saturday cannot come soon enough for us. There will be an 
improvement for sure.”

Spirit of Anthony Foley suffuses Ireland’s Chicago surprise against All Blacks 
| The Breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/ireland-new-zealand-anthony-foley-chicago>
The second-row Alun Wyn Jones, who missed the Australia match following the 
death of his father, returns and even without Roberts and Lydiate in the side, 
the starting lineup has a total of 800 Wales caps. The scrum-half Rhys Webb has 
been ruled out of the rest of the autumn series and will on Friday have surgery 
on the ankle he injured against Australia.

Argentina have recalled their veteran centre Juan Martín Hernández after last 
week’s54-20 victory over Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/japan-argentina-international-rugby-union-match-report>
 in Tokyo, along with the former Leicester flanker Pablo Matera. Their two most 
influential players, the fly-half Nicolás Sánchez and the No8 Facundo Isa, who 
missed last month’sdefeat to Australia at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/argentina-australia-rugby-championship-match-report>
, both start.

Wales team to face Argentina L Halfpenny (Toulon); G North (Northampton), J 
Davies (Scarlets), S Williams (Scarlets), Liam Williams (Scarlets); D Biggar 
(Ospreys), G Davies (Scarlets); G Jenkins (Cardiff Blues, capt), K Owens 
(Scarlets), T Francis (Exeter), L Charteris (Bath), AW Jones (Ospreys), S 
Warburton (Cardiff Blues), J Tipuric (Ospreys), R Moriarty (Gloucester).

Replacements S Baldwin (Ospreys), N Smith (Ospreys), S Lee (Scarlets), C Hill 
(NG Dragons), J King (Ospreys), Lloyd Williams (Cardiff Blues), G Anscombe 
(Cardiff Blues), J Roberts (Harlequins).
 