
I helped get Nottingham Contemporary <http://www.nottinghamcontemporary.org/> 
off the ground. So I like galleries, especially outside London. The objectors 
to the potential closure of New Art Gallery Walsall tactfully address their 
protest to “the authorities” (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/30/art-world-protest-fate-of-new-art-gallery-walsall-grayson-perry-letter-closure>
, 1 December). But that avoids the issue. The issue is that Walsall, as a 
non-southern borough, has seen its spending power reduced by £543 per household 
since 2011. Contrast that with many southern authorities, such as Tonbridge and 
Malling, which has seen its spending power rise by £23 per household since 
2011. The government is responsible for most spending power. It has a political 
agenda. That agenda should be recognised and condemned.

Finally, I could have written a similar letter to that of the objectors, about 
the need to preserve care for the elderly inWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/walsall> with the same money devoted to the 
gallery. The council is between a rock and a hard place that is not of its 
making. It deserves understanding, not blame. The government, on the other hand…
Cllr Graham Chapman
Deputy leader, Nottingham city council

• The letter about the possible closure of Walsall’s New Art Gallery (1 
December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/30/closure-of-new-art-gallery-walsall-would-be-a-devastating-blow>
) seems to have been signed by a whole lot of people who rarely, if ever, visit 
Walsall.

I have visited the gallery three times this year and there has never been more 
than a handful of people there.

Earlier this year I wrote to Walsall council and the New Art Gallery 
suggesting how they could give art a boost in Walsall and I didn’t even get an 
acknowledgment. As there is no sign of Walsall council or the New Art Gallery 
Trust shaking off their unimaginative and lethargic qualities, perhaps we 
should move the current exhibits and use the building to house many of 
Walsall’s 569 homeless people, who could be helped and encouraged to come up 
with their own works of art, which I feel sure would attract more visitors than 
the present set-up.

Thus at a stroke we will make real use of the building, create something truly 
original and give these unfortunate people their pride back.
Roger Watts
Walsall
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQF39F36EjcY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQF39F36EjcY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQF39F36EjcY&media=>
 Video: Noddy Holder’s original lift announcements for new Art Gallery Walsall 
• Another sad casualty of the threatened closure of Walsall’s New Art Gallery 
would bethe lift announcements 
<http://thenewartgallerywalsall.org.uk/2016/03/21/hello-world/>, superbly and 
authentically voiced by Noddy Holder.
Graham Larkbey
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 