
The year 1921 was drawing to a close when Walter Herbert Doughty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/53> took this picturesque 
photograph of St Ann’s Square in Manchester. Although published just once 
during his lifetime, this photograph, now housed and preserved at theGNM Archive
 <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>, has since garnered wider 
recognition.

 The Manchester Guardian and Manchester Evening News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/09/manchester-evening-news-theguardian>
 hiredWalter Doughty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/walter-doughty-guardian-first-photographer>
 in July 1908. The two titles shared offices in Cross Street, Manchester and 
Doughty set about constructing a shared library of photographic prints which 
would later becomeThe Manchester Picture Library. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/manchester-picture-library-1950s>
 By the time Doughty took this photograph he had already made a name for 
himself as a leading newspaperman of the time. In autumn 1921 he returned from 
Cork where he had begun adramatic series of photographs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/2014/nov/07/guardian-news-and-media-archive-a-to-z-in-pictures#img-14>
 that recorded early scenes of conflict in the Irish War of Independence. 
However, it is the accumulation of quieter scenes like this one made closer to 
home that overshadow the early picture files and together form a significant 
body of work depicting the north of England.

Like much of the Guardian’s picture library, this unique vintage print (no 
negative is known to exist) is not in pristine condition. Its discolouration, 
worn edges and the reverse (which was typically used to record the 
photographer’s caption and dates of publication) reveal markings of the long 
journey it has taken.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2014%2Fdec%2F01%2Fwalter-doughty-manchester-guardian-photography-teaching-resource-gnm-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417097846123%2Ff7bd48c1-6c8f-4110-b1dd-22d875316ea9-1373x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walter%20Doughty%3A%20Manchester%20St%20Ann's%20square%201921%20-%20GNM%20Archive%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2014%2Fdec%2F01%2Fwalter-doughty-manchester-guardian-photography-teaching-resource-gnm-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walter%20Doughty%3A%20Manchester%20St%20Ann%27s%20square%201921%20-%20GNM%20Archive%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2014%2Fdec%2F01%2Fwalter-doughty-manchester-guardian-photography-teaching-resource-gnm-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417097846123%2Ff7bd48c1-6c8f-4110-b1dd-22d875316ea9-1373x2040.jpeg>
 Reverse of print - St Ann’s Square, Manchester, 1922. Photograph: Guardian 
News & Media Archive 
St Ann’s Square is an arresting photograph in which Doughty’s camera elegantly 
captures the street’s inhabitants as dark stormy skies pass overhead. The young 
man occupying the foreground seems unaware of Doughty’s presence as he passes 
through the square with his cart. Perhaps he is talking to a friend across the 
street, or has become distracted by the sound of nearby church bells or 
traffic? Behind him, to the extreme right of the frame a policeman can be seen 
conducting those passing through the streets. A group of passers-by divide the 
centre of the scene from the traffic in the background whilst the presence of 
shops and the city’s skyline dominate the frame with an encompassing dark 
shadow.


Paved streets have become damp as a result of recent rainfall and the 
resulting reflections only add to the enigmatic quality of this beautifully 
composed picture. If you look carefully at the original print it is possible to 
trace white paint spotlighting the clouds, a common method of early 
photographic manipulation made directly onto the photograph’s surface. It is 
hard to look at St Ann’s Square and not imagine the collective sounds of this 
active northern street scene.

St Ann’s Square was first published as a standalone photograph 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/11/27/1417106559801/St-Anns-Square-Manchester-001.jpg>
 in the Manchester Guardian on December 31st 1921 accompanied by the title A 
Stormy Passing and caption “Manchester under one of the last skies of the 
old-year”.

 At the time of publication the inclusion of photographs was limited, with 
this photograph appearing as one of just two photographs amidst the papers 14 
pages. In 2006 two Guardian photographers,Denis Thorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/pictures/0,8542,1207236,00.html> and Don 
McPhee <https://www.theguardian.com/slideshow/page/0,,2043336,00.html> visited 
the GNM Archive and selected St Ann’s Square for inclusion in the upcoming 
exhibition and publicationA Long Exposure: Pictures from 100 years of Guardian 
Photography in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/interactive/2008/oct/21/theguardian-pressandpublishing>
. Visitors reacted enthusiastically to its subsequent showing in 2008 at The 
Lowry in Salford. As Thorpe suggested in an interview at the time, Doughty’s 
photograph is artistic and reminiscent of a Lowry painting. It is worth noting 
Doughty himself may well have agreed with this, captioning its reverse in his 
own hand as “An impression of St Ann’s Square”.

Walter Doughty officially retired in 1949 after a 41-year career for the 
newspapers but he continued to do photographic work for the Manchester 
Guardian. He died aged 79 at his Alderley Edge home on 27 March 1958.

Further reading: 

Walter Doughty – the Guardian’s first photographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/walter-doughty-guardian-first-photographer>

A-Z of the Guardian News and Media Archive – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/2014/nov/07/guardian-news-and-media-archive-a-to-z-in-pictures>

Tom Stuttard and the Guardian’s first picture library: teaching resource from 
the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/tom-stuttard-teaching-resource-photography-manchester-guardian-gnm-archive>

A Long Exposure: 100 years of Guardian photography: Guardian photographer 
Denis Thorpe and northern editor Martin Wainwright discuss an exhibition of 
pictures taken by the paper’s Manchester photographers. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/interactive/2008/oct/21/theguardian-pressandpublishing>

Don McPhee: teaching resource from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resource-of-the-month-gnm-archive-december-2012>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
 