
There are many reasons why you may consider approaching a previous employer 
with a view to returning to familiar shores. Whether it's because your new role 
isn't quite living up to expectations, the lure of a coveted position which was 
previously out of reach suddenly becoming available, or simply because you miss 
your former colleagues. Whatever the reason, you'll need a carefully planned 
strategy to make sure your homecoming is a success.

Is it possible to go back?

Obviously, if you left under a cloud, then your options may not be as 
plentiful, but if you left to the sound of much back-patting and a "come back 
anytime" promise then you could be in business.

Research is always good. Test the water before making your final approach, a 
few discreet enquires to trusted former colleagues will tell you whether it is 
an appropriate time to return, and could help you prepare much better than 
going in blind.

Something else that you should think seriously about is whether you can commit 
to going back long-term. If you were successful, but then you have a serious 
bout of déjà vu in your second week – suddenly remembering why you left in the 
first place – leaving the firm again could spell the end of any good 
relationship you may have had up until that point, and the boss may not think 
as favourably about you if ask for a reference.

Making your approach

So, you have decided to venture back across the bridge. If you have only been 
gone a short time, you could just get back in touch with your ex-boss and let 
him or her know that you have made a mistake. Send an email though. A telephone 
call may put them on the spot, so give them space, and give them a chance to 
have a meeting to discuss the possibility.

If you have been away from the company for a while, do your homework. Is the 
boss the same person or someone new? A quick phone call to reception will 
confirm this.

Your CV

As you have been there before, they know what you did, how well you performed 
and why you left. There's therefore no need to get too creative about what you 
have already contributed. Although, if there is a change of manager, you should 
be prepared for the dreaded "reason for leaving" question in the interview.

As well as highlighting your best achievements, focus on what skills you have 
picked up since leaving and more importantly, how you are now an even better 
asset to the firm than you were before. Don't assume it is a foregone 
conclusion that you will be welcomed back – you will still need to prove 
yourself.

Your cover letter

This is where all your preparation comes together. If you don't prepare 
adequately and the boss has changed, at best, your email will bounce back to 
you, or spend the rest of eternity in cyberspace. At worst, the new manager 
will receive it, and your opportunity to make a good first impression is gone.

The content of the letter should be fairly formal, you can definitely direct 
their attention to your former tenure with the firm, but don't dwell on it. 
Rather like your CV, focus on how you are now an even greater asset to the firm.

Direct the reader's attention to your CV, but don't repeat content that is 
already mentioned there. You could pre-empt the "reason for leaving" question 
in your letter, but if you do, you should state clearly why you want to come 
back.

A final tip on the actual application: get someone to read it over for you, an 
objective view is often the thing you need to make sure that the overall 
flavour of your approach is likely to be well received.

Preparation checklist

Before you even put pen to paper you should check that you have done 
everything as follows.

A bit obvious, but check the company website, you are likely to either learn a 
few things, or have confirmed what you already know about the firm.

Open (if you haven't already) a LinkedIn account and reach out to some people 
who could give you some basic information about the changes that have occurred 
while you have been away.

If there are still a few gaps in your research after you have done this, you 
may have to pick up the phone to find out who you need to approach.

David Smith is a job search consultant at Careervisa.co.uk 
<http://www.careervisa.co.uk/>. 

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook. 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 