
Warren Clarke’s road to fame was long and hard-fought. Throughout the late 
1960s and 70s, he eked out a living with a bit-part in a Playhouse here, or 
three separate walk-on Coronation Street characters there. In time, he’d reach 
the level of recognition he deserved, but not before suffering through a glut 
of turgid period dramas like Our Mutual Friend, The Onedin Line and Jennie: 
Lady Randolph Churchill.

Clarke’s first real brush with exposure came when he worked for Stanley 
Kubrick, playing the role of Alex’s droog Dim inA Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange>. The role didn’t ask a 
lot of him, relying – as many subsequently would – on his bulldog grunt of a 
face, but he nevertheless made his mark. The scene that always comes to mind 
first when I think of the film is the one where Dim, having corraled his 
instincts for violence into a job as a policeman, repeatedly attempts to drown 
Alex in a trough.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDZQOBLqinQk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDZQOBLqinQk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDZQOBLqinQk&media=>
Slowly, though, the roles came. By the 1990s, he found his calling playing 
working-class foils to slicker co-stars. He was an earthy football chairman to 
Cherie Lunghi’s manager in The Manageress. Then, in 1991’s Sleepers – a sort of 
proto-Americans, about a set of Russian spies stranded in England after the end 
of the Cold War – he repeated the trick opposite Nigel Havers. Only fragments 
of Sleepers still exist online, much of them full of guffy Masterpiece Theatre 
introductions, but the clips give you a feeling of Clarke’s ability to play it 
for laughs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-YUqWe1z5Iw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-YUqWe1z5Iw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-YUqWe1z5Iw&media=>
 Also worth mentioning from this era: Gone to Seed, a rare misfire in the 
canon. It’s only worth mentioning because it had such a staggeringly good cast 
– Alison Steadman, Jim Broadbent, Peter Cook, Sheila Hancock – that in 
retrospect it looks like a terrible spoof from a Before They Were Famous clip 
show.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPnlIVefDR1U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPnlIVefDR1U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPnlIVefDR1U&media=>
Then Clarke hit his golden period. In The Locksmith, a drama now most famous 
for helping to introduce John Simm to the world, he got to give his dramatic 
muscles a much-needed workout and delivered a performance of such full-blown, 
unrelenting anguish that it’s hard to watch, even now.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEiEexSFeCEo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEiEexSFeCEo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEiEexSFeCEo&media=>
Eclipsing all of that, though, was Dalziel and Pascoe, the detective show that 
managed to outgrow its impossible-to-pronounce title and uninspired workaday 
plotting to run for 11 years and become Warren Clarke’s defining work. The 
secret to its success was probably Clarke’s performance as the “fat controller” 
of the partnership, in turn warm, dishevelled and mocking.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkhmKZwUhW98&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkhmKZwUhW98>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkhmKZwUhW98&media=>
Then came Channel 4’s 2009 drama Red Riding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/red-riding>, the artistic watermark 
of Clarke’s career. Although he appeared in all three instalments, his turn in 
the spotlight came in the 1980 episode, and he was little short of captivating; 
giving a bellowed, red-faced retort to anyone who’d written him off as the 
grubby guy from the rubbish BBC detective show.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ4dhLaulxb8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ4dhLaulxb8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ4dhLaulxb8&media=>
Then, inevitably, came the decline. Clarke’s last few years were spent in part 
voicing a train called Speedy McAllister on a terrible childrens’ show called
Chuggington <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=juZQZnLckr4>. But this merely 
deserves to be a footnote in an otherwise glorious career.

 