
There is a type of smile that I only seem to witness during the last few days 
of the Cannes film festival, when the seances are almost done and talk turns to 
the possible prize-winners. It is a smile that attempts to make light of an 
acute anxiety. It is weak, watery, slightly curdled round the edges. It is the 
Smile of the Critic Who Suspects They Might Have Missed This Year's Palme d'Or 
Winner.
Here is how it happens. The festival schedules so many screenings that it is 
all but impossible to see every film from the main competition unless you 
jettison everything else (interviews, special events, filing copy, the films in 
sidebar competitions, sleeping). So you make semi-educated guesses and simply 
roll the dice. And inevitably, you sometimes get it wrong. Earlier this week, 
one major critic confided in me that he was mortified to have skippedMy Joy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135877/my-joy>, because he was now 
hearing good things about it and was terrified it might win the Palme d'Or, and 
then where would that leave him? He wore the Smile as he said all this and I 
was able to beam back happily.I had seen My Joy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/may/19/cannes-film-festival-godard>, 
thought it was in with a shout and could therefore afford to be amused by his 
discomfort.

That ought to teach me.

The results are in and the prizes apportioned. My Joy (shamefully) goes home 
empty handed. So too does Mike Leigh's wonderfulAnother Year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135875/another-year>, and Rachid 
Bouchareb's ragingOutside the Law 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135868/hors-la-loi>. Instead, the jury 
prize goes toThe Screaming Man 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135870/un-homme-qui-crie>, a measured, 
soulful drama from Chad, and the grand prix to Xavier Beauvois's mesmerisingOf 
Men and Gods 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135867/des-hommes-et-des-dieux>. Juliette 
Binoche <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135872/copie-conforme> is named 
best actress for her superb turn in Abbas Kiarostami's Certified Copy, while 
Javier Bardem (Biutiful <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135869/biutiful>) 
and Elio Germano (La Nostra Vita 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135878/la-nostra-vita>) share the award 
for best actor.Mathieu Amalric 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/may/17/cannes-mathieu-amalric-tournee> 
takes the directing prize for the amiable but flyweightTournee 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135866/tournee>. And that takes care of 
almost everything â€¦

The winner of the 2010 Cannes Palme d'Or is Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His 
Past Lives 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135882/uncle-bonmee-who-can-recall-his-past-lives>
. It is by the Thai writer-director Apichatpong Weerasethakul, a man who is 
masterful at conjuring up serenely odd movie landscapes. Uncle Boonmee (which 
screened late in the competition) charts the final hours of an ailing farmer 
who is visited by the ghost of his dead wife and the spirit of his lost son, 
who romps out of the forest in the guise of an ape. "Why did you grow your hair 
so long?" demands his father.

So what is Uncle Boonmee actually like? I'd like to say that this was a worthy 
winner at the 63rdCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>. Hell, I'd like to say 
that it was a disgraceful winner and that the judges should be thoroughly 
ashamed of themselves, the idiots. Unfortunately I am in no position to adopt 
either stance.

It transpires that there is an expression even worse than the Smile of the 
Critic Who Suspects They Might Have Missed This Year's Palme d'Or Winner. It is 
the wince of the critic who knows it for sure.
 