
At book readings, Stephen King <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> 
sometimes tells a story about his "only preproduction discussion" for the 1980 
film adaptation ofThe Shining. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76626/shining> At seven in the morning, 
King was shaving in the bathroom when his wife ran in to tell him there was a 
call from London, it wasStanley Kubrick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stanleykubrick>. Just the mention of the 
director's name was shock enough that when King went to the phone, he had a 
line of blood running down one cheek and the other was still white with foam. 
The first thing Kubrick said – and it's worth noting that King's growly 
impersonation makes him sound like a swamp creature – was: "I think stories of 
the supernatural are fundamentally optimistic, don't you? If there are ghosts 
then that means we survive death." King asked him about hell, how did that fit 
in? There was a long pause, then: "I don't believe in hell."

King tells this anecdote like a horror story, which I guess it is, since he 
famously hates Kubrick's adaptation of his book. We imagine Kubrick as the 
monster, a corona of wild hair around his pale face, laughing as he drags the 
novel into the depths of soulless art cinema. The director is turned into a 
character from a Stephen King novel as payback for having turnedThe Shining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/29/how-we-made-the-shining> into a 
Stanley Kubrick film.

Six months ago, I was invited to curate the Page to Screen film festival, in 
Bridport, Dorset <http://www.frompagetoscreen.org.uk/>, which is dedicated to 
films adapted from books. I was thrilled to take part and was surprised, when I 
started looking, at just how many films start life in print – six of the nine 
nominees for best picture at this year'sOscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>, for example. Many of the films we've 
chosen gleefully cheat on the books that inspired them. InClueless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/59257/clueless>, for example, Jane 
Austen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten>'s Emma becomes Cher 
Horowitz, Georgian Highbury becomes contemporary Beverly Hills, the horse-drawn 
carriage is a drop-top four by four, while all the bitching and romantic 
mix-ups remain pretty much the same, just with different slang. King has a neat 
theory about how an adapter's voice can force itself on a story. His version of
The Shining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/22/rereading-stephen-king-the-shining>
 "ends with the hotel burning, and [Kubrick's] with the hotel freezing" because 
he is a "warm and gooey" person while Kubrick was "the coldest guy in the 
universe".

One of the films we're showing is based on Barry Gifford's novel Wild at Heart 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Wild-at-Heart-Barry-Gifford/dp/080213453X>, about a 
highly sexed, loved-up couple, Sailor and Lula. At the end of the book, once 
Sailor has completed another long stint in jail, Lula is waiting for him with 
their son, who has never met his father. After giving his son some life advice, 
Sailor walks away from his new family, feeling that he will only end up getting 
them into more trouble. Lula lets him go.

In Chris Rodley's book-length interview with David Lynch 
<http://www.amazon.com/Lynch-Revised-Chris-Rodley/dp/0571220185>, who adapted 
Wild at Heart for the screen, the director says this ending "honestly didn't 
feel real, considering the way they felt about each other. When Sam Goldwyn 
[Jr] saw an early draft of the script he said, 'I hate this ending,' and I said 
– it just popped out of me – 'I hate that ending, too!' And so he said, 'Why 
don't you change it?' and I said, 'I'm going to change it, doggone it!'" Once 
he got started, Lynch changed a lot. He cranked up the ultra-violence, added a 
strand of screwy humour and, most significantly, draped the story ofThe Wizard 
of Oz <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36148/wizard.of.oz> on top. This 
is where it enters Lynchland. At the end of the film, while Sailor is lying in 
the middle of the road, knocked out, with his nose smashed, the good witch 
visits him in a globe of pink light to tell him to go back to his family. The 
witch with her magic wand may as well beDavid Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/davidlynch>, the adapter, descending from the 
sky to give the story a happy ending.

Changing key plot points in a well-loved book can be risky. Hell hath no fury 
like a hardcore fan scorned. Often, the most hardcore fans of all are the 
authors.Anthony Burgess <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonyburgess> 
disowned both the film and the novel ofA Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/may/14/happy-birthday-a-clockwork-orange>
 after Kubrick's version didn't allow Alex, the protagonist, redemption from 
his violent instincts. In 1995, a year after his novelForrest Gump 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Forrest-Gump-Winston-Groom/dp/0552996092/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1364489033&sr=8-1>
had been sanitised for the screen, Winston Groom publishedGump and Co, a 
sequel, which began with: "Let me say this: Everybody makes mistakes ... But 
take my word for it – don't never let anybody make a movie of your life story."
Richard Matheson's novelI Am Legend 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Richard-Mathesons-I-Am-Legend/dp/1933239212> has 
been filmed four times, and never to his satisfaction. After the most recent 
adaptation, he was quoted as saying: "I don't know why Hollywood is fascinated 
by my book when they never care to film it as I wrote it." I can understand why 
authors might be touchy about the sacredness of their text but, more often than 
not, it's worth ignoring them. Most great film adaptations have built their 
success on ignoring, or at least shunting, key elements of the source text.

In some ways, Mike Nichols' film of The Graduate 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2008/03/graduate200803> is a very 
straight adaptation. The script is taken almost entirely fromCharles Webb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/sep/05/graduate-charles-webb>'s 
excellent novel, which itself is sparely written and led by dialogue. According 
to both script and book, Benjamin Braddock, the protagonist, is a 20-year-old 
"track star" and "the kind of guy who has trouble keeping the ladies 
at a distance." On this basis, it makes sense that Nichols wanted to cast 
Robert Redford <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertredford> for the lead.

But the role also calls for Braddock to struggle with communication, find 
relationships difficult and see his parents' poolside LA life as grotesque. 
When Redford auditioned, being tall and dashing, Nichols wasn't convinced. 
Instead, the director called in a young stage actor who he had seen playing a 
transvestite in an off-Broadway play. Not many people believedDustin Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dustinhoffman> would be right for the role, 
least of all Dustin Hoffman. "I always felt that I had been miscast," he has 
said. "I expected to be fired, so the discomfort I felt was not just being new 
to movies. The discomfort was feeling that they'd made a mistake casting me."

The Graduate, particularly its use of music and Hoffman's performance, inspired
Richard Ayoade's adaptation of my novel,Submarine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/15/richard-ayoade-interview>. 
Hoffman plays Benjamin Braddock in constant physical distress, swallowing his 
lines, using "an often inflected delivery," as Ayoade puts it. "When you read 
the book, he sounds more sarcastic and snarky, closer toHolden Caulfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/jan/29/jd-salinger-rock-star>
," he says, "but with Dustin Hoffman it feels genuinely 
rabbit-in-the-headlights."

For me, the book's version of Benjamin Braddock is a good-looking sociopath 
almost on thePatrick Bateman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho>
 scale, compared to the film's uneasy non-hero. Comedies of awkwardness – from
Rushmore <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79577/rushmore> to The Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/jul/08/the-office-still-does-the-business>
 toCurb Your Enthusiasm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/curb-your-enthusiasm> – couldn't 
exist without Hoffman's performance. He allows us to feel for Braddock, despite 
his selfish, privileged existence.

The Graduate is not unusual in softening its lead character for the screen. 
Sometimes film-makers are accused of doing this out of commercial concerns, to 
get a lower certificate or a wider demographic. That might sometimes be true –
Forrest Gump, I'm looking at you – but there's also a difference in the way a 
film is consumed. "When you read, you half become the main character, there's a 
grey area between your voice and the one on the page," Ayoade says, "but in a 
film, when you see someone on screen who is obviously not you, there's a 
physical otherness – you sort of decide whether you enjoy being in the company 
of that person."

That physical otherness only increases when a lead actor is a star, someone we 
know outside the film as hugely famous, wealthy and with a complex love life. 
How much more work do we ask of an audience to emotionally connect with a 
character played byTom Cruise <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomcruise>? We 
are less forgiving of characters on screen, too. As Ayoade puts it: "I think 
there is still a puritanical streak in most films. Wickedness must be 
punished." As a rule, all actions on the big screen – wicked or otherwise – 
receive their appropriate reaction. Film-makers are not so easily allowed to 
use the literary author's get-out-of-jail-free card: letting the reader decide.

In American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/10/book-club-american-psycho-ellis>
, the novel, we are kept aware that Patrick Bateman's murders could all be in 
his imagination. The ferocious sex-horror is either disturbing because it's 
real or because it's his fantasy. We only go along with the book's violence 
because there are the safety valves of unreliability and chapter-long 
digressions aboutWhitney Houston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/whitney-houston>. In the film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82514/american.psycho>, we meet a 
considerably mellower grade of psychopath. This seems like a sensible decision 
since, in film, ambiguity is harder to sustain.Christian Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christianbale>'s character is never as 
deranged or as complex as the book's. At the end of the film, we are offered a 
way out – was it all in his head? – but that moment feels like a cheat rather 
than a real question.

Alfred Hitchcock's 1950 film, Stage Fright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78758/stage-fright>, was criticised for 
what became known as its "lying flashback" – a long flashback about a murder 
that we later learn is untrue. Audiences felt tricked, and the film didn't do 
well. Speaking toFrançois Truffaut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/francoistruffaut>, Hitchcock said: "In 
movies, people never object if a man is shown telling a lie. And it's also 
acceptable, when a character tells a story about the past, for the flashback to 
show it as if it were taking place in the present. So why is it that we can't 
tell a lie through a flashback?"

Even when a film is as aggressively ambiguous and nonsensical as Kubrick's The 
Shining, audiences still want an objective truth. Perhaps it's the physicality 
of film – the idea that seeing is believing. The documentaryRoom 237 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149695/room-237> is a showcase for the 
myriad ways in which people have stretched reality to try to find clear meaning 
inThe Shining. Most commentators begin by saying that when they first saw the 
film they didn't enjoy it, it didn't make sense. Only later did they grasp its 
true message: it's an apology for Kubrick's faking the moon landings or a 
metaphor for the genocide of native Americans or a vehicle for sexy subliminal 
messages. InThe Shining, the camera's depth of focus adds to the sense that 
there must be a grand directorial plan at work: every object burns with 
significance. And as I watchedRoom 237, I believed each conspiracy theory in 
turn.

It's one of the pleasures of watching a story jump between mediums – trying to 
second guess the logic, or otherwise, behind each decision. At the festival in 
Bridport, we're showingThe Shining in a disused hotel on a cliff top. Jan Harlan
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2008/feb/29/jan.harlan.kubrick.archive>
, Kubrick's right-hand man, will be there to answer questions. At least then we 
can finally find out which of our crackpot theories is true.

In some cases, even the source text is unsure of itself. For his second film, 
Ayoade is working withAvi Korine to adapt The Double by Dostoevsky 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/theplaylist/richard_ayoade_also_working_on_adaptation_of_dostoevskys_the_double>
 (the obvious next step after working on one of my novels). It's a story about 
a man who is disturbed to find that his more charismatic doppelganger works in 
the same office as him. Ayoade tells me what's unusual aboutThe Double is that 
Dostoevsky <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fyodordostoevsky> never wrote an 
ending he was satisfied with. I asked if that would not make life easier, 
since it removed any issue of the author's infallibility? "Yes," Ayoade 
replied, "we'll help Fyodor get it right for once."
 