
Cannes 2011, on reflection, looks an absolutely vintage year. Not only did it 
introduce us toThe Artist <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142801/artist> 
andMelancholia <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141827/melancholia>, The 
Tree of Life <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/139929/tree-of-life> and 
Take Shelter <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142870/take-shelter>, it 
also gave usThe Skin I Live In 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141826/skin-i-live-in>, Footnote 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144232/footnote>, Drive 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142036/drive>, The Kid on the Bike 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144222/kid-with-a-bike> and Once Upon a 
Time in Anatolia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141833/once-upon-a-time-in-anatolia>. 

And now we're approaching the release one of the films which Peter Bradshaw 
wrote about most warmly last May:Le Havre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141832/le-havre>.
 Extra Le Havre 
Reviewing the latest from Aki Kaurismäki – the deadpan Finnish film-maker 
behindI Hired A Contract Killer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/89668/i-hired-a-contract-killer>, The 
Match Factory Girl 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/85216/match-factory-girl>, Leningrad 
Cowboys Go America <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0097728/> and The Man Without a 
Past <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/93307/man.without.a.past> – Bradshaw 
called it a "wonderful, big-hearted comedy".

"Le Havre had all the master's trademarked deadpan dialogue and delicious 
nuggets of bone-dry humour, and his compassion for the marginalised and 
dispossessed, but with something richer and sweeter than I remember from his 
previous pictures. His sensibility is closer to that of Chaplin, in this film, 
than anyone else.

Le Havre is shot in the French port town, with French actors and dialogue, 
though Kaurismäki's repertory stalwart player Kati Outinen has a role. She 
plays the wife of Marcel (André Wilms), a dignified, stoic man who works as a 
shoeshiner on the streets. Marcel witnesses an illegal immigrant boy from 
Gabon, Idrissa (Blondin Miguel), escape from the police and sets out to help 
him. But a tough cop, Inspector Monet (Jean-Pierre Darroussin) is on his trail, 
not to mention a mean-spirited local given to making anonymous denunciations.

Kaurismäki's movie moves lightly but elegantly and quickly, like a little 
jockey on a powerful horse. In the hands of someone else, this film might seem 
unendurably twee and affected, but its charm and good nature carry it along. 
Somehow, for all its comedy and absurdity, Le Havre addresses its theme with 
more persuasive confidence than many a grim social-realist picture.

Apart from everything else, Kaurismäki is a master of making deadpan a subtle, 
expressive performance mode, rather than the arthouse cop-out it too often is. 
With him, it is a specific discipline and a refined comic mode. What a treat 
this film is."
 Photograph: Ian Langsdon/EPA 
We're huge Kaurismäki fans at the Guardian, as you may have gathered 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2003/jan/17/artsfeatures1>. So we're really 
excited to be streaming the film on our site from next Friday 6 April, through
Curzon on Demand <http://www.curzoncinemas.com/film_on_demand/>, the online 
wing of the chain of cinemas in which the film will also be playing from the 
same date. It'll be available for a couple of months for £6. Then from the 13 
April we'll start a programme of free streams of seven classics from the 
Curzon/Artificial Eye back catalogue. We'll release a film a day, with one of 
our writers cheerleading for it; you'll be able to watch them for the following 
fortnight.
 Extra Le Havre Curzon 
But anyway, back to Le Havre: we'll release more details tomorrow, but we 
thought it wise to flag this up for your diaries, particularly as following the 
screening at Curzon Soho next Friday night, we'll behosting a Q&A 
<http://www.curzoncinemas.com/events/details/1130/the-guardian-presents-le-havre-qa-mark-pagel/>
 withMark Pagel <http://www.evolution.reading.ac.uk/>, one of the world's 
leading evolutionary theorists, who'll be offering a unique perspective on the 
film and discuss his work on our species' capacity for culture, cooperation and 
community. We'll liveblog the event on this site, so if you've a question for 
Mark or a comment about the film, we're love you to watch along with us and get 
involved then.

Watch out, too, John Patterson singing Kaurismäki's praises in the Guide 
tomorrow, and, next week, for Simon Hattenstone's interview with Kaurismäki – 
largely spent drinking in Soho …Kippis! <http://www.awa.dk/glosary/slainte.htm>
 