
Wayne Garvie <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wayne-garvie>, the executive 
responsible for growing BBC Worldwide's international production business, is 
leaving to join the super indie All3Media.

Garvie will become managing director of international production at All3Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>, which owns the independent 
producers responsible for shows including Skins, Hollyoaks, Midsomer Murders, 
Shameless, Saturday Kitchen and Fifth Gear.

Last month All3Media added to its roster of production subsidiaries by buying 
Optomen and One Potato Two Potato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/aug/13/all3media-optomen-gordon-ramsay>
, which make Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares and The F Word.

Helen Jackson, director of BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
Worldwide's indies unit, will take over Garvie's responsibilities as managing 
director of content and production until a permanent replacement is appointed.

Garvie is leaving the BBC after more than a decade. He joined the corporation 
as BBC Manchester head of entertainment and features from Granada in 1998. 
Three years later he became the London-based head of the BBC entertainment 
group.

He moved to the corporation's commercial arm, BBC Worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide>, in 2006 in his current role, 
with responsibility for content investment strategy, international production 
network and talent and brand ventures.

John Smith, BBC Worldwide chief executive, said: "Wayne has had an exemplary 
career at the BBC, including the last four years at BBC Worldwide. He goes with 
our gratitude for all he has done, particularly in establishing our 
international production base and taking fantastic shows such as Dancing with 
the Stars to the world."

Garvie added: "I feel especially proud and privileged to have been at 
Worldwide these last few years, and have been inspired by the leadership and 
challenge given to me by John. Our content and production business is in 
excellent shape and in very safe hands. However, All3Media represents a 
terrific opportunity for new challenges and experiences."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 