
“We used to cross the railroad tracks in the dark to defecate. With a toilet 
at home my children are safe and we can answer the call of nature without 
fear,” said Mrs Malliga, a WaterCredit borrower who told us her story when we 
met in India this August. For the first time in her life, Malliga has access to 
safe water and a toilet in her home. Possibility, safety, hope are the words 
that come to mind when we listen to how, like so many other women in her 
community, she had to spend hours scavenging for water and risk her and her 
children’s safety trying to find a place to defecate after nightfall.

Statistics provided by UNICEF <http://www.unicef.org/india/wes.html> show that 
India has the largest number of people in the world who still defecate in the 
open, with a staggering 600m lacking toilets. The lack of access to safe water 
and sanitation has had a devastating impact on those living at the base of the 
economic pyramid (BOP). In contrast, it is very rewarding to see the 
transformation that follows when families gain access to these basic utilities. 
Our experience with Malliga further fuelled our determination to tackle this 
global challenge through a partnership that is powering smart innovation in the 
water sector.

In a world where technology has created opportunities for many, 750 million 
people still live without access to safe drinking water 
<http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/JMP_report_2014_webEng.pdf>
, while2.5 billion people lack proper sanitation 
<http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/JMP_report_2014_webEng.pdf>
. This results in water-related disease killing children at a rate equivalent 
to a classroom every six minutes. Women spend 180m hours per day collecting 
water for their families, often from polluted sources.

These are harsh truths, however, it is important to emphasise that this is a 
solvable problem. We know how to install a toilet and we know how to supply a 
home with permanent access to safe water. In addition, while conventional 
charity will always be necessary to meet the needs of those living in extreme 
poverty (those earning less than $1.25 (75p) per day), millions more at the BOP 
represent a market waiting to be discovered. We know that there is a demand of 
up to$12bn 
<https://docs.gatesfoundation.org/documents/assessing-microfinance-wsh-2008.pdf>
 among the BOP for affordable financial products such as micro-credit loans to 
install a household toilet or water connection. Understanding this, Water.org 
pioneered WaterCredit, a market-based model through which the organisation and 
its local micro-finance institution (MFI) partners help those at the BOP gain 
access to small loans to pay for water connections and/or toilets in their 
homes.

Financial inclusion at the BOP for water and sanitation needs represents a 
significant opportunity to improve the lives and health of families living in 
poverty. The WaterCredit model has the potential to reach millions of children 
and their families. Together, our organisations, the IKEA Foundation andWater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water>.org, have dedicated resources 
to making this happen by refining and expanding the WaterCredit model. While 
our joint effort initially focuses on Bangladesh, our aim is to scale this 
model worldwide. Access to the capital people need to invest in a water and/or 
sanitation solution allows families to buy back their time and live healthier 
and more productive lives. A water connection means children can go to school 
and mothers are able to work; a toilet means parents spend time earning instead 
of caring for sick loved ones. A water connection and a toilet create a cycle 
of opportunity that can break the cycle of poverty.

As of now, more than 1.5m people have gained access to safe water and 
sanitation through WaterCredit <http://water.org/solutions/watercredit/#stats>. 
Building on this progress, the Ikea Foundation is helping Water.org innovate 
around the edges of this model by funding market research throughWater.org’s 
new ventures fund <http://water.org/new-ventures/>. More specifically, the IKEA 
Foundation will improve the health and wellbeing of nearly 180,000 people in 
Bangladesh through its partnership with Water.org.

By funding both the WaterCredit and New Ventures Fund, the IKEA Foundation is 
helping drive forward the critical innovation needed to end the water and 
sanitation crisis improving the lives of children living in the world’s poorest 
communities. Combining Water.org’s experience in this sector with IKEA 
Foundation’s holistic funding model creates tremendous potential to scale the 
solutions that provide better health and greater opportunities for children and 
their families.

As the CEOs of two organisations dedicated to empowering people who lack 
access to safe water and sanitation, we understand that we will not be able to 
solve this crisis alone. We need the help of others from the public and private 
sector who can leverage their resources, networks and voice to improve 
financial inclusion at the BOP for water and sanitation needs. We need more 
programmes like WaterCredit that drive down the philanthropic cost per person 
reached with safe water and increase the overall number of people served. If 
you would like to learn more about Water.org’s WaterCredit initiative, we would 
love to have you visit theWaterCredit <http://water.org/solutions/watercredit/> 
website. We welcome your feedback, ideas and insights. Let’s work together to 
solve the water crisis and end the cycle of poverty.

Per Heggenes is the CEO of the Ikea Foundation <http://www.ikeafoundation.org/>
 and Gary White is the CEO and co-founder ofWater.org <http://water.org/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 