
This was the year when racism seemed to suddenly grow into a powerful 
political project, in Europe and America. When Donald Trump was elected he was 
cheered on by the KKK and neo-Nazis.

Sadly, some conservative Australian politicians act as the shock troops for 
race hate. Rather than building understanding, their strategy is division; they 
bang on about how Australia used to be a great place to be a racist. (The 
attorney general, George Brandis, used the term “bigot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/24/george-brandis-people-have-the-right-to-be-bigots>
” but we know what he meant.)

From Bernie Sanders to stocking fillers – December's literary highlights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/11/from-bernie-sanders-to-stocking-fillers-decembers-literary-highlights>
Literature and the law are two very different responses to hate speech and my 
late sister embodied both. Deborah Cass was a legal academic at the London 
School of Economics. She loved working in the law and published important  
<http://regnet.anu.edu.au/news-events/events/5196/traversing-divides-symposium-honour-deborah-cass>
scholarship 
<http://regnet.anu.edu.au/news-events/events/5196/traversing-divides-symposium-honour-deborah-cass>
. She believed in the better side of our shared humanity, and the possibility 
of making a better world. She fought for the underdog and defeated bullies.

If the law was the great love of Deborah’s hard working intellect, it was 
literature that was her first love. As a teenager she read and reread the Greek 
myths. After falling ill she retired from the law and took up writing fiction. 
She had some short writing published and started on a novel.

As a young girl Deborah was shy, so our parents made her a little theatre, to 
help build her confidence. Dad constructed a wooden stage and Mum sewed on a 
curtain and fashioned a family of glove puppets. Deborah would act out little 
plays, literally trying on different characters.

She found a strong voice for herself, by imagining other people. Empathy made 
her strong.

Deborah died in 2013 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/obituaries/writer-and-educator-saw-law-as-a-means-to-better-the-world-20130801-2r1oj.html>
 at 53 years of age after a long and courageous struggle with cancer. She lived 
life with vigour but we knew there was much left undone and wanted to remember 
her with a prize in her name.

We thought hard about what it should be. How do you pay tribute to a life? We 
chose in the end to go with her heart not her head, and decided to create a 
prize for writers not lawyers.

Deborah’s family and friends resolved that her prize should explore the 
migrant experience, as this would reflect her life and her values. She was the 
granddaughter of Jewish migrants who came to Australia early last century, as a 
safe haven from European antisemitism.

The  <http://deborahzcass.org/>Deborah Cass Prize <http://deborahzcass.org/> 
goes to new writing, by early career authors, who must have a migrant 
background. Our criterion for eligibility is that the author must either be 
born overseas or have at least one parent who was. Around 40% of the people in 
Australia are migrants themselves or the child of a migrant.Writers Victoria 
<https://writersvictoria.org.au/calendars/opportunities-competitions/2016-deborah-cass-prize>
 administers and promotes the prize.

The Australian story is largely a story of migration and its aftermath. 
Refugees and those simply seeking a better life shaped our nation, enriched the 
culture and made a vast contribution to the economy, as labour, consumers and 
entrepreneurs. In the USA it is estimated that more than 40% of Fortune 500 
companies were  
<http://www.fastcoexist.com/3062774/world-changing-ideas/the-quickest-way-to-stifle-american-entrepreneurship-keep-out-immigrant?utm_content=buffer13657&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
founded by immigrants 
<http://www.fastcoexist.com/3062774/world-changing-ideas/the-quickest-way-to-stifle-american-entrepreneurship-keep-out-immigrant?utm_content=buffer13657&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
 or their children.

Gloria Steinem: 'Fewer people will say we live in a post-racist, post-feminist 
world'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/11/gloria-steinem-feminism-womens-rights-donald-trump>
In Australia, the haters – and their fellow travellers – keep prosecuting a 
tired old debate about whether to dismantle a law that was designed to reveal 
and condemn  
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/freedom-of-speech-more-like-freedom-to-be-a-racist-20161122-gsuu0b.html>
hate speech 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/freedom-of-speech-more-like-freedom-to-be-a-racist-20161122-gsuu0b.html>
. As a lawyer, I bet Deborah would support using the law to sanction against 
hate speech. But as a humanist, I think she would have taken a broader view and 
argued that we must cultivate empathy.

Of course we ought to condemn the most hateful speech. But surely our vision 
and thus our work should be in understanding different races and cultures. We 
need not just litigators but storytellers.

Hate is not only a political strategy, it is a failure of imagination, a lack 
of empathy. We can’t legislate for imagination, we can only do what people have 
always done: tell new stories, build better worlds in the theatre of the mind.

This year is the second year of the prize and the judging panel is again made 
up of three great writers:  
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/meet-tony-ayres-producer-of-some-of-australias-best-tv-think-the-slap-devils-playground-and-nowhere-boys-20150731-gin6be.html>
Tony Ayers 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/meet-tony-ayres-producer-of-some-of-australias-best-tv-think-the-slap-devils-playground-and-nowhere-boys-20150731-gin6be.html>
,  <http://www.alicepung.com/>Alice Pung <http://www.alicepung.com/> and  
<http://christostsiolkas.com.au/>Christos Tsiolkas 
<http://christostsiolkas.com.au/>. The judges are evidence – if you need it – 
that migrant communities give us wonderful stories and strong voices, enriching 
Australia to the benefit of everyone.

The 2016 Deborah Cass Writing Prize will be awarded on 6pm, Tuesday 13 
December at Centre for Contemporary Photography, 404 George Street Fitzroy.
 