
Joe Root’s expected succession of Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> as England Test captain, be 
it in January or further down the line, comes with no guarantees, with the 
team’s assistant coach, Paul Farbrace, believing any talk about his suitability 
involves a touch of “crystal-ball gazing”.

Uncertainty over Cook’s continuation in the role following the 4-0 defeat in 
India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/england-india-cricket-test-series-defeat>
 has given rise to debate as to whether Root, 25, is ready to step up from 
vice‑captain given his status as the team’s best batsman at present.

Captaincy question hangs over Alastair Cook with England stagnating | Ali 
Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/21/alastair-cook-england-captaincy-future>
Root has led his county, Yorkshire, in only three first-class matches with his 
first experience in the role – whenMiddlesex chased down 471 in the fourth 
innings of their championship fixture at Lord’s in April 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/30/middlesex-yorkshire-county-championship-match-report>
 – earning him the affectionate nickname “craptain” among his team-mates.

Nevertheless, Root has been locked in as Cook’s eventual replacement since 
being appointed to his role as Test deputy in one of the first moves after
Andrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss> became the 
director of England cricket in May. Both Cook and the head coach, Trevor 
Bayliss, have talked up his long-term credentials since.

Farbrace, who first worked with Root during a spell in charge of Yorkshire’s 
second team from 2011-12, is more cautious, however, given any change that 
results from Strauss’s and Cook’s review would be a step into the unknown.

He said: “I don’t think that anybody who takes over as captain of England, you 
can ever really know whether they’re ready to do the job or not. Whether he 
will be the right bloke to lead England, until he starts doing it, you never 
quite know.

“It’s like Haseeb Hameed and Keaton Jennings coming into this side in India. 
They’ve never played international cricket before. Until they actually play, 
you never know whether they’re going to be good enough. I think that definitely 
applies to the job of being captain.

“Rooty hasn’t had a great deal of experience. One game he did captain at 
Lord’s, Middlesex chased down 471 – so he took a fair bit of stick from the 
Yorkshire boys for that, I can assure you. But until he actually does the job, 
no one’s going to know. It’s a bit of crystal-ball gazing, isn’t it?”

Farbrace expects Cook to continue through to the Ashes series next winter, 
despite ending the tour of India looking understandably crushed by the result 
and calling for time to consider his options away from the emotions of 
England’s harrowingfinal-day collapse in Chennai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/20/india-v-england-fifth-test-day-five-live>
.

Farbrace said: “We’ve planned, and have been planning, for Cooky to be captain 
going to the Ashes in Australia next winter. Personally, I hope that continues. 
We know he still has the support of the team, and he’s a very popular bloke and 
very popular captain.

“He’s got that decision to make – and as he said before the series started, he 
and Straussy will sit down in the new year and have a conversation about the 
way forward. The most important thing is that Cooky will make the decision 
based on what’s right for England cricket, not what’s right for Alastair Cook.”
 