
Daenerys, the Mother of Dragons from Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, would dislike Me 
Before You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/me-before-you-film-love-disability-thea-sharrock-sam-claflin>
. There’s no bite, no blood and guts. Lots of medications in shiny cupboards in 
a very posh flat. Definitely no sex. Which of course there should be in such a 
film, even if a bit fluffy, with no front bottoms. We get a bit of snogging, 
but Lou – played by Game of Thrones’ Emilia Clarke – doesn’t even undress Will, 
the “hero”. Not even to help him in to his PJs, poor thing. But there is death. 
Will’s end, of his own choosing, supposedly at Dignitas – or at least in a huge 
luxury Swiss chalet nearby, not in the actual grey industrial building.

I’m no fan of a romcom but even I get that killing off the hero is not 
standard fare. But that is the key reason I can’t get on board with this film. 
Many of us can’t. A piece of fairytale romance is what it purports to be, but 
what perhaps is a clever device for writer Jojo Moyes, to me underlines the 
view that you are better off dead than a living, disabled burden on your loved 
ones.

The last week has been quite a rush. Involved with the Not Dead Yet UK 
<http://notdeadyetuk.org/> protest at the premiere of Me Before You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/25/disability-rights-campaigners-protest-at-premiere-of-me-before-you>
, I glued myself to the internet while my tougher comrades braved the chill in 
person, including actor-activist Liz Carr and Jane Campbell. Live tweeting 
plainly showed the cast and Moyes caught by surprise. It quickly went viral, 
with our tweets and hashtags trending high on the Me Before You page.
#MeBeforeYou <https://twitter.com/hashtag/MeBeforeYou?src=hash> became 
#MeBeforeEuthanasia <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23MeBeforeEuthanasia> and 
great sarcastic outpourings attached to#LiveBoldly. 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23LiveBoldly>
Penny Pepper (@PenPep) 
"@e_lisney <https://twitter.com/e_lisney>: Liz Carr ready for #LiveBoldly 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/LiveBoldly?src=hash> #rightsnottragedy 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/rightsnottragedy?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/EBEBeIC3r7 <https://t.co/EBEBeIC3r7>" bbc Clarissa tells it 
true!@NOTDEADYETUK <https://twitter.com/notdeadyetuk>
 <https://twitter.com/PenPep/status/735548869396811778> May 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/PenPep/status/735548869396811778> 
We felt a sense of something big stirring. I got snippets from Liz: Moyes 
saying she’s never heard our views in the four years since the book was 
published.Jane Campbell  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jane-campbell>
explained to the general invitees why disabled people were angry. When we took 
stock the next day we realised our social media reach was significant and 
overwhelmingly positive. My own Twitter sharesalone reached 24,000 
<https://twitter.com/PenPep>.

Fast forward to Tuesday in the preview theatre at Warner Brothers, where I saw 
the film in its entirety. Another world of money and movies, and me, a real 
disabled person, feeling like an alien among mostly white middle-aged men. As I 
left, the woman behind the bar asked me if I enjoyed the film. My emphatic “no” 
seemed to surprise her.

Why their puzzled faces? After all – no offence was meant. Why don’t you get 
our anger? You kill off the hero because he’s disabled and churn out repetitive 
cliches about disabled lives that has me reaching for my specially adapted axe. 
This is just weeks after theInvictus Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/invictus-games> and a few months before the 
Paralympics. Wait – aren’t some of those participants “horribly paralysed”? The 
messages are horribly mixed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fme-before-you-suggests-better-dead-than-disabled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F724f9f4d605ef9180af788af66e2fe1ef4a16710%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20long%20to%20watch%20disabled%20characters%20like%20us.%20Instead%20we%20get%20Me%20Before%20You%20%7C%20Penny%20Pepper&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fme-before-you-suggests-better-dead-than-disabled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20long%20to%20watch%20disabled%20characters%20like%20us.%20Instead%20we%20get%20Me%20Before%20You%20%7C%20Penny%20Pepper&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fme-before-you-suggests-better-dead-than-disabled%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F724f9f4d605ef9180af788af66e2fe1ef4a16710%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 ‘Tyrion Lannister (played by Peter Dinklage) has his fair share of sex, booze 
and outbursts of violence.’ Photograph: 2015 Home Box Office, Inc. All 
Disabled people have seen it all before in terms of film portrayal and sadly I 
don’t have room to go into secondary questions around non-disabled actors 
taking these roles. The plotlines of these narratives are cliches of bravery, 
pity, triumph over tragedy and often death.

Television is not much better. We have a handful of disabled female actors 
leading the field – Liz Carr asClarissa Mullery in Silent Witness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/media-blog/2015/mar/01/silent-witness-clarissa-disabled-portrayal>
,Lisa Hammond as Donna Yates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/aug/30/theatre-disability-crips-in-scripts>
 in EastEnders,Cherylee Houston as Izzy Armstrong 
<http://www.ehlers-danlos.org/about-us/our-patron-cherylee-houston/> in 
Coronation Street. Yet work written by disabled writers presenting new stories 
is rare. Overwhelmingly, we remain the subject of programmes using a wildlife 
study technique such asThe Undateables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-undateables>. We are mostly the 
studied, the talking head, the object of fascination – the freak.

I’ve been writing disabled characters into my work since my teens. Yet the 
more I wrote about disabled people who loved and fucked and birthed and died, 
and all the mess and joy in between, the less my work succeeded.

Theatre must get over disability and help us 'put crips in our scripts' | 
Kaite O'Reilly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/aug/30/theatre-disability-crips-in-scripts>
My disability erotica collection, Desires, made it all the way to the 
researchers on the Richard and Judy book club. This wasn’t what disabled people 
should be doing; it’s not how the non-disabled like them to be, even now.

Still, there is hope: last year I was delighted by an invite to launch the 
Literary Consultancy’s initiative,Quality Writing For All 
<https://literaryconsultancy.co.uk/event/quality-writing-for-all-campaign-launch-featuring-penny-pepper/>
 with my one woman play Lost in Spaces. This campaign aims to increase 
diversity within literature, to give space to those writers left outside the 
mainstream.

Back to Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>. There we have Peter 
Dinklage, a real disabled person, as Tyrion Lannister, “the Imp”. He has his 
fair share of sex, booze and outbursts of violence, and he is there as part of 
GoT’s great storytelling. For disabled people, strangely enough, are human 
beings who find their lives going a certain way, and this gives us a unique 
understanding of the greater human condition. Overwhelmingly, we want to live 
as part of you. So open an accessible door, and let our stories through.

• Penny Pepper’s memoir, First in the World Somewhere 
<https://unbound.co.uk/books/first-in-the-world-somewhere>, will be published 
in 2017
 