
Everybody has seen them, in parks, at sporting events and even filming current 
events. Drones are becoming commonplace and have reached a maturity in their 
control where they can be sold as toys that don’t need an expert to fly them. 
TheEU select committee in the House of Lords 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201415/ldselect/ldeucom/122/12202.htm>
 has recommended caution in the regulation of drones – especially important, it 
suggests, if public confidence is to increase to a point where they are 
accepted as solutions for tasks such asdelivering parcels for Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/02/amazon-trialling-the-use-of-drones-for-parcel-delivery>
, spraying crops or providing security at large events.

Media reports do not help the cause. When a quadcopter lowered a flag during 
an international football match betweenSerbia and Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/15/football-league-premier-league-drone-copycats-civil-aviation-authority>
, the Premier League was prompted to ask for advice on similar incidents. And 
when aDJI Phantom was flown on to the south lawn of the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/26/security-alert-white-house-device-drone-found>
, it caused a lockdown and full investigation. A collection of unexplained 
drone flights over Paris earlier in March also causedalarm. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/04/drone-sightings-paris-seine-concorde-invalides>

Britain could become a leader in the billion-pound drone industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/jan/16/drone-law-uk-amazon-delivery>
As the numbers of vehicles sharply increases, the number of incidents like 
these will, inevitably, rise. The expansion of this technology throws up 
considerable legal implications. Who, for example, will be responsible when an 
incident occurs? Will it be the drone owner, the operator, the pilot or the 
software developer? Lawyers and engineers need to sit together to establish the 
legal ground rules to ensure technology develops at pace with regulation to 
ensure safety and security are never playing catch-up.

The public is right to be cautious. After all, it takes little imagination to 
see that these vehicles can be used for both good and nefarious purposes. A 
drone flying under control from GPS, for example, provides a delivery platform 
for any terrorist organisation, being able to fly to a given point and endanger 
safety. Regulation is clearly necessary, but before we can put effective rules 
in place, we need additional technology that can mitigate these risks, and 
enable clear strategies that can increase confidence and ultimately allow the 
benefits of safe autonomous flying vehicles to be delivered.

The recommendations of the select committee call for users of drones to be 
registered. This should be a basic requirement of future legislation. However, 
a clear distinction needs to be drawn between a simple drone and a toy. This 
could be based on weight: drones over 4kg or a self-built drone over 1kg should 
be registered and require a flying licence that links a pilot to a drone, which 
should then be stored onboard. While regulation will provide a deterrent, it 
does not provide comprehensive protection as many operators are unaware, or are 
willingly ignoring regulation, as the spate of recent arrests for drone 
incursion has shown.

The problem is that the rapid growth and interest in drones has outpaced the 
technology available to support effective regulation. The use of geo-fencing, 
partitioning an area off using GPS co-ordinates as a virtual boundary, is an 
excellent idea, but most off-the-shelf quadcopters like theDJI Phantom 
<http://www.dji.com/product/phantom> or Parrot AR Drone 
<http://ardrone2.parrot.com/> don’t include GPS as standard and can easily be 
modified to remove it. A no fly zone is not compatible with common 
off-the-shelf hobbyists platforms. Future platforms should include GPS as a 
non-removable component.

Geo-fencing restrictions would also have to be dynamic, flexible and managed 
to protect high-profile events such as football games or music festivals from 
drones not flown through licensed agencies. We would need to be able to create 
rapidly changing regions of managed airspace to prevent operation of unknown 
drones.

The development and successful application of this technology rests on 
understanding the behaviour of autonomous systems. Research should be directed 
not just to understand what a vehicle can do but to determine what a vehicle 
will never do, for example not entering a geo-fenced area, even under human 
control. By reliably understanding these boundaries of operation we can impose 
useful ground rules that will keep us safe around these vehicles.

Jonathan Aitken is a research fellow in robotics at the University of Sheffield
 <http://www.sheffield.ac.uk/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 