
In October we learned that over the past year apprenticeship starts topped the 
half a million mark for the first time. That's half a millionÂ opportunities for 
people to progress their careers and benefit from training and qualifications, 
while in paid employment. But impressive as they are, apprenticeships aren't 
just about numbers. The next stage of the apprenticeships renaissance must be 
quality.

All the evidence shows that the training most likely to boost young people's 
pay over their lifetime combines work with training. That's what 
apprenticeships do.

Last year we brought an end to programme-led apprenticeships, meaning all 
apprentices must have a real job, and insisted all apprenticeships must last 
between one and four years, with some flexibility to allow adult apprentices 
with prior skills experience to complete more quickly. This year we are giving 
all apprentices who have not achieved the equivalent of a good GCSE in maths 
and English the opportunity to do so, and with an eye on the future we have 
commissioned entrepreneur Doug Richard to lead an independent review into how 
the apprenticeship programme can deliver the skills employers and learners need.

But we must go further. The government has dedicated itself to raising school 
standards and overhauling the qualifications young people take. I want to see 
this same drive for quality applied to vocational education. High quality in 
any area of life depends on accountability. We need to put the systems in place 
to ensure the best institutions thrive, and the weakest are brought up to the 
same standard. And, where necessary, we must take tough measures to ensure 
improvement.

Excellent teaching plays a vital role and I have been struck by the many 
strong examples of educators and employers working closely together to offer a 
broad learning experience for their apprentices. We must do more to recognise, 
celebrate and spread best teaching practice in apprenticeships and vocational 
education.

And just as we are scrutinising qualifications and assessment in schools to 
ensure they are providing the very best foundation for our young people, we 
also need to ensure that vocational qualifications always represent the skills 
and knowledge employers need and value, and which will best help individuals to 
progress.

Ultimately, we must raise expectations, celebrate the best and not tolerate 
poor standards, coasting performance or mediocrity. The future of Britain's 
prosperity rests on everyone reaching their potential. Our job is to help them 
get there.

Matthew Hancock is the minister for skills

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional> in association with the 
National Apprenticeship Service <http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk>. To get 
more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly 
Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 