
Malcolm Turnbull has used his final bilateral meeting with Barack Obama before 
the US president departs from office to thank him for cooperating with 
Australia on humanitarian issues in the region,including the refugee 
resettlement deal. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/refugees-held-in-australian-offshore-detention-to-be-resettled-in-us>


The two leaders met on the sidelines of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
summit inPeru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru>, and Obama expressed 
confidence during the discussion that Australia’s postwar alliance with the US 
would remain “as robust as ever” despite the election of Donald Trump.

Turnbull later told reporters travelling with him in Peru that Obama wanted 
Trump to succeed, and he wanted key allies of the US to assist with the 
transition.

Malcolm Turnbull: Trump election shows 'jobs and growth' mantra was right
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/malcolm-turnbull-trump-election-jobs-growth-mantra-right>
“He wants America to do well, America to succeed and that’s why he’s reached 
out to the president-elect to offer his support and he’s encouraged all of us, 
he’s encouraged me and other leaders to do exactly the same,” Turnbull said on 
Monday.

The Australian prime minister has not sought to put any public distance 
between his government and Trump since the Republican’s upset victory,welcoming 
a proposed military buildup in the region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/malcolm-turnbull-welcomes-trump-plans-for-military-buildup-in-asia-pacific>
, and blasting Labor for expressinga more hedged view about the Trump 
administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/australia-must-develop-independent-foreign-policy-in-wake-of-trump-win-labor-wong>
.

But Turnbull adjusted his language slightly in Peru, emphasising that 
Australia would prioritise its national interest in dealing with the new 
administration.

“Now we all want to get behind president Trump and do everything we can to 
ensure he is successful. We, of course, will always, as we do that, be 
defending Australia’s interest,” Turnbull said. “We don’t compromise our 
national interest.

“I’m here to represent Australia, Australian jobs and the economic growth that 
we seek to deliver to ensure the future for our Australian children and 
grandchildren as part of this very dynamic Asia-Pacific region.”

In Canberra, the shadow foreign affairs minister, Penny Wong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/penny-wong>, stood her ground in 
arguing Australia needed to pursue an independent foreign policy within the 
alliance framework.

“For Labor, the US alliance has never meant that we reflexively agree with 
every aspect of US policy,” Wong told the Australian Institute of International 
Affairs on Monday.

Turnbull's all the way with Donald J – what could possibly go wrong? | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/malcolm-turnbull-donald-trump-australia-america-relationship>
“Gough Whitlam did not agree with the US on the Vietnam War and Simon Crean 
did not agree with the US on the invasion of Iraq. These Labor positions were 
subject to vicious attacks by conservatives at the time, but history has 
vindicated our positions.

“In the coming period, we need to consider how best to continue to effect 
Australia’s foreign policy and global interests within the framework of our 
alliance with the United States.”

Turnbull in Peru expressed confidence that Australia would be able to manage 
its two key foreign policy relationships – the US andChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> – despite Trump’s clear signal of an 
increased military presence in the region, and his regular campaign threats of 
the trade war with Beijing.

He said world leaders understood they needed to work together to deliver 
harmony and economic growth. “We all need each other to work together. We have 
only got one planet. We’ve only got one Asia-Pacific.”

“I’m confident, as we have done for many years, we’ll maintain a very strong 
and trusted ally in Washington and a very good friend in Beijing,” Turnbull 
said.

Australia had been a vocal public supporter of the Obama-led Trans-Pacific 
Partnership trade pact, but given Trump’s trenchant opposition to the deal, the 
Turnbull governmentlast week signalled it would pursue Chinese-led trade 
agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/australia-signals-support-for-chinese-led-trade-deals-to-replace-tpp>
 in the region.

During a lengthy press conference at the conclusion of the Apec summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/apec-summit>, Obama lamented the loss of 
momentum for American-led trade pacts in the Asia-Pacific.

He did not identify the two Chinese-led trade pacts which now seem set to 
substitute for the TPP, but he referred to “calls for a less ambitious trade 
agreement in the region with lower standards, lower protections for workers, 
lower protections for the environment”.

“That kind of agreement would obviously exclude US workers and businesses and 
access to those markets so, for all those reasons, I believe that TPP is a plus 
for America’s economy, America’s workers, American jobs,” Obama said on Monday.

Turnbull signals Australia won't follow Trump's lead on Paris climate agreement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/10/turnbull-signals-australia-wont-follow-trumps-lead-on-paris-climate-agreement>
He said a withdrawal of American-led economic diplomacy from the region would 
be consequential. “I think not moving forward would undermine our position 
across the region and our ability to shape the rules of global trade in a way 
that reflects our interests and our values.”

Obama continued to argue the world would have to wait and see on Trump. He 
said he could not “be sure of anything” about the new administration.

“People should take a wait-and-see approach in how much his policy proposals 
once in the White House, once he is sworn in, matches up with some of the 
rhetoric of his campaign.

“My simple point is that you can’t assume that the language of campaigning 
matches up with the specifics of governing legislation, regulations and foreign 
policy.

“Once you’re in the Oval Office, once you begin interacting with world 
leaders, once you see the complexities of the issues, that has a way of shaping 
your thinking and, in some cases, modifying your thinking.”

While Turnbull and Obama discussed the regional resettlement agreement 
covering refugees in detention on Nauru and Manus Island, it remains unclear 
whether the agreement will be honoured by Trump once he takes office on 20 
January.

 