
You’ve heard the call – the UK needs more engineers. Our economy needs at 
least twice as many engineering workers, apprentices, technicians and 
professionals – high quality graduate professionals who can lead businesses and 
industry. But we won’t get these by lowering fees for engineering degrees, by 
taking the cap off student numbers or promoting engineering through schools 
outreach.

Eight ways to encourage more students to study engineering
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jan/20/eight-ways-encourage-students-study-engineering>
The key issue facing engineering is none of these. As stated repeatedly over 
the years, and recently by Lord Browne, chairman of theQueen Elizabeth Prize 
for Engineering <http://qeprize.org/>: “People think they know what engineering 
is but the evidence is they don’t – and in the UK the evidence is that we are 
very, very bad at telling them.”

Engineering <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/engineering> needs a 
makeover – one that reveals its excitement and true value to society.

Discounting fees will not work; successive fee hikes attempting to produce a 
differentiated market have failed because lower fees spell second-rate degrees.

No vice-chancellor will accept reduced fee income for one of higher 
education’s most expensive subjects without a guaranteed government refund - 
one that would not be rolled into the block grant and forgotten. The answer is 
to offer scholarships, but applicants need to be convinced that they want to 
study engineering.

Uncapping student numbers will not increase the number of good quality 
engineering students, who will apply anyway. It will simply open the gates 
wider and court mediocrity.
 Schools outreach in engineering has been going on for years, but with no 
significant effect. 
Schools outreach has been going on for years, but with no significant effect. 
The graph showsUK university applicant numbers in recent years 
<http://www.engineeringuk.com/Research/Engineering_UK_Report_2015/> together 
with engineering course applicants (upscaled by 10 for comparison). Both traces 
vary similarly reflecting demographic trends and the effect of changes to fees. 
The numbers are not clearly heading for a timely doubling, particularly since 
universities are fighting a 14% reduction in 18 year-olds numbers over this 
decade.


The graduate engineer challenge can only be met by increasing the proportion 
of all university applicants that choose engineering.

The third trace shows that proportion has varied little from approximately 
3.5% for many years, and the rise since 2007-08 is very slow.


Despite the huge number of school outreach projects over many years 
encouraging more young people into engineering and the vast resources expended, 
there has been no significant effect – a sobering observation.


Last year Ofqual consulted 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140807151639/http://ofqual.gov.uk/documents/completing-gcse-level-reform-june-2014/>
 on a proposal to remove engineering qualifications at GCSE and A-level. Low 
take-up of the subject was a contributory factor, which clearly underlines the 
problem.


Despite this, school outreach initiatives continue, seldom with targets, 
metrics and reviews to establish effectiveness. As Einstein said: “Insanity is 
doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results”.


Some say that “it does no harm”. Yet, in a recent letter 
<http://www.ingenia.org.uk/ingenia/articles.aspx?Index=928> to the Royal 
Academy of Engineering magazine, Dr Graham Bray, Beacon Academy’s Stem 
director, commented on an externally-organised engineering day for 60 year 9 
students noting “the projects were to be built essentially from scrap – bits of 
dowel, paper cups, masking tape, etc. The majority of projects didn’t work, and 
it was frustrating to see the final products. Is this the image that we want 
our students to have of engineers – that they produce stuff from scrap that 
doesn’t actually work?”

It is generally acknowledged that people are influential in determining the 
subject choice of their children going into higher education. If they wanted to 
become a doctor, vet, dentist, lawyer or accountant, parents would have no 
problem recognising the standing and nature of these professions.

What do uni engineering departments need most? People in overalls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/nov/21/university-engineering-departments-overalls-research>
But to most people, an engineer repairs domestic appliances, installs 
broadband and services cars; most people have no interaction in their daily 
lives with professional engineers, and thus cannot give informed advice. Why go 
to university to get a blue collar job?

Further public misunderstanding of engineering is caused by the media which 
confuses science and engineering, often attributing engineering achievement to 
science (the Rosetta mission which landed the Philae module on comet 67P being 
a recent example).


Engineering is frequently presented as part of science, when the converse is 
true – professional engineers make use of science and maths as tools alongside 
finance, problem solving, design, quality, law, management, ethics, risk and 
sustainability.

Add the misunderstanding of engineering’s relationship with technology, the 
overuse of the acronym Stem (now used as shorthand for science), the 
confounding aspects of the Engineering Council’s designations “chartered 
engineer”, “incorporated engineer” or “registered engineer” when we mean 
“professional engineer” (as used worldwide), you see why Lord Browne’s 
statement is so right.

A rebranding of engineering is needed so people understand its approach to 
creativity, design and innovation bringing us our food, drink, energy, 
transport, buildings, communications, IT, clothes, entertainment – indeed all 
aspects of our lives.


We need a sustained marketing campaign to sell engineering to the public 
through the media and product branding; we need to engage those working in the 
media in a better understanding of engineering so they deliver the correct 
messages.

The engineering profession must clarify its organisation and the terms it 
uses; and academia must reformulate engineering education away from whathas 
been described 
<http://bigbeacon.org/2013/06/twitter-chat-652012-math-science-death-march/> as 
the “mind-numbing math-science death march that casts aside thousands of 
capable young people who might otherwise have made effective engineers”.

Government must fully support such a rebranding campaign if it is not going to 
be too late in sustaining and growing the estimated engineering sector 27.1% 
contribution to GDP.


A coordinated task force of can-do individuals must be identified to take it 
forward. Where from? Well, with 36 professional engineering institutions and 
many other bodies including The Royal Academy of Engineering, EngineeringUK, 
Womens’ Engineering Society, Engineering Council, Engineering Professors’ 
Council and so on, the pool is huge.

Professor Kel Fidler is former chairman of the Engineering Council and former 
vice-chancellor of Northumbria University.

Join the higher education network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 