
We’ve all done it: the 3am night that we try to hide from the boss the next 
day. But imagine if they already knew of your scant hours of sleep by logging 
onto an online dashboard of your personal biometric information. Your energy 
levels are rated low; your performance today will be sub-optimal.


As the trend for wearables extends into the workplace and employers look to 
collect staff data, could this scenario become a reality?


Wearable technology – smart devices worn on the body to collate real-time 
health information – allows us to monitor our heart rate, sleep patterns and 
mood indicators, as well as exercise regimes and eating habits.Smart jewellery 
<http://www.wareable.com/smart-jewellery/semi-precious-the-best-smart-jewelry-582>
,clothing 
<https://www.wearable-technologies.com/2015/03/a-look-at-smartclothing-for-2015/>
 and evenchips under the skin <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-31042477> 
all exist but the majority of wearables arewrist-based 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2015/03/31/wearables_market_action_is_all_in_the_wrist_says_marketscryer_idc/>
.

The Apple Watch may have grabbed the headlines but most wearables are made by 
specialist players <http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25872215> 
such as Fitbit, Jawbone, Garmin, Misfit and Pebble. The sector is growing 
rapidly. Apredicted 72.1m wearable 
<https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25696715> devices will be 
shipped in 2015 (up from 26.4m in 2014). A significant amount of that growth is 
coming from corporate health and wellbeing schemes.

Companies urge take-up

Bupa has been working with a number of major UK employers, including Accenture,
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> and Carillion, to integrate 
wearables and health apps into their employee health and wellbeing programmes.

“Tesco wanted to set individual or corporate challenges,” says Patrick Watt, 
Bupa’s corporate director. This includes measuring steps taken each day. “The 
CEO can compete against somebody pushing trollies around a Swindon car park,” 
says Watt.

Bupa’s software collates information and converts it into “wellness points”, 
employees are then be ranked in league tables and kept engaged via tips and 
reminders.

Wellness points are not just gained for pedometer-style challenges, but also 
for mindfulness, nutrition and relaxation. Employees can set goals such as 
calories consumed in the staff canteen or even time taken to read stories to 
their children at night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fwearables-companies-smart-devices-health-wellbeing-privacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd88f7430d508e93b5da14d056d5808fcdcf6c5f5%2F0_2497_7843_4704%2F7843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wearables%20could%20make%20it%20impossible%20to%20keep%20your%20hangover%20secret%20at%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fwearables-companies-smart-devices-health-wellbeing-privacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wearables%20could%20make%20it%20impossible%20to%20keep%20your%20hangover%20secret%20at%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fwearables-companies-smart-devices-health-wellbeing-privacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd88f7430d508e93b5da14d056d5808fcdcf6c5f5%2F0_2497_7843_4704%2F7843.jpg>
 Jawbone UP3, a multi-sensor activity tracker that provides in-depth 
information about your health and fitness. Photograph: PR image 
In the US, where employers pay for healthcare, the use of wearables is more 
advanced. Health insurer Cigna offers wearables such as FitBit and Jawbone to 
employers as part of its wellbeing package. “Employer-paid health plans are 
increasingly offering cash incentives such as premium reductions or funds … to 
employees who improve their health,” says Joe Mondy, a Cigna spokesperson. 
“Some employers are discounting their employee’s premiums by $500 for reducing 
their body mass index or total cholesterol.”


BP’s US operations gave 14,000 employees a free Fitbit Zip in 2013, on the 
proviso that they wouldtrack their steps over the year 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/parmyolson/2014/04/17/the-quantified-other-nest-and-fitbit-chase-a-lucrative-side-business/>
. Those reaching over one million steps gained points towards a lower health 
insurance premium.

However, some question the use of such personal data as there are obvious 
privacy concerns. Bupa is quick to stress that its Boost software works on the 
basis that “all user data is anonymised” and employees can opt in or out of the 
information they are willing to share. But if willing to share all they can 
appear by name, with their wellbeing points ranked alongside other colleagues, 
including their boss. Those performing poorly, or not at all, would surely be 
conspicuous.


“The landscape has changed – if it is used to track activity, as some sort of 
GPS to see whether workers are at their posts, then you destroy the trust and 
relationship you have with an employer,” says Watt.


This effectively describes how Tesco uses smart armbands 
<https://hbr.org/2013/09/wearables-in-the-workplace> to monitor warehouse 
operatives, allotting tasks, verifying when an order is fulfilled and “nudging” 
a worker whose order is running short or late. This has led tocomplaints of 
surveillance 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/tesco-accused-of-using-electronic-armbands-to-monitor-its-staff-8493952.html>
, which Tesco has denied.

Who benefits?

Aside from privacy issues, there is also the question of efficacy. Chris 
Evansof Buck Consultants at Xerox uses both a Jawbone and a Fitbit but is less 
convinced of their worth as a corporate wellbeing tool.

“Our view is there is a broader base of more accessible wellbeing 
initiatives,” says Evans. “There is already a huge amount of data available to 
most employers if they care to look for it … rather than have even more data 
coming out of our ears and be even more lost in this quagmire of information.”

Buck has worked with a large financial firm that integrated wearables into its 
wellbeing programme, but more due to a need to “constantly reinvent the 
programme to keep people interested” rather than as a significant step-change, 
says Evans.

Dr Chris Tomkins, who leads AXA PPP’s proactive health services, also argues 
that “on a per unit basis [wearables] are quite expensive for corporate 
wellbeing plans. You can deliver a lot more value across the whole spectrum of 
psychology, nutrition, fitness, for less than the cost of a wearable device.” 
Wearables, he says, are “somewhat style over substance … Slapping on a wearable 
device in itself is not going to change your behaviour.”

He also believes that the top three health risks – mental health, obesity and 
blood pressure – are the same in almost any workplace. Real-time data, 
therefore, is often not necessary.

The technology, however, is quickly advancing beyond simple metrics such as 
physical activity.Phone software that detects mood and anxiety 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2014/02/04/tech/innovation/this-new-tech-can-detect-your-mood/>
 is already a reality. “There areprofessional rugby teams  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-24836161>that monitor their players and can 
almost predict an injury because of changes in their biometrics, or predict 
illness because their resting heart rate has gone up,” says Evans.


You could see why other high-risk workplaces, such as financial trading, could 
be interested. Watt is convinced that “technology is a real game-changer and 
wearables will quickly improve. Two years ago you had pedometers. Now you have 
the Apple Watch …Wearable technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wearable-technology> makes the tracking 
of your activity, your diet, your sleep, your mood, so much easier.”


The debate to come will be whether that data is personal or part of what your 
employer pays you for.
 