
Some of the biggest firms running the government's welfare-to-work scheme have 
been penalised for poor performance after it was revealed almost eight out of 
10 unemployed people on the programme for two years had failed to get a proper 
job.

While ministers argued that the Â£3bn Work Programme (WP) had seen rising 
numbers of jobless people finding work, the Department for Work & Pensions said 
several firms would see a cut in the "number of referrals" from job centres 
because of "low performance".

A4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e>, one of the biggest private-sector 
partners for the Work Programme, will get 5% fewer jobseekers to place into 
work in the east Midlands, South Yorkshire and Merseyside. In the south and 
east of the country, Avanta and Seetec will be similarly penalised.

In effect, the government is cutting these firms' potential profits as the 
companies are paid for each unemployed person they take on, then for getting 
them into work and finally for keeping them in work.

Ministers warned that ultimately they could be stripped of these lucrative 
contracts if they continued to underperform. Instead, jobseekers will be sent 
to top-performing firms, such as Ingeus, (founded by the wife of the former 
Australian prime minister Kevin Rudd) as a reward. Another winner was G4S, the 
security services company.

Mark Hoban, employment minister, said: "Work Programme providers have improved 
significantly, but we have always been clear that, while many are performing 
well, others are lagging behind. That is why, in order to drive up performance, 
help as many people into work as possible, and give the best value to the 
taxpayer, from August this year we began referring more claimants to the 
better-performing providers."

Ministers accept the Work Programme has had "teething issues" but now claim it 
is rapidly improving. Hoban noted that 168,000 people who had been unemployed 
for at least a year had now been in jobs for at least six months. This is 27% 
more than in late June, when there were 132,000 new jobs.

However, Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> said figures 
showed this success was dwarfed by the million people referred to the Work 
Programme who had not found work.

Liam Byrne, shadow work and pensions secretary, said: "The Work Programme is 
now on its knees. It's failed over a million people and is so bad that even 
after two years' help eight out of 10 don't get steady jobs." said Liam Bryne, 
the shadow work and pensions secretary.

Bryne said the Work Programme was another example of ministerial bungling in 
the key area of social security. "Universal Credit is in crisis, Atos [which 
assesses health-related benefits] is out of control and now the Work Programme 
doesn't work. Iain Duncan Smith must be the worst welfare secretary in living 
memory: is there anything left for him to bungle?"

The Department for Work & Pensions declined to comment on Labour's claim.

One key area of concern is that the programme is failing to help sick and 
disabled people to get jobs. According to the data released today, more than 
93% of disabled people on the scheme are failing to find long-term work. Just 
6.8% of those referred to the programme in the latest three months have found 
long-term work.

The industry says there should be more money made available to train those who 
have been unable to work because of illness or addiction in new skills.

Kirsty McHugh, chief executive of the Employment Related Services Association, 
which represents the industry, said this was a "major concern".

"We believe far more needs to be done to join up health and skills budgets 
with the Work Programme to help those on ESA [employment and support allowance, 
which has replaced incapacity benefit] into work. Many of this group have 
significant needs that cannot be met by the Work Programme alone," she said.
 