
All that hard work last season was for nothing. So were all those draining 
qualifying games this summer. West Ham United’s attempt to reach the group 
stage of theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> ended in familiar 
frustration, because of both the manner of the defeat and the identity of their 
conquerors.

Astra Giurgiu were too wily for them for the second successive year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/06/west-ham-europa-league-astra-giurgiu-report>
, becoming the first visiting side to win at the London Stadium, but the way 
West Ham squandered their slender advantage was largely down to their own 
making. Slaven Bilic’s side conceded a sloppy goal, let themselves down with 
some generous finishing and were too naive in the defining moments.

West Ham agree €28m (£24m) fee with Juventus for Simone Zaza
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/west-ham-juventus-simone-zaza-fee>
On a night when West Ham’s weaknesses in attack were encapsulated by Bilic 
resorting to sending James Collins up front in those desperate dying stages, 
the only consolation is that a£24m fee has been agreed with Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/west-ham-juventus-simone-zaza-fee>
 for Simone Zaza. How they could have done with the Italy forward here.

Bilic did not shed any light on that deal. He was too frustrated with what he 
had witnessed on the pitch. “I didn’t hide it,” West Ham’s manager said.

“I said this is one of the most important games for us this year. This is like 
a final that you have to win to go through. The disappointment is massive. We 
created a few opportunities that we should have scored.”

The nagging concern for West Ham was the knowledge they should have left 
Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/18/astra-giurgiu-west-ham-united-europea-league-playoff-match-report>
 in a vastly superior position last week, only for Astra to equalise moments 
after a glaring miss from Michail Antonio. Although Astra have made a slow 
start to their season, winning one of their first five league matches, the 
Romanian champions produced a classic European away performance, snatching a 
2-1 aggregate victory thanks to Filipe Teixeira’s goal and some spectacular 
goalkeeping from Silviu Lung.

To put Astra’s achievement into context, they lost 5-1 to CFR Cluj last Sunday 
and have a manager, Marius Sumudica, who cannot attend his team’s domestic 
matches after being banned by the Romanian Federation for betting on games. 
“This is one of the best days in my life, on pretty much the same level as when 
my children were born,” a jubilant Sumudica said. “Because I knew that they 
were mine. Obviously I’m kidding.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwest-ham-astra-giurgiu-europa-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93232534b87bd6c063539acc39fbd5210fd56028%2F0_0_2724_1634%2F2724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Ham%20Europa%20dream%20ends%20after%20Teixeira%20strike%20for%20Astra%20Giurgiu&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwest-ham-astra-giurgiu-europa-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Ham%20Europa%20dream%20ends%20after%20Teixeira%20strike%20for%20Astra%20Giurgiu&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwest-ham-astra-giurgiu-europa-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93232534b87bd6c063539acc39fbd5210fd56028%2F0_0_2724_1634%2F2724.jpg>
 Astra Giurgiu’s goalkeeper Silviu Lung thwarted West Ham with a number of 
outstanding saves. Photograph: John Sibley/Reuters 
Sumudica, who revealed Astra have a monthly wage bill of €130,000 (£111,000), 
argued West Ham had a better team last year and it was true that Bilic’s task 
was complicated by the absence of eight injured players and Arthur Masuaku’s 
ineligibility. The relentless injuries have hurt most in the attacking areas 
and this was a game too soon for Manuel Lanzini and Dimitri Payet, both of whom 
could return at Manchester City on Sunday.

For all that West Ham lack a creative spark without Payet, however, they did 
make chances. The problem was taking them. This was a difficult evening for 
Jonathan Calleri, the Argentinian forward who spurned two glorious 
opportunities, and West Ham found Lung in defiant form.

Yet, frantically as West Ham searched for that elusive goal, what really 
frustrated Bilic was that they played as individuals. He said that he did not 
see enough desire from his team.

Teixeira’s winner was utterly avoidable, stemming from a West Ham attack that 
broke down when Sam Byram put Reece Burke into difficulties with a poor pass 
from right to left on the stroke of half-time.

Burke’s heavy headed touch invited a tackle and West Ham were exposed when the 
young left-back sold himself, leaving his fellow defenders outnumbered as Astra 
countered. With both full-backs out of position Daniel Niculae fed Teixeira, 
the Portuguese midfielder formerly of West Bromwich Albion, who gave Astra 
control of the tie for the first time.

West Ham confirm signing of Edimilson Fernandes from FC Sion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/west-ham-confirm-signing-of-edimilson-fernandes-from-fc-sion>
West Ham, who presented Edimilson Fernandes on the pitch before kick-off after 
completing the £5.5m signing of the Swiss midfielder from FC Sion, were crying 
out for inspiration. But when Bilic turned to his bench during the interval, he 
could bring on only Enner Valencia, whose confidence disappeared long ago.

At least Ashley Fletcher, a summer signing from Manchester United, showed no 
fear after replacing Calleri. The young forward scared Astra with his direct 
running, appealing for a penalty after a risky tackle from Teixeira; and a 
superb save from Lung denied him his first goal in claret and blue.

However, this was the first real test of West Ham’s character in their new 
stadium. It was also the first time they heard boos at the final whistle.
 