
In February, Roy Greenslade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/feb/17/digital-media-dailytelegraph>
 reported that US conservative media outfitBreitbart News Networ 
<http://www.breitbart.com/>k was expanding into the British media scene with 
the establishment of a London office. Heading up Breitbart's new UK operations 
are executive editor James Delingpole and managing editor Raheem Kassam.

The expansion – which Delingpole himself effectively concedes 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/columnists/james-delingpole/9146471/why-are-journalists-so-scared-of-giving-people-what-they-want/>
 is about "pandering to readers' prejudices" to maximise profits – reveals the 
worrying extent to which the forces behind climate denial and racism are one 
and the same: "American conservativism" of the "right-wing libertarianist" kind.

Anti-science

Given Delingpole's track record 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2013/09/26/climate_change_denial_james_delingpole_tells_it_like_it_isn_t.html>
 offundamentalist opposition to climate science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/georgemonbiot/2010/jan/27/james-delingpole-climate-change-denial>
 at the Telegraph, it is hardly surprising that Breitbart UK's environmental 
reporting standards sink to an unprecedented low.

In one story this month, for instance, Delingpole lauded a new US poll which 
found that: "More Americans believe in God than in man-made global warming 
<http://www.breitbart.com/Breitbart-London/2014/04/22/Tragic-Earth-Day-news-for-green-propagandists-more-Americans-believe-in-God-than-man-made-global-warming>
." Only thirty-three per cent of respondents, the poll showed, are confident 
that average global temperatures are rising mostly due to human-caused 
greenhouse gasses.

Delingpole mockingly dismissed the explanation of Nobel Prize winning 
biochemist, Prof Robert Leftkowitz: that public opinion is being misled by "the 
force of concerted campaigns to discredit scientific fact" - largely funded by 
the fossil fuel industry, as documented in arecent extensive study in Climatic 
Change <http://phys.org/news/2013-12-koch-brothers-reveals-funders-climate.html>
.

Rather, said Delingpole: 

"Perhaps he should venture out of the biochemistry lab a bit more often. If he 
did so, he would realise that the 67 per cent who had doubts about greenhouse 
gas theory are almost certainly correct."

Delingpole's scientific evidence for this is the alleged inability of broadly 
accurate if conservative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/earth-insight/2013/sep/18/climate-change-double-impact-study>
 (rather than alarmist)computer models 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/apr/03/earth-has-fever-global-warming>
 to account for "real world data" – data which he completely fails to 
understand, hence his endorsement of thefictional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/jan/30/global-warming-wishful-thinking>
 "pause in global warming since 1997."

Anti-activism

Similarly, another story this month by Breitbart 'political correspondent', 
Andre Walker – a former Tory political aide who resigned after beingcaught 
plotting to smear a deputy council leader 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/conservative/7414127/Tory-aide-Andre-Walker-caught-plotting-smear-campaign-in-YouTube-clip.html>
 –lent unwarranted credence 
<http://www.breitbart.com/Breitbart-London/2014/04/08/Teachers-Acting-Illegally-Over-Climate-Change>
 to a new report by the anti-climate policy advocacy group, the Global Warming 
Policy Foundation (GWPF).

One of GWPF's funders is Tory Party donor Michael Hintze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/mar/27/tory-donor-climate-sceptic-thinktank>
, head of $5bn hedge-fund CQS which operates in theoil finance industry 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/quote/RIG:LN>, among other areas. The report claimed 
that "environmentalism" had come to "permeate school curricula across the UK," 
resulting in children being "brainwashed" by climate change activism.

Walker's story on the report quoted a spokesman for British education minister 
Michael Gove, saying that teachers who do not offer a "balanced" view on 
climate change issues are breaking the law. "There has been concern for a 
number of years about teachers using the classroom to preach radical ideas," 
commented Walker, before throwing in a bone for his former party: "The Thatcher 
government introduced the National Curriculum in 1988 because some schools 
spent so much time on 'trendy' causes that they had little time left for the 
basics."

Anti-everyone

While attacking environmental science and activism, Breitbart UK 
simultaneously revels in being an unadulterated mouthpiece for right-wing 
ideology without even a semblance of editorial objectivity. Literally dozens of 
'news' articles over the last month, many by editor Raheem Kassam, offergushing 
praise <http://www.breitbart.com/Breitbart-London/2014/04/22/What-is-UKIP> for 
theanti-environmentalist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2013/mar/04/ukip-energy-climate-policies>
 UK Independence Party (Ukip) - which as far right expertDr Matthew Goodwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/mar/12/ukip-far-right-bnp> of 
the University of Nottingham explains, has "considerable overlaps with the 
extreme right."

"Far from being 'xenophobic' or 'racist'," Kassam writes instead, "Ukip's 
objections to mass immigration into Britain" are merely a reaction to the Blair 
government's policy of "'open borders' immigration from Europe." He whines that 
Ukip is "often unfairly lumped" with the British National Party (BNP) and the 
English Defence League (EDL).

Compare Kassam's unbridled enthusiasm for Ukip with the sober assessment of 
Dan Hodges in The Telegraph 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/danhodges/100261889/ukip-are-now-a-racist-party/>
, who explains how his views on the party have changed as the party's racism 
has become increasingly obvious:

"Over the past year Ukip has gone beyond raising general concerns about 
immigration to directly targeting and stigmatising individual national groups. 
Poles, Romanians, Bulgarians and Albanians are amongst the favourite targets. 
And, as Nigel Farage said at the weekend, he believes that's fine because they 
represent national, not racial stereotypes. But of course it isn't fine… Ukip 
is now an overtly racist and extremist party."

Indeed, in a damning overview in yesterday's Spectator, Nick Cohen decisively 
highlights thesystematic pattern of overt xenophobia 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/nick-cohen/2014/04/are-you-fit-to-be-british-take-the-ukip-test/>
 on the part of Ukip candidates and representatives, demolishing the myth of 
the party's love of Britain.

Kill 'em all

Breitbart's hysterically partisan support for Ukip is no innocuous error of 
judgement. On 2nd April,Breitbart columnist Patrick Dollard 
<http://www.breitbart.com/Columnists/Pat-Dollard> tweeted this 
<https://twitter.com/PatDollard/status/451488153468010496> in response to the 
Fort Hood shooting last month 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/04/02/fort-hood-shooting/7225399/>
 by an Iraq War veteran – the same Texas base where former US Army psychiatrist 
Nidal Malik Hasan killed 13 people in 2009:

"If there is even one more act of Muslim terrorism, it is then time for 
Americans to start slaughtering Muslims in the street, all of them."

Patrick Dollard (@PatDollard) 
If there is even one more act of Muslim terrorism, it is then time for 
Americans to start slaughtering Muslims in the streets, all of them.
 <https://twitter.com/PatDollard/statuses/451488153468010496> April 2, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/PatDollard/statuses/451488153468010496> 
Despite being widely reported and condemned 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/04/02/conservative_filmmaker_pat_dollard_its_time_for_americans_to_start_slaughtering_muslims_in_the_streets/>
, to date Dollard has not deleted or apologised for this statement, and 
Breitbart.com continues to list him as a columnist.

Legitimising far right extremism

The problem is that the Breitbart phenomenon represents just one strand of an 
increasingly entrenched web of neoconservative influence that is working hard 
to legitimise far right extremism.

Breitbart UK's managing editor, Raheem Kassam, is an Associate Fellow at the 
leading London neocon think-tank, theHenry Jackson Society 
<http://henryjacksonsociety.org/people/professional-staff/research-staff-and-associates/contact-raheem/>
 (HJS), where he was marketing and communications director from 2010 to 2013. 
The Henry Jackson Society was criticised in 2012 byfounding HJS member and 
former director Dr Marko Attila Hoare 
<http://rightweb.irc-online.org/profile/Henry_Jackson_Society#sthash.NC0RqyyU.dpuf>
, a historian at Kingston University, who complained that the Society:

"… has become an abrasively right-wing forum with an anti-Muslim tinge, 
churning out polemical and superficial pieces by aspiring journalists and 
pundits that pander to a narrow readership of extreme Europhobic British 
Tories, hardline US Republicans and Israeli Likudniks."

While running pro-Ukip spin in the name of journalism, Kassam is also 
long-time director of 'Student Rights,' which describes itself as an 
"independent" anti-extremism "campus monitoring group," despite actually being 
a HJS-funded project sharing the same office.

Student Rights has come under fire recently from motions passed by multiple 
Student Unions 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/hilary-aked/student-rights-campaign_b_4452823.html>
 at London universities for "disproportionately and unfairly targeting Muslim 
students, contributing to their marginalisation and ostracisation, damaging 
campus cohesion and feeding into a growing trend of Islamophobic discourse in 
wider society." The motions note that:

"Student Rights' work and reporting has been used by far-right groups to 
target a Muslim-student event which led to reported threats of violence and the 
event subsequently having to be cancelled by the university."

While Student Rights' directors deny this 
<http://www.studentrights.org.uk/article/2161/huffington_post_uk_setting_the_record_straight_on_student_rights>
 – pointing to some recent work on far right extremism - according to the
Institute for Race Relations 
<http://www.irr.org.uk/news/far-right-targets-islamic-events/> (IRR) "the 
majority of its work has been on 'Islamic extremist' events" and "its 
counter-extremism agenda shares some aspects of the far Right's framework about 
Islam and the Left." The group – which does not actually represent any students 
– has according to IRR opposed student activist "events in support of 
Palestinian causes; events in solidarity with Guantanamo detainee Shaker Aamer 
(labeled an Al Qaeda operative); and Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions campaign 
meetings."

The HJS project's far right sympathies go back to its founding in 2009. London 
Student 
<http://content.yudu.com/Library/A1nkge/LondonStudentissue10/resources/index.htm>
, the newspaper of the University of London Union, reports that the same year, 
Student Rights criticised the London School of Economics Student Union for 
passing a 'no platform' policy on fascist groups, including the British 
National Party (BNP). A Student Rights editorial characterised this policy as 
"another example" of unions "limiting free speech on campus":

"The BNP is a legitimate political party… Student Rights draws the line at 
violence and hate-speech, but this doesn't tend to be the topic for most BNP 
members."

That editorial is no longer available on the website.

The bizarre Breitbart marriage between climate-denying Delingpole and 
extremism-obsessed Kassam is perhaps not all that bizarre. It represents the 
disturbing logic of how Anglo-American neoconservative ideology is attempting 
to influence public and politics by harnessing anti-science discourse and 
rehabilitating the extreme right.

Both these activities happen to support two intertwined goals: empowering 
Anglo-American control of Middle East fossil fuels, and criminalising peaceful 
activism that could undermine this control.

Though the neocons like to pretend they're fighting for freedom and liberty, 
it's obvious they stand far apart from these basic democratic values.

Dr Nafeez Ahmed <http://www.nafeezahmed.com/> is executive director of the 
Institute for Policy Research & Development <http://www.iprd.org.uk/> and 
author ofA User's Guide to the Crisis of Civilisation: And How to Save It 
<http://www.crisisofcivilization.com/> among other books. Follow him on Twitter 
@nafeezahmed <https://twitter.com/NafeezAhmed>
 