
Listen to BBC Sound Of 2016 winner Jack Garratt and what do you hear? Earnest 
lyrics about hopelessly profound love? Aye. Plaintive stabs of electro and 
reverbed guitars? Yip. The voice of a 24-year-old raised in charming 
Buckinghamshire village Little Chalfont? Erm, not exactly. Garratt sounds as if 
he’s been busking in New Orleans for 40 years, existing on a diet of bourbon 
and filterless fags. And so do James Bay, Hozier, Tom Odell and George Ezra. In 
fact, besides a smattering of catarrh-loosening growls, they’re all almost 
indistinguishable. Setting himself apart must be the reasonJames Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/james-bay> wears that desperately appalling 
hat. Why else would he?

Vocal trends in pop ebb and flow. Remember when, in the wake of Arctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys>, any lad in leather who’d 
ever stood in a chip-shop queue – Reverends, Pigeon Detectives, Enemies – 
thought he could distil the state of the nation into three, flat-vowelled 
minutes? Or when, nine years ago, British singers adopted the fey, 
estuary-accented semi-rapping of Lily Allen, Kate Nash and Jamie T? This 
tennis-ball-lodged-in-the-throat blues is just the latest fad.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH6bjwDFk8mo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH6bjwDFk8mo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH6bjwDFk8mo&media=>
But at least Allen and co tried to insert some colloquial character into their 
voices, albeit often with a crowbar. Bay, however, is from Hitchin; Ezra, 18 
miles away in Hertford; Ben Howard hails from Totnes, not Tennessee.

Much of this enthusiasm for blues-soul affectation can be traced back to Paolo 
Nutini <https://www.theguardian.com/music/paolo-nutini>, whose 
Paisley-by-Kentucky warble made his 2006 debut album go double-platinum. Then 
came James Morrison, Passenger, Howard and Jamie N Commons, who presumably 
quickly figured out that a bit of snarl can give even the clammiest ballad a 
bit of pizazz and disguise the sexless mundanity of another lonely, 
middle-class white boy with a guitar. Ask Ed Sheeran: everyone else has upped 
their husk levels, hoping to mirror his stadium-filling achievements.

“As soon as one person gets popular, people follow,” says singer-songwriter 
Fiona Bevan, who worked with Sheeran early on in his career. “Everybody is 
basically being a magpie.” Could producers be coaxing the faux-’Merican croon 
from some of these young acts? “It’s the music industry,” she says. “Of course 
there’s cynicism, and people chasing money. Some kids who get signed don’t know 
who they are yet. And, yes, when you put those people in a studio, they can get 
swayed. Though if an artist has been swayed by a producer or a studio, they’re 
not a strong artist.”

Garratt’s blues warble and bland everyman backstory – failed a Junior 
Eurovision heat, decided to make music with “integrity” instead – may not 
indicate the strongest artist either, but here’s hoping he represents the tail 
end of this tiresome trend. But we can change things. Sleaford Mods have had a 
good year: nip out and buy a few more of their albums and 2017 could be full of 
fellas with Nottingham accents singing about the smell of piss instead.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVslvM30EWI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVslvM30EWI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVslvM30EWI&media=>
Fiona Bevan’s album, Talk To Strangers, is out now <http://fionabevan.co.uk/>
 