
Three years at university is a "waste of time" 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/the-apprentice/8480671/Lord-Sugar-University-is-a-waste-of-time-Apprentice-interview.html>
 according to Lord Sugar."I would have already made £200,000 by then," 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/the-apprentice/8480671/Lord-Sugar-University-is-a-waste-of-time-Apprentice-interview.html>
 he boasted a couple of years ago.

Whether you agree with Lord Sugar or not, there are certainly many 
alternatives to spending three years in higher education. And while few of us 
may share his thirst for money (and know-how to make it), there are plenty of 
ways of pursuing your career goals without going to university.

The rise in tuition fees has discouraged some prospective students in England: 
last year saw a10% drop in university applications 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-18282831>. Although the figure has 
recovered, there are other reasons why you might prefer to avoid the route. 
Perhaps you're fed up of reading books and sitting exams or maybe you just 
can't wait to get stuck into the real world of work. You may have missed your 
expected grades, and with education chiefs warning earlier this month that 
A-level students are in danger of missing out on a university place, 
alternative options are firmly in the spotlight.

You can do many careers without doing a degree – even traditional professions 
such aslaw 
<http://www.cilex.org.uk/careers/careers_home/graduates/non-law_graduates/becoming_a_cilex_lawyer.aspx>
 andaccountancy <http://www.aat.org.uk/qualifications>. If you've got an idea 
for a business venture, charities such asThe Prince's Trust Enterprise Programme
 <http://www.princes-trust.org.uk/need_help/enterprise_programme.aspx> and 
Business Angels <http://www.ukbusinessangelsassociation.org.uk/>, offer grants 
and advice to start-ups.

Apprenticeships are a great way of getting on the ladder at major companies 
and organisations such asTransport for London <http://www.tfl.gov.uk/>, 
National Grid <http://www.nationalgrid.com/uk>, British Airways 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/globalgateway.jsp/global/public/en_>, 
Virgin Media <http://www.virginmedia.com/> and Tesco <http://www.tesco.com/>. 
If you've always wanted to join thepolice <http://www.policecouldyou.co.uk/> or 
fire service <http://www.fireservice.co.uk/recruitment/howtojoin>, you don't 
necessarily need a degree, and learning a trade, such as plumbing or becoming 
an electrician, can give you a steady career footing from an early age.

So if you want to follow in the footsteps of Jamie Oliver, Richard Branson or 
Ben Affleck (none of whom went to university) or even Lord Sugar, join in our 
live chat for tips and advice on mapping your route to your dream job without a 
degree.

Our panel of experts will be on hand to discuss any questions you have and the 
options available onWednesday between 1pm and 3pm.

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever: you can create a free Guardian account, or log in using your 
Twitter or Facebook profiles and comment. Alternatively, you can tweet us
@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions 
toKate Hodge 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&to=kate.hodge@theguardian.com> 
who can post them on the Q&A.

Mark Morris is careers guidance practitioner for the Chartered Institute of 
Legal Executives (CILEx) <http://www.cilex.org.uk/>, which offers a flexible 
and affordable non-university route to becoming a paralegal or a qualified 
lawyer.

Montanna Stafford is product manager at the Association of Accounting 
Technicians (AAT) <http://www.aat.org.uk/>. She has over five years' experience 
at the AAT working with employers, young people and training providers to 
deliver vocational accounting and finance qualifications.

Ravi Soni is a careers adviser for the National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>. His role 
includes helping people with interview techniques and interview preparation.

Clare Whitmell is a Guardian contributor and a qualified business 
communication trainer. She specialises in writing and presentation skills 
coaching and also blogs about CV writing and job hunting tips on
JobMarketSuccess.com <http://www.jobmarketsuccess.com/>.

Laura McFarlane is partnerships manager at IdeasTap <http://www.ideastap.com/>
, an arts charity for young, creative people at the start of their careers.

Hattie Wrixon co-founded Uni's Not For Me <http://www.unisnotforme.com/> when 
she was 17-years-old. After studying three AS levels she completed a one year 
business training course and undertook a short apprenticeship in PR and 
marketing. She now runsUni's Not For Me <http://www.unisnotforme.com/> full 
time.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 