
In a world where technology use among children and young people (and the rest 
of us) is high and continuing to rise, children’s services’ use of tech to 
engage with young people has barely begun to catch up.

Services are constrained by grit in their wheels: poor hardware, risk averse 
security considerations and cultures of social work practice that find it hard 
to embrace new digital products. Social workers are under pressure to deliver 
vital services that keep children safe, and under the strain it’s not 
surprising if they resort to familiar and trusted ways of working.

For the last three years I’ve been implementing Mind Of My Own (Momo 
<http://www.mindofmyown.org.uk/>) – an app that helps young people communicate 
with their social care team – into children’s services. In this time, I’ve seen 
plenty of success and failure across many tech products. Here’s what I’ve seen 
grease the wheels of change.

Your software has got to be simple for everyone to use

By that I mean bulletproof simple and accessible. Social workers have so many 
things to think about they don’t want to have to think about how to use new 
things. Commercial software needs to be accessible – otherwise people won’t use 
it. In the social care world, exactly the same standards should apply. If your 
product isn’t accessible it’s a non-starter.

WhatsApp is a good example of a smooth and accessible product. It works on 
multiple mobile devices, interfaces easily with other messaging products and 
includesend-to-end encryption <https://www.whatsapp.com/faq/en/general/28030015>
, meaning it’s far more secure and private than texting, a Skype call or using 
Facebook Messenger.

How interviewing successful care leavers taught young people to dream big
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/oct/03/interviewing-successful-care-leavers-taught-young-people-to-dream-big>
Build confidence and competence

Social workers are trained and experienced in working with young people. 
However, the social work curriculum doesn’t yet include the creative use of 
technology. This doesn’t make sense when you consider that frontline 
professionals spend 70% of their working week on a computer.

Don’t expect social workers to be naturally confident using tech at work 
because most won’t be. Some will even feel intimidated by young people’s 
proficiency.

At Momo we’ve found the best way to increase social worker confidence and help 
them feel competent is to get them hands-on with the app. This changes Momo 
from something hypothetical, that they have only heard about, into something 
they have got to know well through use. We’ve greased this wheel further by 
building ademo version <https://app-demo.mindofmyown.org.uk/#/> that performs 
like the real app.

Give social workers decent hardware

If you were a social worker three years ago you were lucky to get a laptop, 
let alone one that could connect to a wireless network outside the office. No 
wonder using tech with young people never seemed a possibility.

But worker access to hardware is changing. We’ve talked to social workers in 
Havering and East Sussex who are using hybrid Windows devices to make use of 
Microsoft OneNote with children. Independent reviewing officers in Surrey and 
Hertfordshire all have iPads and workers in Buckinghamshire and Bedford have 
iPhones big enough to co-use with a child or young person. Worker confidence is 
increasing because of this. Having a good piece of well-oiled web-connected kit 
empowers them to use it in creative and modern ways.

Understand change fatigue

It’s no good expecting a great new product to gain traction simply because 
your staff have access, have been trained, and have a new device to use it on. 
It can still butt up against the rough wall ofchange fatigue 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/07/12/forcing-constant-change-social-workers-risks-illusion-progress/>
, because as a general rule tired staff aren’t open to trying new things.

As an independent reviewing officer, children’s services, says: 

When you are in this job there are constant new agendas and new directions. 
You’re constantly being involved in change. You do get to the point where you 
go: Oh god, can we just not do it the usual way, do I have to wheel around or 
fill in another bit of paper?”

If you want your product to be given a chance it needs to offer something 
meaningful to workers too. I’ve seen this achieved through storytelling, 
sharing positive stories that celebrate the work they do and the successes they 
achieve. Recognition of good practice and effort invested in using new digital 
tools pierces the fatigue wall because it makes people feel good.

In summary

Make it simple but expect change fatigue to make even the simplest products 
hard to implement. Give social workers the hardware to use apps, then get them 
hands on so they feel confident about doing so. Finally, back all of this up 
with continued support to keep those change wheels running smoothly.

Joe Roberson is director and founder at Mind Of My Own 
<http://www.mindofmyown.org.uk/>, a multi-award winning app for children and 
young people in the social care system.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 