
It seems cruel to go on about it now that she has lost, but up until the very 
last moments of her campaign for the Democratic nomination,Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hillaryclinton> seemed intent on doing all 
she could to cover up the fact that she was indeed a woman running for the 
White House.

She swaggered across the midwest, with shot glass or beer in hand, threatening 
to bomb Iran. She got all sentimental about girlhood hunting trips with her 
dad. She repeatedly got her supporters to talk up her "testicular fortitude".

But even if it took defeat for Clinton to discover her inner feminist, her 
failed run for the White House did more to further the cause ofwomen in US 
politics <http://nymag.com/news/features/46011> than she or others might have 
imagined.

Here's why:

Although Clinton seemed ambivalent about the historic nature of her candidacy, 
millions of other women had no such reservations. The sheer passion of their 
support for Clinton as the first viable woman candidate for the White House 
made American politicians take notice.

Clinton's failed run elevated the importance of the women's vote, as well as 
women's concerns, in these elections.

Barack Obama and John McCain are now competing fiercely for women voters 
<http://www.thenation.com/doc/20080707/pollitt>. 

Witness Obama's newly gushing admiration for Clinton, or the degree to which 
the McCain camp is parading its most prominent woman supporter,Carly Fiorina 
<http://www.carlyfiorina.com/>, the former Hewlett-Packard executive.

Listen to all the rumble about whether Obama and McCain – or both – will 
choose a woman as a running mate. Fiorina's name is in circulation, despite a 
lack of political experience and the charges of corporate espionage before she 
was sacked from HP.Kay Bailey Hutchinson <http://www.senate.gov/~hutchison/>, a 
long-serving Republican senator from Texas, has also been mentioned. A more 
unconventional choice would beSarah Palin <http://gov.state.ak.us/>, the 
Republican governor of Alaska. A gun-loving, pro-environment, anti-abortion 
mother-of-five, including one child with Down's syndrome, Palin is hugely 
popular in Alaska and – in contrast to McCain – she is a youthful 44.

On the Democratic side, Clinton's most fervent supporters are still hoping for 
a return to the White House – this time with official recognition for her role 
as adviser and confidant, unlike her earlier spell as first lady.Kathleen 
Sebelius <http://www.governor.ks.gov/>, the highly regarded governor of Kansas, 
is also frequently mentioned as a running mate for Obama.

It's far from clear whether any of these scenarios will actually materialise. 
But at least the woman's vote is not being taken for granted, certainly not 
with so many women now actively following the political process. The excitement 
of the Democratic primary campaign led to a burst of organising among women 
unseen since the battle to legalise abortion in the 1960s and early 1970s. That 
means a whole new generation of activists and organisers.

Some of those new activists are purely in it for Clinton, such as the 
disgruntled supporters who say they will carry on the fight against Obama 
online.

But others are equally adamant they want to maintain their organising edge. 
Or, as one former Clinton staffer said in her valedictory email: "This 
reawakened feminist will not be silenced."

Clinton, too, is unlikely to retreat from the public stage. For the first time 
in her adult life, she now outshines her husband. It'sHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, rather than Bill, who is 
going to be the star campaigner for Obama during the elections.

As she returns to life as the junior senator from New York – albeit one 
capable of winning 18 million votes – Clinton could emerge as a much more 
powerful figure.

Like Al Gore, who, following his loss in 2000, went through a box of old 
slides and rediscovered his passion for theenvironment 
<http://film.theguardian.com/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1872370,00.html>
, Clinton could enter a new chapter in her life as the crusader for healthcare. 
She could become the greatest ally of President Obama in the Senate, helping to 
steer through his healthcare reform.

Or, building on her populist message in the final months of the Democratic 
race, Clinton could set herself up as a champion of working-class Americans.

The point is, Clinton retains much of her stature despite her loss, and 
continues to be seen as a politician with potential. Her future involvement in 
politics is likely to go beyond the narrowly defined traditional women's issues 
such as abortion. It could be healthcare or it could be the military, given 
Clinton's position on theArmed Services Committee 
<http://armed-services.senate.gov/>. Clinton, though a woman, would be 
identified with an issue that is central to the lives of men and women.

But, of course, Clinton did lose her race for the White House, and she lost in 
part because she is a woman.

Gender played a role in how she conceived her campaign – stressing her 
toughness and war-readiness to avoid being typecast as weak. There is even a 
case to be made that Clinton's ambivalence about running as a woman candidate 
led her to frequent and confusing shifts of policy during her campaign, which 
deepened the perception that she was untrustworthy or would say anything to get 
elected. Or, to put it another way, Clinton, in her desire to be all things to 
all voters, may have fallen into that classic woman's trap of being a people 
pleaser.

Gender also affected how Clinton's campaign was viewed by commentators – 
especially the aging white males who continue to have a lock on cable 
television news shows. It governs how any powerful woman in America is viewed. 
Witness the hostility towardsMichelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jun/21/uselections2008.barackobama1>, a 
corporate lawyer. In the course of the campaign, Michelle Obama has been 
accused of being an angry woman, or demeaning her husband by complaining about 
his domestic foibles.

Deborah Tannen 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/03/07/AR2008030702844.html>
, the linguistics professor who writes about language and gender, argues that 
Clinton's entire candidacy was constantly viewed through gender. She was always 
the former first lady capitalising on her husband's presidency – never the 
senator elected in her own right in New York.

The language used to describe Clinton's every move was steeped in gender and, 
more often than not, negativity. She was "shrill", never forceful. In rare 
moments of grace, she was seen to be lacking confidence. Tannen and others call 
it the "double bind", where women in leadership are punished for possessing 
qualities admired in men.

Even so, Clinton went farther than any other women before her. Unlike 
Geraldine Ferraro <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geraldine_Ferraro>, who was 
plucked from relative obscurity and put on the vice-presidential ticket in 
1984, Clinton fought for the duration of her candidacy. And that endurance 
gained her widespread respect.

She broke all fundraising records before she was outpaced by Obama. She 
received a record number of votes for a Democratic primary, about 18 million. 
She demonstrated that white male voters would accept a woman as 
commander-in-chief, laying to rest the old notion that they wouldn't.

Twenty years ago, when a congresswoman from Colorado, Pat Schroeder 
<http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C0CE3DA103CF932A35754C0A966958260&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=5>
, made a brief run for the White House, she discovered that most Americans had 
no idea what a woman president would look like. They had no previous models to 
draw on. Thanks to Clinton, now they do – just about.
 