
Q I am a support worker. One of my clients is a 19-year-old single mother. Her 
child is 15 months' old. This client has almost Â£1,000 worth of debts to pay 
off and her only source of income is the benefits she gets for being a single 
parent, unable to work. The figures her debtors are asking for leave her in 
receipt of less per week than she is supposed to be paying out. If she were to 
pay all of these instalments, there would be no food and electricity for her 
and her child. But if she leaves some to buy the food, etc, then these debts 
will increase and she will end up in trouble from her debtors. I am quite new 
to this kind of support, and am not sure how to advise her. Can you help?

JK

A The best option is for your client to contact one of the charitable 
organisations which aim to get people out of debt. (Payplan at your local 
citizens advice bureau is one). The money advisers there will assess how much a 
person needs to live on each month, and draw up a realistic debt repayment 
plan. It is very important that people who have debt do not overcommit 
themselves to a spending plan they can't really afford, as they will end up in 
even greater difficulties over the long run.

These types of organisations are skilled in negotiating with credit card and 
loan companies. Your client has a couple of options which the advisers will be 
able to recommend once they fully understand her personal circumstances and 
assets.

For example, she may be able to make a one-off payment to her creditors which 
will be offered as a full and final settlement. Even though she cannot afford 
to pay off the whole debt, the loan or credit card company may accept this 
final payment because recovering some money is better than recovering none.

Alternatively, she may be able to ask the companies to freeze her debt, so 
that she does not accrue any more interest while she is paying off the capital 
sum. She will, with the help of money advisers, be able to draw up a sensible 
repayment plan to clear the debt over time. The final option is to declare 
herself bankrupt, but this is a serious step which is not advisable if she owns 
her own home, or if she ever hopes to be able to take out a mortgage in the 
future.

Useful numbers 
 National Debtline: 0808 808 4000
 Consumer Credit Counselling Service: 0800 138 1111
 