
Earlier this month the universities secretary David Willetts devoted a 
significant part of his speech atHEFCE's annual conference 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/news/speeches/david-willetts-hefce-conference-2012> to 
the issue of widening participation. He endorsed the practice, already adopted 
by many universities, of offering places to applicants lower grades with from 
poorly performing schools or low incomes homes. "Grades are not the only 
indicator," he told his audience, suggesting that admission "can be based on 
more than just A-Level results, by looking at all the information that 
indicates the potential of an individual to succeed. The aim is that those who 
can perform best at any given university are selected for it."

A survey by SPA (supporting professionalism in admissions 
<http://www.spa.ac.uk/>) late last year showed that almost a quarter of 
universities were planning to offer lower grades to 2012 applicants from poor 
schools or deprived backgrounds.

According to Willetts, spending on widening participation by universities and 
bodies such as Office of Fair Access(OFFA) <http://www.offa.org.uk/> and Higher 
Education Funding Council England <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/> (HEFCE) is set to 
increase by £100m in 2012/13 against 2009/10 figures.

Universities have been spending significant sums for many years on improving 
access to HE. There have been some imaginative and innovative schemes which 
must already have increased opportunities for many people. Although 
institutions assess the impact of their own work, there's been little attempt 
to evaluate this activity nationally and to draw some conclusions on the kinds 
of interventions that are most effective. I've always thought this was a 
tremendous wasted opportunity but now Willetts is acting to address this.

He told the conference that he is asking HEFCE and OFFA to "develop a shared 
strategy for widening access to maximise the impact of the combined investment 
across the entire sector. In particular, we've stressed the importance of all 
widening participation activity resting on a firm evidence base - derived both 
domestically and from overseas - in order to deliver improvements throughout 
the HE system." He went on: "It's vital here that the whole is greater than the 
sum of its parts, with the minimum of duplicated effort, the commissioning of 
new broadly valid research, where appropriate, and integrated monitoring of 
performance, wherever possible. Let's not forget that the whole point of this 
work and this investment is to identify and realise human potential".

Given the last Labour government's claim to be implementing "evidence based 
policy" it's a mystery to me why OFFA has never been resourced to carry out 
this research and evaluation itself. I would sound a note of caution however on 
any attempt to impose a shared template for widening participation across the 
sector. The best initiatives are often successful because they are responding 
to local circumstances and universities must be free to tailor their access 
initiatives to meet the particular needs of their local communities.

As is so often the case with these big set-piece speeches, one of the most 
interesting ideas from Willetts came in questions afterwards. TheTelegraph 
reported 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/9212087/David-Willetts-admit-students-on-potential-rather-than-grades.html>
 that he floated the idea that more universities could follow the example of 
the medical school at King's College London, andoffer bright pupils from 
non-selective state schools an extra foundation year 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/prospectus/undergraduate/details/name/emdp/alpha/MNO/header_search/>
 to enable them to catch up with more privileged, often hot-housed pupils. "We 
know, at the end of the day, that their chances of getting a good medical 
degree are as good as those who turn up with three As," he said.

A foundation year would seem to be a neat solution to the constant refrain of 
the Russell group that the effects of poverty and poor schooling are the most 
significant obstacles to widening participation. Research highlighted by the
Joseph Rowntree Foundation 
<http://www.jrf.org.uk/work/workarea/education-and-poverty> and the Sutton Trust
 <http://www.suttontrust.com/research/> shows how the academic potential of 
tens of thousands of poor children is being wasted. Many children on free 
school meals are top performers when they are at eleven – but by the time they 
finish compulsory schooling two-thirds of those bright pupils have dropped out 
of the top group. As a result, each year sixty-thousand children who have been 
top performers at some point in their school career – and so should make it to 
higher education – fail to make it to university.

A thought-provoking article by Jeevan Vasagar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2012/jan/10/how-cambridge-admissions-really-work>
 shows how this is playing out on the ground in admissions offices across the 
UK. He was allowed to listen in on the discussions of admissions tutors at 
Churchill College Cambridge. He describes the case of one bright young pupil, 
which illustrates the problem better than any statistical litany:

"She has had 'unimaginable teaching difficulties', the tutors hear. She has 
taken her A-levels at a school that has had a spectacularly high turnover of 
teachers. Peering at his laptop when her name is announced, Nick Cutler, an 
admissions tutor at Churchill, says there are 'multiple flags'. The flags are 
used to indicate factors such as poverty, or a school that performs very poorly 
at GCSE. There are six categories in all – including whether an applicant has 
spent time in care. There is evidence that a strong candidate from a bad school 
is likely to perform well when they come to Cambridge. But the academics are 
concerned that in this case, the school has been so turbulent that she simply 
lacks essential knowledge. Her examination and interview marks are low."
"The rapid pace of Cambridge would "kill her", one of the academics says. 
Another agrees: "I would really like to give her a place, but for her own 
sanity, she's much better going to one of the other redbrick, Russell Group 
universities, and just taking her time."

A foundation year is not the only way of addressing this issue – many 
universities are taking an even more direct role by sponsoring academies and 
technical colleges. Of course the suggestion that universities should take a 
hand and do the job that ought to have been done by schools and anti poverty 
initiatives, will infuriate many. They will argue that universities cannot be 
expected to solve all the problems of society. But finding and nurturing the 
talented people who can advance our knowledge must surely be one of the primary 
purposes of university.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/2012/jan/31/higher-education-network-members>
.
 