
If we find aliens, or they find us, what happens next? Most of the answers to 
that question come in the form of films. There’s Contact (we build a space 
ship),District 9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/03/district-9-review> (coexist 
unhappily),Close Encounters of the Third Kind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/close-encounters-of-the-third-kind> (friendly 
abductions) and Independence Day (bang!). Next week,Denis Villeneuve’s Arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/arrival-review-amy-adams-denis-villeneuve-alien-contact>
 will give its answer, but what’s the plan in the real world?

Arrival review: heartfelt alien-contact movie communicates spectacular ideas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/arrival-review-amy-adams-denis-villeneuve-alien-contact>
Well, there has been a lot of thought about it. “There’s a big debate within 
the whole community over whether we should respond or not,” saysDr John Elliot 
<http://www.leedsbeckett.ac.uk/staff/dr-john-elliott/>, joint coordinator for 
the UK Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (Seti) Research Network – 
although he admits that it may not be a choice that any single body gets to 
make. Seti’s policy, once it is fairly sure that an intercepted signal is an 
alien message, will be to share it openly to allow people all over the world to 
try to understand it. Thereafter, it will be hard to stop anyone from 
answering. “I would have thought that there would be a reply made in some form 
at some point round the globe by someone with the required equipment,” Elliot 
says.

This scenario imagines receiving a transmission, but not alien visitors 
themselves. The chance of that is considered remote, even by those who expect 
aliens to exist, because even aliens are presumed to work within the laws of 
physics. In summary: our galaxy is a flattish disc about 100,000 light years 
across, and our planet is right at a sparse edge of it; only a small proportion 
of the planets in our galaxy are within, say, 1,000 light years of us. As a 
result, even a craft from such a nearby planet travelling directly towards us 
at half of light speed – which may be impossibly fast for a machine with life 
inside it – would take 2,000 years to get here. Why would it come? And what are 
the chances of it arriving exactly now?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwhat-protocol-aliens-make-contact-arrival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a1171ac46b9bc485b1ac33932e575b2e8b0b7b2%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20protocol%20if%20aliens%20make%20contact%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwhat-protocol-aliens-make-contact-arrival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20protocol%20if%20aliens%20make%20contact%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwhat-protocol-aliens-make-contact-arrival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a1171ac46b9bc485b1ac33932e575b2e8b0b7b2%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Out of this world ... Stephen Spielberg’s Close Encounters of the Third Kind. 
Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
Alien transmissions could be passing by all the time, however. Much of the 
problem is a matter of linguistics. Part of Elliot’s work is to devise and 
understand languages that might make sense to an intelligent alien – so-called 
xenolinguistics. “It’s the same as if you’re in the Amazon rainforest and you 
encounter a lost tribe,” he says. “You’d include their message, or part of it, 
as an echo. But you’d need to have something simple at the front and build upon 
it.” A good part of the work could be done by sending simple binary images – 
perhaps a picture of a rock – and starting to establish words from there.

The trouble is, it won’t happen quickly. If the aliens are only 100 light 
years away, their message will be 100 years old by the time we get it – as will 
our reply by the time it turns up. “It’s a 200-year turnaround even just to say 
hello,” says Elliot. We might improve on this by imagining a technology that 
can send messages faster than light, but then we have overturned a fundamental 
law of physics, which leaves yet more explaining to do.
 