
Like many teenagers, apprentice design assistant Belinda Diangi had never 
considered doing an apprenticeship as an alternative to A-levels and 
university. “To be honest, I didn’t know anything else,” she says. “I thought I 
had to go to university – I was going to become an English teacher.”

Diangi had been interested in fashion for years but thought an English degree 
would be more worthwhile. “University’s so expensive I didn’t think studying 
fashion would be worth it,” she says.


She is not alone when it comes to students being encouraged down the 
university route. Whileless than a third of job roles 
<http://www.cipd.co.uk/pm/peoplemanagement/b/weblog/archive/2016/01/15/future-careers-of-young-at-risk-as-university-becomes-gamble-research-warns.aspx>
 are expected to be graduate positions by 2022, recent research fromCity and 
Guilds 
<http://www.cityandguilds.com/~/media/Documents/Courses-and-Quals/Apprenticeships/EMSI%20reports/cggreatexpectationsonline%20pdf.ashx>
 showed that two-thirds of young people are planning on going to university, 
despite a third of them not knowing what they are going to study.

Kirstie Donnelly 
<http://www.cityandguilds.com/about-us/how-we-are-organised/management-board/kirstie-donnelly>
, managing director of City and Guilds, says the gap between students entering 
university and graduate jobs has been exacerbated by years of rhetoric in the 
UK that “unless you go to university, you’re not going to get a job, or at 
least not a well-paying one”.

The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills found that in 2015 
working-age graduates would earn an average of £32,500compared with £22,000 for 
non-graduates 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/458101/BIS-15-484-graduate-labour-market-statistics-Q2-2015.pdf>
. Research by jobs website Adzuna also found that the difference between 
lifetime earnings of graduates and non-graduates might also be larger than 
previously thought – potentiallyas high as £500,000 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/jobs/11744118/Graduates-earn-500000-more-than-non-graduates.html>
.


However, a degree alone does not guarantee a high salary. Figures from the 
Office for National Statistics reveal that more than a quarter of graduates in 
2013 were paid less than the£11.10 an hour average 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/10578118/Graduates-earning-less-than-those-on-apprenticeships.html>
 for those on work-based training schemes. More recently, the Sutton Trust 
found that people who had completed level five apprenticeships (equivalent to a 
foundation degree) were expected to earn £52,000 more over their lifetimesthan 
graduates from non-elite universities 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/money/apprentices-earn-more-university-graduates-6597455>
.

“We do need to get more role models into schools to challenge the assumption 
that university is always the best route – more employers speaking to students 
aboutwhat skills they are looking for 
<http://www.cityandguilds.com/~/media/Images/About%20Us/Broadsheet%20News/Oct%2013/Making-education-work-infographic-900%20jpg.ashx>
 and former apprentices sharing their experiences. Mandatory work experience 
also needs to be reinstated,” Donnelly says.


Donnelly adds that while some graduates earn more, all graduates have to carry 
around the burden of student debt, whatever job they end up in – andalmost half 
of graduates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/19/half-recent-uk-graduates-stuck-jobs-ons>
 end up in non-graduate jobs. With the average debt for university leavers now 
at £44,000 
<http://www.cipd.co.uk/pm/peoplemanagement/b/weblog/archive/2016/01/15/future-careers-of-young-at-risk-as-university-becomes-gamble-research-warns.aspx>
, apprentices may find themselves better off in the long run.


“There’s also a huge range of higher degree apprenticeships. People don’t 
realise you don’t need to go to university now to become a solicitor, an 
engineer or work in finance,” Donnelly says.

Indeed, for those looking to leapfrog university 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/personalfinance/borrowing/11059617/Avoid-45000-student-debt-and-grab-a-30000-wage-instead.html>
 into a career, there areno shortage of recruiters 
<http://www.apprenticeshipguide.co.uk/apprenticeship-providers/>. Competition 
is no less stiff, though. PriceWaterhouseCoopers had almost 12 applicationsfor 
every higher apprenticeship spot 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2721423/Firms-offer-teens-30k-jobs-trump-university-Companies-receiving-100-applications-post-school-leavers-shun-9-000-year-courses.html>
 it offered in 2014, and Marks and Spencer had100 for every spot 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2721423/Firms-offer-teens-30k-jobs-trump-university-Companies-receiving-100-applications-post-school-leavers-shun-9-000-year-courses.html>
 on its management scheme for school leavers.

Jo Page, a secondary school careers adviser with Careers Wales, supports the 
idea that there shouldn’t be a one-size-fits-all approach to education. “We 
survey all our students in year 10 and year 12 to see who are thinking about 
apprenticeships and prioritise them as most people don’t realise that 
apprenticeship applications require as much time and research as university 
applications.”


Having access to independent careers advice is vital, she says, but ultimately 
students have to weigh up what is right for them, and do lots of research. Like 
universities, not all apprenticeships are created equal.


University v apprenticeships: choose the right career option for you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/university-apprenticeship-choose-right-career>
“We had one young girl who was adamant all the way through school about going 
to university, but then she got offered a BBC apprenticeship,” Page says. 
“She’d already been made offers for university and had to really weigh up which 
one to go for. In the end she took the apprenticeship.”


While there is a far wider variety of apprenticeships and higher 
apprenticeships available today than previously – Page was recently sent a job 
advert for a wedding planner apprentice, andspace engineering 
<http://space.loucoll.ac.uk/> is another option – students need to also be 
realistic about their choices. While the upfront costs of university are 
intimidating, Page says travel or relocation costs could also put students off 
their dream apprenticeship.


“A lot of students considering both apprenticeships and higher apprenticeships 
may not have access to their own transport. So then we talk to the student and 
ask them could they get there? For example, from Newport to Lamby Way, Cardiff, 
that’s three buses. Is that affordable on an apprentice’s salary?”


While there has been a recent trend in big companies such as Penguin ditching 
degree requirements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/18/penguin-ditches-the-need-for-job-seekers-to-have-university-degrees>
, a number of employers still require degrees. The ratio of graduate to 
non-graduate jobs also varies around the country, with a report last summer 
finding that by 202260% of jobs in London 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-33254142> will require a degree.


Diangi hasn’t thought about going to university for a while now, though. After 
deciding to drop out of sixth form, in December she finished her 18-month 
apprenticeship at Darling Clothes while studying for a level three diploma at 
theFashion Enter <http://www.fashion-enter.com/index.php/our-team/> college. At 
19, Diangi is now a junior designer with the firm on £18,000 a year.

“I had never worked a day in my life before starting the apprenticeship and 
when I started I didn’t think I would get so involved with the company so 
quickly. I thought I would be working on the sidelines,” she says.


“It’s interesting as we’ve had university graduates join the team too and they 
weren’t as confident as I had expected, meanwhile all the apprentices were 
thrown in at the deep end.”


With many employers having expressed concerns that university graduates are 
not workplace ready 
<http://www.britishchambers.org.uk/press-office/press-releases/young-people-need-more-support-to-make-transition-from-education-to-work,-says-bcc.html>
, Diangi said her apprenticeship pushed her to mature quicker and gave her the 
chance to get much-needed work experience. “I’m glad I picked this route as I 
will have way more experience than when my year group of university fashion 
graduates come out,” she says. “I’ve had a head start.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 