
What on earth qualified me to judge the Turing test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/09/what-is-the-alan-turing-test>
, thegold standard for artificial intelligence 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_test> (AI)? I’ve been sceptical – but I 
hope open-minded – about the whole idea for years. But then, I am human 
(mainly). I did write a short biography of Alan Turing himself. And it was 
Turing, in 1950, who first suggested a mathematical proof that computers would 
one day assume a kind of humanity.

What is the Turing test? And are we all doomed now?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/09/what-is-the-alan-turing-test>
Public interest in this isn’t just down to rising interest in Turing himself. 
The test he set out is the basis for the controversial idea of “singularity”, 
the moment when AI comes of age and computers start thinking and learning for 
themselves.

Turing said that, when you were convinced you couldn’t tell the computer and 
human apart during a conversation, then the test would have been passed.

No computer program seemed close to passing so, in 1990, the inventor Hugh 
Loebnerfounded the prize <http://www.loebner.net/Prizef/loebner-prize.html> 
that bears his name, a kind of Turing test lite. This culminates in the top 
four computer programs talking to the judges individually via a screen for 25 
minutes each, while each judge is simultaneously having a conversation with a 
human. At the end of each session, the judges have to decide which was which.

I felt surprised, but hugely privileged, to be asked to be one of four judges 
last weekend, and presented myself fashionably late at Bletchley Park, where 
the Loebner prize has been held in recent years (it began in Massachusetts), 
and where Turinghelped crack the Nazi Enigma code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/29/bletchley-park-codebreakers-first-world-war-exhibition>
.

The other judges included a branding expert, a Sky News technology journalist 
and a robotics expert describing herself as a “robot psychiatrist 
<http://www.robot.md/>”.

I had a moment of nerves a few minutes into the process when my fellow judges 
made noises to indicate they knew which was which in their conversations, and I 
was not completely sure about mine (I was in fact engaged with this year’s 
winner, Steve Worswick’sMitsuku program <http://www.mitsuku.com/>).

In the event, one of the four programs was malfunctioning, spouting stuff 
about not understanding the letter “a”. That left three, and it became clear to 
me pretty quickly that the sheer perfection of the answers from the robots – 
perfectly spelled and grammatical – gave them away. The real humans 
demonstrated their authenticity by their imperfections, second thoughts, 
hesitations and mis-typings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frobots-pass-humans-turing-test-loebner-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7b00436669378348736d41fb7e92f154b1313be%2F0_124_3778_2268%2F3778.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20difference%20between%20robots%20and%20humans%3F%20It's%20my%20newt%20%7C%20David%20Boyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frobots-pass-humans-turing-test-loebner-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20difference%20between%20robots%20and%20humans%3F%20It%27s%20my%20newt%20%7C%20David%20Boyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frobots-pass-humans-turing-test-loebner-prize%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7b00436669378348736d41fb7e92f154b1313be%2F0_124_3778_2268%2F3778.jpg>
 Films about Alan Turing such as The Imitation Game in 2014 starring Benedict 
Cumberbatch have fuelled interest in the codebreaker who pioneered artificial 
intelligence. Photograph: Black Bear Pictures/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
One program reflected back my own mistakes – I wrote “tecah” instead of 
“teach” – which was clever but not quite human either. Nor, in the end, was the 
program we all judged the best shot, which required a strategy for avoiding 
questions it couldn’t answer. When I asked which part of San Francisco it came 
from, the robot replied: “Why don’t we talk about that later?” But then, 
arguably, my question wasn’t really fair either – it would have been like 
asking how many sandwiches were left in their room (I asked that and was told 
later that it was “borderline sneaky”).

We judges needed strategies too. I asked about loving and hating the same 
person at the same time, an idea I thought might be alien to robots. I also 
told the old cracker joke about why French people have only one egg at 
breakfast (answer: because one is un oeuf).

One of the robots told me the joke about Tiny the newt (why is it called Tiny? 
Because it’s my newt). I asked why it was funny. It sidestepped the question.

The programs we talked to were huge achievements. Their non sequiturs and 
rapid changes of subject certainly seemed human in a Pinter-esque way. But in 
the end, they were trying to trick us into thinking they were human rather than 
communicating on an equal basis.

The experience has convinced me that AI is not going to produce thinking 
robots any time soon, and I have a feeling that by the time they have cracked 
the human question, we will have changed it.

It isn’t the infallibility of people that makes them human, after all. Quite 
the reverse; it is their sheer fallibility – their ability to make mistakes, be 
quirky, make relationships, love and care. It is more unnerving, not more 
reassuring, to be phoned by a robot that is nearly human than it is to be 
phoned by an obvious machine.

It may be that computers will be able to do all that one day, but I noticed 
that I had built some kind of relationship with all four human beings I talked 
to through a screen, but not with any of the robots, though we had talked just 
as much.

In the meantime, I tend to fall back on the CS Lewis maxim: “When you meet 
anything that is going to be human and isn’t yet, or used to be human once and 
isn’t now, or ought to be human and isn’t, you keep your eyes on it and feel 
for your hatchet.”
 