
Shyness seems an obvious theme for a writer. Writers are often natural 
introverts and onlookers, and the printed word allows them to convey meaning to 
others independently of their bodily presence. ForSigmund Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/30/sigmund-freud-unconscious-theories>
, writing was “in its origin the voice of an absent person”: it let us 
transcend the limitations of our mumbling, blushing selves. And yet, as I have 
found when trying to write about my own shyness, as a subject it poses 
problems. It is a low-level, lingering, nebulous feeling, hard to turn into a 
story or drama. It has none of the pathos or narrative momentum of major life 
events like love, loss, illness and grief. Shy characters are not born 
protagonists; they are too passive to propel stories along. And shyness is 
tricky to write about autobiographically without succumbing to the hectoring 
self-pity that is the death of good prose.

Shyness, often seen merely as a wish to withdraw from others, can also amount 
to an undue interest in them, a desire for human closeness which defeats itself 
through fear and doubt. For me, it has less to do with simple timidity than a 
kind of social deafness, a tin ear for non-verbal cues, a sense that I have 
failed to grasp some invisible thread that holds communal life together. The 
shy author often overcompensates for this problem by becoming a field biologist 
of humanity, a close reader of the semiotics of the social world.

The English fiction writer Elizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/feb/24/a-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-elizabeth-taylor>
 certainly fits this profile. She would spend days on end just walking around 
Buckinghamshire market towns, sitting on her own in the Tudor tearooms, public 
gardens and pubs, listening in. And then she would pour into her novels and 
stories all her interest in social ineptitude and her hatred of fake 
sociability. Awkwardness and embarrassment are, Meg and Patrick inThe Soul of 
Kindness 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/3651494/The-other-Liz-Taylor.html> 
(1964) agree, “underrated forms of suffering”. “I never think embarrassment is 
a trivial emotion,” says Beatrice in Taylor’s story “Hester Lilly” (1954). 
Taylor’s characters live lives of stockbrokerish comfort and silent anguish, 
baking sponges for coffee mornings, hosting bridge evenings and enduring 
formula luncheons that always start with sherry and end with fool. One of her 
opening sentences beautifully condenses the way that people steel themselves to 
join in with these rituals: “In the morning, Charles went down the garden to 
practise calling for three cheers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe131c3607fa4320d8f218e29120539c3c2b6130a%2F0_772_4678_3828%2F4678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20an%20introvert%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20fiction%20%E2%80%93%20and%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20an%20introvert%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20fiction%20%E2%80%93%20and%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe131c3607fa4320d8f218e29120539c3c2b6130a%2F0_772_4678_3828%2F4678.jpg>
 ‘Shyness is nice’ … Morrissey, left, on stage with Johnny Marr and the Smiths. 
Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
The New Zealand writer Janet Frame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/jan/30/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
 also nails perfectly these unseen dramas of shyness. Her narrators are full of 
hidden fire and verve, the opposite of the fearful self they present to others. 
As a child, Frame’s innate introversion was aggravated by her embarrassment at 
her wild frizz of red hair and her rotten teeth, which led her to cover her 
mouth when talking. She began to invest everything in her writing, retreating 
into a parallel world she called the “Mirror City”. This city came to seem more 
real to her than the real world she floated through like a silent, timorous 
ghost. She was loath to spend the one currency of hers that might have any 
worth in this real world – talking about her life in the Mirror City – for fear 
its magic would be disenchanted. She would not even divulge the titles of her 
books to people she met. What she called her “primitive shyness” about her 
writing made her unwilling “to reduce or drain into speech the power supply of 
the named”.

All writers have this sense of a split between their literary and actual 
selves; for Frame, the split was full-blown and blighted her life. “In 
conversation I am bedevilled,” she wrote in 1955. “In written expression an 
angel will visit.” Her muteness or incoherence in the flesh meant that many who 
met her took her for an idiot. She had channelled all the clever and lucid 
parts of her character into the self that sat alone at a writing desk, waiting 
for an angel to appear.

We are all tongue-tied; some of us are just more aware of it than others

Frame’s fictional alter egos are tongue-tied women who think that the babble 
and prattle of the spoken word can never match the depth and nuance of writing. 
“What is the use of speech?” the unspeaking Erlene reflects in Frame’s novel
Scented Gardens for the Blind(1963). “On and on, saying nothing, the tattered 
bargain-price words, the great red-flagged sale of trivialities, the shutdown 
sellout of the mind?” In another Frame novel,Towards Another Summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/29/fiction.reviews>, Grace Cleave, 
an excruciatingly shy writer, has rashly accepted Philip Thirkettle’s 
invitation to spend the weekend with him and his young family. (The book was 
published posthumously because it is based on a real weekend that Frame spent 
at the home of the Guardian writerGeoffrey Moorhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/nov/27/geoffrey-moorhouse-obituary>.) 
For Grace, the weekend is hell. She rehearses platitudinous lines in her head – 
“I do like cheese on toast”, “I’ve so enjoyed your cooking” – and sometimes 
manages to say them. But mostly her words “scuttle to the sheltering foliage of 
incoherence”. She longs to sit in her London bedsit at her Olivetti typewriter, 
with the warm light of the Anglepoise shining over the keys, “sending out noisy 
signals to herself”. Frame, like many shy writers, has a sobering sense that 
language always, in the end, sells us short. Words are a compromise, aimed at 
reaching fleetingly across the unbridgeable divide between us all. We are all 
tongue-tied; some of us are just more aware of it than others.

Agatha Christie <https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie>, like 
Frame, avoided social gatherings for fear of seeming, as she put it, “imbecile 
with shyness”. She, too, made amends for her inarticulacy in the flesh with 
fluency on the page. In her case this resulted in almost 100 books, millions of 
words to act as counter-ballast to her real-life reticence. But Christie’s 
solution was quite different to Frame’s. It was to create characters who were 
starkly her opposite – like the nosy and fearless Miss Marple, or the 
hyper-confident Hercule Poirot, an actor manqué who sees the apprehending of 
the villain as an occasion for bravura intellectual display. “If you are doubly 
burdened, first by acute shyness, and secondly by only seeing the right thing 
to do or say 24 hours later, what can you do?” Christie wrote in the Daily Mail 
in 1938. “Only write about quick-witted men and resourceful girls whose 
reactions are like greased lightning.” She confided to her diary that she 
thought Poirot “an egocentric creep”.

Writers find all kinds of indirect ways of writing about their shyness. 
Another of these oblique strategies is to conjure up an imaginary world in 
which shyness is a common feeling – one that, rather than just alienating 
people from each other, unites them in their fears and vulnerabilities. For
Garrison Keillor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/30/garrison-keillor-retiring-lake-wobegon-america-beautiful-tour>
, who grew up a gangly, awkward boy with “a powerful wish to be invisible”, the 
fictional prairie town ofLake Wobegon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lake_Wobegon> serves this role. Here, in a 
shyness-cultivating part of the world somewhere north-west of Minneapolis, even 
close friends stand an arm’s length apart, romantic passion is voiced as mild 
interest and the Norwegian bachelor farmers all eat shy-busting Powdermilk 
biscuits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44f53020740b828522fad5f73a14e55b3ba21a8d%2F0_0_1797_1178%2F1797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20an%20introvert%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20fiction%20%E2%80%93%20and%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20an%20introvert%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20fiction%20%E2%80%93%20and%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44f53020740b828522fad5f73a14e55b3ba21a8d%2F0_0_1797_1178%2F1797.jpg>
 Upper-midwest diffidence … A Boy Named Charlie Brown (1969), based on Charles 
Schulz’s Peanuts comic strip. Photograph: Allstar/Paramount 
Charles Schulz’s Peanuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/09/obamas-peanuts-president-writes-foreword-to-charles-schulz-anthology>
 comic strip, of which Keillor is a lifelong fan, taps into the same mood of 
upper-midwest diffidence. Charlie Brown is Schulz’s own shyness in cartoon 
form. With his anonymous round head, Charlie suffers that familiar seesawing 
between feeling horribly invisible most of the time and horribly visible some 
of the time. Schulz’s virtuosic twist is to give him a dog, Snoopy, who is a 
brilliant wordless communicator, and whose role is to make his master feel even 
more inadequate.

Tove Jansson’s Moomins books are full of introverts, shrewish animals who hide 
under sinks, never saying a word

When it appeared on a page of noisy comic strips all jostling for attention, 
Peanuts drew the eye with its clean lines and white spaces, the boldness with 
which it said so little. The mood music of Minnesotan weather – the softly 
falling snowflakes, the frozen ponds on which the characters skate silently and 
the stone-faced snowmen they build and befriend, only for them to melt away – 
adds to the general ambience of stillness and quiet. In Peanuts, problems 
remain unresolved and words unspoken. Its signature note is the bathetic 
non-ending, a final panel with Charlie Brown exhaling a*sigh* 
<https://thematbickley.files.wordpress.com/2010/06/charlie-brown-sigh.jpg>, 
smiling wonkily with sweat beads shooting off his face or blushing in a way 
that fills his face with diagonal lines. Schulz knew that shyness has no 
narrative arc: the shy just have to carry on being shy. A daily comic strip was 
his way of dealing with this, communicating with the world remotely by creating 
his own world with a few bold pen strokes, and signing his name at the end.

Schulz came to believe, with classically midwest self-deprecation, that his 
own inhibitions were just inverted narcissism. “Shyness,” he wrote, “is the 
overtly self-conscious thinking that you are the only person in the world; that 
how you look and what you do is of any importance.” But the lesson of Peanuts 
is quite the reverse. Who, after all, is a better model of humanity:Lucy van 
Pelt <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucy_van_Pelt>, who shouts at the world 
with bone-shuddering and misplaced conviction, or Charlie Brown, a gentle, 
fair-minded stoic?

Why the Moomins are fiction’s perfect family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/dec/25/moomins-books-fiction-perfect-family-tove-jansson>
Tove Jansson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tove-jansson>’s Moomins books 
are also full of introverts, shrewish animals who hide under sinks or wander 
around the world in search of the horizon, never saying a word. Jansson’s 
scraperboard illustrations scratch these characters out of a background of 
black India ink, as if they are emerging warily out of the gloom. With only the 
thinnest pen line – a tiny widening of the eye pupil, a downturned eyebrow or 
the sole of a foot treading charily through snow – she conveys their fear. But 
the Moomins themselves are more successful role models for the shy. They like 
to wander in the forest alone, enjoying its silence and stillness, or to burrow 
into warm, private spaces. But they sulk and skulk only fleetingly. Mostly they 
retreat so as to think deeply and make something – a painting, a poem or a boat 
carved out of bark – as a way of whittling meaning out of a frightening world. 
Jansson’s lesson is not that shy people should come out of their shells; it is 
that they should embrace that shyness and put it to artful use.

❦

Freud saw writing as one of the “prosthetic gods” that humans have created, 
partly to shield themselves from the world. By rendering us temporarily 
invisible and disembodied, the written word allows us to communicate with other 
people at one remove. Shy writers can use the technologies of writing in the 
same way, as both a buffer against and a conduit to others. Janet Frame loved 
her typewriter as if it were an extra limb that connected her with the world, 
and felt as orphaned without it as today’s teenagers when unglued from their 
phones. The most assertive she ever became was when fighting to keep her 
typewriter while confined in New Zealand’s mental hospitals.Agatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie>, meanwhile, was an early 
adopter of the portable tape recorder. Dictating her words to a secretary made 
her self-conscious, and she would stumble and lose her rhythm. A tape machine, 
whirring and wheezing away, was a friendly audience, and it let her click the 
pause button and gather up her thoughts. For Garrison Keillor, the radio 
microphone did the trick. By mastering radio’s synthetic spontaneity, dropping 
well-timed “y’knows” and “kindas” into his sentences, he managed to turn 
himself into someone else, someone who could speak freely without worrying 
about people yawning or looking at their watches. Almost all shy people, I have 
found, have the same fear as Keillor and me: boring others.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc2e78bbb3033d4d0527d4bc244d411a65c1a0a0%2F0_181_3072_2015%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20an%20introvert%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20fiction%20%E2%80%93%20and%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20an%20introvert%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20fiction%20%E2%80%93%20and%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc2e78bbb3033d4d0527d4bc244d411a65c1a0a0%2F0_181_3072_2015%2F3072.jpg>
 Embrace shyness and put it to artful use … Moomins creator Tove Jansson. 
Photograph: Lehtikuva OY/Rex Features 
Writing, like all kinds of performance, is a chance for the shy to acquire a 
veneer of confidence and ease. When people first sawMorrissey fronting the 
Smiths <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WvPh2fQ0cxA> – yodelling his wild 
falsetto, rotating gladioli above his head, writhing on the floor – could any 
of them have guessed that he was escaping from what he called“the huddled 
shyness of my life” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2002/sep/15/artsfeatures.popandrock>? And 
yet many of his songs, like“Half a Person” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-dZSLJwKlEI> and “Never Had No One Ever” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H888yfanNr8>, are about loneliness, unrequited 
feeling, climbing into empty beds, feeling ugly and unwanted. His lyrics veer 
cagily between the first and second person, a teasing mix of the earnest and 
the evasive. The Smiths song“Ask” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YyaSQLlS5e8> 
seems to be coaxing someone, perhaps Morrissey’s younger self, out of his 
shyness, but it can’t decide whether “shyness is nice” or not.

Morrissey manages paradoxically to appear secure, to bare his soul without 
ever seeming needy or inadequate. His odd mix of shyness and confidence is a 
neat trick to pull off – and perhaps, today, a necessary one. For in our 
confessional culture, with its cult of therapeutic openness, shyness seems to 
be increasingly looked on with confusion and suspicion. A colleague of mine 
told me that he had given Daphne du Maurier’sRebecca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/20/rebecca-daphne-du-maurier-classic-literature>
 to a friend, who had come back to him thoroughly affronted by the narrator’s 
shyness, which he dismissed as “arrogance in low heels”. Shyness now often 
inspires such impatience, my colleague reflected; it has “lost its virtuous 
glow in a tell-all age”.

Alan Bennett: ‘I didn’t see the point of coming out'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/31/alan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview>
Alan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/31/alan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview>
, who became friends with Morrissey when they lived near each other in Camden 
in the 1990s, maps this cultural shift in his work. Bennett inherited from his 
mother a sense that shyness stood for sensitivity and refinement. For her, it 
was a burdensome virtue – one you might prefer not to have, but which did at 
least save you from being “common”, an antithetical state to shyness with “a 
degree of groundless pushing yourself forward”. Bennett eventually decided that 
this was rubbish, that shy people could be “a bit of a bore” and that “social 
ease can and should be faked”. But for Bennett’s characters, shyness is not so 
easily shaken off. Andy inGetting On (1971) is a virginal youth untouched by 
the 60s counterculture, whose father mistakenly believes he is living in a 
“haze of pot and cheap fellowship”. Trevor Hopkins, the polytechnic lecturer in 
the TV playMe – I’m Afraid of Virginia Woolf 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Me%E2%80%94I'm_Afraid_of_Virginia_Woolf> (1978), 
cannot pee in a public toilet and always takes a book on buses so he has 
somewhere to look. Life, impatient of their fears and hesitancies, is leaving 
these characters behind.

“Have you ever thought what’s happened to all the shy people?” Andy asks in 
Getting On. “Whatever happened to reserve, Dad, and self-consciousness? Was it 
your government that got rid of guilt?” Unlike his father, Andy has already 
learned that shyness is as resilient as all the other things that the youth 
cult of the 60s was meant to have swept away, like snobbery, sexual hypocrisy 
and middle-aged complacency. Bennett’s characters have entered an era in which 
shyness is no longer the equivocal virtue it had been to his mother, but a 
disability it is one’s duty to defeat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F867c7e0d606d401498b564ccd60a212f899d908e%2F0_0_8533_4617%2F8533.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20an%20introvert%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20fiction%20%E2%80%93%20and%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20lies%20beneath%3A%20an%20introvert%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20fiction%20%E2%80%93%20and%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fintrovert-fiction-agatha-christie-alan-bennett-morrissey-shyness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F867c7e0d606d401498b564ccd60a212f899d908e%2F0_0_8533_4617%2F8533.jpg>
 Successful role models for the shy … Moomins on the Riviera. Photograph: Susan 
Bruce 2014 Handle Productions Oy, Pictak Cie/Moomin Characters 
Personal growth is one of today’s growth industries. Its guiding principle is 
that your personality is plastic and pliable, a skillset you can learn and 
develop. Our self-help culture trades on stories of people who have transformed 
themselves from depressed solitaries into social butterflies, the psychological 
equivalent of those slimmers of the year who pose in their old and now outsized 
pants. But what Bennett and all these other writers tell us is that shyness 
cannot simply be “busted” or “conquered”. It is a stubborn disposition: we can 
learn to hide it, channel it, finesse it or work around it, but we can never 
quite defeat it.

On reaching old age, Oliver Sacks declared himself 'sorry to be as agonisingly 
shy at 80 as I was at 20'

Even the vicarious communication of print proves an anticlimax. The 
neurologist and writerOliver Sacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/oliver-sacks> grappled with this problem for 
years, wanting to be noticed for his writing but unsure if this was allowed. 
When his first book was reviewed in the newspapers, his father, also a doctor, 
was appalled, for at the time one could be struck off the medical register for 
advertising. Sacks half-agreed with him, and for years misread the word 
“publish” as “punish”. On reaching old age, he declared himself “sorry to be as 
agonisingly shy at 80 as I was at 20”. Diagnosed with ocular cancer, he would 
go off on his own to cry, but found that even when alone he was too shy to 
scream.

If they cannot offer me the solace that my shyness might be overcome, have 
these shy writers taught me anything more useful? Perhaps this: by taking 
shyness as a subject, they have made it real. All my life I have thought of 
shyness as a debility, an inadequacy, an absence. But for these writers it is a 
definite, if painful, quality – something you are, not something that stops you 
being who you are. It is less a shrinking away from the world than a 
redirection of our energies. Rather than smother our sociable impulses, it just 
makes us social in convoluted ways. Shyness is simply part of being a human, 
this more or less communal species which happens to be lumbered with a strange 
gift for turning in and reflecting on itself. There will always be a tension 
between our gregarious instincts and our desire to creep away from the tribe 
and be alone with our thoughts. In all of us that tension is differently 
strung, but surely it was ever thus.

It can feel especially hard to be shy in the age of the selfie, when social 
networks and the smartphone have emboldened people to bring their personal 
lives into the open in ways that would have seemed bizarre just a few years ago 
and still seem bizarre to me. Ours is the era of the open-plan office, the 
library as “social learning zone”, the meeting as creative “sandpit”, the tweet 
as self-praise: an age of nonstop networking, humblebragging and oversharing.

But then I remember that these same technologies have created their own forms 
of shy art, ones that let us relate to each other in amounts we can control, 
like a saline drip. Texting, introduced by Nokia in the 90s as an afterthought, 
took off unexpectedly among shy Finnish teenagers, because it gave those more 
dexterous with their thumbs than their tongues the chance to be more intrepid 
than in real life. Texts, tweets and social media updates allow us to blend 
intimacy with artifice. We can hide behind avatars and emojis, and say the 
things that embarrass us face-to-face, or experiment with suaver versions of 
ourselves.

Perhaps human ingenuity has conjured up the text message for the same reason 
it invented the alphabet a few thousand years ago. We want to say what we feel, 
to open our hearts to others. But we can’t – not without something to help us 
do it from afar. So we are all shy authors now. We compose our words carefully 
with our thumbs, editing and deleting as we go. And then, with a little wince, 
we press send.

• Joe Moran is professor of English and cultural history at Liverpool John 
Moores University.Shrinking Violets: A Field Guide to Shyness 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/shrinking-violets.html> is published by 
Profile.
 