
"Universities should do more" is a phrase heard rather frequently in the 
corridors of power. Michael Gove only recently asserted that universities 
should take a leading role in raising A-level standards. Now, Alan Milburn is 
telling universities to "redouble their efforts" to enable disadvantaged 
students to gain places in university. In both cases, the diagnosis of the 
problem is clear and sound. That universities can play a role in addressing 
both issues is also sensible. But there are issues – and tensions – inherent in 
the solutions proposed that may make progress difficult.

In my view, Gove understands well what is wrong with the current A-level 
system, not least because universities have been complaining that students are 
ever less well prepared for undergraduate study. He – and universities – 
rightly want schools to strive for the highest levels of excellence. Milburn's 
recent report addresses a very different but equally pressing issue. Social 
mobility has stagnated in part because disadvantaged young people are less 
likely to go to university. This needs to be addressed not only in the 
interests of social justice, but to support the needs of the economy.

Where Gove's focus is on excellence, Milburn wants universities to make lower 
offers to disadvantaged students and an extension of foundation degrees and 
other 'access' programmes. His aim is not to lower standards but to "level the 
playing field", getting universities to help disadvantaged students overcome 
material and cultural barriers inhibiting entry to and success in higher 
education.

But there remains a tension in what universities are being asked to do. 
Milburn's vision is egalitarian and opens the doors to expansion of higher 
education provision. Gove's vision is elitist and unopposed to a shrinking of 
the sector. How can we raise academic standards and at the same time overcome 
barriers to social mobility? Surely, universities should play a substantial 
role in both, but is this possible without placing unrealistic demands on a 
hard-pressed sector that already does a great deal in this area?

Both universities and the private sector have developed bridging resources 
with considerable potential.JISC Content  <http://www.jisc-content.ac.uk/> has 
digitisated a large number of educational resources mainly for university 
students.Jorum  <http://www.jorum.ac.uk/> is a repository of free learning and 
teaching resources created by UK FE and HE institutions.Khan Academy  
<http://www.khanacademy.org/> delivers the basic building blocks of knowledge 
in a wide range of disciplines via short animated podcasts. MOOCs (or Massive 
Open Online Courses) are generatinghuge interest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2012/nov/21/online-learning-moocs-pedagogy-technology>
 from universities and learners.Curriki <http://welcome.curriki.org/>, a non 
profit online education community, enables teachers to create their own bespoke 
resources – as does theGuardian Teacher Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/teacher-network>.

Universities also organise conferences where research specialists address 
A-level students and teachers. They act as consultants for exam boards and 
review syllabi. They work with local schools in disadvantaged areas and invite 
pupils to 'taster' lectures, summer schools, and other activities that 
demystify university for those, often the first in their families, to enter 
higher education. However, in the overwhelming majority of cases, academics and 
universities work locally, without much coordination and all too often without 
significant effect.

Universities could substantially and effectively contribute to the agendas set 
by Gove and Milburn by means of a common virtual platform which universities 
across the UK contribute to, and from which teachers and students across the UK 
can draw. There are several platforms available that would fulfil this need, 
such as theExcellence Gateway <http://www.excellencegateway.org.uk/>. Another 
that I am personally involved with and which I think could make a difference is 
JISC-fundedthe Faculties <http://www.thefaculties.org/>.

This site includes filmed lectures by academics on topics taken directly from 
the A-level curriculum. These free 'stretch and challenge' resources can be 
played on laptops, tablets and mobile phones, and bring the latest research 
into A-level classrooms not to prep students for the exam, but to inspire the 
sort of higher level thinking that Gove wants to see. And they keep teachers 
and examiners up-to-date with the research too.

Many of the films are specifically tailored to prepare students for the 
challenges of higher education. An entire section of the site is devoted to 
careers, so prospective students can see what opportunities an undergraduate 
degree opens for them. Students and teachers can also use the interactive 
discussion function associated with every podcast to engage with each another 
and the presenter.

The site addresses the Milburn report recommendations by providing a platform 
for universities to create 'access' resources and engage in outreach activities 
collectively instead of individually and nationally instead of locally. And by 
building a library of rigorous A-level study aids and access resources, 
universities can make a big difference by recording what they do already and by 
virtually engaging their audience too.

It may sound like another burden for universities but platforms such as this 
promise powerful impact from modest effort by taking advantage of simple 
technologies that students use every day. And there's a sweetener. Universities 
cringe at the demands made of them at a time when they must focus on the new 
fee regime and the challenge of sustaining recruitment. But those universities 
that contribute resources to the Faculties can embed banners to draw attention 
to their programmes. There may be other ways for Gove and Milburn to achieve 
their goals, but as things stand, innovating trumps asking universities to 'do 
more'.

James Harris is senior lecturer in Modern European history at the University 
of Leeds <http://www.leeds.ac.uk/> and project manager of the Faculties 
<http://thefaculties.org/>, providing university lectures for secondary schools 
– follow it on Twitter@thefaculties <https://twitter.com/thefaculties>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network <http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network>.
 