What was the average wage for apprentices in 2012?  £195 per week  £207 per week
 £221 per week  £340 per week By how much did apprenticeship applications 
increase in 2013?  10%  17%  20%  32% Which of these is not currently possible 
to do an apprenticeship in?  Costume and wardrobe  Fruit picker  Sandwich artist
 Jockey How many employers take on apprentices each year?  25,000  75,000  
100,000  200,000 Can university graduates do an apprenticeship?  No  Yes  Yes, 
but the employer has to pay training costs  Yes, but they have to pay the 
employer to do it How many employers noticed an improvement in workplace 
motivation after hiring an apprentice?  50%  63%  79%  92% Which of these stars 
didn't start out as an apprentice?  Sir Alex Ferguson  Ozzy Osbourne  Jamie 
Oliver  David Beckham How likely is it for an apprentice to reach management 
level?  Very unlikely, apprentices can't get to manager position  Unlikely, 
they need a degree  Likely, there's a good chance  Very likely, it's almost 
guaranteed By how much could doing a level 4 higher apprenticeship increase 
your lifetime earnings?  £30,000  £100,000  £150,000  £300,000 How many 
graduates wish they had taken a more vocational route, like an apprenticeship?  
23%  35%  44%  49%  You got…  Top-notch apprentice: great job, you're well on 
the way to being the next Alan Sugar.  Qualified apprentice: great job, you're 
well on the way to being the next Alan Sugar.  Qualified apprentice: great job, 
you're well on the way to being the next Alan Sugar.  Intermediate apprentice: 
with a bit more training and experience you'll be on the road to apprentice 
excellence.  Intermediate apprentice: with a bit more training and experience 
you'll be on the road to apprentice excellence.  Intermediate apprentice: with 
a bit more training and experience you'll be on the road to apprentice 
excellence.  Junior apprentice: in the words of Alan Sugar, "Don’t worry if you 
make mistakes because that’s how most people learn."  Junior apprentice: in the 
words of Alan Sugar, "Don’t worry if you make mistakes because that’s how most 
people learn."  Junior apprentice: in the words of Alan Sugar, "Don’t worry if 
you make mistakes because that’s how most people learn."  Junior apprentice: in 
the words of Alan Sugar, "Don’t worry if you make mistakes because that’s how 
most people learn."  Try harder next time...  Challenge your friends Submit 
answers  