
London is the driving force of higher education participation in England, and 
widening participation in particular – at least that's whatthe latest Hefce 
report <https://www.hefce.ac.uk/news/newsarchive/2013/news83564.html> would 
have us believe. Participation in higher educationhas increased by more than 
13% in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/24/london-highest-numbers-higher-education>
 since 1998-99. And in the city's low participation neighbourhoods, 
participation rates have almost doubled.

Good news if you're a young person living in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> who wants to go to university. Hefce's 
research suggests your chances of doing so are far better than if you lived in 
any other area of the country. What it does not show however is 'job done' for 
widening access in the capital. Nothing could be further from the truth.

There is no one factor which accounts for why more young people in London have 
been going to university in the past 15 years. A major reason, however, are the 
relatively high levels of achievement at GCSE of London learners, in particular 
those from low income backgrounds. Another factor is the ethnic make-up of the 
city – London is home to more young people from Chinese and other Asian 
backgrounds than the rest of the UK and both these groups enjoy high rates of 
participation.

There are also more than 40 higher education institutions in the city, a 
number that is set to grow. Learners are more likely to take up higher 
education in their own region and this tendency is magnified for those from 
under-represented backgrounds. Finally, let's not discount the impact and 
legacy of government investment in widening access in the 2000s. There were 
more than 10Aim Higher <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aimhigher> partnerships and
Lifelong Learning Networks <http://www.lifelonglearningnetworks.org.uk/> in 
London, whose ethos lives on through organisations like Aimhigher London South,
Linking London <http://www.linkinglondon.ac.uk/> and, my own, AccessHE 
<http://www.accesshe.ac.uk/>.

This educational ecosystem does not perform miracles, however. Hefce's POLAR 
research method <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/whatwedo/wp/ourresearch/polar/polar3/> 
divides the country into small areas based on census area wards, before using a 
specially developed methodology that relies on entry data from theHigher 
Education Statistics Agency <http://www.hesa.ac.uk/> (HESA) and others, 
alongside population estimates derived from child benefit records. It then 
calculates rates of higher education participation and divides the country into 
five quintiles from low to high participation.

On the basis of this method, the number of learners from low participation 
areas in London is now calucated at 23%. Combined with an overall 'level of 
participation' rate of 48%, the effect has been to move virtually all London 
wards out of the lowest participation quintile, leaving only 3000 young people, 
or 3% of the young population, as 'disadvantaged' in 2011-12.

This gives the impression that we have miraculously solved the widening access 
challenge in London. But it is plainly absurd to suggest that only 3000 young 
Londoners in any one year come from a background that could be described as 
disadvantaged. To be fair, the Hefce report does include a measure of 
participation by household income. London is still way ahead of the country 
with 41% of those in low income areas going on to higher education.

On this measure, 47% of the 2011-12 cohort in London are disadvantaged. Given 
what we know about the London economy, this is a much more realistic figure. 
While London has the largest number of affluent people, it also has the largest 
number of poor people. But POLAR is still the dominant measure that Hefce uses 
to allocate its (soon to be diminishing) resources for widening participation 
and theOffice for Fair Access <http://www.offa.org.uk/> (OFFA) uses to shape 
what higher education institutions do and whom they target in their access 
agreements.

More than £100m is being invested by HEIs in London on outreach work to widen 
access and financial support for learners from disadvantaged backgrounds. The 
vast majority of this £100m is being spent in London. Taken literally, the 
Hefce reports suggests these funds should be spent on 3000 learners. 
Thankfully, this is not the case.

London universities are using a range of ways to ensure they can serve as many 
genuinely disadvantaged learners as possible. But they and OFFA risk becoming 
increasingly hemmed in by the way that POLAR analysis is being used. There is 
an urgent need to review how we define learners from disadvantaged backgrounds 
not just to enable HEIs to allocate their resources fairly and ethically but 
for the sake of access work more generally.

Many politicians are already sceptical about efforts to widen access. If we 
cannot define who these efforts are aimed at in a realistic way, then the risk 
is this scepticism will turn into outright opposition.

Graeme Atherton is head of AccessHE <http://www.accesshe.ac.uk/> – follow it 
on Twitter@AccessHE <http://twitter.com/accessHE>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 