
‘Apple’s iPhone sales disappoint 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/miguelhelft/2016/01/26/apples-iphone-sales-disappoint-but-profits-beat-targets/#2b28d7a3ddf5>
 but profit beats targets,” said the headline. It turned out that Apple sold 
“only” 74.77m iPhones in the fiscal first quarter of 2016, which is less than a 
1% increase on the same period a year ago. So what happens? The share price 
plummets andAlphabet <https://abc.xyz/> (aka Google) overtakes Apple as the 
world’s most valuable company.

And right on cue, we get the usual kind of kindergarten “analysis” from the 
tech commentariat. Apple has run out of ideas. It needs a new “breakthrough 
<http://www.techinsider.io/apple-needs-a-hit-2016-1>” product along the lines 
of the iPhone. The iPad was supposed to be that product, but its sales are 
declining. And the Apple watch clearly isn’t going to take its place etc, etc...

There are two kinds of people: those who are obsessed with the datafication of 
their bodies and those who are not

The only one of those propositions with which I agree is the last. I bought an 
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> watch a while back, on the 
principle that if you write about this stuff you should put your money where 
your keyboard is. Six months on, I find myself deeply underwhelmed by the 
device. Sure, it tells the time, but then so does a £25 Timex.

It links seamlessly with my iPhone, but you would expect that from a company 
famously good at linking together the products in its ecosystem. The watch 
vibrates when an email or a text comes in, which seemed useful at first (I 
could discreetly see who was emailing or texting while in meetings). But the 
charm quickly wore off: when you get as much inbound stuff as I do, the 
attractions of having a miniature wasp on your wrist soon pale.

When I confided my disappointment in the watch to some other users, however, 
they reacted badly, or at least sceptically. Could I not appreciate the health 
and fitness affordances of the device? It turned out that these guys – and they 
are all males, by the way – were entranced by the fact the watch enabled them 
to monitor their heart rates, fitness levels, activity profiles and so on. It 
even reminded them every hour that they should get up from their screens and 
move about.

And then it dawned on me – there are two kinds of people in the world: those 
who are obsessed with the datafication of their bodies and those who are not. I 
belong to the latter category: the only thing that interests me about my heart 
is that it is still beating. And when it isn’t I shall be past caring. But if 
the current craze for wearable devices such as fitness trackers is anything to 
go by, I may soon find myself a member of a despised minority, rather like 
cigarette smokers, whisky drinkers and followers ofDavid Icke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/mar/17/features.weekend>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fdo-we-need-app-to-monitor-premarital-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86efd178dad3ae89bd05665846a69e453e97a5a2%2F0_0_1322_1735%2F1322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20self-monitoring%20becomes%20uncomfortably%20intimate%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fdo-we-need-app-to-monitor-premarital-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20self-monitoring%20becomes%20uncomfortably%20intimate%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fdo-we-need-app-to-monitor-premarital-sex%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86efd178dad3ae89bd05665846a69e453e97a5a2%2F0_0_1322_1735%2F1322.jpg>
 Illustration by Matt Murphy. 
The fitness-tracker obsession started out as a wacky hobby of early adopters, 
but is beginning to acquire a harder edge. I’m told some firms are beginning to 
“incentivise” (ie coerce) employees – even senior executives – to wearFitbit 
<http://www.fitbit.com/uk/home>-type wristbands. In one case, it was so that 
companies, allegedly, could assess levels of employee stress, a touching 
example of digital paternalism, courtesy of the HR department.

And now it turns out that an outfit called Oral Roberts (which I had hitherto 
assumed was a brand of toothpaste, but is, in fact, an American private 
university) hasstipulated 
<http://qz.com/609002/a-christian-college-is-using-fitbits-to-track-students-health-but-not-never-their-sex-lives/>
 that all its incoming freshmen must wear Fitbits to track their fitness 
levels. In the past, the unfortunate students of Oral Roberts were obliged to 
note down the amount of steps and exercise they had undertaken in a “fitness 
book”. Henceforth, this will be done by digital technology.Mens sana in corpore 
sano and all that.

Since premarital sex is forbidden on the Oral Roberts campus, one would have 
thought the authorities would want to use students’ Fitbit data to make sure 
there was no hanky-panky. But apparently they are not going to go down that 
road, although the technology can do it. (It’s all to do with therate of 
calorie burn 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/woman-has-sex-wearing-fitbit-here-is-what-happened-10451295.html>
, apparently.)

What is really astonishing about this obsession with datafication is how far 
it has already gone. I know this because I came upon an intriguing paper by a 
New York University scholar,Karen Levy <http://www.karen-levy.net/>, published 
in, of all places, theIdaho Law Review 
<http://www.uidaho.edu/law/law-review/articles>. The title – Intimate 
Surveillance – says it all. The nub of it is: whatever you’re in to, there is 
an app for datafying it. Truly,Heidegger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/martin-heidegger> was right when he defined 
technology as the art of arranging the world so that you don’t have to 
experience it. And he didn’t even have an Apple watch.
 