
In Misery <http://www.miserybroadway.com/>, the Broadway adaptation of the 
Stephen King novel, Bruce Willis plays a writer imprisoned by Laurie Metcalf’s 
psychotic fan. He is stripped of his dignity, mobility and artistic free will.

 But at least he gets to keep his earpiece.

Rumours have swirled that Willis, who is making his Broadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> debut, has been wearing an 
earpiece that feeds him his lines while the play is in previews. A note from 
the press representative confirmed that indeed “an earpiece was used as a 
safety net”.

 Sharp-sighted spectators have also spotted a Bluetooth embedded in Al 
Pacino’s ear during previews forChina Doll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/10/china-doll-broadway-david-mamet-al-pacino-delayed-opening>
 andthe New York Post has reported 
<http://nypost.com/2015/10/29/al-pacino-totally-lost-over-his-terrible-new-broadway-play/>
 that there are no fewer than seven teleprompters dotted around the set to help 
him with his cues. And just a few doors down, Cicely Tyson and James Earl Jones 
are both using earpieces as the cantankerous oldsters inThe Gin Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/15/the-gin-game-review-james-earl-jones-cicely-tyson>
, according to various accounts. (It is widely acknowledged that Tyson used an 
earpiece onThe Trip to Bountiful 
<http://www.broadway.com/buzz/awards/tony-awards/nominees/355/the-trip-to-bountiful/>
, but she still walked away with the Tony award for featured actress in a play.)

Two-week delayed opening of David Mamet's China Doll raises eyebrows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/10/china-doll-broadway-david-mamet-al-pacino-delayed-opening>
 There has been plenty of grumbling on message boards and sidewalks, with 
disgruntled theatre fans insisting that a key duty of an actor is to learn his 
or her lines. But just what is so terrible about a little wireless assistance?

Well, in some ways, acting is related to athletics. (Antonin Artaud 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/antonin-artaud> called actors “athletes of 
the heart”.) Theatre and games are both live events, performed by bodies in 
real time, and most of us have an innate distaste for anything that smacks of 
cheating. If we won’t allow a swipe of Vaseline on a slide ball or a steroid 
shot in the arm of its pitcher, we may feel the same revulsion at actors who 
have extra help. Still, prompting is not illegal and has long been a part of 
the theatre. Perhaps earpieces can be seen as a less obtrusive resource than 
halting a scene to shout, “Line!”

 Maybe we also ought to consider degrees of difficulty, in the way that judges 
at a diving or a figure skating competition might. Some lines are harder to 
learn than others. Comic banter is easy enough, but goodness knows how anyone 
learns Lucky’s speech in Godot or anything by Gertrude Stein. The repetitive 
card playing of The Gin Game is apparently an incredible challenge, and in the 
original Broadway production, Hume Cronyn took to writing his cues on the card 
table itself. Should we be more forgiving of Pacino, who reportedly has to 
learn pages of new text every day, than of Willis, whose play has been 
performed before and whose script is probably more stable? (And if this Misery 
is anything likethe movie version <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0100157/>, his 
character doesn’t even do most of the talking.)

Also, both these plays are still in previews (China Doll will be in previews 
for a while yetas it just delayed its opening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/10/china-doll-broadway-david-mamet-al-pacino-delayed-opening>
), so can temporary assistance be pardoned? We might be more lenient if 
theatres offered a significant discount during the preview period. Very few do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftheatre-earpiece-prompting-bruce-willis-al-pacino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeb240e862293c4a56b54cd22177053d28585fe5%2F0_0_3981_2393%2F3981.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20a%20star%20doesn't%20know%20the%20script%2C%20send%20for%20the%20earpiece&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftheatre-earpiece-prompting-bruce-willis-al-pacino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20a%20star%20doesn%27t%20know%20the%20script%2C%20send%20for%20the%20earpiece&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftheatre-earpiece-prompting-bruce-willis-al-pacino%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feeb240e862293c4a56b54cd22177053d28585fe5%2F0_0_3981_2393%2F3981.jpg>
 Deborah Rush, Rupert Everett, Angela Lansbury, Jayne Atkinson and Simon Jones 
in Blithe Spirit – but what did Lansbury’s hairstyle conceal? Photograph: 
Robert J Saferstein/AP 
We are apparently more merciful toward older actors relying on technology to 
cover memory lapses. Angela Lansbury wore an earpiece in the recent revival of
Blithe Spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/18/blithe-spirit-review-fine-noel-coward-revival>
 and while some may have looked askance at her hairstyle, which resembles twin 
cinnamon danishes stuck to her face, there weren’t many criticisms of what that 
hair concealed. “If we’re going to play important roles at our age, where our 
names are above the title on the marquee, we’re going to ask for some support 
if we need it,”Lansbury unashamedly told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/02/arts/international/the-many-fortunes-of-angela-lansbury.html?_r=0>
.

At 75, Pacino is not in the first blush of youth. Jones has nearly a decade on 
him and Tyson is at least 90. There aren’t too many reports of younger actors 
using earpieces, though some may resort to analogue methods, as when Mario 
Lopez apparently scribbled lines on to his hat during his A Chorus Line stint 
or Matthew Broderick used on a seated prompter during the early weeks ofThe 
Starry Messenger 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/24/theater/reviews/24starry.html>.

Of course there are alternatives. Surely within the ranks of actors in New 
York there are excellent, age-appropriate performers who could arrive at the 
first rehearsal confidently off book. But would we pay to see them? On Broadway 
big names can be much of the draw and it’s worth wondering if ticket buyers 
would prefer a word-perfect no-name or a prompted star, though knowing that an 
actor is prompted does have a way of shearing off some of that celebrity 
glamour.

Yet even if we still want to see that star, earpiece and all, it’s worth 
wondering just how much these fed lines enable a performance and how much they 
inhibit it. Some avant-garde theatre companies, such as theWooster Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/nov/15/usa.arts> and the Nature Theater 
of Oklahoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/30/awkward-weird-dirty-nature-theatre-oklahoma>
, use earpieces deliberately, to connect the actor to the voice or the person 
he or she is meant to be playing, or to issue directions that only the actors 
can hear and to which the actors must respond immediately. In the best cases, 
the actors don’t seem confined by the technology and the results are often 
thrilling.

On the other hand we have the evidence of Michael Gambon, who gave up stage 
acting because of the great difficulty he had learning his lines. The anxiety 
surrounding drying (or what we Americans call “going up”) landed him in the 
hospital,forcing his withdrawal from Alan Bennett’s The Habit of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/02/michael-gambon-alan-bennett>. He 
soldiered on for a while, even trying an earpiece. But he felt it constrained 
his acting. As he told the Sunday Times: “After about an hour I thought, ‘This 
can’t work. You can’t be in theatre, free on stage shouting and screaming and 
running around, with someone reading you your lines.’”

Gambon’s declaration should give one pause. How much more ferocious would 
those card players be without their prompting, how much wackier Madame Arcati? 
Would Pacino and Willis be delivering better performances without technical 
assistance? Maybe. Or maybe they wouldn’t be able to deliver those performances 
at all. After all, which would you rather see, an actor aided by prompting and 
arguably less engaged in the moment-to-momentness of the live event, or an 
actor struggling for a line?

There is something both painful and gratifying about watching an actor dry. It 
reminds us of theatre’s liveness and it can conjure a lot of sympathy for that 
floundering actor. But it can also be a horrible, cringing thing to behold. I’m 
not sure that those who saw Jones’s Much Ado About Nothing  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/sep/20/much-ado-about-nothing-review-rylance>
at the Old Vic, which reportedly had many long and uncomfortable pauses, would 
begrudge him his Gin Game earpiece.

 Even actors who don’t rely on earpieces sometimes need a little prompting. 
Years ago Laurie Metcalf, Willis’s Misery co-star, told a Chicago reporter that 
she had extra help when she was performing The Miss Firecracker Contest while 
pregnant with her daughter. “There must have been something about my anxiety 
and getting ready that would transfer to her,” she said. “On the line before my 
cue, I’d always feel this little kick.”
 