
This doesn't make me especially proud, but last week's announcement that Anne 
Rice was to "quit being a Christian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/30/anne-rice-quits-being-christian>
" while remaining committed to Christ made me smile. Rice made the annoucement 
on Facebook:

"In the name of Christ, I refuse to be anti-gay. I refuse to be anti-feminist. 
I refuse to be anti-artificial birth control. I refuse to be anti-Democrat. I 
refuse to be anti-secular humanism. I refuse to be anti-science. I refuse to be 
anti-life. In the name of Christ, I quitChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> and being Christian. Amen"

Amen indeed. Reading her statement, I felt a wave of smug pleasure reserved 
for those who feel they've been proven right.

Rice was an atheist when she wrote the series of vampire books that coloured 
my teenage years, even though she later justified the presence of the 
diabolical creatures in her novels by explaining that she never glorified evil, 
and that "on the contrary, the continuing battle against evil is the subject of 
the work". Keen readers would disagree (Lestat 
<http://www.annerice.com/bookshelf-vampirelestat.html>'s apostasy and his 
sensual mercenary ways, not glorified? Yeah, right!) and I, like many others, 
felt nothing but consternation when she announced her return to Catholicism 
back in 1998.

The curse continued, as one by one seemingly all of my heroes came out as 
religious. A few years ago, indie musician Beck went public about his 
involvement with Scientology (my partner found this more depressing than Kurt 
Cobain's fate – "at least his suicide seemed to fit hisown mythology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/oct/20/biography.nirvana>, learning 
about Beck's faith just made me feel ill"). Juliette Lewisfollowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/sep/17/women.popandrock> shortly 
after. Madonna, whom I adored as a teen, got into Kabbalah (at least the 
religious overtones earlier in her career weremore subversive 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lA983t3Rdzs>). And worst of all Prince, whom I 
had followed compulsively since my childhood, announced in 2001 that his faith 
had take a new direction: he had chosen to become a Jehovah's Witness (going as 
far ashanding out pamphlets <http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,518587,00.html> 
door-to-door, leaving a trail ofgobsmacked people in his wake 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/prince/2010/07/06/prince-from-sex-god-to-man-of-god-86908-22385739/>
).

Why this feeling of superiority (some might say bigotry-lite) on my part? Does 
knowing that a favourite creator has a faith I disdain change the quality of 
their output? In most cases, religious conversion doesn't put me off so much 
that I give up buying their art entirely (that is unless they really go 
overboard – see John Travolta'sBattlefield Earth: A Saga of the Year 3000 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0185183/>, one of the worst received movies 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battlefield_Earth_%28film%29#Critical_reception> 
ever). Prince's music, for example, has always had the imprint of his bizzarre 
brand of religious mysticism, and for the most part it has helped his music – 
pop masterpieces such as his songThe Cross 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x62ivq_11-the-cross-lovesexy-tour-dortmund_music>
 wouldn't exist otherwise.

It does, however, change my perception of them as people. Christians have to 
live with (and defend themselves from) stereotypes that contain grains of 
truth: a lot of Christian denominations are closely associated with 
anti-choice, anti-science and anti-gay mindsets, which is why it breaks my 
heart to see my heroes joining their ranks. By evangelising while also not 
voicing their disapproval ofsome traits associated with Christianity, they add 
their tacit approval to groups perpetuating systems of oppression. The same 
goes for communists who are uncritical of their movement's past, for gender 
activists who don't acknowledge how feminism has historicallyfailed 
working-class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/mar/24/middle-class-feminism-politics>
 andminority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/apr/10/white-feminism-black-woman-womanism>
 women, or for libertarians unwilling toanalyse 
<http://www.feministe.us/blog/archives/2010/04/30/blogging-against-disablism-day-addressing-ableist-language/>
 the limitations of free speech.

In other words, I find myself put off when believers of any kind broadcast 
their faith without any critical appendix. But Rice's pronouncement has also 
made me take a look at my own response to religion: when news of her statement 
came through, I assumed she'd come back to atheism and let out a small whoop of 
joy. In fact, she's still into Christ, but has made it clear she hates some of 
the baggage. That's a stance I can actually admire (though I still wish she'd 
come clean about Lestat and those other vampires). It's a rare thing when 
famous people get to explain their thinking in detail (and when they do, it can 
bepainful 
<http://gawker.com/5002269/the-cruise-indoctrination-video-scientology-tried-to-suppress>
), but I'm glad Rice has chosen to do so.
 