
Did a novel change your life? Five journalists are planning to reveal the 
books that changed theirs during on-stage interviews.

Andrew Marr, India Knight, Paul Mason, Paul Morley and Gaby Wood will explain 
how they were influenced by their favourite fictional work at a series of 
events atKing's College London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/kings-college-london> later this month 
and in early October.

According to the publicity release 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/newsrecords/140815-joi-2014.aspx>, the 
interviews "will challenge the traditional format of literary conversations, 
using reflections on fiction to offer insights into how journalism works as a 
creative art form."

So Marr will reveal what he gets from Tolstoy's War and Peace in conversation 
with the editor of the London Review of Books, Mary-Kay Wilmers.

Knight will discuss Nancy Mitford's The Pursuit of Love with her former 
partner Andrew O'Hagan, who is creative writing fellow at King's. Morley will 
be interviewed by Adam Thirwell about his regard forVladimir Nabokov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/vladimirnabokov>.

Mason will talk to Anne Enright about Gravity's Rainbow by Thomas Pynchon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomaspynchon>. And Wood's conversation with 
Jonathan Coe will centre on Italo Calvino's The Castle of Crossed Destinies.

The talks, part of the "joy of influence" festival, will explore where fiction 
and non-fiction writing blends and has been responsible for cross-fertilisation.

They will take place on separate days at the Edmond J. Safra lecture theatre 
at King's.More details about dates here 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/newsrecords/140815-joi-2014.aspx>. To obtain 
tickets, which are Â£5 (with some concessions), go tokcl.ac.uk/cultural 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/index.aspx>.

Source: King's College 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/newsrecords/140815-joi-2014.aspx>
 