
On the eve of the big breakthrough for women in the 1997 general election, 
when female MPs broke the magical 100 barrier, I was in Ethiopia, running a 
workshop on behalf of the British Council on women in politics. On my way to 
Addis Ababa airport to catch a flight home to London, I made a pilgrimage to 
the grave of suffragetteSylvia Pankhurst 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/womanshour/2005_41_wed_03.shtml>, in the garden of 
the Holy Trinity Church near the grave of her great friend, Emperor Haile 
Selassie.

I placed a red flower on her tomb in deference to her socialist beliefs, 
making a wish that in the upcoming election, for the first time in British 
history, at least 100 women would be elected to the House of Commons. A record 
121 women were elected.

The leap forward was due to a big swing to Labour, combined with the fact that 
the party had bravely introduced controversial all-female shortlists for 
winnable seats with no Labour incumbents. This was about the only type of quota 
system available in our first-past-the-post electoral system.

If I were to make a wish that at the next general election at least 200 women 
would be elected, I would be disappointed.

In 1928, when the Equal Franchise Act  
<http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_publications_and_archives/parliamentary_archives/archives___the_first_women_in_parliament_1919_1945.cfm>
 was passed, it raised among British women huge hopes that quite soon they 
would become equal participants with men in the House of Commons. Eighty years 
on, the UK parliament rates a poor 69th in theworld league of women in 
parliament <http://www.unicef.org/pon95/wome0003.html>, one ignoble place below 
Cambodia.

Women's representation in politics is not linked to whether a country is rich 
or poor. The United States has 16.8% women representatives. Japan has 9.4% 
women in the Diet. Rwanda, with 48.8%, and Sweden, with 47%, have the highest 
representation of women in any parliament in the world, versus the UK at just 
over 19% women MPs. Countries ranked above the UK in the world league include 
Afghanistan, Australia, Rwanda, Belarus, Pakistan, New Zealand and 27 other 
European states, including far, far ahead of us, the Scandinavian countries.

Spain comes a commendable fifth in the European Women in Politics League with 
36.3% female MPs. More than half of Spanish cabinet ministers arewomen 
<http://lifeandhealth.theguardian.com/women/story/0,,2274645,00.html>. 

If this were a soccer league, we'd keep firing the manager until the UK 
clambered up to a top position. The facts on the ground show that if the 
Conservative party wins the next election, the percentage of women in the 
mother of parliaments is likely to tumble even more shamefully lower down the 
league. For more than a quarter of a century, the political parties have said, 
repetitively and routinely, that they want to increase the number of female 
MPs. Party leaders have simply not delivered the goods. There is still only one 
woman in every five MPs.

I have learned from campaigning and working on equal representation of women 
in politics in more than 40 countries that encouragement, lobbying and training 
are helpful, but progress is too slow. AsHelena Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/helenakennedy> would say: "It's like 
waiting for fish to grow feet."

One look around the world shows that in politics, no actions, let alone 
exhortation, will ever succeed without some form ofquota 
<http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/index.asp?PageID=150> as a perhaps temporary 
breakthrough measure. The 20 countries with more than 30% women in parliament 
share two things in common: their electoral system uses some form of 
proportional representation and they use quotas.

Elections after a major upheaval can be a swift catalyst for reform and 
throwing off the baggage of the past. Five countries currently with more than 
30% women in their legislatures took such an opportunity to introduce radical 
reforms: Rwanda, Mozambique, Uganda and Burundi after wars and South Africa 
after Apartheid. In the United Kingdom, major constitutional and devolution 
reforms led to the first Scottish parliament in more than 300 years, and a 
Welsh assembly.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> activists 
in the Labour party seized the chance and lobbied hard for quotas to be 
introduced into the party candidate selection system. The Scottish parliament 
now has 33.3% women members and the Welsh assembly 46.7% women members. At one 
point there was even an exact gender balance of female and male assembly 
members and more than half the Welsh assembly ministers were female. Before the 
reforms, only one in 20 Welsh local councillors was a woman.

Our party leaders have taken a few hesitant steps in the right direction, but 
so far it has been all foreplay. They need greater courage to go all the way in 
both chambers of parliament. David Cameron's first promise when he became 
Conservative party leader was to increase the number of women MPs in the party 
from the current17 out of 180 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/mar/02/women.gender> Conservatives. 
Shadow leader of the House, Theresa May, has been touring the country working 
hard to carry out her leader's pledge, but at the current rate of candidate 
selection, even a major swing to the Conservatives would most likely only 
result in a handful more Tory women MPs at most.

Lib Dems, long-term supporters of reforming the voting system from 
first-past-the-post to PR, threw away their chances of becoming a truly 
representative political party by slamming the door on equal representation of 
women and men MPs at a party conference a few years ago, when they voted 
against the introduction of gender balanced quotas in their candidate selection 
system. To try to compensate for this disastrous vote, party activists upped 
the amount of training and encouragement for women budding politicians and 
targeted extra cash and resources at constituencies with female candidates. The 
results are not encouraging. Out of the 54 Lib Dem MPs, nine are women. At the 
next general election, Liberal Democrats are likely to deliver little or no 
increase in women â€“ given a fair wind, they might increase their number of 
female MPs by a couple.

There is only one way most of us will live to see gender equality in the 
British parliament: speedy reform of the electoral system to PR, combined with 
a gender balance quota.

The big questions is, do party leaders Gordon Brown, David Cameron and Nick 
Clegg have the political commitment and courage to deliver equality for women 
in parliament and a more democratic political system?

This article was amended at 4:15pm on July 7 2008
 