
Every week 15m of us push our shopping trolleys up and down the aisles of the 
Co-op's 3,000 stores. As we do so, the in-store radio plugs their deals of the 
week. When we settle up at the checkout, the till displays promote their latest 
venture: legal services.

QualitySolicitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/apr/03/uks-first-chain-high-street-lawyers>
 (QS) might have private equity clout to fund a £15m advertising campaign 
(designed by Team Saatchi no less), but the Co-op has a store on every high 
street and potentially up to 1,000 bank branches (if you count itsrecent 
purchase of 632 Lloyds branches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/19/co-op-lloyds-branches-high-street-bank>
). It also has the one thing that no law firm or law firm marketing scheme like 
QS is ever likely to achieve – with or without TV ads in the middle of Downton 
Abbey – a brand that many of us have warm feelings towards, underpinned by the 
Co-operative ethos.

On Thursday Co-operative Legal Services launched its new family law arm of its 
business. Earlier this year Co-op became thefirst consumer brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/apr/02/abs-tesco-law-here> to become an 
ABS (alternative business structure) and among the first three ABSs regulated 
by the Solicitors Regulation Authority.

In a movement named after its high street rival (Tesco Law), the Co-op's 
progress into legal services has been somewhat overlooked. Their foray into 
family law is well-timed and might well change the face of consumer legal 
services. The retailer has 500 staff at its headquarters in Bristol (20 in its 
family department in Paddington, London with room for 80) and ambitions to 
recruit 3,000 lawyers in five years.

The retailer claims to have developed a low-price, fixed fee tariff for family 
work. Non-lawyers might well be stunned that fixed pricing in divorce counts 
for an innovation in the rarified world of legal services. Relationship 
breakdown might be one of the most upsetting and financially precarious times 
of life, but family lawyers remain wedded to the hourly rate - only compounding 
uncertainty.

If priced correctly, the family offering will be well received, especially in 
the context of the dreadful legal aid reforms which will strip publicly-funded 
legal advice in family law except where there is domestic violence.

"I personally think it is an absolute tragedy," Christina Blacklaws, director 
of family law with the Co-operative Legal Services, said of the legal aid act 
last week. Blacklaws joined the retailer from legal aid firm TV Edwards at the
end of last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/nov/10/coop-move-into-family-division> 
(together with managing partner Jenny Beck and head of business development, 
Chris May). The Co-op already does a lot of publicly-funded family work, 
including child protection, and is applying for more contracts in the current 
tender round. "We, and all other advice agencies, need to work together," the 
lawyer told me.

"We will continue to offer legal aid for as long as we can. We might well be 
the last man standing when it comes to legal aid."

Ironic perhaps that the largest legal aid family practice (if the Co-op isn't 
the largest already) could be a new style ABS – doubly ironic if it is "the 
last man standing". Critics of deregulation have argued that new-style market 
entrants would only be interested in those more profitable aspects of legal 
practice, ditching the less remunerative. "The expectation is that big business 
will storm the aisles like a deranged contestant on Supermarket Sweep throwing 
all the money-making stuff – personal injury, conveyancing etc – into its 
trolley and leaving non-remunerative, publicly funded law to gather dust on the 
shelf," Iobserved in 2008 
<http://www.newlawjournal.co.uk/nlj/comment/reply/1118>.

In the run up to the passing of the Legal Services Act 2007 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2007/29/contents>, the Law Society even 
tried to argue that new market entrants should be made to offer financial 
support to existing law firms to "safeguard access to justice".

Eddie Ryan, who was MD of the Co-operative Legal Services up until July, used 
to talk of the Co-op's relationship with members as "wrapping our arms about 
people who need our help". Legal services appear to be a great fit for the 
Co-op brand.

When I spoke to Christina Blacklaws last week, she talked of the guiding 
principle for its move into the legal services being its "ethos, the ethical 
standards of the Co-op and everything that stands for". That ethos is 
articulated this week in a newcustomer charter 
<http://www.co-operative.coop/legalservices/family-and-relationships/our-charter/>
, number one being "no nasty surprises. Apparently that principled stance will 
also inform their lawyering, including in the emotionally fraught area of 
divorce. "If people want a Rottweiler, they can go somewhere else," Blacklaws 
told me.

Meanwhile, the forthcoming QualitySolicitors TV campaign will be "openly 
anti-supermarket law (as well as anti-bank law and anti-breakdown company law). 
"Legal services offered by supermarkets and others will be faceless and 
entirely remote and miss the crucial local, personal element,"says founder 
<http://www.qualitysolicitors.com/qualitysolicitors-legalzoom> Craig Holt.

The flashpoints for competition in the newly–liberalised world of legal 
services are already around greater standards, accessibility, price 
transparency and innovation in the delivery of services. Frankly, lawyers have 
much to learn from other sectors.
 