
NatWest this week shocked the banking industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/natwest-paves-way-for-introduction-of-negative-interest-rates>
 by changing the terms and conditions on its business accounts to pave the way 
to charge customers for holding their deposits, although it insists it has no 
immediate plans to do so. In an upside-down world where interest rates turn 
negative and you could end up paying a bank to lend them your money, what are 
the alternatives?

1. Under the mattress

If you know for certain your bank is going to give you back less than you put 
into an account, then why leave it there? Why not stash it under the mattress? 
True, your £1,000 will still be worth £1,000 after a year. Unfortunately it’s 
what lots of Greeks did when their financial system verged on total collapse. 
One couple in their 80s took €80,000 (£66,000) out of the bank, stuck it under 
the mattress – and had it nicked within days. If you hold cash in your house, 
most insurance policies will pay you back just £500 if you suffer a fire or 
burglary.

If you must hide it in the house, don’t use the mattress. The internet is full 
of “15 Secret Hiding Places That Will Fool Even the Smartest Burglar” 
listicles; our favourite is a realistic-lookingiceberg lettuce 
<http://www.diyncrafts.com/3833/home/15-secret-hiding-places-will-fool-even-smartest-burglar>
 that doubles up as a lockable safe you keep in the back of your fridge.

NatWest paves way for introduction of negative interest rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/natwest-paves-way-for-introduction-of-negative-interest-rates>
2. In property

It’s almost every Brit’s favourite investment. Trouble is, £1,000 won’t get 
you far. The typical deposit an investor now has to put down for a buy-to-let 
property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/12/buy-to-let-landlords-struggling-tax-increases>
 is around £55,000. What’s more, stamp duty is higher on buy-to-lets, and from 
next April anyone with a BTL mortgage faces a raft of tax increases. If you 
have just £1,000, the boring but sensible option in a world of zero interest 
rates is to use the money to pay down your mortgage.

3. Peer-to peer lending

This is where you use the internet to link up with people who need to borrow, 
cutting out the banks and earning yourself a higher rate of interest. More than 
150,000 people now have peer-to-peer accounts in the UK – the big players are 
Zopa, Ratesetter and Funding Circle – with around £6bn lent out. Currently,
rates on offer are between 3% and 7% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2015/oct/10/ratesetter-funding-circle-zopa-interest-peer-p2p-lenders>
, although these will fall if Bank of England base rate drops to zero or below.

But in finance you don’t get this sort of return without lots of risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/10/former-city-regulator-warns-peer-to-peer-lending-lord-turner>
; China, Sweden and the US have already seenpeer-to-peer companies collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/feb/15/quakle-collapse-warning-peer-to-peer-investors>
, and in the UK if anything goes wrong you’re in the cold. There is no safety 
net if the company goes bust, so you could lose every penny.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fwhere-to-put-1000-pounds-if-we-enter-a-world-of-negative-interest-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F631519aac6a42e65e03252e1dea783a65e1d55f1%2F0_83_3857_2314%2F3857.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20to%20put%20%C2%A31%2C000%20in%20a%20world%20of%20negative%20interest%20rates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fwhere-to-put-1000-pounds-if-we-enter-a-world-of-negative-interest-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20to%20put%20%C2%A31%2C000%20in%20a%20world%20of%20negative%20interest%20rates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fwhere-to-put-1000-pounds-if-we-enter-a-world-of-negative-interest-rates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F631519aac6a42e65e03252e1dea783a65e1d55f1%2F0_83_3857_2314%2F3857.jpg>
 There are plenty of alternatives to putting money under the mattress. 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
4. Gold

After the Brexit vote, the price of gold rocketed, with bullion dealers 
reporting record demand from nervous investors seeking a safe haven. An ounce 
of gold jumped by $61 as the result emerged, hitting $1,324. TheRoyal Mint  
<http://www.royalmint.com/bullion>lets you buy gold in units of £20 upwards, 
and will store it for you, too. Or buy an exchange-traded fund, which tracks 
the price of physical gold, at a charge of 0.4% a year. But in truth, gold has 
been a lousy long-term investment. Loads of small investors rushed in during 
the global financial crash, pushing the price up to $1,837 an ounce in 2011, so 
are now sitting on losses of around 25%.

5. Shares and funds

Dividends from some of Britain’s biggest companies currently look very 
attractive compared to the prospect of zero interest rates on savings accounts. 
Take Legal & General, the insurer which has been around since 1836. Buy its 
shares today and, so long as the company maintains its dividend, the income 
from the shares will be worth 6.7% on your money. L&G recently reported its 
profits, and is confident it will maintain its policy of increasing dividends 
every year. Some analysts rate it a “screaming buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jun/28/legal-general-brexit-john-kingman>
”.

Alternatively, buy an equity income fund. These pool the shares of the big 
dividend-paying companies, and typically achieve a payout of around 3.5% to 4% 
a year. Minimum investments are usually £500 to £1,000.

Of course, the risks are high; BP used to be the biggest dividend payer in 
Britain until the Deepwater Horizon disaster wiped out much of its profits, 
while the big banks were the steady-eddies of every equity income fund. Yet for 
the last seven years RBS has not paid a penny in dividends, and there are few 
signs of that returning, especially when the bank may not be paying depositors 
a penny in interest.

6. Renewable energy and community finance schemes

Sounds nice and green but too woolly and not likely to make much of a profit? 
Not at all – many renewable energy schemes are products designed by financiers 
to give steady long-term returns that, with a good wind, can give you 6% a 
year. Try platforms such asAbundance 
<https://www.abundanceinvestment.com/?gclid=Cj0KEQjwlNy8BRC676-W0JezxbwBEiQA4Ydg0RlhgsmGQnqkYrIGkHeuLPE1PqdUDfxan2l6vgct-WAaAoAu8P8HAQ>
 andEthex <https://www.ethex.org.uk/> to find schemes, with all the usual 
warnings that these are relatively high-risk.

7. Classic cars, wine, stamps, antiques and other collectables

If you believe the hype, these have been sensational places to put your money. 
Your £1,000 would stretch to a just one-third of a single bottle of Chateau 
Lafite Rothschild 1982 vintage. If you had bought it in 2000 and sold it in 
2010 you would have made a profit of 1,137%, largely as the new filthy rich of 
China became obsessed with it. But since the credit crunch, wine has fallen out 
of favour; buyers who snapped up 2010 Lafite Rothschilds have lost around half 
of their money since then. Classic cars have had a better run, although since 
2015 even the price of Ferraris has stalled. Better to buy anAustin Allegro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/02/bye-buy-to-let-tax-changes-alternative-investments>
; 642,340 were built from 1973 to 1982, but fewer than 300 are left on 
Britain’s roads and can be picked up for around the £1,000 mark.
 