
Almost 72 hours have passed since millions of people on the east coast took 
shelter in their homes and braced for a historic storm that would eventually 
cause serious destruction in many states. With so many huddled up for several 
days, much attention was directed to reading and covering the storm. And while 
people tirelessly refreshed social media streams for updates and flipped 
through multiple browser tabs to readSandy liveblogs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/oct/31/superstorm-sandy-cleanup-live>, 
the world beyond the north-east corridor kept on turning and news kept 
happening.

For those of you who have been consumed by all things Sandy for three days, 
here's a quick catch-up guide to the key stories you may have missed.

US elections

• It's less than a week until the big day, though both candidates had to 
adjust their strategy and campaign stops 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/richard-adams-blog/2012/oct/30/us-politics-sandy-missed>
 due to inclement weather. Campaign advertising was mostly suspended on the 
east coast but is pushing onward in the rest of the country.

Two national polls put Obama and Romney at a 47% apiece tie. Updated polling 
numbers are hard to come by as many calling centers are based in New Jersey and 
many swing states were affected by the storm.

• In the highly contentious Massachusetts senate race between Elizabeth Warren 
and Scott Brown, the candidates seem to be in a dead heat, according to two new 
polls which place each candidate a hair ahead of the other. Their final debate 
was cancelled because of the weather.

• Also, Joss Whedon "endorsed" Mitt Romney 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/oct/29/mittromney-us-elections-2012> and 
Madonnaactually endorsed Barack Obama 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/29/madonna-obama-new-orleans-concert> 
at a New Orleans concert, inciting boos from the audience.

National news

• A third Massachusetts pharmacy has shut down after a contamination at 
another pharmacy in the state caused a deadly outbreak that has killed 25 
people and sickened another 337 in 18 states. The most recent pharmacy to 
close, Infusion Resource, is not affiliated with the company connected to the 
outbreak, New England Compounding Center.The outbreak has prompted criticism of 
Massachusetts regulators 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2012/oct/29/meningitis-outbreak-massachusetts-investigation>
, and the state is inspecting all pharmacies that handle sterile medications.

• An Oklahoma law that lets people carry their firearms out in the open goes 
into effect on Thursday. State officials say therehas been a sharp rise 
<http://www.sfgate.com/news/article/Okla-prepares-for-open-carrying-of-firearms-3994132.php>
 in the number of residents applying for gun licenses.

Syria conflict

Monday marked the final day of the truce declared for Muslim holiday Eid 
al-Adha. A UN and Arab League envoy admitted the ceasefire had done little to 
quell attacks and aid agencies were only able to deliver a portion of the 
humanitarian relief they were hoping to, due to the failure of the truce.

The government attacked rebels with renewed intensity after the end of the 
truce with airstrikes on the suburbs of Damascus, outlying areas of Homs and 
the rebel-held town of Ma'arat al-Numan.

On Tuesday, state TV reported the assassination 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live/2012/oct/30/syria-conflict-after-failed-ceasefire-live>
 of an air force general in a Damascus suburb – the most recent of several 
attacks on high-level figures from the Assad regime.

A three-day conference between 150 members of the Syrian opposition began in 
Istanbul on Monday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/oct/29/syrian-air-force-attacks-aleppo-eid>
 to focus on "transitional governance and management after the downfall of the 
Assad regime".
 Residents receive humanitarian aid from the Free Syrian Army in Haram town, 
Idlib province on Monday. Photograph: ASMAA WAGUIH/REUTERS 
World news

• Bahrain's interior ministry announced on Tuesday they would be banning all 
protest rallies or gatherings and threatened legal action against groups that 
organize anti-government demonstrations. A Sunni minority rules over a Shia 
majority in the country, and the warning seems to be directed towards the 
largest Shia political bloc, al-Wefaq who have organized several marches and 
requested to hold a rally Sunday,but were rejected by the government 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/oct/30/bahrain-opposition-protests-ban>.

• Lawyers for Chinese premier Wen Jiabao are denying reports by the New York 
Times 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/oct/28/wen-jiabao-family-deny-report> 
that his family members have $2.7bn of "hidden riches".

• A Greek magazine editor was arrested Sunday and is set to appear in court 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/oct/28/greek-editor-court-tax-evaders> 
after publishing a list of more than 2,000 wealthy Greeks who allegedly have 
Swiss bank accounts in his weekly journal Hot Doc.

• The North Korean leader's wife made her first public appearance after a 
two-month absence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/oct/30/north-korea-leader-wife-public>, 
according to state media. Ri Sol-ju attended a concert and football match with 
Kim Jong-un on Monday.

Sport

• Sunday, the San Francisco Giants won their fourth consecutive game of the 
world series, swiftly annihilating the Detroit Tigers. It's the Giants' second 
title in three years and The Guardian's David Lengel artfully explained (in the 
third-person) why sportswriters didn't predict the sweep 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2012/oct/29/world-series-san-francisco-giants-detroit-tigers>
.

• NBC bought the rights to broadcast English Premier League games 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/oct/29/nbc-250m-english-premier-league-epl-broadcast-us>
 in the US with a three-year deal that begins next season. The $250m deal beat 
offers by Fox and ESPN.

• The regular season of the NBA began Tuesday and we've got a preview ready 
for the big day 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2012/oct/30/nba-2012-2013-season-preview>.

Technology

• On Monday, Microsoft launched the third version 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/oct/29/windows-phone-8-launch> of 
its newest operating system Windows Phone 8, in an attempt to catch up with 
Apple's iOS and Google's Android. The service is positioned distantly behind in 
the market and is trying to chase Apple and Google's dominant mobile platforms.

• Apple announced Monday that their senior vice-president of iOS software, 
Scott Forstall,would be leaving next year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/oct/29/apple-lose-senior-executives>
. He will serve as an adviser to chief executive Tim Cook in the interim. Head 
of retail John Browett is also set to leave after being appointed five months 
ago.

Culture

• In an offence to geeks everywhere, George Lucas has announced the Star Wars 
series will continue with new feature films afterLucasfilm was bought by Disney 
for $4.05bn. Star Wars episode seven is set for a 2015 release, with a new film 
expected to come out every two to three years after. Lucas will serve as a 
creative consultant on the new films andhand-picked Lucasfilm co-chairman 
Kathleen Kennedy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/oct/30/disney-lucasfilm-star-wars-deal> to 
be president of Lucasfilm.

• Anderson Cooper's daytime talk show will not be returning for a third season 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/tvandradioblog/2012/oct/29/anderson-cooper-daytime-kelly-ripa>
 – proving the difficulty of claiming the daytime chat spot ratings once owned 
by Oprah Winfrey.

• Bristol Palin's ex-boyfriend Levi Johnston married someone in Alaska 
<http://www.usmagazine.com/celebrity-news/news/levi-johnston-marries-sunny-oglesby-in-alaska-20122810>
. That is already one more sentence than you needed to know about Levi Johnston.
 