
Dan Gabryszak built Yentna Station Roadhouse with his own hands. The wood was 
sourced from the forest behind the lodge "and milled in my workshop out back", 
says Dan, jerking a thumb towards a door as he makes me a reviving hot 
chocolate. The other materials came by barge or air-taxi.

Electric power for the lodge comes from a combination of petrol generators and 
banks of car batteries wired together, Heath Robinson-style, in the dining 
room. Heat belts out from an industrial-sized, frontiersman-spec, wood-fired 
stove in the middle of a room. A couple of lazy-looking, well-loved and 
well-fed labradors hog the hearth.

The roadhouse, like every other building on this trail, is a multitasking 
facility. As well as hot drinks and food, it offers gas and oil fill-ups, 
engine repairs, airstrip services and a chance to see the Northern Lights. Once 
a year, the lodge serves as a checkpoint for the famous Iditarod Sled Dog Race.

The cabin Dan built has a rudimentary, gold-rush-era charm. Inside it's 
comfortable and welcoming, but a feeling of detachment prevails. And that's 
just the way Dan and his family like it.

An old hippy from Los Angeles, Dan moved away from California 30-odd years ago 
when he got fed up with city life. What particularly bothered him about the 
urban lifestyle, I asked. "Well, have you spent any time in a big city 
recently?" was his rhetorical response. Dan hasn't been to LA since his parents 
died in the 1990s, and has no plans for any further visits.

The only thing wrong with Yentna Station Roadhouse, Dan admits, is its name. 
This roadhouse is not on any road. In fact, the nearest stretch of asphalt is 
more than 40 miles away. In the summer you come either by light aircraft or by 
boat. In the winter, when the Yentna river is frozen and the snow drifts are 
moose-head high, you get here either on a dog mushing rig or, as we did, on 
snowmobiles, or "snow machines" as they insist on calling them in Alaska.

The first leg of the trip had been a breeze. As it turned out, the old saying 
about Anchorage was true - it really is "only 20 minutes from Alaska". But as 
well as being an ideal base camp for an Alaskan odyssey, Anchorage is a 
pleasantly strange city. In the winter, when the days are short and night time 
lasts until 9.45am, it exists only in buildings and vehicles. Pedestrians are 
visible only as they scuttle from cars to doorways, their bodies mummified in 
heavy clothing.

At 9am, with the temperature at -35C, I'd walked in darkness across the road 
from my comfortable B&B, The Copper Whale Inn, to the funky, mismatched chairs 
and Formica tabletops at Anchorage's Snow City Caf√©. Breakfasting on blueberry 
pancakes and a bottomless cup of coffee, I imagined myself as a character from 
Chabon's Yiddish Policemen's Union, taking cinematic direction from the Coen 
brothers. But by 10.30, with daylight intensifying through a white cloak of 
heavy snowfall, I was gunning my snow machine down the Yentna river towards 
Dan's roadhouse.

Chris Maynard of Alaska Snow Safaris was my guide. We had driven our pick-up 
truck - two snow machines clamped on to a low-loading trailer behind, a snow 
plough up front - out of Anchorage towards Willow (aka Dog Mushing Capital of 
The World, population 500), parked the vehicle in Chris's friend's garage and 
clattered off into the backwoods.

After 20 minutes of rollercoaster single track, we ducked on to the wide, icy 
freeway of the Susitna river (clocking our first moose of the day) before 
turning off at a fork down to Yentna Station. Population eight.

I'd never seen snow like it. Not in northern Scandinavia, not even on big 
powder days in the Alps. It clung to tree branches like great dollops of 
meringue mix. It settled on the roofs, pavements, power cables and road 
surfaces, sat 3ft high on car bonnets and spangled the tree branches like 
cheesy white tinsel Christmas decorations. Snow on snow on snow.

But this was nothing, I was told by locals, who always seemed eager to get 
involved in a bit of extreme conditions one-upmanship. Sometimes, they said, 
the drifted snow got so deep it engulfed the 8ft-high road signs.

Walking in these conditions is almost impossible, but gunning through them on 
a snow machine is utterly fabulous. You can stay on the hard-packed, iced-river 
trails, marked for dog musher training runs by wooden posts, taking care to 
avoid the tell-tale slushy puddles where the ice is dangerously thin, and 
suppressing a whoop of delight as you hit 60mph.

Or you can slide off the trail into the fresh, untracked powdery stuff, your 
machine suddenly becoming wilful and boat-like, each turn cutting a languid, 
dolphin-ish swath through the deep white surf. While this is great fun, and 
nirvana for gung-ho snow machine pilots, it can also be dangerous.

One day, after a visit to a vast and spectacular ice cave in Skookum, a 
glacier up in Placer Valley (you know Skookum - down the Seward Highway, along 
Turnagain Pass, the awesome Chugach mountains on your left), we discovered that 
our tracks (unmarked by posts this time) had been obliterated by heavy 
snowfall. The flat, fading light, the milky sky and the white open tundra 
melded into one and progress became dreamy and disorientating. A man could 
easily get lost out here.

This is not an adventure holiday for the fashion-conscious. Every day on the 
trail began with a quasi-ceremonial insulation programme that involved 
systematic togging up in a comically multi-layered outfit of Michelin-man 
proportions. Thermal long-johns and top, thick, long socks, canvas trousers and 
padded, squall-proof over-trousers with braces. A sweatshirt, two fleeces, two 
pairs of gloves, a fleecy snood to keep my neck warm, a fleece balaclava, a 
helmet and goggles. Our thermal, waterproof boots were preposterously 
over-sized US Army extreme conditions issue. They looked ridiculous, but were 
remarkably efficient.

Strangest of all was the odd, vaguely fetishised contraption I had to wear to 
stop my nasal exhalations from steaming up my goggles. Strapped around my chin 
and up, over my head like a black neoprene S&M mask, a rubbery apron of 
material flapped around over my nose and mouth, redirecting the air downwards 
and making me look like a cross between Darth Vader and Dr Zoidberg, the Jewish 
lobster with the squiddish mouth from Matt Groening's Futurama. Fully dressed, 
I was more lagged boiler than human being. Not that it mattered, of course. I 
mean, it wasn't as if I was going to bump into anyone I knew . . .

Alaska is massive. The Last Frontier state is 1,420 miles from north to south, 
by 2,400 miles from east to west. That's a fifth of the size of the US and as 
big as England, France, Italy and Switzerland combined. The Alaskan coastline 
is more than twice as long as the rest of the US coast. The state also boasts 
17 of the country's highest peaks and 5,000 glaciers, two of them larger than 
the state of Delaware.

But it's pretty much deserted. The population is just 670,053, and almost half 
of them live in Anchorage. If Manhattan were as sparsely populated, it would 
have just 25 inhabitants.

Once you get off the big roads and into the woods, an untamed world opens up. 
This is proper backwoods territory; a beautiful, raw wilderness wearing its 
magnificent inhospitality like an all-enveloping blanket.

Alaska's pervading white silence is something else, too. Our engines rumbled 
along the trails for most of the day like braying, 1,500cc husky dogs, but when 
we stopped and killed our engines it was as if we'd also hit the mute button on 
the atmosphere. The abruptness of the chilly, metallic stillness, dampened by 
thick, dry snow and eerie, flat light, was overwhelming.

This forbidding widescreen serenity is what people come here for. It's the 
inaccessible chill factor that provided choice material for Jack London and 
proved a fatal attraction to Chris McCandless, the idealistic wanderer whose 
story is told in Sean Penn's recent film Into The Wild. Because of its harsh, 
uncompromising beauty and its lack of boutique hotels, because its natural 
spectacle fires the imagination and its promise of true escapism is a bit 
scary, Alaska is now one of the most talked about adventure destinations in the 
world. In the past few months, as well as Penn's movie, we have had Bear Grylls 
in Alaska on Channel 4, the amazing stories of Timothy Treadwell and, more 
recently, Charlie Vandergraw, who both lived with Alaskan grizzlies (Tredwell 
was eventually eaten by them), and Guy Grieve's get-away-from-it-all book Call 
of the Wild.

The bears were all asleep when we went on our three-day trip, and while we 
were to encounter several abandoned buses, RVs and deserted cabins on the way, 
Jack London's "masterful and incommunicable wisdom of eternity" probably wasn't 
going to put us in any danger. Unlike the recklessly unprepared McCandless we 
had food, shovels, flares, a satellite phone, extra gas and enough supplies to 
keep up us going for a while. If we got desperate, Chris Murray said we could 
set fire to our snow machines, providing us with heat and creating a beacon to 
alert search helicopters. In truth, passing traffic would probably save the 
airborne rescuers the job.

Every half an hour or so, a pair of snow machines would rumble by, each 
trailing behind them a sled of supplies - wood, building materials, gas 
canisters and so on. We also met a dog musher, face bare to the elements, flush 
and cold blasted, his team of dogs keen and lively in their little black racing 
bootees.

Our friend was training for the Iditarod race and had taken a wrong turn 
somewhere along the river.

Dog mushing is a big deal in Alaska. The state has no major league baseball, 
American football, basketball, soccer or ice hockey teams, so counts mushing as 
its primary competitive sport, and the Iditarod is Alaska's answer to the Super 
Bowl. Everyone you meet out here seems to be involved somehow.

Bentalit Lodge, where we stayed on the first night of our snow safari, is run 
by Tom Brion. A slow talking, ex-US airforce man, who, like his pal down the 
river at Yentna, raised the roof on his impressively proportioned 11-bedroom 
lodge himself, he helps out with the Iditarod in the winter, has a hand in 
running the local post office (where service, I was told, could be erratic) and 
delivers supplies in his khaki-coloured, two-seater Cessna.

At breakfast, Tom offered me a sachet of powdered whitener as a milk 
substitute for my coffee. He was a little short of proper milk on account of 
the fact that his wife hadn't returned from a trip she took to the supermarket 
in Anchorage . . . three days ago.

Way to go

Getting there British Airways (0870 850 9850, ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) 
flies Heathrow-Seattle and can organise onward flights to Anchorage with Alaska 
Airlines from ¬£626.20 rtn inc tax.

A six-night trip including BA flights, transfers, two nights in Anchorage, a 
day's ice-climbing and a four-day all-inclusive snowmobile safari costs from 
¬£1,799 per person with Black Tomato (020-7610 9008,blacktomato.co.uk 
<http://www.blacktomato.co.uk>). The trips run from mid-November to mid-April.

Further information

Tourist information: travel-alaska.co.uk <http://www.travel-alaska.co.uk>.

Flight time: 16.5 hrs.

Time difference: -9hrs.
 