
Every now and then prizes feel compelled to celebrate themselves. We’ve had the
Best of Booker <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/10/news.bookerprize> 
(Salman Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children), theBooker of Bookers  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/news/rushdie-wins-booker-of-bookers-with-midnights-children-865047.html>
(also Salman Rushdie), the lost Booker (JG Farrell’s Troubles). Now it’s the 
turn of the Baileys Women’s prize for fiction to wheel 10 years of winners into 
the ring. In its previous livery, as the Orange prize, Andrea Levy’s Small 
Island wascrowned best of the first 10 years.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/oct/04/books.orangeprizeforfiction2005> 

Who will join Levy at Monday evening’s anointing of the best Baileys winner of 
its second decade, as decided by an assembly of judges from each year? The 
public vote, announced on Radio 4’s Women’s Hour on Monday morning, was for 
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s half of a Yellow Sun, set in the Nigerian civil war. 
A quick tour round the books desk produced one vote vote for Zadie Smith’s On 
Beauty, one for Marilynne Robinson’s Home and one for Ali Smith’s How to Be 
Both. I’m rooting for Adichie for entirely personal reasons, whichI explained 
in a recent blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/19/half-of-a-yellow-sun-identity>
.

Here’s what our reviewers said about them at the time: not exactly compliments 
all round. Cast your vote in the comments below, and we’ll let you know the 
result later.

2006 - On Beauty by Zadie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/sep/10/fiction.zadiesmith>
James Lasdun wrote: “With so much done so extremely well, it seems ungrateful 
to dwell on imperfections. Numerous virtues more than make up for them: 
characters such as Claire Malcolm, an east-coast poet/intellectual portrayed 
with a stunningly accurate feeling for the type. Or Carl, a sharp, touching 
study of a ghetto teenager making good, done with all the volatile political 
and sexual currents set in motion by such a progress. Or Howard Belsey himself, 
who starts out like an escapee from a Malcolm Bradbury novel but whose 
limitless capacity for folly keeps deepening and strangely sweetening his 
character. Above all, just the sheer novelistic intelligence – expansive, witty 
and magnanimous – that irradiates the whole enterprise.”

2007 – Half of a Yellow Sun by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/19/fiction.shopping2>
Maya Jaggi wrote: “Adichie’s powerful focus on war’s impact on civilian life, 
and the trauma beyond the trenches, earns this novel a place alongside such 
works as Pat Barker’s Regeneration trilogy and Helen Dunmore’s depiction of the 
Leningrad blockade, The Siege.”

2008 – The Road Home by Rose Tremain  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/09/featuresreviews.guardianreview21>
Sylvia Brownrigg wrote: “Tremain is at her luminous best in ... odd moments of 
companionability; she has the art of finding the improbable graces in human 
connection. That these relations lead Lev gradually to the road home gives the 
story a gentle, pleasing form, if not any real dramatic denouement.”


2009 – Home by Marilynne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/oct/04/fiction>
Sarah Churchwell wrote: “Near the end of Gilead, Ames observes: ‘Augustine 
says the Lord loves each of us as an only child, and that has to be true. He 
will wipe the tears from all faces.” It takes nothing from the loveliness of 
the verse to say that is exactly what will be required.” This sentiment, that 
all will be weeping, and in need of divine comfort, is the foundation of Home, 
one of the saddest books I have ever loved.”


2010 – The Lacuna by Barbara Kingsolver  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/nov/08/the-lacuna-barbara-kingsolver>
Alice O’Keeffe wrote: “The Lacuna, [Kingsolver’s] first novel for 10 years, 
takes in the Mexican revolution, the exile of Trotsky in Mexico City, the first 
world war and the communist witchhunts in 1950s America. It is an admirably 
ambitious work spanning a fascinating period of history, but it lacks the 
strong characterisation that made The Poisonwood Bible such a success.”


2011 – The Tiger’s Wife by Téa Obreht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/mar/12/tigers-wife-tea-obreht-review>
Kapka Kassabova wrote: “The Tiger’s Wife is a frisky tiger cub chasing its 
tail – it covers a lot of ground, growls a lot, and never quite gets there, but 
we have fun along the way. What the novel lacks in emotional depth, it makes up 
for in personality and sheer wackiness.”


2012 – The Song of Achilles by Madeline Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/29/song-of-achilles-miller-review>
Natalie Haynes wrote: “Miller spent 10 years writing this book, yet her smooth 
prose conceals the painstaking research she has clearly put into it. This is a 
deeply affecting version of the Achilles story: a fully three-dimensional man – 
a son, a father, husband and lover – now exists where a superhero previously 
stood and fought.”


2013 – May We Be Forgiven by AM Homes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/19/may-we-be-forgiven-am-homes-review>
Theo Tait wrote: “May We Be Forgiven is a very uneven novel, rickety, 
meandering and repetitive. There are far too many forgettable subplots and 
similar comic routines. Its recipe for redemption, as in This Book Will Save 
Your Life, involves an uneasy mixture of truism (be nice to children, animals, 
strangers) and kitsch (form friendships with immigrants who work at fast food 
outlets, listen to the wise medicine man). It is, however, often very funny, in 
a bad-taste way.”


2014 – A Girl is a Half-formed Thing by Eimear McBride  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/20/girl-half-formed-thing-review>
Anne Enright wrote: “An instant classic – an account of Irish girlhood to be 
set alongside O’Brien’sThe Country Girls 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780752881164>
 for emotional accuracy and verve, and the sense of its overwhelming necessity. 
A Girl Is a Half-Formed Thing is completely modern in its sensibility and 
completely old-fashioned in the way it triumphantly ignores the needs of the 
book market.”


2015 – How to Be Both by Ali Smith  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/13/how-to-be-both-ali-smith-review-novel>
Laura Miller wrote: “It may sound dauntingly experimental, but the hallmark of 
Smith’s fiction is that she approaches her formal adventures with a buoyant, 
infectious warmth and her feet planted firmly on the ground. How to Be Both 
feels like a frolic (or it does if you read the Del Cossa portion first), until 
its depth, heart and intelligence are revealed.”

 