
In a country nicknamed “Europe’s last dictatorship”, where no one knows the 
name of their local MP, let alone what they do all day, running for parliament 
is a curious undertaking.


Belarus, where Europe’s longest-serving leader, Alexander Lukashenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko>, has ruled for 22 
years, is to elect a new parliament on Sunday and 37-year-old Andrey Kozik is 
one of a self-proclaimed new generation of politicians hoping to gain a seat.

On the campaign trail in Minsk this week, Kozik, a lawyer, admitted that the 
notion of representative democracy was still unfamiliar to most citizens.

“While campaigning, I have visited thousands of apartments, and no man could 
recollect the name of their MP,” he said.

Unlike most parliaments in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, Belarus’s lower house performs 
a largely symbolic role. In the last four years, it has drafted just three 
bills and acts mostly as a formal body where presidential decrees receive 
trouble-free approval.

But this doesn’t deter Kozik, who believes he can affect real change. He is 
running on a campaign promising “peaceful change” inBelarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus>, but is quick to make clear this 
does not align him with the opposition, which he said had discredited itself by 
challenging the authorities “for the mere aim of opposing”.

Kozik comes from a powerful political family. His father, Leonid, was the 
co-author of the declaration of independence drawn up before the collapse of 
the Soviet Union. 


Twenty years later, Leonid Kozik became head of the Federation of Trade Unions 
of Belarus, the Soviet-era structure which still represents 96% of working 
Belarusians, and frequently cracks down on any opposition to Lukashenko within 
the state trade unions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbelarus-election-politics-lukashenko-russia-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4ed4e603616c304c7865a8a928e9168c32ad007%2F0_218_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who'd%20be%20an%20MP%20in%20Europe's%20'last%20dictatorship'%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbelarus-election-politics-lukashenko-russia-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%27d%20be%20an%20MP%20in%20Europe%27s%20%27last%20dictatorship%27%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbelarus-election-politics-lukashenko-russia-eu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4ed4e603616c304c7865a8a928e9168c32ad007%2F0_218_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Kozik sets up in central Minsk on Thursday. Photograph: Mikalai Anishchanka 
A recent report 
<http://www.osce.org/odihr/elections/belarus/218981?download=true> by the 
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights said the most recent 
presidential election, held in October last year, showed Belarus had a 
“considerable way go to” on democratic standards. It pointed to the lack of 
safeguards against multiple voting, the limited choice for voters and the 
uneven playing field between Lukashenko and his rivals.

But Kozik says he wants to distance himself from this image of Belarusian 
politics – and from his father’s legacy. He claims to represent a new group of 
thinkers educated in a time of independence.

When asked about the message he wanted the country to give to the 
international community with Sunday’s vote, Kozik said he hoped Belarus would 
“pass this test for the democratisation of political process”, but added that 
the country “deeply needs help”.


Though he is comfortable criticising Belarusian politics more generally, Kozik 
stops short of directing his ire at Lukashenko.

He praised the president’s foreign policy, speaking of his delicate balancing 
act of allying withRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> while 
building new friendships in the west. Kozik said he believed the parliamentary 
election would be dominated by politicians who are able to think of “change 
within the system”.

But old habits die hard, and after speaking, Kozik asked to approve the 
transcript of the interview with him.


As the country heads to the polls, there is a palpable agitation on the 
streets of Minsk. Many express anger at the pro-government politicians running, 
but direct just as much scorn at the opposition candidates, who they see 
running each year to no effect.

Across the city, Valery Voronetsky, Belarus’s ambassador to Austria, has also 
mounted a campaign to win a seat in parliament.


Speaking after a rally on Thursday evening in a neighbourhood of Minsk, the 
53-year-old said he wanted to see “different points of view” in parliament, 
including those of the opposition, but added, only “if they are pro-Belarusian”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbelarus-election-politics-lukashenko-russia-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4107ce5a7918213b3d335c30bd57ab8bb1e30131%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who'd%20be%20an%20MP%20in%20Europe's%20'last%20dictatorship'%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbelarus-election-politics-lukashenko-russia-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%27d%20be%20an%20MP%20in%20Europe%27s%20%27last%20dictatorship%27%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbelarus-election-politics-lukashenko-russia-eu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4107ce5a7918213b3d335c30bd57ab8bb1e30131%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Valery Voronetsky, Belarus’s ambassador to Austria, speaking at an event in 
Minsk. Photograph: Mikalai Anishchanka 
He didn’t miss the opportunity to stress the importance of relations with 
Austria, a further sign of the country’s delicate balancing act between the 
Kremlin’s influence and the rest of Europe.

Belarus president shows how to win five elections – without even trying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/08/belarus-lukashenko-election-dictator>
According to Voronetsky, Austria “has become the second investor for Belarus 
after Russia”, and has played a key role in lifting European sanctions against 
Belarus.

Voronetsky stressed that Belarus “is a perfectly European country, with the 
richest European cultural traditions” and “the richest democratic tradition”.

The EU imposed sanctions against Belarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> in 2004, steadily extending them to 
more individuals and organisations following flawed elections that returned 
Lukashenko and his supporters to power in a succession of landslides.

But as Belarus slowly attempts to distance itself from Russia, scared by recent
events in Crimea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/russia-accuses-ukraine-of-armed-crimea-incursion>
 and eastern Ukraine, the image of a fair and democratic election has become 
all the more important. The results of the vote on Sunday will show how far 
they are willing to go to truly open up the political landscape.
 