
Hari Kunzru

Clearly, if writers were barred from creating characters with attributes that 
we do not “own” (gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and so on), fiction 
would be impossible. Stories would be peopled by clones of the author. Since 
trespassing into otherness is a foundation of the novelist’s work, should we 
restrict ourselves in some way, so as to avoid doing violence to those who 
identify with our characters? The injunction to refrain from “cultural 
appropriation” sounds like a call for censorship, or at best a warning to 
self-censor, an infringement of the creative liberty to which so many 
surprising people profess themselves attached.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0185f8d7b953a08d28a07213a33eecd8bbf88af8%2F0_338_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0185f8d7b953a08d28a07213a33eecd8bbf88af8%2F0_338_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘Attempting to think one’s way into other subjectivities is an act of ethical 
urgency’ … Hari Kunzru Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
It is true that the politics of offence are used to shut down dissident voices 
of all kinds, frequently in minority communities, and the understanding of 
culture as a type of property to which ownership can be definitively assigned 
is, at the very least, problematic. Should the artist go forth boldly, without 
fear? Of course, but he or she should also tread with humility. Note that I do 
not say, “with care”. I don’t believe any subject matter should a priori be off 
limits to anyone, or that harm necessarily flows from the kind of ventriloquism 
that all novelists perform. Quite the opposite. Attempting to think one’s way 
into other subjectivities, other experiences, is an act of ethical urgency. For 
those who have never experienced the luxury of normativity, the warm and fuzzy 
feeling of being the world’s default setting, humility in the face of otherness 
seems like a minimal demand. Yet it appears that for some, the call to listen 
before speaking, to refrain from asserting immediate authority, is so 
unfamiliar that it feels outrageous. I’m being silenced! My freedom is being 
abridged! Norm is unaccustomed to humility because he has grown up as master of 
the house. All the hats are his to wear. For the deviant others, who came in by 
the kitchen door, it has always been expected, even demanded.

Good writers transgress without transgressing, in part because they are humble 
about what they do not know. They treat their own experience of the world as 
provisional. They do not presume. They respect people, not by leaving them 
alone in the inviolability of their cultural authenticity, but by becoming 
involved with them. They research. They engage in reciprocal relationships. It 
does not seem like a particular infringement of liberty to pass through the 
world without being its owner, unless someone else is continually asserting 
property rights over the ground beneath your feet. The panicked tone of the 
accusations of censorship leads me to suspect that what is being asserted has 
little to do with artistic freedom per se, and everything to do with a bitter 
fight to retain normative status, and the privileges that flow from it. The 
solution is simple, my fearful friends. Give up. Accept that some things are 
not for you, and others are not about you. You will find you have lost nothing. 
It may even feel like a weight off your shoulders. Put down that burden and 
pull up a chair. You might hear something you haven’t heard before. You will, 
at least, hear some new stories.

Kamila Shamsie
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba46c709b275340200cd8eeed060756e7d7b1207%2F355_42_1178_707%2F1178.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba46c709b275340200cd8eeed060756e7d7b1207%2F355_42_1178_707%2F1178.jpg>
 To continually return to the same subset of humanity, and declare that there 
is no one else who imaginatively engages you or who you know how to 
imaginatively engage with, strikes me as one of the most dispiriting things a 
writer can say.Kamila Shamsie, Photograph: Tristan Fewings/Getty Images for 
DIAGEO 
One of the novels I love is Peter Hobbs’s In the Orchard, the Swallows. It’s 
set entirely in the north of Pakistan – and is beautiful and true (a better 
word than “authentic”). If anyone tried to dispute Hobbs’s right to have 
written that book (and I should say, every Pakistani I know who has read it has 
expressed only admiration), I would be the first in line to defend him, and it. 
But the point about the book is that it’s wonderfully and sensitively written; 
it has no interest in peddling stereotypes, or making great claims about the 
place in which it’s located; there is no whiff of arrogance or entitlement. I 
don’t know what went on in Hobbs’s mind when he wrote it but I feel fairly 
confident it wasn’t: “How dare anyone dispute my right to write this?”

In fact, if you do start with an attitude that fails to understand that there 
are very powerful reasons for people to dispute your right to tell a story – 
reasons that stem from historical, political or social imbalances, you’ve 
already failed to understand the place and people who you purport to want to 
write about. That’s a pretty lousy beginning, and I wouldn’t want to read the 
fiction that comes out of it. Far better to understand the reasons, and perhaps 
even use those reasons as a way into character and story.

Lionel Shriver's full speech: 'I hope the concept of cultural appropriation is 
a passing fad'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/lionel-shrivers-full-speech-i-hope-the-concept-of-cultural-appropriation-is-a-passing-fad>
So by all means, let’s have a broadening of the imagination. That doesn’t mean 
you have to leave the patch of ground on which you live – but it would be 
helpful if you looked at who else is on that patch of ground with you. To 
continually return to the same subset of humanity, and declare that there is no 
one else who imaginatively engages you or who you know how to imaginatively 
engage with, strikes me as one of the most dispiriting things a writer can say.

In short: don’t set boundaries around your imagination. But don’t be lazy or 
presumptuous in your writing either. Not for reasons of “political 
correctness”, but for reasons of good fiction.

Aminatta Forna
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02fb2391d17095d3f6a16313fcef64ad1fc0953a%2F261_368_3670_2202%2F3670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02fb2391d17095d3f6a16313fcef64ad1fc0953a%2F261_368_3670_2202%2F3670.jpg>
 ‘Every writer is free to write about what they want, but that does not mean 
the work cannot be critiqued’ … Aminatta Forna Photograph: David Levenson/Getty 
Images 
Literature is an imaginative art. To suggest that a writer cannot depict 
characters unlike themself is patently absurd. Books would have to be peopled 
with characters exactly like the author. In my case, they would all be 
Scottish/Sierra Leonian women, who would be required to travel to each other’s 
countries (presumably Scotland and Sierra Leone), fall in love with each other, 
betray each other, befriend each other and occasionally shoot each other.

Lionel Shriver’s speech was crass and unhelpful; she turned an important 
creative question into “whites versus chippy minorities”. Yet writers from 
minority groups have spoken out at length about being expectedonly to address 
certain subjects. My last book was set in Croatia. In the year of publication I 
answered the question: “Why Croatia?” so many times I began simply to answer: 
“Why not?”

Jonathan Franzen’s remarks about not being able to write a black woman 
character because he has never been in love with a black woman made me squirm. 
He said he has to have experience of loving a category of person before he can 
write about them. That’s hard to believe for all sorts of practical reasons, 
but beyond that, writing is about imagining how others think and feel and how 
that informs their behaviour; it is about offering a different way of seeing 
and in so doing it creates empathy. I tell my creative writing students: “Don’t 
write what you know, write what you want to understand.” I write from a place 
of deep curiosity about the world.

Every writer is free to write about who and what they want, but that does not 
mean the work cannot be critiqued. People who belong to minority groups have 
had to live with limiting, irritating and insulting portrayals all our lives, 
as well as always dying before the end of the movie. I have thrown aside many 
modern novels because a white writer’s purpose in including a character of 
colour has been merely to make a point about race or reflect a white 
character’s value system. It’s bad writing, plain and simple. Shriver wants to 
be given points for trying. Well, I might do that for my undergraduates, but I 
won’t do it for a published author. Sorry.

Chris Cleave
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F796e74862d8fe26a4c69ec10b3394aab83449b57%2F530_30_3392_2035%2F3392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F796e74862d8fe26a4c69ec10b3394aab83449b57%2F530_30_3392_2035%2F3392.jpg>
 ‘I do think there is such a thing as shared emotional truth and that its 
discovery is the purpose of the novel’ … Chris Cleave Photograph: James Emmett 
Cultural appropriation is a valid concern to raise, and I’ve long been on 
record as respecting those who raise it. I do write across boundaries, though. 
While actively soliciting people’s right to reply (I’ve published all 
responses, good and bad, on my website for the last decade), I do my best, when 
I write, to be everyone.

In my novels I cross boundaries of gender, ethnicity, nationality, sexuality 
and class <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/09/fiction5>. That’s the 
best way I know to tell stories about our world, where those faultlines define 
our society. I show scenes from both sides, using one character to view another 
askance. Why? Because my characters’ eyes can be sharper than mine, since my 
own identity has no lock on a unitary or objective way of seeing things.

I do my research. Sometimes – as when interviewing refugees and torture 
survivors – I’ve learned things I wish I could unlearn. The violence of the 
world’s true stories can crack you open. You lose the shape you were moulded 
in. You take on other forms. How should one judge the healthiness of a writer 
like that, an empathist, a broken vessel? By the temperature of their work, I 
think. By its willingness to surrender heat to light.

A good novelist is a good observer – everything else is just style. A writer 
must be alive to what goes said and unsaid in the world, making themself small 
until only the reader is reflected in the work. A well-crafted novel is a 
mirror, and as a reader I don’t mind where the glass was made or how it got its 
silver. I require only that its reflection is fair.

Readers are mostly ignored in this debate, but the worldly and widely read 
reader has a hinterland, is quick to spot an agenda and is willing to call out 
fakes. Readers are more heterogeneous than writers will ever be, and in their 
multiplicity a book finds its measure of truth.

I do think there is such a thing as shared emotional truth and that its 
discovery is the purpose of the novel. That’s why people of many different 
cultures will sometimes cry at the end of an honest book. Even after the 
characters’ voices have faded, if those voices led me – the reader – to 
discover a truth for myself, then that experience will move me. It might even 
crack the mould I was made in.

AL Kennedy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbfd25140a7613bb3acece625b886f7d64b80b04%2F291_673_2330_1398%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbfd25140a7613bb3acece625b886f7d64b80b04%2F291_673_2330_1398%2F2330.jpg>
 ‘Fiction proves that humanity can think of things that never were and then 
make them’ … AL Kennedy. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Fiction doesn’t appropriate, it creates. That’s the wonder of it. Fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> proves that humanity can think of 
things that never were and then make them – in this case, not a new government, 
or a new way of designing cities, or a cure for cancer, but a narrative that 
can involve any reader in a further imaginative act. When the writer writes, or 
the reader reads, they’re consenting to be someone other than themselves. The 
reader of properly crafted work can share emotional and psychological space 
with a character. This is a practice of empathy, which might not seem as big a 
deal as good government, or more civilised cities, or cancer cures, but 
functional fiction is part of the culture that helps create those things, too. 
Believing in the power of human imagination and experiencing empathy gives you 
reasons to act and invent on behalf of others.

Currently, the Eng Lit business and our critical establishment prefers to 
define all writing as autobiographical, journalistic. It isn’t. It never was, 
and reducing it in such a manner denies us our ability to imagine. Without 
regular exercise of that ability we abdicate our rights to conscious change.

Inexperienced authors – and uncomprehending observers – can become bewildered 
when facing the question at the heart of fictional writing: “How do I write 
someone who isn’t me? I’m not old/young/Asian/anyone other than myself – how 
can I seem to be?” Bewilderment is natural, but it’s never enough. The 
appropriate response to character is awe. And then the appropriate response to 
the creation of any fictional character is a dedication to every possible 
effort that will let them live effectively for the reader. The human being the 
writer tries to represent and the human being who is the reader require the 
author to create accessible humanity. The character must be specific and 
individual enough to communicate universally.

Every life has to be respected, may be racked by injustice, is deserving of 
sensitivity – so we write about every life. That’s the only rule and our human 
duty. Backing away from that duty hands the world to the demagogues and bigots, 
those who would prefer us not to speak to each other, accurately represented as 
irreplaceably complex individuals who both reveal and transcend group 
identities. The passion in that helps create a culture that keeps us safe.

Stella Duffy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1e168a2ecf9d725a75e23c3e081843db314b8a5%2F226_1989_3502_2101%2F3502.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1e168a2ecf9d725a75e23c3e081843db314b8a5%2F226_1989_3502_2101%2F3502.jpg>
 ‘I want to write and read work that is as multifaceted as our society’ … 
Stella Duffy. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose for the Observer 
In my new novel, London Lies Beneath, as with the 13 other novels I have 
written, the characters are of different classes, different ethnicities, 
different genders, different sexualities, different abilities. Not in order to 
tick boxes, but because that’s how the world is. I’ve written characters that 
are BAME, white, female, male, disabled, able-bodied, LGBT (individually, not 
lumped together), from every social class and in several different time 
periods. I don’t live in a world with only one group of people and I’m not 
interested in writing about only one group of people.

In The Room of Lost Things, the two protagonists are an older white 
working-class man and a younger British Asian man. Set in south London, where I 
live, the book has a large range of characters, especially in terms of race and 
ethnicity – and more than one reviewer commented that I was “exposing readers’ 
prejudices” by not stating immediately if a character was black or mixed race 
or Asian. I really wasn’t. I mentioned race or ethnicity – including that of 
white characters – when it was relevant to the story. However, if a reviewer 
assumes that a white writer will only write white characters then they 
certainly need to look at their preconceptions.

“Write what you know” is a tired maxim that most writers abandon eventually, 
“write who you are” is even more restrictive. I want to write and read work 
that is as multifaceted as our society. I think it’s vital we write widely and 
inclusively to help shift publishing from the mostly middle class, mostly white 
place it is now. Men need to write women knowing that they are writing from a 
place of privilege – that they are likely to earn more than women and are more 
likely to be reviewed. White writers need to write BAME characters knowing 
there are many more white writers published. The same for straight people, and 
able-bodied people, middle-class people, and on.

We can write who we are not and do it well if we write with passion, strength 
– and care. We’re bound to get it wrong sometimes, but that doesn’t mean we 
shouldn’t try. If we want our writing to reflect the truth, then our characters 
and their experiences must be as diverse as the world in which we live.

Linda Grant 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a5964c45208ee9c3a53728f5ba5aacb0a3c86f7%2F0_84_1794_1076%2F1794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a5964c45208ee9c3a53728f5ba5aacb0a3c86f7%2F0_84_1794_1076%2F1794.jpg>
 ‘The whole point of fiction is that you make it up, but at the same time 
readers have become passionate for authenticity’ … Linda Grant. Photograph: 
Geraint Lewis/REX 
The modern novelist is caught in a contradiction, not of our own making, 
involving demands from the reader that are almost impossible to resolve. Why 
are there no black characters in your fiction, why does this novel not reflect 
contemporary British society? But how dare you, a white writer, appropriate the 
lives and stories of black people you know nothing about? Faced with a no-win 
situation, most white novelists accept the lesser charge of staying in their 
safety zone rather than be accused of getting it badly wrong. There is a true 
and difficult complexity to this problem that neither side fully accepts. The 
whole point of fiction is that you make it up, but at the same time readers 
have become passionate for authenticity, for hearing the truth of other voices, 
other lives (and for treating them, at times, like autobiography or 
non-fiction, the novel as learning aid, in history and geography).

It was theoretically possible for me to have had the chutzpah to travel to 
Jamaica and do months of research into the lives of the Windrush generation, 
but nothing I wrote would have the depth of reality of Andrea Levy’sSmall Island
, the novel that told the story of the women I used to see in church-going hats 
and pristine white gloves standing at the bus stop in Brixton. I was asked 
whether I thought that any non-Jewish novelist had ever really nailed a Jewish 
character, which implied a universality of the Jewish condition that doesn’t 
exist, a condition of Otherness. For the talky male American Jews of Philip 
Roth are not the same people as the timid female Marylebone introverts of Anita 
Brookner. One writes out of deep knowledge of one’s interior world. The 
something that one has to say is the thing that one knows, but married to that 
is intense curiosity about the lives of others – about what the person sitting 
opposite you on the tube is thinking. The origin of fiction is telling a story, 
about yourself or others. In practical terms we are mostly appropriating, 
ruthlessly, the lives of our families and our friends, but that’s not the same 
as cultural appropriation because it has no political freight. So in answer to 
the debate I don’t know, I really don’t know. I hope fiction gets through it 
alive.

Naomi Alderman
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90aa18156d84acbaaa8abaac7fdd43503cc77ede%2F0_302_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90aa18156d84acbaaa8abaac7fdd43503cc77ede%2F0_302_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘As a writer you need to accept that you’ll fail at some level. I do my 
research, I work hard, and I accept that I’ll get some things wrong’ … Naomi 
Alderman. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Of course fiction writers can write whatever they want, no matter their 
backgrounds. I’ve written male characters, people older than me, people gayer 
than me, people who lived and died 2,000 years ago. My new novelThe Power has a 
21-year-old male Nigerian journalist as a viewpoint character as well as a New 
England politician in her 50s.

But here’s the thing: you have to try to do it well. You have to be familiar 
with whatever tropes might apply to your character: racist, sexist, homophobic, 
sizeist, ableist, antisemitic and anything else. It’s not OK, for example, to 
make your Chinese character shifty and inscrutable or your fat character stupid 
and lazy: you need to have learned enough to understand where these false ideas 
come from and why it’s so pernicious to replicate them. Do better. Treat your 
characters as human beings. Write them as people not ideas or stereotypes.

Here’s another thing – you need to accept that you’ll fail at some level, and 
be humble when you do. I come from the Orthodox Jewish world: I could write you 
an essay on the precise messages communicated by the clothing of each 
individual person on the Golders Green Road. I can’t do the same for people in 
Lagos. I do my research, I work hard, and I accept that I’ll get some things 
wrong. I hope people will point out my mistakes to me, and then I’ll apologise 
and try to do better next time. People criticising your writing is not a 
violation of your freedom of speech, it is a gift freely given and should be 
accepted with gratitude.

And if a few people decide they only want to read books about minority groups 
written by members of that group, I think that’s a perfectly reasonable 
preference. It’s not one I share, but I can certainly understand why a person 
might feel a rule like that would broaden and deepen their reading for a time.

No one has a right to be read. No one has a right to be above criticism. When 
you publish a book, you enter the ring and you’re going to take some punches. 
The sting when they hit tells you that you’re where you want to be.

Philip Hensher
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90664124edde6a43788027aaea9ae8f9c33aaf8d%2F0_338_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90664124edde6a43788027aaea9ae8f9c33aaf8d%2F0_338_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘An attempt to put a stop to good writing on extra-literary moral grounds is 
deplorable, because it might succeed’ … Philip Hensher Photograph: Eamonn 
McCabe for the Guardian 
The only thing worth saying about the issue of cultural appropriation is that 
it has nothing to do with identity, and everything about quality. Good writing 
can do whatever it feels like doing. Bad writing can’t do anything. A bad 
writer can’t tell you anything about his or her own culture, let alone anyone 
else’s. A really good writer can throw themself into worlds they may only have 
glimpsed, and light them up.

There is no point in getting much exercised about very bad writing: it puts a 
stop to itself in time. But any attempt to put a stop to very good writing, on 
the grounds of prejudice, or of extra-literary moral grounds, is deplorable 
because it might succeed. Not everything that deserves a hearing gets that 
hearing.

I don’t think we should dismiss these concerns being labelled as “cultural 
appropriation”, however. There is something discreditable about a straight 
woman giving her obviously inadequate version of gay male relations, or a rich 
American arts graduate giving his researched version of the country of his 
great-grandfathers, or a middle-class Londoner explaining what it is like to be 
an impoverished Nigerian immigrant. There’s no doubt that prize juries have 
elevated such productions above the superior but disadvantaged accounts by gay 
male authors, Gujarati novelists, or that Nigerian immigrant himself. Those 
accounts may be lost forever.

Authors should try harder; the industry should try harder; and nobody should 
assume that any book has any kind of right to its own subject. It has to be 
earned, whether it is a matter of a straight white woman living in Devon 
writing about straight white women living in Devon, or a gay man living in 
Switzerland in 2012 writing about aBengali family in Dhaka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/20/scenes-from-early-life-review> 
in the 1970s. I see no reason why writers should assume that any territory is 
theirs by inheritance. The key point is that as few extra-literary concerns as 
possible should stand in the way of good writers – not the claim that no one 
should ever write about experience not their own, nor the sustenance of ancient 
privileges of race, education, sexuality and class.

Anyone proposing to use “cultural appropriation” as a taboo for writers is 
taking action againstKim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/12/100-best-novels-kim-rudyard-kipling>
,Salammbô <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gustaveflaubert>, The Grass Is 
Singing <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dorislessing>, A Bend in the River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/08/100-best-novels-bend-in-the-river-vs-naipaul-review>
,The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/angelacarter>. Putting a kybosh on their 
future equivalents, too.

Maggie Gee 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63c115a9c99ba8ce6cdce5d5a8f440578e91164c%2F0_555_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63c115a9c99ba8ce6cdce5d5a8f440578e91164c%2F0_555_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 ‘The freedom to inhabit different others comes at a price – humility’ … Maggie 
Gee. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
I thought this debate – about which categories of human beings are free to 
write novels about which other categories of human beings – had peaked about a 
decade ago, ending in a decisive “no boundaries” vote. But no, the old argument 
is back.

Actually it’s OK that it’s back, because it’s a serious debate that can’t just 
be shrugged off. Writers are lucky bastards. We have the invaluable chance to 
make our versions of reality public, and when these versions seem false to 
other people who don’t have the same chance, it’s fair for us to take their 
point to heart.

As Lionel Shriver made light of identity, I had no choice but to walk out on 
her | Yassmin Abdel-Magied
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/as-lionel-shriver-made-light-of-identity-i-had-no-choice-but-to-walk-out-on-her>
Why do writers write novels? On one level to have fun and feel free; but on 
another, to explore, to discover. One of the things we most enjoy exploring is 
other people’s inner worlds, and so we make characters. Every character is in a 
way an invention, so a “lie”; in another way, every character contains part of 
ourselves, but they also lead us down the mysterious passage to another life we 
long to understand. We feel our way into our characters until, effectively, we 
are them as we write them. This is very like the definition of empathy, or its 
German origin word,einfühlung, “feeling our way into another”. All of us in 
some way are trying to understand, trying to see what we hold in common. We 
want to avoid building a narrow fictional world peopled with characters who are 
vain mirror-images of ourselves, so we walk the mile of the novel in a variety 
of different characters’ shoes. But living through a fictional character is 
never as good as knowing actual joy or love, and never as bad as suffering 
actual pain or discrimination. With the freedom to inhabit different others, 
therefore, comes a price. The price is humility about what we know, a 
willingness to show our characters to their models and hear the critical 
comments they make.

Two of my novels, the political comedies My Cleaner and My Driver, had a 
Ugandan central character, Mary Tendo, often written in the first person. I 
started writing the pair of novels in Uganda and surrounded by Ugandans, but of 
course I was not Ugandan. When I finished, back in the UK, I showed them to 
writer friends I had made in Uganda, Hilda Twongyeirwe and Jackee Batanda. They 
critiqued my work at length, and I listened. I feel an ongoing commitment to 
the Ugandan Women Writers’ Association they belong to, Femrite, of which I am 
one of two external members.

I am just off to the Calpe conference on Gibraltar’s Neanderthals. They are 
the heroes of my next novel. I have 3% Neanderthal DNA, which is quite high, 
but that’s not the point. I believe Neanderthals are essentially like us, like 
me, but only by learning about how they lived, and who they were, can I make 
others believe that too.

Nikesh Shukla 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca32c695fb15220e4595f8cf4cdd3613002d5dc2%2F65_152_1380_828%2F1380.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whose%20life%20is%20it%20anyway%3F%20Novelists%20have%20their%20say%20on%20cultural%20appropriation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fnovelists-cultural-appropriation-literature-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca32c695fb15220e4595f8cf4cdd3613002d5dc2%2F65_152_1380_828%2F1380.jpg>
 ‘We have the right to tell stories that are different from our own 
backgrounds, heritages, races, if we do it responsibly’ … Nikesh Shukla. 
Photograph: Aria Alagha 
Here are some tips for writing “the other”. Do your research. Do it properly. 
Make sure someone from the “other” community reads your work before it gets 
read by someone with publishing power. Especially if the person with publishing 
power isn’t from that community. Don’t get defensive if people tell you that 
you got it wrong. Don’t think you can hide behind “it’s fiction and I can do 
what I want” because that tends to err on the side of fetishisation. I think we 
have the right to tell stories that are different from our own backgrounds, 
heritages, races, if we do them responsibly. I don’t know why this is a hard 
thing to understand. Also, ask yourself: why am I telling this story? Why are 
there no stories out there written by people from that community? Did I find it 
easier to write about this because I filtered it through a white gaze and thus 
made it palatable for a largely white publishing industry? And most of all, and 
this bears repeating, don’t get defensive. Because you may be making a larger 
conversation about marginalised communities, and their ability to tell their 
own stories in their own voices, all about yourself.
 