
At the conclusion of Lisa O'Carroll's blog posting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ireland-business-blog-with-lisa-ocarroll/2011/jun/14/denis-obrien-inm-takeover>
 about the huge losses sustained byDenis O'Brien in acquiring 22% of 
Independent News & Media stock, she asks:

"Why on earth does O'Brien want a slice of Irish action, given he has such 
demonstrable success in emerging markets where real progress and profits are 
being made?"

The answer is straightforward, and it has a long history. Newspaper ownership 
defies normal business logic.

It's all about prestige, political influence and the chance to get one's own 
views across to the public (or the opposite, to deny the publication of views 
one doesn't like).

Newspaper proprietors down the decades have sacrificed untold millions in 
order to hold on to unprofitable papers or been happy to put up with small 
returns.

O'Brien, a proprietor-in-waiting, is therefore part of a tradition, and he is 
surely aware of the fact.

I attended a conference in Galway City two years ago and asked O'Brien, in 
public, how he felt about spending millions to buy INM shares only to see the 
value of his investment plunge.

He laughed, put his head in hands in mock horror at his profligacy, and said: 
"I don't know."

But he did, of course. He is a shrewd businessman and doesn't do anything by 
accident. He clearly wanted to disturb theO'Reillys - Tony and son, Gavin - but 
the ultimate prize is the ownership of Ireland's best-selling titles, theIrish 
Independent <http://www.independent.ie/> and its Sunday sister.

He continued to acquire stock and eventually managed to get his own 
representatives on to the board. He succeeded in one key aim by persuading INM 
to sell off its British titles,The Independent and Independent on Sunday.

Though it appeared for a while as if Gavin's legendary charm, inherited from 
his father, had effected a working alliance, the reality behind the scenes was 
very different.

The differences between the two factions emerged in public earlier this month 
whenone of O'Brien's nominee directors was voted off the board. 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/finance/2011/0604/1224298387572.html> 

The result was another public war of words 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/finance/2011/0606/1224298468766.html>. 
O'Brien accused O'Reilly and the INM chairman,Brian Hillery, of being 
"delusional in their total denial of the extremely chronic financial situation" 
and that the group "repeatedly informs the market how well it is performing 
while the share value falls year after year".

An INM spokesman (aka, a spokesman for O'Reilly) countered: "It is not very 
helpful for a major shareholder to be talking down the company, especially when 
it is in complete contradiction of the facts."

Not helpful? Well, it might be if you want to talk it down in order to launch 
a full bid for the company, eh Denis?

Sources: Lisa O'Carroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ireland-business-blog-with-lisa-ocarroll/2011/jun/14/denis-obrien-inm-takeover>
/Irish Times(1) 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/finance/2011/0604/1224298387572.html> (2) 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/finance/2011/0606/1224298468766.html>
 