
She has been accused of being an apologist for obesity, attacked for her own 
body size, been snubbed by Victoria Beckham and been the recipient of at least 
one angry letter from a leading model agency.

But Conservative MP Caroline Nokes says she has become more passionate, rather 
than less, to take on the “arrogant” fashion industry and is determined to take 
her cause to the very heart of government policy – and she has no qualms about 
bringing the full force of legislation with her.

Nokes is the latest public figure to take up the long-running battle to 
persuade designers, fashion houses, retailers and modelling agencies to take 
more responsibility in how they represent the female form and to stop the 
widespread use of underage and underfed models on the catwalks, on advertising 
hoardings and in glossy magazines.

While there have been calls for ultra-thin models to be banned from London’s 
catwalks for more than a decade – in 2006,Tessa Jowell, who was then culture 
secretary, made the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/sep/16/uk.politicsandthearts> – this 
time, says Nokes, there will be more than just another skirmish.

The blame for distorting our view of women doesn’t lie just with advertisers | 
Lucy Mangan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/18/blame-advertisers-women-bodies-thin-fetish>
As chair of the all-party parliamentary group on body image 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm/cmallparty/register/body-image.htm>
, Nokes has picked up the baton with alacrity, publicly calling shame on the 
industry for “its wall of silence” on the issue of super-skinny models, who are 
part of a wider body-image problem. The committee will have an evidence session 
at the beginning of next month and has opened consultations to help it 
investigate whether legislation is needed to keep very thin models away from 
British catwalks.

Nokes said there had been a “wonderful response” from health experts and 
academics on the issues, but no response from modelling agencies and fashion 
designers who had been asked to take part in the consultation.

“They all got our letters. But they are either too scared or too arrogant to 
engage in a conversation,” she says. “This is not a confrontation, this is a 
debate. If someone can come forward and offer an explanation of why a size six 
woman is too large to model clothes when the average woman in this country is a 
size 16, then I am very happy to hear it. I’d like to know about why a sample 
size cannot be made in a size 10. I want to understand their justification. 
Because I think they are perpetrating a myth that only the sub-size six figure 
is desirable.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsuper-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11c52fc699a8d793b05247b929d7b299bc87134%2F0_262_4452_2676%2F4452.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20a%20size-six%20woman%20too%20big%20to%20model%20clothes%2C%20demands%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsuper-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20a%20size-six%20woman%20too%20big%20to%20model%20clothes%2C%20demands%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsuper-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11c52fc699a8d793b05247b929d7b299bc87134%2F0_262_4452_2676%2F4452.jpg>
 Tory MP Caroline Nokes is leading a consultation into whether legislation is 
needed to keep very thin models off the catwalks. Photograph: David Hartley/REX 
Shutterstock 
The investigation came after a petition calling for fashion week health checks 
on models last month reached 30,000 signatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/21/body-image-mp-considers-ban-on-ultra-thin-catwalk-models>
. The petition was started by Rosie Nelson, a size eight model originally from 
Australia, who had been rejected by a British modelling agency until she was 
able to drop her body size “down to the bone”.

“When I walked into one of the UK’s biggest model agencies last year, they 
told me I ticked all the boxes except one – I needed to lose weight. So I did,” 
she said. “Four months later, I lost nearly a stone, two inches off my hips. 
When I returned to the same agency, they told me to lose more weight, they 
wanted me ‘down to the bone’.” Other countries have already acted; Israel, 
where anorexia is a major public health issue, brought in a body-mass index 
(BMI) limit for working models and regulations on photoshopping in 2012. 
Catwalk models in Italy must show health certificates under a self-regulation 
code, Spain enforces a BMI limit and France passed a law in April stopping 
models from appearing on catwalks who had a BMI of less than 18 – meaning a 5ft 
10in woman must weigh at least 8.9 stones. Anyone hiring a model below that can 
face a fine or a six-month prison sentence. World Health Organisation 
guidelines state that an adult with a BMI below 18 is malnourished. Yet, 
according to estimates, the average model working in fashion shows today has a 
BMI of 16, meeting the criteria for “severely malnourished” or anorexic.

But neither Nelson nor Nokes are in favour of seeing models rated on their 
BMI, because they agree with many health experts that it is an imperfect way to 
measure an individual’s health.

There are also reports of it working against the women concerned. Writing in 
theNew York Observer earlier this year, former model Jennifer Sky said models 
working in Spain were told to work round the BMI weigh-ins by wearing weights 
in their hair and Spanx-style underwear lined with sand 
<http://observer.com/2015/04/young-models-are-not-to-blame-for-industry-pressure-to-be-thin/>
.

“I don’t think BMI is the right measure, because many models I know are size 
six to eight, and very conscious of their health and fitness,” said Nelson, who 
instead wants a mandatory health check for models every three to six months.

Nokes is also against the BMI. “It’s a lousy measure for an individual’s 
health,” said the MP for Romsey and Southampton North. “I’m the first to 
acknowledge that legislation is not the answer for everything, but we are faced 
with an industry that’s out of step and thinking it can just go along with the 
situation, while health experts and academics are deeply concerned about the 
impact [it’s having] on our young people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsuper-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F321d52b42ad9bbc1d873e9687038aca58a4455a3%2F249_567_2178_3268%2F2178.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20a%20size-six%20woman%20too%20big%20to%20model%20clothes%2C%20demands%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsuper-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20a%20size-six%20woman%20too%20big%20to%20model%20clothes%2C%20demands%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsuper-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F321d52b42ad9bbc1d873e9687038aca58a4455a3%2F249_567_2178_3268%2F2178.jpg>
 Cindy Crawford in 1996. Photograph: Getty Images 
Nokes says that she has heard from models recently who say they have seen some 
changes, but these appear to be minor things, such as seeing more fresh fruit 
and water being made available at photo-shoots. While these sorts of moves 
might promote good health, they are unlikely to make a difference to body size.

“At the same time, we are hearing that hundreds and hundreds of young women 
are regarded as disposable commodities by an industry that they are desperate 
to get into, because they see it as glamorous and well-paid when, in fact, the 
polar opposite is true,” she says. “It’s far from glamorous, it’s exploitative, 
and it may be well paid for a few individuals but not everyone can be Kate Moss.

“For most young girls, the reality is that they’ll be regarded as washed up 
when they are 18.”

She says that the situation has become worse as the industry’s definition of 
curvy has come to mean thinner and thinner models.

In what some would describe as the heyday of modelling – when supermodels such 
as Linda Evangelista, Cindy Crawford and Claudia Schiffer reigned supreme – the 
normal model size was more like an eight or a 10. Nokes points out that it is 
perverse that while the average size of ordinary people has been rising over 
many years, the size of models has dropped. She points to research from the 
United States that suggested that 20 years ago the average fashion model 
weighed 8% less than the average woman, while today she weighs 23% less.

“And it’s not just size,” adds Nokes. “We’re hearing from models currently 
inside this industry about the murkier side, about the pressures, the extremes, 
and while we’ve been told by agencies for years that they are cleaning up their 
act, it seems they are only chipping away.

“I’d really like someone to come forward and explain to me why a size six 
woman is being told that her hips are too wide to be suitable to showcase 
clothes and why size 10 women are herded off to the plus-size section.”

Nokes said she was finding more support for action among her political peers, 
saying that male and female MPs were meeting an increasing number of 
constituents worried about young people and the pressures of body image feeding 
into cyber bullying.

“We have growing mental health issues among young people, and while the rise 
in social media is a definite factor, and so is exam pressure, this body-image 
pressure has huge ramifications,” she said. “What I’m conscious of so far is 
that this industry as a whole is clinging to an image of beauty which is 
unattainable and damaging, and that it is very, very reluctant to engage in why 
it is so wedded to this idea of a body that’s only found on androgynous 
teenagers.”

UNHEALTHY IMAGE
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsuper-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76124d33025b9cbb0bbbf4a187c9b05c4daada2b%2F70_392_1686_1011%2F1686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20a%20size-six%20woman%20too%20big%20to%20model%20clothes%2C%20demands%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsuper-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20a%20size-six%20woman%20too%20big%20to%20model%20clothes%2C%20demands%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsuper-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76124d33025b9cbb0bbbf4a187c9b05c4daada2b%2F70_392_1686_1011%2F1686.jpg>
 Kate Moss caused controversy by saying: ‘Nothing tastes as good as skinny 
feels.’ Photograph: Handout/Getty Images 
■ In June, an Yves Saint Laurent advertisement was banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/03/yves-saint-laurent-ad-ban-underweight-model>
 by the Advertising Standards Authority for featuring an “unhealthily 
underweight” model.

■ Chanel’s Karl Lagerfeld infamously caused a row in 2013, saying “no one 
wants to see curvy women on the runway”, shortly after he hadaccused singer 
Adele of being “a little too fat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2012/feb/08/karl-lagerfeld-adele>
”.

■ In 2010, eating-disorder campaigners spoke out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/may/05/skinny-male-mannequins-eating-disorder>
 against the manufacture of ever skinnier male mannequins, claiming a rise in 
men suffering from bulimia and anorexia was being fuelled by unrealistic body 
images being used in the fashion industry.

■ Model Kate Moss caused controversy in 2009 when she said one of her mottos 
was a phrase which is also used by many with eating disorders:“Nothing tastes 
as good as skinny feels” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/nov/20/kate-moss-motto-pro-anorexic>
.
 