
This morning, my husband and I conquered the post office. We’d planned our 
attack just before bed and so dreamed of battle, assured of our imminent 
success. We dressed without showering and I prepared our weapons (charged our 
smartphones) while my husband provided us with fuel (coffees in our portable 
mugs). We walked 50 metres up our street, stood under a bus shelter to protect 
us from rain and readied ourselves. This was our time … to take control of our 
local Pokémon gym.

Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-14-tips-to-get-you-started-on-your-creature-collecting-adventure>
 was released in the US last week (there are work-arounds to get it now in the 
UK). If you had only ever been vaguely aware of the world of Pokémon (a 
franchise centred on fictional creatures created in Japan in 1995), you’re 
surely getting better acquainted by the minute. Social media feeds have been 
flooded with Pokémon Go screenshots and in-jokes. It has already been 
downloaded to about 5% of Android devices in the US (for scale, the popular 
dating app Tinder is on only 2%) and its active daily user numbers are 
approaching those of apps such as Twitter.

From Pokéstops to Pikachu: everything you need to know about Pokémon Go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/from-pokestops-to-pikachu-everything-you-need-to-know-about-pokemon-go>
The game itself is simple. Each user plays as a Pokémon “trainer” and, as you 
walk through the world, Pokémon appear. The user then must “catch” them using 
Pokéballs and then, eventually, use them to take control of certain landmarks 
in the area (called gyms).

I’ve never been particularly engaged with the Pokémon franchise. The card game 
passed me by. I dabbled inPokémon Snap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2000/sep/21/onlinesupplement7> on my 
university shared house’s Nintendo 64 and often choose Jigglypuff – an adorable 
pink singing Pokémon – as my avatar in Super Smash Bros. However, my knowledge 
of the Poké-world was fairly limited, and I didn’t plan to download Pokémon Go. 
My husband Tobi, a Pokémon obsessive of many years standing, had other ideas.

I was suspicious on Saturday when he suggested a walk in the park. I like to 
visit most days to spy on other people’s dogs and imagine they are mine, but 
he’s not usually interested in joining me (more of a cat person). My suspicions 
were confirmed when he spent the entire walk staring at his phone. I would have 
been annoyed at this intrusion on my sacred, canine-creeping park time if Tobi 
hadn’t suggested I try it for myself. A Drowzee appeared, I trapped it and I 
was hooked. Sorry, real animals. I’ve got fake pets now.

Since downloading the app, I’ve traversed the city, capturing Pokémon and 
collecting items. And the best bit is? I’m not doing it alone. Tobi and I have 
finally found a way to marry my love of long walks and fresh air to his 
aversion to reality. We’ve often discussed the fact that I was an outdoor kid 
who needed to be persuaded to come in for meals while he preferred to hunker 
down with his books and video games. IfPokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> is making my adult partner 
spend more time outdoors then it’s sure to do the same for kids.

Tobi and I both joined the yellow team, one of three teams you can choose for 
your trainer, and have begun persuading all our friends who live nearby to do 
the same. We’re planning a park trip this weekend with some of those mates and 
another is going to swing by the gym we control tonight to leave one of her 
Pokémon there for extra protection.

It’s not just friends and loved ones this game can bring together. On that 
first walk we noticed several other couples and groups of friends also running 
through the grass, pursuing invisible creatures. We all nodded and smiled to 
each other, enjoying the shared delusion. When I wandered to the shops on 
Sunday, a teenage boy walked past me and said, conspiratorially, “There’s a
Pidgeotto <http://pokemon.wikia.com/wiki/Pidgeotto> over by the gate. Good 
luck!” In my four years’ living in London, this is the most friendly 
interaction I’ve ever had with a stranger.

I’ve just glanced at the app and noticed that another player has joined the 
gym my partner and I took for yellow team this morning, his Hypno nestled in 
next to my Tentacruel and Tobi’s Haunter. The think pieces will come about the 
game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/pokemon-go-privacy-security-full-access-google-account>
’s in-app purchasing system orsafety concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/10/pokemon-go-armed-robbers-dead-body>
 or, I don’t know, maybe something about Pokémon hunts creating bloodlust in 
our youth. But these cute little monsters are one small way of encouraging 
community and in big cities, that’s no small feat. Now if you’ll excuse me, I 
have a Poliwag to evolve.
 