
As I flick little balls at a stag-beetle monster called a Pinsir 
<http://bulbapedia.bulbagarden.net/wiki/Pinsir_(Pok%C3%A9mon)>, the fabric of 
reality does not seem as if it’s under imminent threat. The animated thing 
jumps and dodges around in front of the masonic hall, finally succumbing to an 
upward index finger swipe. I’m left with a few stats and a wobbly camera-view 
of the street. As I meander around my neighbourhood, it’s diverting to have a 
gameworld overlaid on the familiar grid, but there’s nothing to suggest that
Pokémon Go <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> is anything more 
than a fad, certainly not that it’s an early ripple of a technological wave 
that could transform human society. And yet …

Pokémon Go: man quits job to become full-time Pokémon hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/15/pokemon-go-man-quits-job-to-become-full-time-pokemon-hunter>
The idea of augmented reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/26/apple-earnings-pokemon-go-augmented-reality-steve-cook>
 (AR) has been around for years, and the smartphone is finally allowing 
developers to make apps that overlay your local street, park and bus stop with 
extra visuals or information that can enhance or transform them. Thecompany 
that makes Pokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/16/pokemon-go-server-crash-niantic-europe-us>
 offers another game in which players compete to gather “exotic matter”, a sort 
of auratic excess that leaks into our world from portals around landmarks and 
famous buildings, a neat visual metaphor for the cultural power of special 
places.

A little searching offers all sorts of other current AR possibilities. Some 
are useful – point your phone at a foreign road sign or a menu and get an 
instant translation. Others sound crass and depressing. Do I want to “convert 
anything in the real world into an interactive ‘wow’ experience”? Not really, 
because the real world is already interactive and more full of wonders than 
anyone who uses the word “wow” as an adjective is likely to understand.

So far, many of the available applications are aimed squarely at advertisers 
(the “wow experience” app seems to be a tool for making AR ads), and the 
prospect of navigating a reality that has commercials embedded into its very 
fabric is not enticing. But consolations occur. The walking tour of your city 
where you see how it looked 100 years ago. The ramble in the woods where 
taxonomical information about the trees hovers in the branches …

How augmented reality technology erases the human v machine boundary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/14/augmented-reality-technology-pokemon-go-phones>
And yet there’s a deeply ingrained moral reflex that suggests to us that the 
world ought to be enough. We have cultural traditions intended to inoculate us 
against the flight into artificial paradises (just say no, kids!), or cutting 
ourselves off from the social reality of our fellows.Science fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/science-fiction> offers various dystopian 
visions of isolation in which the everyday turns out to be an illusion, and we 
are “really” tethered in stalls in some nightmarish factory farm or distracting 
ourselves as we scrape out a living in a burning, post-apocalyptic wasteland. 
These stories warn that if the real becomes mutable or untrustworthy, 
our experience of ourselves (not to mention each other) may become 
insubstantial, that what makes life meaningful is a certain intractability, a 
resistance to our desires.

Perhaps the prohibition against artificial paradises was once adaptive: don’t 
wander off chewing on those weird berries! Stay with your ape band! But as 
someone who apparently derives greater enjoyment than most from being in my own 
head, I can’t pretend I’m not taken with the idea of doing a little tweaking, 
editing my preferences.

Although while I may wish to augment my reality with nerdy explanatory wall 
texts and elevating historical overlays, there’s no guarantee that my neighbour 
may not prefer to move through a world overlaid with grotesque violence or 
extreme pornography, or just exist in some 24/7Snapchat-esque 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/snapchat> fever dream in which everyone 
looks like cartoon dogs. What happens when we’re in the same physical space, 
but in all other respects, we have ceased to share much of anything at all? And 
what does it mean if someone elects to screen out certain aspects of their 
environment? Poverty, for example, or disabled people, or women’s uncovered 
faces?

This is where the ethics of reality augmentation will begin to intersect with 
an idea much discussed in political circles, the “filter bubble”, a phrase 
coined by activistEli Pariser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/01/steven-poole-non-fiction-reviews>
 for our tendency to create an echo chamber around ourselves, to reinforce 
ideas and perceptions that we appreciate, and mute those we find disturbing or 
contrary to our prejudices.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fpokemon-go-augmented-reality-game-changer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd88708268d86a30d9d2af5ba7a0d96424a429ad2%2F0_198_3792_2276%2F3792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%20is%20a%20game-changer%20for%20us%20all%20%7C%20Hari%20Kunzru%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fpokemon-go-augmented-reality-game-changer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%20is%20a%20game-changer%20for%20us%20all%20%7C%20Hari%20Kunzru%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fpokemon-go-augmented-reality-game-changer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd88708268d86a30d9d2af5ba7a0d96424a429ad2%2F0_198_3792_2276%2F3792.jpg>
 Pokémon Go gamers, Dusseldorf, Germany. Photograph: Action 
Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
Last year a paper was published by computer scientists at the University of 
Southern California describing the mathematical basis for what they call “the 
majority illusion”. Because of the structure of our social networks, behaviour 
or attitudes that are perhaps not common at all globally may appear to us to be 
“what everybody thinks” or “what everybody’s doing”.Individual choices are 
strongly influenced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/18/five-apps-help-smartphone-addicts-fight-fomo>
 by the behaviour of friends and peers, whether that’s getting a new phone, 
joining a social movement, or chewing weird berries. Contagion is rife, 
creating menswear fashions or suicide clusters.

Our “self-evident” perceptions of the world – the self-evidence that leads us 
to believeskinny jeans are cool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jan/09/skinny-jeans-fashion-trend-refuses-to-die>
 or sleeping pills are the only solution – may be highly skewed, and have 
little in common with the perceptions of those enmeshed in networks far away. 
I’m a fairly heavy user of social media, and like others I know who are aware 
of their innate tendency towards bias, I take care to follow a number of people 
whose world views are opposed to my own. I imagine this, no doubt vainly, to be 
a sort of prophylaxis against the madness of crowds. Did I mention I was 
playing Pokémon Go?

What if someone elects to screen out certain aspects of their environment? 
Poverty, for example, or disabled people?

In the current American election campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016>, and indeed in Britain, 
filter bubbles of extreme constriction and resilience are in evidence on left 
and right. Social media has allowed people to create hashtag bunkers for 
themselves. The faux universality of these structures seems to have the curious 
psychological effect of reducing tolerance of dissenting views. Imagine the 
augmented version of this, a politics in which all participants inhabit their 
own highly tailored realities, and are in the process of forgetting that those 
realities are partially constructed, so “natural” and “intuitive” do they feel. 
It is unlikely to be an agora of democratic civility. In fact the agora, the 
shared space of the polis, will be precisely what has vanished.

Like previous technological waves, AR will probably be too useful to resist, 
even for people who have an instinctive horror of mediation. Though it won’t 
plunge the people of the world into a solipsistic abyss, it is a development 
like that of the “internet of things” – something which may appear 
superficially modish and insubstantial, a froth of gadgets and jargon – but 
whose possibilities to transform the social world are at least as profound as 
the internet wave of the last quarter century.

There are what technocrats like to term “challenges” ahead, not least for 
human freedom and dignity. In the meantime, would you like some of these weird 
berries? They make you feel strange, but in a good way.
 