
Poor Rachel McAdams <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rachel-mcadams>. Three 
time-travel movies and not a whiff of the action. First was 2009'sThe Time 
Traveller's Wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/130980/time-traveler-s-wife>, in which 
Eric Bana played a Chicago librarian darting through time while his on-screen 
wife McAdams plodded on faithfully in the present. Then, two years later, came
Midnight in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141834/midnight-in-paris>. Owen Wilson 
got to party in the roaring 1920s every day of his holiday, while oblivious 
fiancee McAdams went sightseeing. And now Richard Curtis's new film, About 
Time, sees McAdams stay home as her partner Domhnall Gleeson goes 
time-travelling in secret, in a bid to change his past and have a better 
future. This time it's a gift – passed down the male line of the family.

McAdams is not alone in being overlooked. From 1981's Time Bandits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90729/time-bandits> to the more recent 
Hot Tub Time Machine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/135629/hot-tub-time-machine>, sci-fi 
films have rarely allowed female characters to leave the present. When Marty 
McFly's girlfriend tried to come along for the ride inBack to the Future II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76492/back-to-the-future-part-ii>, she 
was hastily sedated by the Doc for "asking too many questions". In their 
excellent adventures,Bill and Ted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/24/bill-ted-returns-alex-winter> 
travelled to medieval times to meet some "babes"; true, the women were then 
permitted to time-travel – but only with male characters, and purely to serve 
their needs. Hardly the sort of time-travelling role models women need.
 Always a time-travel bridesmaid ... Rachel McAdams and Domhnall Gleeson in 
About Time. Photograph: Sportsphoto/Allstar/Universal 
While many of these films are immensely entertaining, it's a curious trend 
that shortchanges female characters and, by extension, female viewers. At first 
glance, you could simply put this down to the historical dominance of male 
heroes in cinema. It's a patriarchal world and mainstream movies aren't always 
quick to reflect advancements in equality. But while other areas of sci-fi were 
making progress – takeSigourney Weaver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sigourney-weaver> beating her many-jawed foes 
in theAlien films <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/75860/alien> – the 
time-travel genre, ironically, stood still. Yes, as far back as 1984 The 
Terminator gave us a groundbreaking action heroine in Linda Hamilton, but the 
bouffe-haired damsel in distress was still confined to the here and now, chased 
by one time-traveller and bedded by the other (in order to give birth to a 
future saviour). And the men didn't just get to time-travel: they got to go 
naked, too.

This weekend in London, there's a whole festival dedicated to feminist sci-fi 
films. CalledWomen on the Edge of Time 
<http://www.thehorsehospital.com/now/women-on-the-edge-of-time/>, it promises 
futuristic "worlds free of sexism". Tellingly, time-travel movies are absent 
from the programme. Some might argue that the theme is just more appealing to 
men. But I'm sure I'm not the only woman who fell in love with time-travel 
movies as a kid – and I wanted to be Marty McFly, not his unfortunate 
girlfriend. A time-travelling heroine would have been very welcome. Nor is it 
just action films. In the 1980 romanceSomewhere in Time 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o36EXzADXWc>, Christopher Reeve rewound to woo 
a bygone Jane Seymour; in 2001'sKate & Leopold 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zpSlJaP2sHw>, a 19th-century Hugh Jackman raced 
forward into the arms of a present-day Meg Ryan.

Of course, it is still incredibly hard to get funding for a mainstream film 
with a female lead. This might explain why two recent movies that gave women at 
least a look-in at time travel were independents. Safety Not Guaranteed saw a 
female newspaper intern responding to a mysterious man's ad for a time-travel 
buddy; the whole movie turns on whether she will make the leap. Meanwhile, The 
Sound of My Voice featured two documentary-makers investigating a cult leader 
called Maggie, who claims to have come from the future to warn us about 
environmental issues.

Whatever the merits of these semi-exceptions, it's worth pointing out that 
women just don't get to have fun with time travel like men do; it doesn't seem 
to get them anywhere. While averting some unspeakable catastrophe is a common 
theme in everything from The Terminator toDeja Vu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/116539/deja.vu>, our male travellers 
usually get to rearrange their personal lives, too. In fact, time travel seems 
to offer men an extraordinary level of control, as well as the possibility of 
achieving some sort of perfection – not to mention getting the girl (sidepoint: 
gay time-travellers are even rarer than female ones). Grandpa Biff in Back to 
the Future II gave his younger self a vintage sports almanac, enabling him to 
build a corrupt empire from strategically placed bets and thereby create a 
parallel dystopia. His ultimate goal? A trophy wife in the form of Marty's 
mother.Groundhog Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/07/groundhog-day-perfect-comedy-for-ever>
 saw Bill Murray win Andie MacDowell's hand after studying her, day after 
repeated day. I wonder, assuming this relationship had continued, if he would 
have ever told her the truth.

In About Time, Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/06/mike-scott-waterboys-richard-curtis>
 plays with a similar scenario. Domhnall Gleeson not only uses his talent to 
woo McAdams, but also to perfect his sexual technique. Little does she know how 
many tries it took to wow her on their first night. Admittedly, this is one of 
the film's funnier parts, but it also dupes its female lead to an uncomfortable 
degree, a trend that continues throughout. It's hard to root for a relationship 
when one party is concealing the extent of their power over the other. Thanks 
to time travel, this man has the ability to change his relationship, or erase 
it entirely, without his partner's knowledge.

While a similar idea became a meaty moral issue in 2004's Eternal Sunshine of 
the Spotless Mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/16/eternal-sunshine-spotless-romance>
, in time-travel movies it's usually just ignored or played for laughs. In 
fact, many time-travel heroes deceive women routinely, either for their own 
selfish reasons or simply mistrust. In the hands of generally male 
screenwriters, time travel seems to be a serious business best handled by 
blokes – the implication being that women are somehow too emotional to deal 
with it. Take the Doc's dismissive explanation after he sedated Jennifer: "She 
saw the time machine. I couldn't just leave her there with that information. 
Don't worry, she's not essential to my plan." In last year'sLooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148727/looper>, Bruce Willis tampered 
with the past in an effort to save his future wife. But did we even find out 
her name? No. And did she even speak? Hardly.
 'She's not essential to my plan' ... Elizabeth Shue, Michael J Fox and 
Christopher Lloyd in Back to the Future II. Photograph: Moviestore 
Collection/Rex 
There are mainstream exceptions, of course – but astonishingly few, given the 
500 or so time-travel movies out there. In 1986'sPeggy Sue Got Married 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82950/peggy-sue-got-married>, a lone 
female became unstuck in time; in 1990'sBack to the Future III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76963/back-to-the-future-iii>, the Doc 
allowed his wife aboard; and in 1994'sTimecop 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ewj3wrIUR3s>, a female agent was allowed to 
time travel, but always accompanied by the hero. Ten years later, Jennifer 
Garner woke up in the future in13 Going On 30 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101720/13.going.on.30>; that same year, 
Hermione briefly had the gift inHarry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/99920/harry.potter.and.the.prisoner.of.azkaban>
. And let's face it:The Girl Who Leapt Through Time 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1HLfLNsOPr8>, a 2006 anime adaptation of 
Yasutaka Tsutsui's novel, didn't really have much choice.

But wait. This month sees the release of Teen Beach Movie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uL4ntL58hfk>, a Disney film pitched as the new 
High School Musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/126352/high-school-musical>. Maia 
Mitchell plays Mack, a teen surfer magically transplanted – with her boyfriend 
– into a 1960s surf movie. Does this represent some kind of progress, however 
slight? Possibly. Mack scoffs at old surf movies, saying: "The girls never surf 
as well as the boys." And her lesson to the unemancipated girls of the early 
60s is simple: "Girls can do anything boys can do."

Tell that to poor Rachel McAdams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rachel-mcadams>.

• Teen Beach Movie is out on DVD on 16 August. About Time is in cinemas from 4 
September.Women on the Edge of Time 
<http://www.thehorsehospital.com/now/women-on-the-edge-of-time/> is at the 
Horse Hospital, London WC1, Friday and Saturday.
 