
By June 2004, it was confirmed that the US was using torture at secret 
detention sites and atGuantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>, Cuba. It was in that 
month that piles of "torture memos" were released to the public. Torture did 
not officially end until President Obama took office in January 2009.

A similar story is emerging with respect to targeted killing. The Obama 
administration has produced its own infamous memo; like many of the torture 
memos, it was written by lawyers in the Department of Justice's Office of Legal 
Counsel. It concerns something that many consider worse than torture: the memo 
apparently seeks to justify"targeted killing" 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2011/12/19/q-us-targeted-killings-and-international-law>
.

Calls have gone out for the release of the memo 
<http://www.dailykos.com/story/2011/12/23/1048379/-New-York-Times-sues-for-access-to-Obama-administrations-legal-guidance-on-drone-use>
, but there really is no need. We did need to see the torture memos, but not 
because anyone with legal expertise on the subject would be enlightened by the 
analysis – torture is absolutely prohibited. The legal analysis could only be 
specious. Rather, prior to mid 2004, the use of torture, rendition and secret 
detention were only rumored. The fact of the memos gave credence to speculation.

In the case of targeted killing, the world can see what is happening. The memo 
need not be published to confirm the fact. And, as with torture, the memo will 
not contain a persuasive legal argument respecting the fundamental human rights 
and humanitarian law at issue.

"Targeted killing" is the killing of certain individuals away from battle 
zones using military means, including missiles, bombs and commando raids. The 
missiles and bombs are often delivered by drone aircraft. Given the munitions, 
it is the rare attack that spares the lives of bystanders – over 2,200 persons 
are estimated to have been killed in the three years of theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> in Pakistan alone. 
We have no estimates for deaths in Yemen or Somalia, the other scenes of 
relentless attacks.

"Targeted killing" has become the euphemism du jour. Remember "harsh 
interrogation"? The conduct discussed in the killing memo was once simply 
referred to as assassination.

More and more people are pushing back against the policy. They are reacting, 
no doubt, to the fact that President Obama has authorized many times the 
killings that President Bush did.Obama apparently authorized the killing of an 
American in Yemen 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/09/world/middleeast/secret-us-memo-made-legal-case-to-kill-a-citizen.html?pagewanted=all>
, and he is now engaged in the building of drone bases to continue the campaign 
of assassination.Greg Miller of the Washington Post notes 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/national-security/under-obama-an-emerging-global-apparatus-for-drone-killing/2011/12/13/gIQANPdILP_story.html>
 that "no president has ever relied so extensively on the secret killing of 
individuals to advance the nation's security goals."

In 2001, the US ambassador to Israel, Martin Indyk, stated on Israeli 
television in connection with Israeli targeted killing of suspected terrorists:

"The United States government is very clearly on the record as against 
targeted assassinations. They are extrajudicial killings, and we do not support 
that."

The US did not support such killing for fundamental reasons of law and 
morality. Fundamental principles of law protect the human right to life and due 
process of law. Unlike torture, which is never permitted, states are permitted 
to allow designated authorities to carry out the use of lethal force in certain 
limited situations. In situations of armed conflict hostilities, lawful 
combatants will not be prosecuted for killing that complies with international 
humanitarian law. Today, under the international legal definition of armed 
conflict, the United States is involved in such hostilities in one country only:
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

Beyond Afghanistan, any use of lethal force by designated authorities of the 
United States must follow the normal human rights limits on peacetime resort to 
lethal force. Authorities may engage in lethal forcewhen necessary to save a 
human life immediately, if there is no alternative. In other cases, an attempt 
to arrest is required, followed by a fair trial within a reasonable period.

These restrictive international legal rules on killing are derived from moral 
principle, just as the rules against torture are.Torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/torture> and targeted killing have more in 
common, however. Neither is an effective means toward the ends sought by those 
who employ them: torture is an unreliable means of information gathering; 
targeted killing is ineffective on dealing with the challenge of non-state 
actor terrorist or militant groups.

But even if there was any data at all about assassination having a long-term 
positive impact on suppressing terrorism – which there is not – the data would 
not change the law and morality against it. Indeed, thepresident criticized the 
assassination of a nuclear scientist in Tehran 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/americas/2012/01/201211244648837585.html>. Drone 
attacks outside of armed conflict zones are committing the same wrong – though 
usually more bystanders are killed than was the case in Iran.

President Barack Obama's 3 January 2011 letter introducing his national 
security strategy for the coming decade states that America's overriding goals 
are "security", "prosperity" and a "just and sustainable international order 
where the rights and responsibilities of nations and peoples are upheld, 
especially the fundamental rights of every human being." Impressive, even 
inspiring – but for the fact that the president's campaign of assassination is 
denying many hundreds of individuals their right to life. The security strategy 
looks set to dramatically ramp up the number and deployment of attack drones 
from new permanent bases around the world.

Neither torture nor targeted killing will accomplish the goal of a "just and 
sustainable international order where the rights and responsibilities of 
nations and peoples are upheld".Human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> advocates, legal scholars, 
religious leaders, occupiers and voters are again pushing back against a 
practice carried out in our names that must end.
 