
The brazen attempt by Houthi rebels to sink a US warship patrolling off Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/two-missiles-fired-us-navy-destroyer-from-rebel-held-yemen>
 marks a potentially significant escalation of a conflict that has been 
alternately fuelled and ignored by the western powers. The attack by the 
Houthis, whose main backer is Iran, coincides with an unprecedented ballistic 
missile strike 325 miles inside Saudi territory and suggests a spreading, 
region-wide conflagration could be nearer at hand than previously thought.

Insurrection and revolt have been endemic in Yemen since the early part of 
this century. But the conflict intensified in March last year whenSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, Iran’s main rival, launched a 
large-scale intervention, backed by a coalition of Arab states.

Since then an estimated 10,000 Yemenis have died and many more have been 
injured, displaced or have faced famine conditions. The US and Britain back the 
Saudi coalition and have provided limited practical support such as 
intelligence-sharing and training, but have eschewed direct involvement in 
Yemen. The exception isthe CIA’s repeated drone strikes 
<http://securitydata.newamerica.net/drones/yemen-analysis.html>, including 
those against alleged Islamic State and al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula 
terrorists.

Missiles fired at US navy destroyer from rebel-held Yemen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/two-missiles-fired-us-navy-destroyer-from-rebel-held-yemen>
As in Syria, the Obama administration has favoured a hands-off approach, 
preferring to act through proxies rather than engage directly. This diffidence 
stems from Barack Obama’s fear of the US being sucked into more Middle East 
wars. It is also the byproduct of his controversial attempt to mend fences with
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> through last year’s landmark 
nuclear deal.

The Syrian war has monopolised Washington’s diplomatic energy to the 
disadvantage of Yemen and other regional conflicts, such as Israel-Palestine. 
The unintentional message to Tehran and the Houthis has been that Yemen is not 
a priority. Partly as a result,repeated UN efforts to achieve some kind of 
peace settlement 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/08/yemen-peace-talks-collapse-fighting-intensifies-160807042106210.html>
 have been severely underpowered.

But unpredictable events upset the most careful policy. The US now risks 
getting sucked in more deeply. The American destroyer targeted at the weekend 
was in the area because ofa previous Houthi attack on a United Arab Emirates 
vessel 
<http://www.foxnews.com/world/2016/10/03/us-warships-sent-to-area-where-iran-backed-rebels-attacked-saudi-led-coalition-ship.html>
, part of the Saudi-led coalition. The destroyer belongs to a three-warship 
deployment in the Red Sea-Gulf of Aden area, armed with Tomahawk cruise 
missiles and carrying US special forces commandos.

Riyadh has been shaken by an unprecedented Houthi ballistic missile strike on 
Taif, deep inside Saudi Arabia.
Map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/yemen-zip/giv-1406X7w67dUvJOAC/>
Meanwhile, the weekend bombing of a Yemeni funeral ceremony attended by Houthi 
notables, killing at least 140 people, has further upset Washington’s 
calculations. Saudi-led coalition warplanes are widely held responsible. It was 
the latest in a string of atrocities involving civilians to be blamed on the 
Saudis.

The US strongly condemned the bombing and said it would review its support for 
the Saudi operations. Its angry words will further strain relations with 
Riyadh. The bombing also enables Russia and Iran to accuse the US of hypocrisy 
in Syria, where it broke off diplomatic talks following another outrage –the 
destruction last month of a UN aid convoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/un-aid-convoy-attack-syria-us-russia>
.

We saw how Yemen’s children are slowly starving to death | Krishnan Guru-Murthy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/06/we-saw-how-yemen-children-slowly-starving-to-death-krishnan-guru-murthy>
Sensing perhaps that a wedge can be driven between Riyadh and an embarrassed 
Washington, Iran has been quick to complain to the UN about the funeral 
bombing. For a country guilty of serious, systemic human rights abuses, this 
may seem a bit rich. But it comes on top of western acceptance of theblocking 
by Arab states 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/media-centre/press-releases/2016/09/un-human-rights-council-yet-again-fails-yemeni-civilians>
 of a full UN human rights council investigation into atrocities in Yemen.

Watching a power vacuum develop in as Obama nears the end of his term, 
hardliners in Iran’s Revolutionary Guards appear ready to up the ante not just 
inYemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> but in Iraq, where the 
Shia-led government is a close ally, and in Syria, where Iran’s own fighters 
and those of Hezbollah are keeping Bashar al-Assad’s forces on the offensive in 
Aleppo.

Some analysts suggest an expansionist Iran, like Russia, is seeking permanent 
military bases on the Mediterranean in return for its help. Iran’s behaviour 
will disappoint those who backed Obama’s opening to Tehran and convince 
sceptics, such as Israel’s leadership, they were right to predict Tehran would 
maintain its feud with the west, continue to seek regional dominance and go on 
trying to destabilise predominantly Sunni Muslim Saudi Arabia and its Gulf 
allies, wherever and whenever it can.

Neglected diplomatically by the US and Europe, let down by UN human rights 
watchdog, fuelled by US and British arms sales and exploited and manipulated by 
Iran, the conflict in Yemen is another Syria, on a smaller scale. Like Syria it 
has increasing potential to blow up in the west’s face.
 