
Again and again in television coverage of the mass protests in Kiev against 
the Yanukovich government, we saw images of protesters tearing down statues of 
Lenin. It was an easy way to demonstrate anger: the statues functioned as a 
symbol of Soviet oppression, and Vladimir Putin’sRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is perceived as continuing the 
Soviet policy of domination of its neighbours.

Bear in mind that it was only in 1956 that Lenin’s statues started to 
proliferate throughout the Soviet Union: until then, statues of Stalin were 
much more common. But after Krushchev’s "secret" denunciation of Stalin at the 
20th congress of the Communist party, Stalin’s statues were replaced en masse 
by Lenin’s: Lenin was literally a stand-in for Stalin.

This was made equally clear by a change made in 1962 to the masthead of 
Pravda. Until then, at the top left-hand corner of the front page there had 
been a drawing of two profiles, Lenin and Stalin, side by side. Shortly after 
the 22nd congress publicly rejected Stalin his profile wasn’t merely removed 
but replaced with a second profile of Lenin: now there were two identical 
Lenins printed side by side. In a way, this weird repetition made Stalin more 
present in his absence than ever.

There was nonetheless a historical irony in watching Ukrainians tearing down 
Lenin’s statues as a sign of their will to break with Soviet domination and 
assert their national sovereignty. For the golden era of Ukrainian national 
identity was not tsarist Russia – where Ukrainian national self-assertion was 
thwarted – but the first decade of the Soviet Union, when Soviet policy in a
Ukraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> exhausted by war and famine 
was "indigenisation". Ukrainian culture and language were revived and rights to 
healthcare, education and social security introduced.

Indigenisation followed the principles formulated by Lenin in quite 
unambiguous terms:

The proletariat cannot but fight against the forcible retention of the 
oppressed nations within the boundaries of a given state, and this is exactly 
what the struggle for the right of self-determination means. The proletariat 
must demand the right of political secession for the colonies and for the 
nations that ‘its own’ nation oppresses. Unless it does this, proletarian 
internationalism will remain a meaningless phrase; mutual confidence and class 
solidarity between the workers of the oppressing and oppressed nations will be 
impossible.

Lenin remained faithful to this position to the end: immediately after the 
October Revolution, when Rosa Luxembourg argued that small nations should be 
given full sovereignty only if progressive forces would predominate in the new 
state, Lenin was in favour of an unconditional right to secede.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401468011963%2F28c027bc-03ab-4e6f-acbd-846346931f36-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401468011963%2F28c027bc-03ab-4e6f-acbd-846346931f36-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Vladimir Lenin addressing a crowd in Moscow in October 1917, the day the 
Bolshevik-dominated Soviet government was established Photograph: Print 
Collector/Getty Images 
In his last struggle against Stalin’s project for a centralised Soviet Union, 
Lenin again advocated the unconditional right of small nations to secede (in 
this case, Georgia was at stake), insisting on the full sovereignty of the 
national entities that composed the Soviet state – no wonder that, on 27 
September 1922, in a letter to the Politburo, Stalin accused Lenin of "national 
liberalism". The direction in which Stalin was already heading is clear from 
his proposal that the government of Soviet Russia should also be the government 
of the other five republics (Ukraine, Belarus,Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>, Armenia and Georgia):

If the present decision is confirmed by the Central Committee of the RCP, it 
will not be made public, but communicated to the Central Committees of the 
Republics for circulation among the Soviet organs, the Central Executive 
Committees or the Congresses of the Soviets of the said Republics before the 
convocation of the All-Russian Congress of the Soviets, where it will be 
declared to be the wish of these Republics.

The interaction of the higher authority, the Central Committee, with its base 
was thus abolished: the higher authority now simply imposed its will. To add 
insult to injury, the Central Committee decided what the base would ask the 
higher authority to enact, as if it were its own wish.

 In the most conspicuous case, in 1939 the three Baltic states asked to join 
the Soviet Union – which granted their wish. In all this Stalin was returning 
to pre-Revolutionary tsarist policy: Russia’s colonisation of Siberia in the 
17th century and Muslim Asia in the 19th was no longer condemned as imperialist 
expansion but celebrated for setting these traditional societies on the path of 
progressive modernisation.

Putin’s foreign policy is a clear continuation of the tsarist-Stalinist line. 
After the Russian Revolution,according to Putin 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/transcript-putin-says-russia-will-protect-the-rights-of-russians-abroad/2014/03/18/432a1e60-ae99-11e3-a49e-76adc9210f19_story.html>
, the Bolsheviks did serious damage to Russia’s interests:

The Bolsheviks, for a number of reasons – may God judge them – added large 
sections of the historical south of Russia to the Republic of Ukraine. This was 
done with no consideration for the ethnic make-up of the population, and today 
these areas form the south-east of Ukraine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F14%2F1400083610021%2F1bffd06e-0d27-46b1-aaea-d2f3265435b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F14%2F1400083610021%2F1bffd06e-0d27-46b1-aaea-d2f3265435b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A woman carries a protrait of Stalin during Victory day celebrations in 
Odessa. Photograph: Petr Shelomovskiy/Demotix/Corbis 
No wonder Stalin’s portraits are on show again at military parades and public 
celebrations, while Lenin has been obliterated. In an opinion poll carried out 
in 2008 by the Rossiya TV station,Stalin was voted the third greatest Russian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/dec/29/stalin-name-of-russia> of all 
time, with half a million votes. Lenin came in a distant sixth. Stalin is 
celebrated not as a Communist but as a restorer of Russian greatness after 
Lenin’s anti-patriotic "deviation". Putin recently used the term Novorossiya 
(New Russia) for the seven south-eastern oblasts of Ukraine, resuscitating a 
term last used in 1917.

But the Leninist undercurrent, though repressed, persisted in the Communist 
underground opposition to Stalin. Long before Solzhenitsyn, asChristopher 
Hitchens <https://www.theguardian.com/books/christopher-hitchens> wrote in 2011:

The crucial questions about the Gulag were being asked by left oppositionists, 
from Boris Souvarine to Victor Serge to CLR. James, in real time and at great 
peril. Those courageous and prescient heretics have been somewhat written out 
of history (they expected far worse than that, and often received it).

This internal dissent was a natural part of the Communist movement, in clear 
contrast to fascism. "There were no dissidents in the Nazi party," Hitchens 
went on, "risking their lives on the proposition that the Führer had betrayed 
the true essence of National Socialism."

Precisely because of this tension at the heart of the Communist movement, the 
most dangerous place to be at the time of the 1930s purges was at the top of 
the nomenklatura: in the space of a couple of years, 80% of the Central 
Committee and the Red Army leadership was shot.

Another sign of dissent could be detected in the last days of "really existing 
socialism", when protesting crowds sang official songs, including national 
anthems, to remind the powers of their unfulfilled promises. In the GDR, by 
contrast, between the early 1970s and 1989, to sing the national anthem in 
public was a criminal offence: its words ("Deutschland einig Vaterland" - 
Germany, the united Fatherland) didn’t fit with the idea of EastGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> as a new socialist nation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401468763518%2F40de947c-3581-4f88-ac48-09b5d1b6c337-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401468763518%2F40de947c-3581-4f88-ac48-09b5d1b6c337-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Demonstrators clash with riot police officers in Kiev during protests that led 
to the fall of former president Viktor Yanukovitch. Photograph: Demotix/Corbis 
The resurgence of Russian nationalism has caused certain historical events to 
be rewritten. A recent biopic, Andrei Kravchuk’s Admiral, celebrates the life 
of Aleksandr Kolchak, the White commander who governed Siberia between 1918 and 
1920. But it’s worth remembering the totalitarian potential, as well as the 
outright brutality, of the White counter-revolutionary forces during this 
period.

 Had the Whites won the civil war, Hitchens writes, "the common word for 
fascism would have been a Russian one, not an Italian one … Major General 
William Graves, who commanded the American expeditionary force during the 1918 
invasion of Siberia (an event thoroughly airbrushed from all American 
textbooks), wrote in his memoirs about the pervasive, lethal anti-Semitism that 
dominated the Russian right-wing and added: 'I doubt if history will show any 
country in the world during the last 50 years where murder could be committed 
so safely, and with less danger of punishment, than in Siberia during the reign 
of Admiral Kolchak.'"

The entire European neo-fascist right (in Hungary, France, Italy, Serbia) 
firmly supports Russia in the ongoing Ukrainian crisis, giving the lie to the 
official Russian presentation of theCrimean referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/16/ukraine-russia-truce-crimea-referendum>
 as a choice between Russian democracy and Ukrainian fascism. The events in 
Ukraine – themassive protests that toppled Yanukovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/24/ukraine-task-uprising-political-victory>
 and his gang – should be understood as a defence against the dark legacy 
resuscitated by Putin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401470002345%2Fa760603d-2ead-4557-99c4-11f9b15102aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401470002345%2Fa760603d-2ead-4557-99c4-11f9b15102aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pro-Europe Ukrainians celebrate New Year in Kiev in January 2014. Photograph: 
Stringer/reuters 
The protests were triggered by the Ukrainian government’s decision to 
prioritise relations with Russia over integration into the European Union. 
Predictably, many anti-imperialist leftists reacted to the news by patronising 
the Ukrainians: how deluded they are still to idealise Europe, not to be able 
to see that joining the EU would just make Ukraine an economic colony of western
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, sooner or later to go 
the same way as Greece.

In fact, Ukrainians are far from blind about the reality of the EU. They are 
fully aware of its troubles and disparities: their message is simply that their 
own situation is much worse. Europe may have problems, but they are a rich 
man’s problems.

Should we, then, simply support the Ukrainian side in the conflict? There is a 
"Leninist" reason to do so. In Lenin’s very last writings, long after he 
renounced the utopia ofState and Revolution 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/State-Revolution-V-I-Lenin/dp/0717801969>, he explored 
the idea of a modest, "realistic" project for Bolshevism.

Because of the economic under-development and cultural backwardness of the 
Russian masses, he argues, there is no way for Russia to "pass directly to 
socialism": all that Soviet power can do is to combine the moderate politics of 
"state capitalism" with the intense cultural education of the peasant masses – 
not the brainwashing of propaganda, but a patient, gradual imposition of 
civilised standards.

Facts and figures revealed "what a vast amount of urgent spadework we still 
have to do to reach the standard of an ordinary west European civilised country 
… We must bear in mind the semi-Asiatic ignorance from which we have not yet 
extricated ourselves," he wrote.

Can we think of the Ukrainian protesters’ reference to Europe as a sign that 
their goal, too, is "to reach the standard of an ordinary western European 
civilised country"?

But here things quickly get complicated. What, exactly, does the "Europe" the 
Ukrainian protesters are referring to stand for? It can’t be reduced to a 
single idea: it spans nationalist and even fascist elements but extends also to 
the idea of what Etienne Balibar calls égaliberté, freedom-in-equality, the 
unique contribution of Europe to the global political imaginary, even if it is 
in practice today mostly betrayed by European institutions and citizens 
themselves.

Between these two poles, there is also a naive trust in the value of European 
liberal-democratic capitalism. Europe can see in the Ukrainian protests its own 
best and worst sides, its emancipatory universalism as well as its dark 
xenophobia.


Let’s begin with the dark xenophobia. The Ukrainian nationalist right is one 
instance of what is going on today from the Balkans to Scandinavia, from the US 
to Israel, from central Africa to India: ethnic and religious passions are 
exploding, and Enlightenment values receding.

These passions have always been there, lurking; what’s new is the outright 
shamelessness of their display. Imagine a society which has fully integrated 
into itself the great modern axioms of freedom, equality, the right to 
education and healthcare for all its members, and in which racism and sexism 
have been rendered unacceptable and ridiculous.

 But then imagine that, step by step, although the society continues to pay 
lip service to these axioms, they are de facto deprived of their substance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401466807287%2Ffd63d639-ac2a-413c-9b72-93efe7775664-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401466807287%2Ffd63d639-ac2a-413c-9b72-93efe7775664-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hungarian protesters gather around a fallen statue of Josef Stalin in Budapest 
in October 1956. Photograph: Arpad Hazafi/AP 
Here is an example from very recent European history: in the summer of 2012, 
Viktor Orbán 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/15/hungary-political-regression-repression-racism>
, the right-wing Hungarian prime minister, declared that a new economic system 
was needed in central Europe.

Let us hope that God will help us and we will not have to invent a new type of 
political system instead of democracy that would need to be introduced for the 
sake of economic survival … Co-operation is a question of force, not of 
intention. Perhaps there are countries where things don’t work that way, for 
example in the Scandinavian countries, but such a half-Asiatic rag-tag people 
as we are can unite only if there is force," he said.

The irony of these words wasn’t lost on some old Hungarian dissidents: when 
the Soviet army moved into Budapest to crush the 1956 uprising, the message 
repeatedly sent by the beleaguered Hungarian leaders to the west was that they 
were defending Europe against the Asiatic communists. Now, after the collapse 
of communism, the Christian-conservative government paints as its main enemy 
the multicultural consumerist liberal democracy for which today’s western 
Europe stands. Orbán has already expressed his sympathy for "capitalism with 
Asian values"; if the European pressure on Orbán continues, we can easily 
imagine him sending a message to the east: ‘We are defending Asia here!’


Today’s anti-immigrant populism has replaced direct barbarism with a barbarism 
that has a human face. It enacts a regression from the Christian ethic of "love 
thy neighbour" back to the pagan privileging of the tribe over the barbarian 
Other. Even as it represents itself as a defence of Christian values, it is in 
fact the greatest threat to the Christian legacy.

"Men who begin to fight the Church for the sake of freedom and humanity," GK 
Chesterton wrote 100 years ago, "end by flinging away freedom and humanity if 
only they may fight the Church … The secularists have not wrecked divine 
things; but the secularists have wrecked secular things, if that is any comfort 
to them."

 Doesn’t the same hold for the advocates of religion too? Fanatical defenders 
of religion start out attacking contemporary secular culture; it’s no surprise 
when they end up forsaking any meaningful religious experience. In a similar 
way, many liberal warriors are so eager to fight anti-democratic fundamentalism 
that they end up flinging away freedom and democracy if only they may fight 
terror.

The "terrorists" may be ready to wreck this world for love of another, but the 
warriors on terror are just as ready to wreck their own democratic world out of 
hatred for the Muslim other. Some of them love human dignity so much that they 
are ready to legalise torture to defend it. The defenders of Europe against the 
immigrant threat are doing much the same. In their zeal to protect the 
Judeo-Christian legacy, they are ready to forsake what is most important in 
that legacy. The anti-immigrant defenders of Europe, not the notional crowds of 
immigrants waiting to invade it, are the true threat to Europe.

One of the signs of this regression is a request often heard on the new 
European right for a more "balanced" view of the two "extremisms", the right 
and the left. We are repeatedly told that one should treat the extreme left 
(communism) the same way that Europe after the second world war treated the 
extreme right (the defeated fascists).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401469481990%2Fa21f36c7-7a7a-4908-9f7a-bbeef323e959-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401469481990%2Fa21f36c7-7a7a-4908-9f7a-bbeef323e959-1020x612.jpeg>
 Statue of Stalin in the Museum of Communism in Prague Photograph: Petr David 
Josek/AP 
But in reality there is no balance here: the equation of fascism and communism 
secretly privileges fascism. Thus the right are heard to argue that fascism 
copied communism: before becoming a fascist, Mussolini was a socialist; Hitler, 
too, was a National Socialist; concentration camps and genocidal violence were 
features of the Soviet Union a decade before Nazis resorted to them; the 
annihilation of the Jews has a clear precedent in the annihilation of the class 
enemy, etc.

The point of these arguments is to assert that a moderate fascism was a 
justified response to the communist threat (a point made long ago by Ernst 
Nolte in his defence of Heidegger’s involvement with Nazism). InSlovenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/slovenia>, the right is advocating the 
rehabilitation of the anti-communist Home Guard which fought the partisans 
during the second world war: they made the difficult choice to collaborate with 
the Nazis in order to thwart the much greater evil of communism.

Mainstream liberals tell us that when basic democratic values are under threat 
from ethnic or religious fundamentalists we should unite behind the 
liberal-democratic agenda, save what can be saved and put aside dreams of more 
radical social transformation.

But there is a fatal flaw in this call for solidarity: it ignores the way in 
which liberalism and fundamentalism are caught in a vicious cycle. It is the 
aggressive attempt to export liberal permissiveness that causes fundamentalism 
to fight back vehemently and assert itself.

When we hear today’s politicians offering us a choice between liberal freedom 
and fundamentalist oppression, and triumphantly asking the rhetorical question, 
"Do you want women to be excluded from public life and deprived of their 
rights? Do you want every critic of religion to be put to death?", what should 
make us suspicious is the very self-evidence of the answer: who would wantthat? 

The problem is that liberal universalism has long since lost its innocence. 
What Max Horkheimer said about capitalism and fascism in the 1930s applies in a 
different context today: those who don’t want to criticise liberal democracy 
should also keep quiet about religious fundamentalism.
cenin (@ceninvoncatlien) 
'Whoever is not prepared to talk about capitalism should also remain silent 
about fascism.' Max Horkheimer (1939)
 <https://twitter.com/ceninvoncatlien/statuses/329522948845223936> May 1, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/ceninvoncatlien/statuses/329522948845223936> 
What of the fate of the liberal-democratic capitalist European dream in 
Ukraine? It isn’t clear what awaits Ukraine within the EU. I’ve often mentioned 
a well-known joke from the last decade of the Soviet Union, but it couldn’t be 
more apposite:

Rabinovitch, a Jew, wants to emigrate. The bureaucrat at the emigration office 
asks him why, and Rabinovitch answers: ‘Two reasons. The first is that I’m 
afraid the Communists will lose power in the Soviet Union, and the new power 
will put all the blame for the Communists’ crimes on us, the Jews.’ ‘But this 
is pure nonsense,’ the bureaucrat interrupts, ‘nothing can change in the Soviet 
Union, the power of the Communists will last for ever!’ ‘Well,’ Rabinovitch 
replies, ‘that’s my second reason.’

 Imagine the equivalent exchange between a Ukrainian and an EU administrator. 
The Ukrainian complains: "There are two reasons we are panicking here in 
Ukraine. First, we’re afraid that under Russian pressure the EU will abandon us 
and let our economy collapse." The EU administrator interrupts: "But you can 
trust us, we won’t abandon you. In fact, we’ll make sure we take charge of your 
country and tell you what to do!" "Well," the Ukrainian replies, "that’s my 
second reason."
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401467278809%2F94bd879d-44e6-49bf-8540-0397fa651583-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20both%20the%20left%20and%20right%20have%20got%20it%20wrong%20on%20Ukraine%20%E2%80%93%20%C5%BDi%C5%BEek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fukraine-slavoj-zizek-lenin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F30%2F1401467278809%2F94bd879d-44e6-49bf-8540-0397fa651583-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A pro Russian rally in Donetsk, eastern Ukraine, with a statue of Lenin in the 
background. Photograph: Sergei Grits/AP 
The issue isn’t whether Ukraine is worthy of Europe, and good enough to enter 
the EU, but whether today’s Europe can meet the aspirations of the Ukrainians. 
If Ukraine ends up with a mixture of ethnic fundamentalism and liberal 
capitalism, with oligarchs pulling the strings, it will be as European as 
Russia (or Hungary) is today. (Too little attention is drawn to the role played 
by the various groups of oligarchs – the "pro-Russian" ones and the 
"pro-western" ones – in the events in Ukraine.)

Some political commentators claim that the EU hasn’t given Ukraine enough 
support in its conflict with Russia, that the EU response to the Russian 
occupation and annexation of Crimea was half-hearted. But there is another kind 
of support which has been even more conspicuously absent: the proposal of any 
feasible strategy for breaking the deadlock.

Europe will be in no position to offer such a strategy until it renews its 
pledge to the emancipatory core of its history. Only by leaving behind the 
decaying corpse of the old Europe can we keep the European legacy of égaliberté 
alive. It is not the Ukrainians who should learn from Europe: Europe has to 
learn to live up to the dream that motivated the protesters on the Maidan. The 
lesson that frightened liberals should learn is that only a more radical left 
can save what is worth saving in the liberal legacy today.

The Maidan protesters were heroes, but the true fight – the fight for what the 
new Ukraine will be – is happening now, and it will be much tougher than the 
fight against Putin’s intervention. A new and riskier heroism will be needed. 
It has been shown already by those Russians who oppose the nationalist passion 
of their own country and denounce it as a tool of power. It’s time for the 
basic solidarity of Ukrainians and Russians to be asserted, and the very terms 
of the conflict rejected.

The next step is a public display of fraternity, with organisational networks 
established between Ukrainian political activists and the Russian opposition to 
Putin’s regime. This may sound utopian, but it is only such thinking that can 
confer on the protests a truly emancipatory dimension. Otherwise, we will be 
left with a conflict of nationalist passions manipulated by oligarchs. Such 
geopolitical games are of no interest whatever to authentic emancipatory 
politics.
 London Review of Books cover. Image: LRB 
This article first appeared in the London Review of Books 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v36/n09/slavoj-zizek/barbarism-with-a-human-face>
 