
Funding cuts are forcing universities to search for new and innovative ways of 
creating income to survive. At the same time, we must consider the impact of 
tuition fee rises on our students. There is a great deal of evidence now that 
thousands of young people are being deterred from higher education for fear of 
amassing debt they can never repay.

The University of Worcester <http://www.worcester.ac.uk/> has decided that 
from next year it will award a fee waiver to every first-year undergraduate 
from a low income household who qualifies under the newNational Scholarship 
Programme 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/jan/31/tuition-waiver-scheme-too-complex>
. We have worked out that this is likely to cost us in excess of £3m, 
representing 5% of our annual turnover. This is a huge commitment for a 
university to make in such a difficult financial climate. So why are we 
prepared to stretch our finances this far?

Balancing the need to remain financially viable while remaining accessible and 
inclusive to a broad section of students is not easy for any higher education 
institution, especially when we have no way of knowing the economic backgrounds 
of our undergraduates on entry.

In a bid to encourage and support students from disadvantaged backgrounds who 
could benefit from higher education, the government introduced theNational 
Scholarship Programme 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/whatwedo/wp/currentworktowidenparticipation/nationalscholarshipprogramme/>
 that provides eligible students in their first year at university with a 
scholarship worth at least £3,000.

But even with government funding for the programme increasing from £50m this 
year to £100m in 2013-14 and £150m from 2014-15, plus required matched funding 
from most participating universities,it is nowhere near enough 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2012/jul/04/bursaries-and-scholarships-to-fall>
 to meet the needs of all the students who require support.

In order to calculate how many students might qualify for a scholarship, we 
looked at last year's intake of students and estimated that about 750 out of 
2,500 would be eligible for a fees waiver under the scheme because their family 
income fell below the £22,500 threshold. Our estimation was a long way short of 
the reality. The Student Loans Company has told us that, in fact, 1,150 of this 
cohort would qualify for the programme.

While we have been successful in widening access to higher education at 
Worcester, these figures are a wider reflection of what is happening to 
household finances all over the country. In the last two or three years, the 
recession and associated job losses have hit household finances hard.

University finances have also suffered and this September we cannot hope to 
cover the cost of providing a scholarship for all those students who would 
qualify. We will have to restrict ourselves this year to matching scholarship 
funding allocated to us by the government which will allow us to offer 200 
places with a £3,000 fees waiver.

Despite doing what we can, we feel strongly that having to restrict support in 
this way is tremendously unfair. So from 2013 we have decided to use money from 
research grants and other initiatives to give a scholarship to every student 
who is eligible. A fees waiver means that those students will end up owing 
£3,000 less upon graduation. Some believe scholarships should be a combination 
of fees waiver and cash in hand, but this system seems the fairest and the 
least divisive way of ensuring no one who is eligible misses out.

It is going to be difficult for us to meet this commitment, but we cannot see 
any other way around the problem, given that government funding for this scheme 
and higher education in general is restricted.

I now spend a great deal of my time securing philanthropic donations that 
enable us to offer scholarships to students in their second and third years of 
university to give them additional incentives to do well academically. Just as 
we are seeing families rallying around and supporting young people financially 
to enable them to go to university, so we have philanthropists and businesses 
doing their bit to ensure that young people are not put off from higher 
education for economic reasons.

They are doing so because they realise that none of us can afford to scrimp on 
university education if our young people and country are to have any kind of a 
future.

Professor David Green is vice-chancellor of the University of Worcester 
<http://www.worcester.ac.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 