
The idea of a supremely fit professional cyclist like Simon Yates having to 
occasionally reach for an inhaler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/orica-green-simon-yates-positive-test-administrative-error>
 to ward off a wheeze might seem anomalous. But asthma is surprisingly common 
among some elite athletes.

Orica-GreenEdge: Simon Yates’s positive drug test was ‘administrative error’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/orica-green-simon-yates-positive-test-administrative-error>
A handful have classic asthma, the usually allergy-triggered constriction of 
the bronchial tubes that tends to begin in childhood.


Much more common in sport is exercise-induced asthma, or EIA, in which rapid 
and heavy breathing causes the same symptoms. The effect can be exacerbated by 
atmospheric conditions, which means some sportspeople tend to suffer more than 
others.

John Dickinson from Kent University’s school of sport & exercise sciences 
<https://www.kent.ac.uk/sportsciences/staff/ERG%20Staff/j-dickinson.html>, a 
world expert on asthma in sport, tested all 33 UK-based members of the British 
swimming squad and found 70% had some form of asthma, against a national asthma 
rate of about 8% to 10%. It is believed the chlorinated atmosphere of a pool 
could be a factor in this.


Cycling is another sport where EIA is common – Dickinson’s test on cyclists 
from Team Sky found a third have the condition. Rapid inhalation of cold, dry 
air has been identified as a trigger of EIA. Around half of elite cross-country 
skiers have the condition,as does Paula Radcliffe 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sportacademy/hi/sa/treatment_room/features/newsid_2346000/2346883.stm>
.


While EIA can occasionally bring on have very serious symptoms, sometimes 
athletes do not realise they have it until they are tested. The test involves 
them breathing a very dry air mixture for six minutes at high ventilation, with 
their lung function tested before and after. The asthma-induced fall in lung 
function can be as much as 40%.

Speaking to the Guardian in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/28/asthma-elite-athletes-study-swimmers-cyclist-eid>
, Dickinson said the condition remained a source of some debate: “It depends 
which respiratory consultant you talk to on whether you put these athletes on a 
spectrum of asthma, or whether you think that’s purely down to them exercising 
really hard in a certain environment, and if you take them out of that 
environment they’re fine. It’s a grey zone. But my argument is it’s a form of 
asthma.”

It’s not unknown for professional cyclists to carry a reliever inhaler, which 
helps stop a wheeze as it begins, in the back pocket of a jersey. Use of 
salbutamol, the most common form of such bronchodilator drugs, usually taken as 
a blue inhaler,does not need a doctor’s therapeutic use exemption certificate 
<http://www.uci.ch/clean-sport/therapeutic-use-exemptions/> within certain 
limits.

Terbutaline, the bronchodilator taken by Yates, is permitted by anti-doping 
authorities as an inhaler, but only with a certificate. Certificates are also 
needed for the more powerful preventer inhalers for asthma, which aim to ward 
off symptoms, the most common of which are steroid-based. The injection of any 
anti-asthma drugs is not permitted.
 