
Patroclus is like a brother to Achilles, wrathful hero of the Greeks at Troy, 
and the other half of one of literature’s greatest friendships. When Patroclus 
dies in battle, wearing his beloved friend’s armour, Achilles laments – Homer 
tells us in another familial simile – like a lion who has lost his cubs.

The best eight young adult books – and why grownups should read them, too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/20/young-adult-books-that-grownups-should-read>
A century or so after The Iliad 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=The+Iliad&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 was written, the authors of the Book of Samuel also turned to the lexicon of 
family to depict the legendary bond between David and Jonathan. Their affinity 
is measured not just through comparisons with blood allegiances, but against 
them: David’s survival hangs on Jonathan’s willingness to betray his father, 
King Saul, to save his friend. Their story is a contest between the obligations 
of family and the free choice of friendship.

Achilles and Patroclus, David and Jonathan: these are archetypal double acts, 
but both are repeatedly and strikingly evoked by reference to other types of 
relationships. It is as if – then as now – friendship lacked a convincing, 
independent vocabulary of its own. It isn’t only the authors who turn to 
analogies and avatars to evoke these characters’ feelings: so do the friends 
themselves. Achilles insists his terrible, cruel grief for Patroclus could not 
be more painful were his father to die, or his son. After David kills Goliath, 
in wordless homage Jonathan “stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, 
and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and 
to his girdle”. Famously, to David their love was “wonderful, passing the love 
of women”.

This trope of likening friend to family, which writers in different millennia 
and civilisations have reached for (“Dear as the mother to the son”,Tennyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-tennyson> says of Arthur Hallam in 
“In Memoriam”, another of friendship’s loveliest testaments), encapsulates a 
paradox. Without our friendships, life would be thin. On the other hand, from a 
certain, instrumental point of view, they are inessential, eccentric luxuries, 
difficult to justify in the common currencies of money, duty and procreation. 
The comfort of enduring witness and voluntary intimacy that friendships 
provide, the sense of conducting a two-way experiment in knowing: such benefits 
are less tangible than those of spouses, children or parents. Friendships 
derive their value from the ways in which they supplant or compensate for these 
primary kinships. And authors from Homer onwards have turned to family to 
describe them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fwhy-modern-fiction-has-turned-friendship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426788965428%2Ffa004da4-9752-4f2b-abc0-f2b7f975f00b-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20modern%20fiction%20has%20turned%20its%20back%20on%20friendship&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fwhy-modern-fiction-has-turned-friendship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20modern%20fiction%20has%20turned%20its%20back%20on%20friendship&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fwhy-modern-fiction-has-turned-friendship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426788965428%2Ffa004da4-9752-4f2b-abc0-f2b7f975f00b-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Zadie Smith. Photograph: Craig Barritt/Getty Images 
That friendships between adults are harder to rationalise than other close 
relationships may be one reason they are underrepresented in modern fiction, 
considering their importance in most people’s lives. Film loves friendships, as 
does television, as the cops and cowboys in buddy movies and series fromButch 
Cassidy to Cagney and Lacey and Thelma and Louise attest. So do children’s 
stories, perhaps because, along with the separation from parents with which 
they coincide, the making and breaking of friendships are among childhood’s 
first dramas. Think of the beautiful triangle of Winnie the Pooh, Christopher 
Robin and Piglet. Nineteenth-century authors, especially the Americans, 
followed friendships across oceans and frontiers; Jane Austen chronicled their 
tensions and microcrises.

Yet with some noteworthy exceptions – Zadie Smith’s NW 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/nw-2.html>, Linda Grant’s Upstairs at the Party
 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/upstairs-at-the-party.html>, Elena Ferrante – 
recent adult fiction tends to relegate friendship to the subplot, below the 
headline concerns of family and romance. It might not help that friendship 
denies writers the shortcuts they enjoy in the portrayal of other ties. A 
certain amount of invisible magic is implicit in romantic love, and there is 
always the fall-back rationale of sex. The axioms of psychoanalysis structure 
the way we read and think about parents and families. Fictional friendship 
lacks these conventions.

Achilles, Patroclus, David and Jonathan suggest a rudimentary grammar. In both 
these stories, as in many robust friendships, there is sameness and difference: 
Achilles is an infinitely better warrior, but Patroclus is older, wiser and 
gentler (and a better cook). There is rivalry: if these men measure their 
friendships against other relationships, they also measure themselves against 
their friends. In both, the comrades speak hard truths (“you’re impossible”, 
Patroclus tells Achilles), and share a sense of self-sufficiency, which tips 
over into an us-against-the-world secrecy and collusion. Friendship may be a 
free choice, but its costs can be high. Patroclus and Achilles lose their 
lives; Jonathan risks his own for David, and forfeits his crown. Both 
partnerships rely as much on the mutual exposure of weakness as on macho 
virtues, tears as much as swagger. Shared experiences accumulate, all that 
crying and fighting, such that the men become repositories of each other’s 
pasts. Then both these heartbreaking friendships are cut short by death – 
before familiarity curdles into nostalgia, choice morphs into obligation, and, 
as so often happens in reality, the friendships that were once a counterpoint 
to more humdrum commitments become almost indistinguishable from them.

AD Miller’s The Faithful Couple is published by Little, Brown.
 