
If any artist is worth a lot of money it is Francis Bacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bacon>. Looking at his paintings in 
Tate Britain, I am hit in the face by their brilliance. One gallery contains 
such famous works as David Hockney's paintingMr and Mrs Clark and Percy 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hockney-mr-and-mrs-clark-and-percy-t01269> 
andAnthony Caro's Early One Morning 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/caro-early-one-morning-t00805>. Yet every 
single thing here wilts in the baleful glare ofBacon's Triptych – August 1972 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/bacon-triptych-august-1972-t03073>, a 
painting with the darkness ofCaravaggio 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/michelangelo-merisi-da-caravaggio>, 
the curves ofBernini 
<http://www.goldaraphael.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/04/bernini_apollo.jpg>, 
and the brutal passion of a criminalTitian 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9f/Titian_-_Tarquin_and_Lucretia_-_WGA22892.jpg>
.

Bacon is a great artist, and Christie's is putting big money on that 
greatness. The auction house expects to make at least $85m (£53m) when another 
of his triptychs goes on sale this evening.The New York sale 
<http://www.christies.com/sales/post-war-and-contemporary-evening-sale-new-york-november-2013/>
 is aiming tooutdo the record-making $120m price recently paid for Munch's 
Scream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/may/03/the-scream-sells-record-auction>
 – but is Bacon that appealing to art collectors?

One thing is obvious if you take a glance at the art market and its 
mega-sales. Collectors are idiots, and auctioneers know it. They report that 
prices are seriously influenced by how much red or gold is in a picture. Think 
about it: you have tens of millions to spend on art and you allow yourself to 
be influenced by ... its colour. How dumb is that? What does it say about the 
vacuous tastes of art's new plutocrats?

The Bacon triptych is unusually bright for him, with big passages of yellow. 
Yet the big selling point is surely its content. With this work, you gettwo 
modern greats for the price of one. It is a portrait of Lucian Freud 
<http://292fc373eb1b8428f75b-7f75e5eb51943043279413a54aaa858a.r38.cf3.rackcdn.com/world_14_0_temp-1381742393-525bb739-620x348.jpg>
, who stands with Bacon as a modern master of the painter's art. Freud and 
Bacon had an intense friendship,fraught with rivalry 
<http://www.smh.com.au/lifestyle/dark-night-of-the-soul-20121029-28e7l.html> 
yet also, it is said, sexually charged. One of the reticent Freud's most public 
gestures was to make aWanted poster for his own portrait of Bacon after it was 
stolen in Berlin <http://www.alexalienart.com/FreudBaconPosterStolen.jpg>. This 
moving poster was suggestive of how much he felt for Bacon, as well as for that 
little painting.

Freud is today at least as revered as Bacon. Both of them deserve the fame. So 
maybe Christie's is right and Three Studies ofLucian Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/freud> presses all the buttons to 
make obscene amounts of money. Bright colours and famous names – it's as 
profound as that.
 