

Old gaze ... My Bloody Valentine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/my-bloody-valentine>

In an article 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/filmandmusic/story/0,,2135023,00.html> about 
"nu-gaze" in The Guardian recently, something caught my attention. Alan McGee, 
all round music industry legend (and, lest we forget,regular contributor to 
this blog <http://blogs.theguardian.com/arts/author/alan_mcgee/profile.html>) 
was quoted in the article as saying: "My Bloody Valentine were my comedy band. 
Ride were different - they were a rock band, really, a fantastic rock band - 
but My Bloody Valentine were a joke, my way of seeing how far I could push 
hype."

Despite thinking that this was like saying you prefer the Ruttles to the 
Beatles, I didn't dwell on it untilMcGee wrote again 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/music/2007/08/hype_springs_eternal.html> about 
MBV's legacy for this blog - and this time in even stronger terms:

"Highlights of my hyping skills include talking up Kevin Shields to be a Brian 
Eno-like genius (when in fact you could put a monkey in the studio with Alan 
Moulder and make it sonically interesting)."

As recently as 2004, McGee was still calling Shields a "genius artist 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/fridayreview/story/0,12102,1167043,00.html>". So 
why the U-turn?

It's well known that chief Valentine Kevin Shields drove McGee to the brink of 
a nervous breakdown and Creation to the brink of bankruptcy while making 1991's 
seminal Loveless album. Taking three years, 18 engineers and Â£250,000 to 
complete (remember that pre-Oasis, Creation were a modest, only-just-surviving 
indie label), Shields, so the story goes, twisted the knife even further by 
naming songs after his answers to McGee's weekly phone calls asking when the 
album would be finished: Soon; When You Sleep; To Here Knows When ... Like all 
great rock anecdotes, there are aspects that are probably apocryphal, but the 
fact remains that McGee let MBV take three years and toy with his mental health 
because he had absolute conviction in Shields' vision. And thank goodness he 
did, because Loveless rewrote the rock rulebook.

Which is why McGee's recent claim is almost impossible to take seriously. Is 
it due to a personal spat? Something relating to Primal Scream? Who knows. It 
may simply be that, like all music legends, McGee is something of a paradox: 
the guy who signed Oasis is the same guy who signed Jesus and Mary Chain, 
manages the awe-inspiring Mogwai and only a couple of weeks ago was praising 
(quite rightly) the unfettered gonzo noise of Pissed Jeans. McGee is also a 
punk at heart, and knows that wildly 
misguided/offensive/ridiculous/contradictory statements make rock and roll more 
fun.

To try and satisfactorily sum up the importance of Loveless, My Bloody 
Valentine's magnum opus, is impossible. But to try to conceive of the 
subsequent history of rock in the album's its absence is like thinking of jazz 
without A Love Supreme, or of literature with Ulysses. For me, part of its 
appeal is that it sounds perennially anachronistic; like it simply shouldn't 
exist - an oblique, 30 minutes-plus Lynchian memory that, even after literally 
hundreds of plays, still sounds fresh and exciting.

Where MBV's ghost really can be found looming, though, is over some of the 
most innovative acts of the last 10 years, including Boards of Canada, Animal 
Collective andFennesz 
<http://profile.myspace.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=user.viewprofile&friendID=77288849>
 - all of whom manage to deal convincingly in the same currency of what might 
be referred to as a kind of "fictitious nostalgia".

When it comes down to it, though, Loveless is still unlike anything pop music 
has ever heard. Which isn't bad for an album that's 16 years old, is it?
 