
Last week, the New York Times times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/27/health/hiv-patient-zero-genetic-analysis.html?_r=0>
 on astudy 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature19827.html> 
published by the journal Nature which charged that the HIV virus first came to 
the United States in the 1970s, taking the blame for bringing Aids to our 
shores away from the infamous “Patient Zero”, Gaëtan Dugas, a French Canadian 
gay flight attendant. Dugas was not named in early research, and is still not 
named in the Nature study 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature19827.html> - 
but he was outed and demonized in Randy Shilts’s 1987 book And the Band Played 
On.

Gaétan Dugas: 'patient zero' not source of HIV/Aids outbreak, study confirms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/26/patient-zero-gaetan-dugas-not-source-of-hivaids-outbreak-study-proves>
This “news” was met largely with a collective yawn by many people I know who, 
like me, study Aids for a living. After all, Patient Zero’s importance has long 
been downplayed by scientists,recognized as 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature19827.html> 
“neither the first Aids case to come to CDC researchers’ attention, nor the 
first to display symptoms.” And while Nature notes theorigins of HIV/Aids 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature19827.html> 
“remain contentious” amongst serious scholars, “and the earliest movements of 
the virus within the US are unknown,” Shilt’s account has never been taken too 
seriously by them.

And the Band Played On – a work of book-length journalism written as the Aids 
epidemic was unfolding in the United States – was not a work that examined 
events after time had passed. Since Shilts’s death (itself related to Aids), 
his overwrought emphasis on Dugas has been widely criticized byAids historians 
<http://www.bu.edu/today/2015/anthony-petro-after-the-wrath-of-god/>, social 
scientists 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=kZOso0FMsrMC&q=and+the+band+played+on#v=snippet&q=and%20the%20band%20played%20on&f=false>
 andpublic health researchers 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4046389/> – particularly for 
framing “the epidemiological spread of the epidemic as very much amoral failing 
on the part of this flight attendant,” as scholarAnthony Petro puts it 
<http://www.bu.edu/today/2015/anthony-petro-after-the-wrath-of-god/>. 


Indeed, those of us who study Aids have long known that long before common 
symptoms such as Kaposi sarcoma and pneumonia were showing up among 
hemophiliacs and gay men, they were likely affecting homeless people who lived 
off society’s radar, people who used IV drugs and those who avoided medical 
treatment out of fear. As activist Betty Williams told the Act up Oral History 
project <http://www.actuporalhistory.org/interviews/images/bwilliams.pdf> in 
2008: “I actually believe that Aids kind of existed among this group of people 
first, because if you look back, there was something called junkie pneumonia, 
there was something called the dwindles that addicts got, and I think this was 
another early Aids population way too helpless to ever do anything for 
themselves on their own behalf.”

What is newsworthy about the Nature study is that, by “jackhammering” the 
decaying RNA of decades-old blood samples, epidemiologists have proven that the 
strain of HIV Dugas had was already circulating before he was a carrier. The 
Times article alsopoetically points out 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/27/health/hiv-patient-zero-genetic-analysis.html?_r=0>
 an irony: Dugas was never supposed to be known as Patient Zero, but as Patient 
Letter O, for “outside southern California”.

So why, then, did the myth of Patient Zero live on for so long? Why was he, or 
anyone, scapegoated in the first place?

Both happened because we like to blame individuals (especially queer folks, 
women, immigrants and people of color) for diseases, particularly communicable 
ones that involve sex. Societally, it is far easier to blame them for disease 
rather than to deal with the complex medical, political and epidemiological 
causes – just as it has been easier to unfairly malign Dugas all these years.

In white America’s long, ableist history of considering itself well unless 
made unwell by those it considerssick outsiders 
<https://www.academia.edu/3560422/Technologies_of_Blood_Asylum_Medicine_and_Biopolitics>
, Dugas was just one of many individually maligned as pariahs.

They include “Typhoid” Mary Mallon 
<https://www.amazon.com/Typhoid-Mary-Captive-Publics-Health/dp/0807021032>, an 
Irish immigrant blamed for typhoid transmission and kept in isolation for 26 
years on an island in New York City;Nushawn Williams 
<https://www.upress.umn.edu/book-division/books/notorious-h-i-v>, convicted for 
transmitting HIV to nine young women and – despite having long ago finished his 
sentence – kept in “civil confinement” indefinitely 
<https://www.poz.com/article/hivpositive-convict-nushawn-williams-remain-civil-confinement>
; andMichael “Tiger Mandingo” Johnson 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/steventhrasher/a-black-body-on-trial-the-conviction-of-hiv-positive-tiger-m?utm_term=.dyLKjPy6e6#.tul8rPXOJO>
 (whom I have covered at length and is the subject of my doctoral 
dissertation), who was convicted of four people to HIV and transmitting the 
virus to one person despite there being no RNA evidence used to even see if 
Johnson and his sex partner shared the same strain of HIV. (Johnson is serving 
a 30-year prison sentence in Missouri, often in solitary confinement, in a 
state where the average sentence for second-degree murder is only 25 years 
<https://doc.mo.gov/Documents/publications/Offender%20Profile%20FY14.pdf>.)

But while blaming diseases on individuals – or even criminalizing them, as 
people with HIV are in more than30 US states 
<http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/policies/law/states/exposure.html> and 70 countries 
<http://www.hivjustice.net/news/new-report-shows-hiv-criminalisation-is-growing-global-problem-but-advocates-are-fighting-back/>
 – may make well people feel weirdly superior, it doesn’t do much about curing 
or curtailing the transmission of communicable diseases.According to 
<http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/> the World Health Organization, Aids has killed 
about 35 million people, and about 37 million people are currently living with 
HIV globally. Threatening them for living with such a treatable disease only 
increases its stigma, forcing them into the shadows and decreasing the 
likelihood that others at risk will get tested.


We would do well to look at the Nature study’s new timeline and ponder if HIV 
was circulating among IV drug users in the early 1970s. Many such people 
avoided healthcare settings which they (rightly) believed could be punitive – 
which could have aided HIV’s transmission. We as a society are in part to 
blame, then, for creating the condition in which the epidemic could take hold – 
just as we are now responsible for allowing punitive laws that specifically 
target HIV to continue letting it flourish.

It’s also worth noting that societies begin to understand that a disease 
exists and is worthy of treatment only when it begins to affect people (or 
animals) whose lives the society values. When Aids was only affecting homeless 
people and IV drug users in the US, there was not a critical mass of care about 
them to make it register. Aids began to come into some focus when it affected 
homosexual men, not because gay men’s lives were valued by US society at large 
(they weren’t), but because amongst them were some powerful, often closeted, 
white gay men who were raised to believe their bodies were important and 
infallible.

When they believed that their bodies were unfairly giving out on them (and 
threatening to out them), these men – along with out lesbians and gay men and 
transgender people of all races – did something about it, founding groups like
Gay Men’s Health Crisis <http://gmhc.org/> and Act-up <http://www.actupny.org/>
. They applied so much pressure that scientific and political communities had 
to verify that Aids existed.


Hastening this process was news that hemophiliacs and others receiving blood 
and organ transfusions were affected. These people – particularly children like 
Ryan White – were considered “innocent” and worthy of protecting from the 
disease, unlike homosexuals like Dugas who were considered guilty for getting 
it and for giving it to others.

Since the disease wasn’t given public attention until it infected those with 
societal clout, is it ever right to out one believed to be “Patient Zero”? As a 
journalist, I understand the desire to do so to tell a story. Times story 
author Donald G McNeil Jrdefends 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/30/sunday-review/the-ethics-of-hunting-down-patient-zero.html?_r=0>
 the practice epidemiologically, saying stopping such people is important in 
stopping epidemics. But he uses the term “super-spreaders”, which sounds too 
much like “super-predators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/25/hillary-clinton-race-crime-justice-reform>
” and is too pejorative for my taste, with both terms overburdening the 
individual rather than the conditions they inhabit.

In her new book Conflict Is Not Abuse 
<https://www.amazon.com/Conflict-Not-Abuse-Overstating-Responsibility/dp/1551526433>
, novelist and Aids historian Sarah Schulman writes about how the transmission 
of HIV to millions worldwide is a normative human experience unworthy of 
criminalization or stigma. Dugas was innocent not just because RNA now says so, 
but becauseall people who live with HIV or who die of Aids are innocent 
<https://www.academia.edu/10002442/Statement_of_Ownership_An_Autethnography_of_Living_with_HIV>
.

Let’s allow Dugas’s most recent exoneration to be his final one, and let’s 
take this chance to retire the idea of the HIV/Aids scapegoat. Let’s stop the 
shame and blame, so that we may move on the challenge of tackling the real, 
treatable and preventable ways HIV is transmitted.
 