
A full century after Arnold Schoenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jan/17/classical-music-schoenberg> and 
his studentsAlban Berg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jun/01/opera-lulu-alban-berg> and Anton 
Webern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2007/apr/23/buildingaclassicalmusiclib1>
 unleashed their harsh chords on the world, modern classical music remains an 
unattractive proposition for many concertgoers. Last season at the New York 
Philharmonic, several dozen people walked out of a performance ofBerg's Three 
Pieces for Orchestra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CvYClyyPGUk>; about the 
same number exited Carnegie Hall before the Vienna Philharmonic struck up
Schoenberg's Variations for Orchestra 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s5jppDgkCeI>.

The mildest 20th-century fare can cause audible gnashing of teeth. Benjamin 
Britten's Serenade for Tenor, Horn and Strings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sibbmSroXHc> is a more or less fully tonal 
score, yet in 2009 at Lincoln Centre, it failed to please a gentleman sitting 
behind me. When someone let out a "Bravo!" elsewhere in the hall, he growled: 
"I bet that was a plant." I resisted the temptation to swat him with my pocket 
score.

Some of this behaviour can be blamed on the notorious bad manners of certain 
New York patrons, but the problem is widespread, as any music administrator 
with a yen for 20th-century repertory will tell you. Some Prommers are still
traumatised by the shock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/aug/10/classicalmusicandopera.proms20071>
 of encounteringHarrison Birtwistle's ultraviolent piece Panic 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lUe9FQtYB6A> at the 1995 Last Night of the 
Proms. For decades, critics, historians and even neuroscientists have been 
pondering the question of why so-called modern music seems to perplex the 
average listener. After all, adventurous artists in other fields have met with 
a very different reception. The highest-priced painting in history is Jackson 
Pollock's swirlingly abstract No 5, 1948, whichsold in 2006 for $140m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/nov/03/usa.topstories3>. Tycoons and 
emirs covet avant garde architects. James Joyce's Ulyssesinspires worldwide 
drinking parties 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/06/16/bloomsday-2010-ulysses-ce_n_612983.html#s100029>
 every 16 June.

Once, these cultural untouchables were dismissed as charlatans – merchants of 
the "emperor's new clothes", to employ a phrase that remains commonplace among 
unappreciative concertgoers. A New York Times editorial threw a "new clothes" 
insult atMarcel Duchamp's Nude Descending a Staircase 
<http://www.snap-dragon.com/duchamp.html> when it showed in 1913. The same 
conceit was trotted out in 1946 by a commentator who perceived no difference 
between a Picasso and a child's drawing. TS Eliot's The Love Song of J Alfred 
Prufrock wascited for its "incoherent banalities" 
<http://www.usask.ca/english/prufrock/recept1.htm>. These days, you would draw 
puzzled stares if you announced at a dinner party that Pollock is a crock. But 
if you said the same ofJohn Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/sep/30/christmas-no1-facebook-campaign>
, you might get no argument.

Explanations for the abiding resistance to musical modernism have 
proliferated, their multiplicity suggesting that none quite holds the key. One 
theory holds that a preference for simple tonality is wired into the human 
brain. Attempts to test this proposition have produced ambiguous results. For 
example, a couple of studies suggest thatinfants prefer consonant to dissonant 
intervals 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6W4K-45TTXH0-10&_user=10&_coverDate=12%2F31%2F1998&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_origin=search&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_searchStrId=1556725655&_rerunOrigin=google&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=aba522dba593e304893b3b8f2da7cf06&searchtype=a>
. Yet infants hear tonal music almost from the moment of birth, and so have 
been conditioned to accept it as "natural". Moreover, visual arts research 
demonstrates thatchildren prefer representational images to abstract ones 
<http://www.jstor.org/pss/20715242>. The 327,000 people who came to see bleak 
late Mark Rothko works at Tate Modern in 2008 and 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2008/sep/26/rothko.tate>
overcame that inclination; the same can happen with music.

There's also a sociological explanation: because concert audiences are 
essentially trapped in their seats for a set period, they tend to reject 
unfamiliar work more readily than do gallery visitors, who can move about 
freely, confronting strange images at their own pace. Yet if the style of 
presentation conditioned the response, one would expect that dance, theatre and 
movie audiences would show the same revulsion toward novel ideas.

The relative popularity of George Balanchine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/georgebalanchine>, Samuel Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/10/samuelbeckett> or Jean-Luc Godard
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeanlucgodard> suggests otherwise. Indeed, 
it's striking that film-makers have made lavish use of the same dissonances 
that concertgoers have found so alienating. Stanley Kubrick's2001: A Space 
Odyssey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36269/2001>, with its 
hallucinatoryGyörgy Ligeti <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JnuAaKiX1sg> 
soundtrack, mesmerised millions in the late 1960s. Martin Scorsese'sShutter 
Island <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/130910/shutter-island>, which 
deploys music by Cage, Morton Feldman, Giacinto Scelsi, and Ligeti again, was a 
recent box-office hit.Michael Giacchino's score for the TV series Lost 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Hre5fkdq-0&feature=related> is an encyclopedia 
of avant garde techniques. If the human ear were instinctively hostile to 
dissonance, these and 1,000 other Hollywood productions would have failed.

Composers: better off dead?

The core problem is, I suspect, neither physiological nor sociological. 
Rather, modern composers have fallen victim to a long-smouldering indifference 
that is intimately linked to classical music's idolatrous relationship with the 
past. Even before 1900, people were attending concerts in the expectation that 
they would be massaged by the lovely sounds of bygone days. ("New works do not 
succeed in Leipzig," a critic said of the premiere of Brahms's First Piano 
Concerto in 1859.)

The music profession became focused on the manic polishing of a display of 
masterpieces. By the time Schoenberg, Stravinsky and company introduced a new 
vocabulary of chords and rhythms, the game was fixed against them. Even 
composers who bent over backwards to accommodate a taste for Romantic tonality 
encountered scepticism; they could not overcome, except by drastic measures, 
the disadvantage of being alive.

Museums and galleries took a markedly different approach. In America, the 
Museum of Modern Art, the Art Institute of Chicago, and other leading 
institutions propagandised for modern art. Wealthy patrons embraced some of the 
most radical new work; dealers whipped up publicity; critics romanticised 
Pollock and company as go-it-alone heroes. The idea took hold that museums 
could be sites of intellectual adventure. On a recent trip to MoMA, I was 
struck by a poster at the entrance: "Belong to something brilliant, 
electrifying, radical, curious, sharp, moving . . . unruly, visionary, 
dramatic, current, provocative, bold . . ."

Car parts as percussion

At present, no major orchestra is able or willing to describe itself in the 
same terms. But a few organisations are moving in that direction. Beginning in 
1992,Esa-Pekka Salonen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/esa-pekka-salonen> 
gave the Los Angeles Philharmonic a bolder profile, and he is now applying the 
same model to the Philharmonia in London. Youngish crowds of 1,000 or more show 
up for the Chicago Symphony'sMusicNOW 
<http://cso.org/TicketsAndEvents/EventDetails.aspx?eid=3540> series, which 
cannily offers a supplement of free pizza and beer. London's Southbank Centre 
and the Barbican have drawn eager throngs to evenings ofEdgard Varèse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/08/edgard-varese-national-youth-orchestra>
,Iannis Xenakis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/feb/05/guardianobituaries>, Luigi Nono 
andKarlheinz Stockhausen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/dec/08/guardianobituaries.obituaries>. 
Even in New York, the situation isn't entirely hopeless.Alan Gilbert, who took 
over as the New York Philharmonic's music director last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/sep/21/alan-gilbert-new-york-philharmonic>
, has had startling successes with such rowdy fare asLigeti's Le Grand Macabre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TP3DvIjcpi0>, Varèse's Amériques 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MNpN2p495lA>, and, at the beginning of this 
season,Magnus Lindberg's Kraft <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SswOOiNoStU>. 
Veteran observers were agog at the sight of Philharmonic subscribers cheering 
Lindberg's piece, which contains hardly a trace of tonality and requires the 
use of discarded car parts as percussion. What made the difference was 
Gilbert's gift for talking audiences through unfamiliar territory: in a 
mini-lecture, he mapped out the structure of the piece, demonstrated a few 
highlights, made jokes at his own expense, and generally gave people the idea 
that if they left early they'd be missing out.

All music is an acquired taste; no music is everywhere beloved. A couple of 
months ago,the blogger Proper Discord noticed 
<http://properdiscord.com/2010/09/02/perspective-and-proportion/> that the 
top-selling album in America that week – Katy Perry's precision-tuned pop 
medley Teenage Dream – had been purchased by only one in 1,600 citizens. 
Certainly, some genres are more popular than others, but individual tastes 
change dramatically. When I was young, I loved the 18th- and 19th-century 
repertory to the exclusion of 20th-century music, both classical and pop. Then, 
once I acknowledged the force of dissonance, I went from Schoenberg to Messiaen 
to Xenakis, and, following the path of noise, moved on to the post-punk sound of
Sonic Youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jun/05/sonic-youth-rock-music>. Some of 
my contemporaries found classical music by proceeding in the opposite 
direction: they began not with Mozart but withSteve Reich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/steve-reich> or Arvo Pärt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arvo-part>. To build the audience of the 
future, classical institutions should make more of unexpected bridges between 
genres.

What must fall away is the notion of classical music as a reliable conduit for 
consoling beauty – a kind of spa treatment for tired souls. Such an attitude 
undercuts not only 20th-century composers but also the classics it purports to 
cherish. Imagine Beethoven's rage if he had been told that one day his music 
would be piped into railway stations to calm commuters and drive away 
delinquents. Listeners who become accustomed to Berg and Ligeti will find new 
dimensions in Mozart and Beethoven. So, too, will performers. For too long, we 
have placed the classical masters in a gilded cage. It is time to let them out.

Alex Ross will be speaking at the British Library, London, tomorrow. Details 
here <http://bl.uk/whatsonon>. 
 