
When a Guardian article stated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/29/man-booker-prize-2015-bill-clegg-longlist-13-writers>
 thatChigozie Obioma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/13/the-fishermen-chigozie-obioma-review>
 was the “sole African writer” to be longlisted for the 2015 Booker prize, the 
journalist in question had clearly forgotten there was life north of the 
Sahara. Thankfully, the Moroccan-born writerLaila Lalami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/the-moors-account-laila-lalami-review>
, who was also longlisted, was quick to remind him,tweeting 
<https://twitter.com/LailaLalami/status/626424931300057088>: “I am African. 
It’s an identity I’m often denied but that I will always insist upon”.

The best books on Algeria: start your reading here | Pushpinder Khaneka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/booksblog/2015/jan/05/algeria-best-books-review-world-library>
I know Lalami’s frustration well. Every time I have to declare my ethnicity I 
am reminded that “black African” is seemingly the only category that exists. 
Being both Algerian and British, I am constantly explaining why I identify as 
European and African – as though I’m “choosing” to be African, rather than it 
simply being a fact.

In politics and academia, north African countries are commonly grouped with 
the Middle East under the umbrella of MENA. In conferences I have been to on 
“African” issues, Morocco,Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, 
Tunisia, Libya and Egypt have often had tokenistic representation, if any at 
all.

But the identity equation isn’t as simple as Arabic speakers equal Arab 
people. There are still communities across the Maghreb that speakBerber 
<http://www.britannica.com/topic/Berber> or Amazigh and a dialect called darija 
<http://darijadictionary.com/> that heavily features French and Spanish 
phrases. Besides, being Arab isn’t an alternative to being African, or even 
black. Mauritanians and Sudanese can identify as all three at once.

The religion argument isn’t watertight either. Islam is the dominant religion 
in parts of eastAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and the 
Sahel, with notably large communities in Tanzania, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, 
Ethiopia and Eritrea. Perhaps then, it simply boils down to colour. Could it be 
that to be African is to be black? And if so, what shade will do? Are the South 
Sudanese, with a pigment that is dark, rich and beautiful, more African than 
their neighbours to the north, of lighter skin? Surely a categorisation based 
on race is too reductive and ignores the continent’s great diversity in 
nations, cultures and ethnicities.

A categorisation based on race ignores the continent’s great diversity in 
nations, cultures and ethnicities

That leaves the question of culture. At a party a Nigerian quizzed me about 
Algeria: “Is it conservative like Saudi Arabia?”, he asked. “No,” I replied. 
“It’s conservative like Nigeria.”


Whether through football, music or film, Algerians have more in common with 
Nigerians than Saudis. Ivoriancoupé-décalé 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coup%C3%A9-D%C3%A9cal%C3%A9> legends Magic System
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BAkqJT_sMKQ> have joined forces with rai 
heavyweightsCheb Khaled <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RvK19xgAxSU> and 113 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x20ff6_rida-taliani-113-musique-rai-algeri_news>
 as well as a number of lesser-known Maghrebi artists. During the African Cup 
of Nations, crowds cluster around televisions across the continent to see their 
national teams play, in an event that brings every corner of Africa together.

The migrant experience also unifies the continent. In France’s banlieues, 
immigrants from the former African colonies – north and south of the Sahara – 
share cramped conditions, as well as a sense of isolation and discrimination. 
The Arabs driving sports cars or shopping on the Champs Elysées are more likely 
to be from the Gulf states than from the Maghreb.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnorth-africa-algeria-black-africa-shared-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441725767305%2Fc97d8b77-59ce-4116-8913-30e562bdeae2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20we%20think%20of%20north%20Africa%20as%20part%20of%20Africa%3F%20%7C%20Iman%20Amrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnorth-africa-algeria-black-africa-shared-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20we%20think%20of%20north%20Africa%20as%20part%20of%20Africa%3F%20%7C%20Iman%20Amrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnorth-africa-algeria-black-africa-shared-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441725767305%2Fc97d8b77-59ce-4116-8913-30e562bdeae2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The town square of Beni Isguen, Algeria. Photograph: Robert Hardin/Rex 
Shutterstock 
Certainly there is something to be said about north Africans trying to 
distance themselves from “black Africa”. This is as much about sources of 
influence and power (after independence, countries like Egypt and Algeria 
looked to the Middle East for a model of an Islamic nation, or north to Europe 
for economic partnerships) as it is about the racism that exists here as it 
does everywhere else in the world.

Pourquoi ne pensons-nous pas à l’Afrique du Nord comme faisant partie de 
l’Afrique? | Iman Amrani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/11/algeria-black-africa-north-africa-shared-history>
Perhaps the glue that most strongly connects north Africa to the rest of the 
continent is colonial history. France’s colonial troops included soldiers from 
Algeria, Senegal, Mali, Burkina Faso, Benin, Chad, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Niger 
and the Republic of Congo. These Africans fought side by side in the second 
world war and the traces of this are still present in the collective memory of 
these countries. The British used soldiers from Egypt, as well as many from the 
other former colonies including Nigeria, South Africa and Kenya.

In 1962 north Africa and South Africa were both struggling against colonialism 
and apartheid when Nelson Mandela went to receive military training 
<https://www.nelsonmandela.org/news/entry/nelson-mandelas-military-training> 
with the Algerian FLN in Morocco. In 1969, Algiers hosted thePan-African 
culture festival 
<https://carinyasharplesjournalist.wordpress.com/2012/09/24/flashback-21-july-1969-pan-african-culture-festival-rocks-algiers/>
. Historically, African nations have had shared struggles.

Of course, north Africa benefits from being linked to the Middle East, both 
for business and development. Saudi is in the top five trading partners both 
for imports and exports with Egypt, but this relationship shouldn’t be 
exclusive. Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya and Egypt share not only a colonial 
past with the rest of Africa, but also a physical continent. Although identity 
is largely subjective, some things are irrefutable and north Africa being in 
Africa is part of that.
 