
I have always been into engineering and practical work. So in year 10, when I 
was expected to do some work experience, my dad secured me a position in the 
engine workshop at a racing company he works for.

It was then I became desperate to break into the engineering industry. I 
always thought I would take the route of AS levels, A-levels and eventually 
university, as this seemed the norm. But just before I took my GCSEs, I found 
out about apprenticeships.

Our school hosted workshops about the opportunities available, including 
various companies presenting their schemes and opportunities to us. As a 
hands-on learner that enjoys practical challenges, this opened a whole new 
avenue for me. The thought of discovering and developing new skills, with the 
benefits of full-time employment and a doorway to a career in engineering, 
convinced me that an apprenticeship was for me.

I explored the different companies offering apprenticeships. I came across the 
scheme byKraft Foods <http://www.kraftfoodscompany.com/eu/en/home/index.aspx>, 
which was exactly what I was looking for. To apply I completed an application 
form and sent my CV, and later received a letter informing me that I had been 
chosen to undergo a series of interviews and theoretical and practical tests. 
After successfully completing these, I was offered a placement at the company.

The way the course is split suits me well. I study at Midland Group Training 
Services <http://www.mgts.co.uk/> in Coventry for one day a week and then work 
on-site in one of the five departments of the Krafts Food site for four days. 
Our theory lessons cover a wide variety of topics: from the arrival of green 
beans to the packaging and dispatching of the finished product, alongside more 
tradition subjects such as electrical principles, mechanical principles, 
further maths.

In the practical skills element of the course, I work days shifts from 8am to 
4pm. I shadow one or two technicians, running errands for them, helping fix 
anything that goes wrong with the lines and machines. We bridge the two 
elements of the course by running a project in college that we work on and 
develop in the factory.

I feel that if had taken the route of further education I would not be the 
confident person I am today. I am treated as an adult by my colleagues who 
recognise that, despite my age, I am in a working environment and not looked 
upon as a young student. I enjoy the responsibility I get from being able to 
get stuck into engineering projects and not just learning theory.

There are a variety of ways which students can obtain information about 
apprenticeship schemes. Before I left school I researched lots of websites that 
outlined opportunities for placements. My school also held a few workshops 
providing information about apprenticeships and the different options available 
aside from further education, which was helpful.

University wasn't the right option for me â€“ as a practical learner I would not 
have enjoyed attending lectures and only exploring the theoretical side of 
engineering. I firmly believe we need to show young people that university 
isn't the only option. We need to give them the necessary confidence and 
support to make informed decisions about how best to pursue their futures, 
rather than assuming university is the answer for everyone.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 