
It's great to be able to celebrate a genuinely powerful and moving public 
sculpture. There have been so many disappointments, and that's a gentle way to 
describe theugly, stupid stuff our cities have become cluttered with 
<http://www.stpancras.com/about-stpancras/stpancras-arts/> since public art 
became a British obsession of the noughties. The recession has slowed it down a 
bit – I haven't heard as much about it lately, anyway – but the torrent has not 
ceased: we still haveYinka Shonibare's Nelson's Ship in a Bottle 
<http://www.london.gov.uk/fourthplinth/plinth/shonibare.jsp> to look forward to.

But this is not the work I wish to praise. No, I want to take a moment to 
point out Britain's most poignant and beautiful work of modern art in a public 
place. It isRodin's sculpture The Burghers of Calais 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:The.burg.of.calais.london.arp.750pix.jpg> 
and it stands in the gardens west of the Houses of Parliament. Have you stood 
and looked up at this tender masterpiece recently, its dark figures framed 
against the gothic honeycomb of Westminster?

Perhaps only tourists see it, but actually you can walk here in a few moments 
from Tate Britain. It's worth the stroll. The medievalism of the architecture 
that looms over it sets the scene nicely: when Calais was besieged by the 
English king in the 14th century, six townsmen gave themselves over as 
prisoners, believing they were to be executed in return for the city's 
salvation. In the event, they were spared, but Rodin's sculpture portrays the 
moment of their martyr-like sacrifice: it is a poem to surrender. The emaciated 
bodies, tattered robes and, above all, the wonderfully delicate and melancholy 
gestures and poses of the figures express a strange and captivating mood of 
self-negation.

With this sculpture, designed in the 1880s, Rodin proved himself the greatest 
European sculptor sinceMichelangelo 
<http://books.simonandschuster.co.uk/Lost-Battles/Jonathan-Jones/9780743285391> 
andBernini <http://cgfa.acropolisinc.com/b/bernini1.jpg>. Indeed, the soft 
feeling of surrender it evokes is comparable withMichelangelo's Dying Slave 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Dying_slave_Louvre_MR_1590.jpg> in the 
Louvre. Yet, in Rodin's hands, this is disconcertingly modern art.

Rodin's masterpiece is sculpture as history painting, and it serves in London 
as a monument to humble, everyday heroes. It is true and it is beautiful. If 
only more public art rose to its level.
 