
Q I have credit card debts of around £12,000 that built up when I was 
unemployed for six months. I am now trying to get a loan to consolidate the 
debts but so far I have been turned down by my own bank, Smile, (the internet 
arm of the Co-operative bank).

I have had a permanent job since August and now earn £23,000 a year. I am 
German but have lived here for two years. Could that be the reason? What can I 
do to get a loan? With all these repayments I don't really have enough money 
left to make a living.

I would really appreciate if you could tell me what to do, or which bank to 
approach and how to approach them!

CF

A If you are renting a house and not on the electoral register then it could 
be affecting your credit rating. However, it is more likely that banks are 
reluctant to give you a loan because of your outstanding credit card debts. In 
many cases, people who consolidate their debts actually find they are paying 
back more money over a longer period of time than if they persevered with 
clearing their credit card debts.

You can write to your credit card companies and ask them for a moratorium on 
interest payments so that you can clear the capital debt. You say that you are 
struggling to repay your debt on your current salary. It may be an option to 
declare yourself bankrupt if you don't own a home or any assets, but this is a 
very serious step to take and you should not even think about it without having 
expert advice.

Talk to your local Citizens Advice Bureau and make an appointment to see a 
money specialist. Alternatively you could talk to the Consumer Credit 
Counselling Service, which is a free advice service funded by the credit card 
companies. You can contact them on 0800 138 1111 or atwww.cccs.co.uk 
<http://www.cccs.co.uk/>.
 