
The publication of Nick Clegg's report on social mobility 
<http://www.dpm.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files_dpm/resources/HMG_SocialMobility_acc.pdf>
 was a missed opportunity to identify the importance of postgraduate study as a 
means of breaking the middle and upper class stranglehold on the most highly 
paid professional and managerial jobs. The deputy prime minister allowed 
himself to be characterised in the press as blaming schools, top universities 
and "snobbery" - rather than income inequality - for the UK's appalling record 
in giving people at the bottom of the social pile a fair crack at bettering 
their lot.

Evidence brought together by the 1994 group in its recent paper "The 
postgraduate crisis 
<http://www.1994group.ac.uk/documents/120215_PostgraduateCrisis.pdf>" shows how 
postgraduate study improves the earnings and employment prospects. Both taught 
and research postgraduates are much less likely to be unemployed three and a 
half years on than graduates and postgraduates are much more likely to be in 
managerial or professional roles. The 1994 report also quotes LSE research 
commissioned by the Sutton Trust showing that those with a master's or PhD 
earned on average between 15% and 23% more respectively over their lives than 
graduates.

It is clear that individuals can significantly improve life chances through 
postgraduate study and yet this government has nothing to say about how it is 
going to ensure fair access for people from all backgrounds. In its evidence to 
the Higher Education Commission postgraduate review, theUK Council for Graduate 
Education <http://www.ukcge.ac.uk/news/latestnews/May+Newsletter> revealed that 
37% of PhD students are now self funding – with just 14% funded by research 
councils. The proportion of those funded by research councils is expected to 
fall further, placing more burdens on individuals and institutions which 
already fund far more PhD students than research councils.

As always the richest institutions will be best placed to increase their 
funding of PG study. You will no doubt have read in the press of the£26 million 
donation for postgraduate humanities scholarships at Oxford University 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-17198710> by Mica Ertegun – widow of the 
founder of Atlantic records. But even at the top, the generosity of individuals 
cannot fill the gap left by the failure of this government to address the issue 
of PG funding. Oxford and other Russell Group institutions are seriously 
concerned that once fees treble, talented students from poorer homes will count 
themselves out of postgraduate study. Having overcome all the obstacles to get 
to a Russell Group university, these students are in effect being told that 
they can go so far and no further.

Dr Wendy Piatt, director general of the Russell Group, warns that "the student 
support system for postgraduates needs to be strengthened. The government must 
ensure that the new regime does not have a negative impact on the propensity of 
some students to pursue postgraduate study... the lack of funding for 
postgraduates could have damaging consequences. Many professions require a 
postgraduate qualification and we are concerned that the lack of financial 
support at this level is another hurdle for students – especially those from 
more disadvantaged backgrounds – to overcome."

In it's written evidence 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/lords-committees/science-technology/STEMsubjects/STEMevidence.pdf>
 to an enquiry by the Lords Science and Technology Committee, Oxford University 
called for the state to intervene to financially support masters degrees in 
STEM subjects and sounded concerns about the impact of higher fees on take-up 
of PhDs. "In the STEM subjects most would have run up a debt of four years 
worth of fees and maintenance by the time they would embark on a doctorate. If 
they have become debt-averse by then, it may well dissuade them from entering a 
further period of low financial reward, depending on how important it is to 
them to start repaying the loan straight after graduating. Such aversion may be 
greater among those from some under-represented groups."

Part of the problem is that although they make up more than a quarter of the 
student body, too little is known about postgraduate students. A recentPhD 
project from Philip Wales at the LSE 
<http://www2.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/news/archives/2012/03/PostraduateResearch.aspx>
, offers rare evidence that students from poorer homes are under-represented 
among PG students and that they are deterred by higher fees. In May, theHigher 
Education Funding Council <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/year/2012/201210/> 
(Hefce) produced data on the proportion of PG students who fail to complete 
their studies. On average 18% are expected to fail to complete their studies. 
But there is a huge variation in the performance of individual institutions. In 
some such as Liverpool John Moores, Bradford and Durham, non-completion rates 
are expected to be well below 10% but in others such as Salford, Central Lancs 
and Coventry, around a third are expected not to complete their studies. What 
do we know about why they drop out? And what do we know about who is most 
likely to drop out? Very little and without that sort of evidence it will be 
difficult to force politicians to act.

This is not just a matter of individual advancement but of national economic 
necessity. As the 1994 report points out, the higher level skills of 
postgraduates are essential for UK competitiveness and yet the number of UK 
students studying beyond graduate level has stalled in recent years. The 
government has asked Hefce to monitor the situation. The danger is that they 
will be monitoring a decline that will be difficult to reverse in the years to 
come.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 