
“Blondes make the best victims 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/150364-blondes-make-the-best-victims-they-re-like-virgin-snow-that>
,” Alfred Hitchcock declared with lip-licking relish. “They’re like virgin snow 
that shows up the bloody footprints.” Somewhere Jaume Collet-Serra was 
listening. His new film,The Shallows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/the-shallows-review-blake-lively-shark-thriller-jaume-collet-serra>
, not only has a blond victim in med student/surfer girl Nancy (Blake Lively), 
but it also enthusiastically embraces Hitchcock’s barely buried sadism.

The Shallows review – deep breath: Blake Lively shark-fighting thriller is 
superb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/the-shallows-review-blake-lively-shark-thriller-jaume-collet-serra>
Hitchcock’s The Birds (1963) famously uses the natural world to punish the 
sexually adventurous single and gorgeous Melanie Daniels (Tippi Hedren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tippi-hedren>). The film leads her out to an 
isolated vacation spot, where birds mysteriously start to attack. Hitchcock, 
working through his catspaws (birdspaws?) terrifies his heroine, bloodies her, 
and finally reduces her to catatonic silence. The Shallows follows a similar 
script. It leads “bossy” Nancy out to an isolated vacation spot, and lets the 
natural world show her who is really boss.

In The Shallows (out now in the US and 12 August in the UK), the isolated 
vacation spot is not a California seaside town but a Mexican beach. In what may 
be a deliberate Hitchcock homage, Nancy is knocked off her board by a brief 
seagull swarm – but for the most part the malevolent natural world is 
represented, not by improbably aggressive birds, but by an improbably 
aggressive and determined shark. The creature injures Nancy while she’s surfing 
and then traps her on a barely person-sized outcrop of rock. As in The Birds, 
the director and the fauna seem to conspire together against the blond, 
beautiful heroine. DirectorJaume Collet-Serra 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1429471/reference>’s winking camera-work repeatedly 
gives you the shark’s eye view of Nancy paddling oblivious on her board. 
Hungry, toothy sea creature and hungry, toothy director salivate together at 
the anticipated carnage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1PD2sGCQ7Eo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1PD2sGCQ7Eo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1PD2sGCQ7Eo&media=>
 The Shallows trailer. 
Collet-Serra is a talented director; The Shallows slides across the screen as 
gracefully and swiftly as its finned antagonist. Salvation is proffered and 
then whisked away with split-second, mean-spirited timing. Would-be rescuers 
are dismembered, ships pass blandly in the distance, the life-saving buoy 
crumbles in Nancy’s hand. The film is a brilliantly constructed mechanism for 
torturing a skilled, independent woman who has clearly waded out of her depth. 
In recompense for her folly, her virgin blood is spread across the water, for 
the delight of sharks and viewers alike. A seagull stranded with her on the 
rock even seems like a stand-in for Hitchcock himself; the bird master looking 
on approvingly with his head cocked, and even getting in the occasional peck.

Even if Hitchcock would approve, he wouldn’t feel threatened. Collet-Serra is 
good, but not that good. Compared to the eerie scene in The Birds where the 
birds roost waiting on the jungle gym, The Shallows is as bulky and bloated as 
the dead whale that Nancy climbs onto for safety. There is no scene in The 
Shallows as good as that sequence in The Birds where Melanie is attacked in the 
attic, flailing haplessly against her avian attackers, the only sound her own 
desperate breathing. Collet-Sera may get to show giant gaping toothy maws, 
people bitten in half, and gouts of crimson across the water – but nothing 
approaches the terrifying parasexual cruelty that Hitchcock manages with a 
handful of birds.

So, yes, to no one’s surprise, Collet-Serra is not as controlled, or as 
masterful, as Hitchcock. But that lack of mastery actually adds to the pleasure 
of the film – and gives Nancy, trapped on her tiny outcrop, more room to 
breathe. One of the clumsiest conceits in The Shallows is the repeated use of 
inset screens; you see large images of Nancy’s phone as she texts, or of her 
watch as she reads the digital readout counting down the shark’s terrifying 
circuit around her outcrop. These frankly ugly image-within-image compositions 
(Hitchcock would be appalled) split apart control of the screen. Suddenly 
Nancy, typing or testing, is in command of at least part of what you see.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpwOhqGhP-mk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpwOhqGhP-mk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpwOhqGhP-mk&media=>
This is especially the case when Nancy obtains a waterproof camera and records 
a plea-for-help selfie video. Collet-Serra often has his camera trace over 
Lively’s bikini-clad form, but when Nancy gets to dictate her own image, she 
doesn’t linger on sensuality. Instead, you just see her face distorted in a 
fish-eye, as she tearfully says good bye to her sister and father. She even 
orders the person who finds the picture to erase an earlier portion of the 
tape, which shows a frightening shark attack, lest it disturb her family. It’s 
as if she’s taking the director’s seat away from the putative director. 
Collet-Serra wants terror and shark attacks and blood, but Nancy insists on 
erasing them all so she can say (a provisional) goodbye to her family with 
dignity.

Melanie in The Birds pretty much never has control over the camera or the 
action. She’s a beautiful adornment on the screen, to be bloodied and 
despoiled. This is literally the case, in the attic scene, where Hitchcock, 
whose relationship with Hedren was frankly abusive, tied birds to her and let 
them peck her for the camera.

Nancy, in contrast, may have nature and the director against her, but she’s 
more than capable of fighting back. When her leg is torn open, she uses her med 
school knowledge to create stitches out of her jewelry, and sews them through 
her own leg. When the part of the buoy she’s reaching for comes off in her 
hands, she uses it to stab her adversary. If the world throws a jellyfish at 
her, she’s going to catch that jellyfish and chuck it at the shark.

The Birds is a manifestation of Hitchcock’s genius; his control is like a 
natural force, permeating each exquisite frame. In one stunning, vertiginous 
bird’s eye view of the flaming town below, he even seems to be become a kind of 
hovering, distant, omnipotent god. He punishes his hapless victims not so much 
for their iniquities as because their suffering is so satisfyingly beautiful.

Nancy’s suffering is, and is meant to be, a pleasure too; 50 years after The 
Birds, directors via the natural world are still torturing blondes for the 
entertainment of movie goers. But because Collet-Sera has few pretensions to 
genius, the torture is less total; even stranded on her rock, Nancy has more 
room to move.

Male directorial genius in Hitchcockian suspense demands complete control, 
especially of the leading lady. The Shallows, though, isn’t genius; it’s 
shallow, trashy fun. Which is why Nancy, in contravention of logic and good 
taste, gets to shoot a flare gun and set a giant shark on fire. The special 
effects are garish and the idea is preposterous. But when beauty and mastery 
are defined through women suffering, garish and preposterous exploding sea life 
can seem a welcome alternative to virgin snow.
 