
When the movie director Alan Parker made a TV documentary about the British 
film industry, he gave it the subtitle “Un film de Alan Parker”. The butt of 
the joke was the pretentious possessiveness of French cinematic auteurs – and, 
increasingly, American directors, who take the credit “a film by” – but there 
was an additional layer of irony because television is very rarely a director’s 
medium.


 In drama, a project will generally be credited to an actor – James Nesbitt in 
The Missing – or occasionally, as almost never happens in cinema, a writer: 
especially with the late Dennis Potter (Pennies from Heaven, The Singing 
Detective) and Jack Rosenthal (The Evacuees, Bar Mitvah Boy) but also, more 
recently, with Sally Wainwright’s Happy Valley.

 This makes Babylon (Channel 4, Thursday) an intriguing case-study because the 
pilot episode, screened in February, was a rare example of directorial 
television. Thedark comedy about the metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/nov/12/babylon-co-creator-jesse-armstrong-policing-is-a-balancing-act-on-a-razors-edge>
 was co-created - and the try-out script filmed - by Danny Boyle, trailing both 
Oscar (Slumdog Millionaire) and Olympic (London 2012 opening ceremony) glory.

 As a result, viewers and reviewers of the pilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/feb/09/babylon-tv-review-danny-boyle>
 were inevitably looking for evidence of Boyle’s presence behind the camera: 
conscious of camera-work, cutting and pace in a way that would usually not be 
the case, although it had happened with Boyle before: his Inspector Morse 
episodes – in particular, Masonic Mysteries – were among the most visually 
stylish of the franchise.

 This different prism also applies with The Knick (Tuesdays, Sky Atlantic) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/oct/16/steven-soderbergh-tv-series-the-knick-swanky-enjoyable-lacks-bite>
 – because it is directed by Steven Soderbergh – and previously happened, in 
2008, when the late Anthony Minghella helmed (as Variety magazine would say) 
the first episode of BBC1’s The No 1 Ladies Detective Agency, although, on that 
night, there was a double multiplex-perspective because the script was written 
by another name more associated with the big screen, Richard Curtis. Three 
years earlier, The Girl in the Cafe, a BBC1 romcom about developing-world debt, 
was generally credited in publicity and commentary to Curtis, although he had 
only written the screenplay and the drama was directed by David Yates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbabylon-danny-boyle-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415880833379%2Fb3d6f5db-9b92-4c5c-a90d-091654eda853-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20television%20will%20never%20be%20a%20director's%20medium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbabylon-danny-boyle-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20television%20will%20never%20be%20a%20director%27s%20medium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbabylon-danny-boyle-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415880833379%2Fb3d6f5db-9b92-4c5c-a90d-091654eda853-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Clive Owen in Steven Soderberg’s The Knick. Cinemax Photograph: Cinemax 
 In the same way, the first full series of Babylon has frequently been 
described in previews as “Danny Boyle’s”, although, busy elsewhere, he is no 
longer the director. His replacement, as it happens, also has movie 
credentials: Jon S Baird made the movies Cass and Filth, which was also a black 
comedy about cops.

But, although the opening episode starts with a startling choice of shot – a 
sustained tight close-up of the face of James Nesbitt as the police 
commissioner – we become progressively less aware of what the camera is doing 
than when we were playing spot-the-Boyle. As Babylon progresses, the tone seems 
to belong, in the long television tradition, to the writers: Jesse Armstrong, 
Sam Bain and Jon Brown, and especially Armstrong, who was a writer for The 
Thick of It: the savagely bantering, inventively metaphorical diatribes given 
to the Nesbitt character often give Babylon the feel of a police version of the 
political sitcom created byArmando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci>.

 And Iannucci is a good example of the way that ownership is going in 
television. If film is a director’s medium, TV these days is a 
producer-writer-director’s medium, the American concept of the“showrunner” – 
Vince Gilligan’s Breaking Bad, Matthew Weiner’s Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/oct/28/untold-story-of-us-tv-showrunners>
 – spreading here through British double-hyphenates such as Jed Mercurio and 
Hugo Blick, who fill all three roles on Line of Duty and The Honourable Woman 
respectively.

 There is no such pervasive vision in Babylon. Early on, there’s a sequence in 
which two senior police figures speak while striding down an office corridor, a 
flourish that has the odd effect of drawing attention not to Jon S Baird behind 
the camera but – indirectly – to the American director Thomas Schlamme, who, in 
early episodes of The West Wing, made on-the-go dialogue the visual signature 
of the series. The homage in Babylon confirms what an influential image this 
has become, although the scene also contains a social truth because, in many 
real-life institutions, the walk-and-talk has become a tic of powerful men who 
are copying it from the White House drama.

It’s an example of how Babylon is not “un film de” Danny Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-boyle>, Jon S Baird or Jesse Armstrong 
but has the feel of an ensemble achievement.
 