
Rodin's The Kiss (1901-4) is currently on view at the Turner Contemporary 
gallery in Margate. As thepictures here 
<http://www.turnercontemporary.org/exhibitions/rodin-s-the-kiss> show, it is an 
extraordinary setting. Exhibited in an airy space with a vast view of sea and 
sky behind it through a glass wall, Rodin's sculpture somehow looks bigger, 
more eternal than it usually does when it is exhibited as part of theTate 
collection <http://www.turnercontemporary.org/exhibitions/rodin-s-the-kiss>. On 
the sun-filled day when I saw it recently, powerful light illuminated the huge 
scale of the man's hand embracing his slender lover.

The isolated grandeur of this sculpture's display in Margate is a bit like the 
solitary splendour ofMichelangelo's David in its immense niche in Florence 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/peteriches/4508370490/>, and it powerfully 
focuses attention on the greatness of Rodin. The gallery also has some robust 
erotic drawings by him shown within its Tracey Emin exhibition. So Margate is a 
good place to see the works of Rodin this summer.Why go to Paris 
<http://www.musee-rodin.fr/>?

Seeing Rodin, slightly unexpectedly, by the seaside makes me think. What is it 
that makes this sculptor so compelling? Rodin is our contemporary. The 
startling quality of The Kiss is that it does not seem confined to the world of 
sculptural forms that stand apart on plinths. These lovers could be any lovers. 
There is a simple reality to their depiction, a stark revelation of human 
facts. Rodin sharesMichelangelo's sensual feel for sculpted surfaces 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f5/Michelangelo_-_Bearded_slave.jpg>
, but he has a very modern directness. He flirts with the banality of life 
itself – a kiss is just a kiss.

Rodin is the father of modern sculpture – of sculpture that comes down from 
the plinth, that occupies or surrounds our own space: The Kiss leads toRichard 
Serra <http://www.moma.org/visit/calendar/exhibitions/14>. Another casually 
contemporary aspect of Rodin is his faith in the multiple to circulate his 
images: the Tate version of The Kiss currently in Margate is one of three that 
were carved in his lifetime.

Yet he looks backward as well as forward. The Kiss is not pure visible fact, 
but a story that was conceived as part of an epic literary vision. These are 
intended by Rodin to be the adulterous lovers Paolo Malatesta and Francesca da 
Rimini who Dante encounters in Hell in his 14th-century poemThe Divine Comedy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divine_Comedy>. The statue is one of many works 
by Rodin that circulate around his masterpieceThe Gates of Hell 
<http://www.musee-orsay.fr/en/collections/works-in-focus/search/commentaire_id/the-gates-of-hell-8933.html?no_cache=1>
, a superabundant attempt to illustrate the first book ofDante's epic, Inferno 
<http://danteworlds.laits.utexas.edu/index2.html>. It's a very 19th-century 
project in the spirit of Romanticism. It is amazing that we can respond to The 
Kiss as a contemporary work of art when it also shares the illustrative 
instincts of a 19th-century painting likeAry Scheffer's Francesca da Rimini – 
an 1835 depiction of the same figures from Dante – in the Wallace Collection 
<http://wallacelive.wallacecollection.org/eMuseumPlus?service=ExternalInterface&module=collection&objectId=65250>
.

Perhaps the power of The Kiss in Margate lies in the Romantic void of sea and 
sky you see behind it. The operatic vista is the equivalent of showing the 
sculpture withWagner <http://www.wagneroperas.com/> playing loud. It reveals 
that, like Wagner's genius, Rodin immerses us in the twilight of Romanticism.
 