
Hip-hop, like any genre, has its great periods and its fallow periods. For old 
heads,the golden age <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_age_hip_hop> was the 
late 80s, maybe stretching into the early 90s. But you don't need to go back in 
history to pinpoint one of hip-hop's greatest ever years. Just take 2013.

This year saw album releases by some of the genre's titans, including Jay Z's 
Magna Carta Holy Grail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/07/jay-z-magna-carta-holy-grail-review>
, A$AP Rocky'sLong Live A$AP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/10/asap-rocky-long-live-review>, 
Kanye West'sYeezus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/dec/20/best-albums-2013-kanye-west-number-1>
, Drake'sNothing Was the Same 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/26/drake-nothing-was-the-same-review>
 and Eminem's long-awaitedMarshall Mathers LP 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/07/eminem-marshall-mathers-2-review>
. Beneath the superstar level, too, there were great recordings:Earl Sweatshirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/25/earl-sweatshop-doris-review>, 
the youngest Odd Future member, offered a more muted brand of nihilism this 
year with his album Doris; New York's big man Action Bronson and his ferocious 
Strictly 4 My Jeeps single showed him as a force to be reckoned with in his 
home town, and went viral after he performed the song at St Hilda's community 
centre for a group of pensioners in London; the eccentric Detroit rapperDanny 
Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/27/danny-brown-old>'s 
acclaimed album Old was a return to his maniacal raps, shrill giggles and 
boom-bap beats; and Pusha T's extraordinaryMy Name Is My Name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/17/pusha-t-my-name-review> included 
appearances from Kendrick Lamar and Rick Ross and many others. Among the women, 
singles from Angel Haze, Iggy Azalea, and Nicki Minaj continued to make 
mainstream radio playlists, and enlisted hordes of teen female fans.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyfP7qK0khuQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyfP7qK0khuQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyfP7qK0khuQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch Action Bronson here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yfP7qK0khuQ>

But what's been most exciting, perhaps, has been the way hip-hop has smashed 
its way into any area it fancies this last year. While rap and rock have been 
cross fertilising sinceRun-DMC and Aerosmith teamed up for Walk This Way 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4B_UYYPb-Gk> in 1986, 2013 saw hip-hop's 
biggest names taking the music in any and every direction. "Borders and 
barriers just aren't there," says the hip-hop producer and DJ, The Last 
Skeptik. "Yeezus is experimental in a lot of ways and it's exciting that it's 
allowed to be. People are now considering hip-hop as just music, where before 
it was treated as this very strange thing that a lot of people didn't give a 
shit about. This year it's everywhere."

It became impossible, this year, to talk about popular culture without also 
talking about hip-hop: if Miley Cyrus's twerking at the VMAs became one of the 
most discussed moments of the year, one of the reasons it did so was precisely 
because it was taking from hip-hop andstirring up a debate about cultural 
appropriation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/27/miley-cyrus-twerking-cultural-appropriation>
. Though the appropriation of rap styles and cultures by the white mainstream 
has long existed, the presence of instant news and comment via the web meant it 
was now a common talking point, rather than just a point of discussion within 
the hip-hop world (indeed, if "twerk" was one of the words of the year, 
"think-piece" should have been, too). Rap is being deconstructed more than 
ever, from questions of whether Jay Z is bolstering a new kind of black 
identity by going vegan (albeit temporarily), whether feminists can enjoy the 
genre, or how dangerous the commodity fetishism rife within the culture is – a 
theme taken up by non hip-hop artists, such as Lorde, prompting responses that 
there had long been rappers aware of just this issue, and maybe someone should 
have taken notice of them in the first place. Maybe this was the first time 
hip-hop has dominated the pop culture headlines since the moral panic around 
gangster rap in the late 80s and early 90s – and this time the headlines were a 
lot more sympathetic to the rappers.

Hip-hop's co-opting of brands, in fact, reached new heights this year, when 
Jay Z signed his $20m deal with Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/jul/04/jay-z-samsung-music-future>
, which saw Magna Carta Holy Grail be made available first to users of Samsung 
devices. The difference this year was that it wasn't just the rappers 
celebrating the brands, but the brands who wanted the rappers. While Ace Hood's
Bugatti <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=djE-BLrdDDc>, Migos's Versace 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rF-hq_CHNH0> and Jay Z's Tom Ford 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IkgekVh7oKI> may have been among the year's 
biggest songs, that Samsung deal was more important than any of them. It's a 
long way fromKurtis Blow becoming the first hip-hop artist to appear in a TV 
advert <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q18TEfOsosg>, when he signed a deal 
with Sprite back in the 80s. It's even further from the ambivalence displayed 
by Timberland and Cristalwhen their products were adopted by hip-hop artists 
and fans 
<http://www.decanter.com/news/wine-news/487126/rapper-jay-z-boycotts-racist-cristal>
, fearful they would lose ground in their preferred demographics. Jay Z's 
Samsung deal is the final proof that hip-hop is now a coveted sales vehicle for 
non-musical brands, not least because it is the only music whose reach is 
genuinely worldwide.

Even hip-hop's fashions reflected a scene confident in expressing its 
individuality. Where the hyper-masculine era of 50 Cent and Jay-Z's Big Pimpin' 
was dominated by baggy-trousered prison gear and Rocawear, now the influences 
come from the likes of Schoolboy Q of Black Hippy and his bucket hats, and from 
Odd Future's Supreme beanies (though Kanye's leather jogging bottoms have yet 
to catch on). As DJ Snips, a Kiss FM DJ and part of the Livin' Proof 
collective, says: "In clubs you just see more diversity than you have in a 
while, in terms of people aligning themselves with different hip-hop tribes. 
You get Flatbush Zombies fans dressed as hippies in tie-dye, Meek Mill fans in 
Gucci and A$AP fans in leather shirts and goth T-shirts. And it all seems 
acceptable for each sub-group to like each others' music. This isn't the first 
time that this has happened but it feels like it's coming back around."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMSrTnWDTdwI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMSrTnWDTdwI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMSrTnWDTdwI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch YG here <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MSrTnWDTdwI>

So what about outside the club? While the internet has atomised hip-hop, it 
has helped nurture a true underground culture online. And while Vine, the 
mini-video sharing app, may not have been as globe-conquering as was predicted 
when it launched, it's been crucial to the spread of underground hip-hop. The 
hip-hop platformWorld Star Hip Hop <http://www.worldstarhiphop.com/videos/> 
features weekly Vine compilations, which have developed their own soundtrack – 
this year that's included YG's My Nigga, Migos'sHannah Montana 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ajHQaxdVoOY>, and revived releases like J Dash 
and Flo Rida's contagious 2011 twerking anthem Wop and last year's Don't Drop 
That Thun Thun by Finnaticz.

The main thing, though, according to Jo Fuertes-Knight of Vice's music site 
Noisey, is that this has been the year everyone has been talking about hip-hop. 
"For me, in terms of the press and its flirting with hip-hop, this year has 
been fucking amazing. Everyone from the Daily Mail to indie fans were talking 
about people like Kanye and Jay Z. Jay Z's album wasn't even very good, but 
people were talking about it this year. Rihanna was making shit electronica 
last year, but this year she's making trap tunes. Juicy J and 2 Chainz have had 
these genuine revivals of Atlanta music, because ofMiley Cyrus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/miley-cyrus> shedding light on a scene."

And now the question is: what happens in 2014?
 