
Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> has an 
image problem. And it’s not socks, sandals and floral pattern hemp shirts. 
Typical depictions of the issue, such as homeless polar bears, steaming smoke 
stacks and swirling storms, are failing to provoke meaningful engagement. Work 
needs to be done to find a new generation of images that can switch people on 
and encourage them to take action.

If you thought 2014 – the hottest year since records began 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/dec/17/2014-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record>
 – was significant in terms of climate change, 2015 is likely to top it. Just 
over one month in and we’ve had devastatingfloods in Malawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/17/malawi-floods-kill-176-people>, 
killing nearly 200 and displacing 200,000. Al Gore and Pharrell Williams have 
taken centre stage at theWorld Economic Forum’s Annual Meeting in Davos 
<http://www.weforum.org/events/world-economic-forum-annual-meeting-2015/>, 
announcingLive Earth 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/21/pharrell-williams-announces-live-earth-2015-davos?source=fb&subsource=20150123clfb01&utm_source=gpeace&utm_medium=fb&utm_campaign=20150123clfb01>
, a music concert that will span seven continents – including Antarctica – this 
summer.

The UK will be having a general election in May, in which the ascendant Green 
party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/21/green-surge-party-that-will-decide-election>
 is hoping to give the political establishment a run for its money. And of 
course, the year will close withCOP 21 in Paris <http://www.cop21.gouv.fr/en> 
where a new international agreement on the climate must be agreed.

It’s impossible to predict how any of these events will pan out, or what super 
storms will hit where and when. But what we do know is that their stories will 
be told and retold with the aid of hundreds of videos, photos, cartoons and 
graphics all over the world.
 Villagers in Malawi stand beside a flooded street. Photograph: Bonex 
Julius/AFP/Getty Images 
Images are a powerful and increasingly prolific tool for communication. They 
can convey complex messages instantly, in a way that is easy to remember – and 
as a result are frequently shared online. They also have the potential to 
transcend the language barriers inherent to written and spoken word – 
particularly significant when conveying a global problem like climate change to 
an international community.

Science won't win over the climate change sceptics - we need stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/behavioural-insights/2014/dec/02/science-wont-win-over-sceptics-climate-change>
Certainly the relentless stream of high-resolution, cinema-screen size images 
forming the backdrop toAl Gore’s Davos address 
<http://www.weforum.org/sessions/summary/whats-next-climate-action> creates a 
powerful visual narrative that requires little or no English to understand.

But what if these depictions of climate change that we have become so used to 
are, in fact, not fit for purpose? What if instead of helping people engage 
with the issue, they’re actually switching people off?
 Images are a powerful and increasingly prolific tool for communication. They 
can convey complex messages instantly. Photograph: Art Wolfe/Mint Images/Corbis 
Characterised by uncertainty and made up of long-term, cumulative processes, 
climate change is for many audiences – particularly those in wealthy, 
industrialised nations – vague and abstract, making it difficult to visualise 
and meaningfully comprehend.

You don’t have to be an activist, saying you care is sometimes enough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/nov/25/dont-have-to-be-activist-saying-you-care-is-enough>
Yet while research into the verbal communication of climate change has 
proliferated – some excellent resources can be found at theYale Project on 
Climate Change Communication 
<http://environment.yale.edu/climate-communication/>, Talking Climate 
<http://talkingclimate.org/>, and the Climate Outreach and Information Network 
<http://www.climateoutreach.org.uk/resources/> (where I recently completed a 
research internship) - our understanding of how people think about and react to 
visual stimuli is limited to a handful of academic studies that focus on
documenting the discourse 
<https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/publication/disaster-averted-television-coverage-201314-ipcc%E2%80%99s-climate-change-reports>
 andmeasuring the public’s response to it 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959378012001379>. Few 
people offer the practical guidance we desperately need on how to use images to 
deepen public engagement.

I say desperately because the same selection of images are being produced and 
reproduced, circulated and recirculated year on year, with little or no 
understanding of their effect. Whether it’s major campaigning organisations 
such asGreenpeace 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/climate-change/> and 
Friends of the Earth 
<http://www.foei.org/what-we-do/climate-justice-and-energy/>, or international 
news outlets such asthe Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/environment> 
andHuffington Post <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/news/climate-change/>, the 
delicate balance ofmaking an image powerful and ensuring its message is 
meaningful <http://talkingclimate.org/pictures-its-a-matter-of-perspective/> is 
not always struck.

Questions are starting to be raised, however. The UK Climate Change and 
Migration Coalition <http://climatemigration.org.uk/> recently published a 
piece asking whetherthe wrong images 
<http://climatemigration.org.uk/image-problem-are-we-using-the-wrong-photographs-to-illustrate-migration-and-climate-change/>
 are being used to illustrate stories of human movement connected to shifting 
weather patterns.

So, at this crucial juncture in the calendar, with the window of opportunity 
for preventing the most serious impacts of climate change still open – but 
closing quickly – focusing our attention on finding potent images that will 
develop and enhance people’s commitment to tackling the issue is a critical 
challenge.

Can art inspire climate change action? An ice installation aims to do just that
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/oct/23/climate-change-ice-watch-installation-art-greenland-copenhagen-ipcc>
It requires us to think creatively about balancing urgency with saliency, 
connecting global impacts to local actions and combining methods of artistic 
and scientific practice. The Climate Coalition’s powerfulFor the Love of… 
<http://www.theclimatecoalition.org/campaigns/love> campaign and 10:10’s hugely 
successfulIt’s happening gallery <http://www.1010uk.org/itshappening> offer 
some indication of where this type of work could take us. But we need far more. 
Not only this, we must find a way of connecting this new generation of visual 
language to the diverse values and interests of a wide range of audiences, so 
we can not only increase engagement with climate change but broaden it, too.

Kate Monson is a freelance writer from London. She is currently studying for a 
MSc in human ecology atLund University in Sweden

The sustainable living 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sustainable-living> hub is 
funded by Unilever. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled brought to you by. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/?INTCMP=dis_233592> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
 