
Few things would please Alfred Hitchcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfredhitchcock> more than the idea that, 36 
years after his death, he is somehow “back”: a portly, sinister specter in the 
back row of the multiplex, or perhaps leaving an insidious trail of silvery 
ectoplasm across Hollywood backlots. Then again, he’d probably take issue with 
the idea that he was ever gone: Hitchcock took up spiritual residence in genre 
cinema and television while he was very much alive, as suspense techniques that 
began as his alone became standard practice.

The Girl on the Train review: red herrings on the tracks signal problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/03/the-girl-on-the-train-review-emily-blunt-paula-hawkins>
“Hitchcockian” has become a go-to descriptor for entire branches of 
storytelling – not always an apposite one, but evocative to an audience far 
beyond the film-nerd coterie that tends to adjectivize auteurs. (Even 
“Coenesque” feels niche by comparison.) And when Vertigo formally challenged 
Citizen Kane for branded “greatest film of all time” status – topping Sight & 
Sound’s famed decennial critics’ poll in 2012, ending Kane’s 50-year reign – it 
was clear that Hitchcock’s style remained something of a cinematiclingua franca
, its effectiveness and influence recognizable to viewers across cultures and 
generations. Indeed, as the poll met with inevitable online pushback from film 
fans, the recurring question wasn’t “why Hitchcock?”, but “whythis Hitchcock?” 
Among others, Psycho, North by Northwest, Rear Window and Notorious have at 
least as many adherents; DNA from any number of his works is detectable in one 
contemporary thriller or another.

But even allowing for his continuing watermark presence in our cinemas, it 
feels like the industry is having more of a Hitchcock moment than usual. Chalk 
it up to coincidence or a gap spotted in the market for mature genre fare away 
from the more fanciful superhero glut, but the adult mystery is very much back 
in fashion. The chiaroscuro murkiness offilm noir, after all, emerged from the 
general mood of pessimism among audiences and film-makers in the thick of the 
second world war; perhaps the current international climate of political 
distemper has audiences once more seeking the shadows.

Television, the medium that Hitchcock himself embraced to enduring effect in 
the mid-1950s, is leading the revival most directly. A protracted, 
contemporary-set prequel to Psycho, Bates Motel has been renewed for a fifth 
series on the A&E cable network, while news broke last week that Universal 
Cable Productions is developing Welcome to Hitchcock, a series in which classic 
narratives from Hitchcock’s oeuvre will be repurposed and reimagined over the 
course of a season. The Hitchcock estate has lent its support to the project, 
which sounds rather like the American Horror Story offilm noir – fingers 
crossed for a Lady Gaga cameo.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emily%20Blunt%20on%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%3A%20'The%20vomit%20was%20not%20my%20own'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emily%20Blunt%20on%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%3A%20%27The%20vomit%20was%20not%20my%20own%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview&media=>
Emily Blunt on The Girl on the Train: ‘The vomit was not my own’ – video 
interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/29/emily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview>
In cinemas, this week sees the release of The Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-girl-on-the-train>, an adaptation of 
Paula Hawkins’ bestselling beach read that – quite aside from its thoroughly 
Hitchcockian games of gaslighting, voyeurism and misplaced memory – tips its 
hat to the master in its very title. After all, its mystery may mostly unfold on
terra firma, but you can’t imply railway intrigue without invoking the director 
of Strangers on a Train and The Lady Vanishes. Director Tate Taylor is best 
known for The Help, a film that could well be described as the diagrammatic 
opposite of “Hitchcockian”, so he’ll take what reference points he can get.

The Gone Girl backlash: what women don’t want
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/07/gone-girl-backlash-david-fincher-misogynist-feminist>
The Girl on the Train’s throwback stylings aren’t unusual on the scene at the 
moment. Hell, even the title is leaving an echo. Last week, news emerged that 
Fox 2000 was closing in on the rights to another hot literary property, The 
Woman in the Window. No relation to Fritz Lang’s glistening 1944film noir of 
the same title – though the allusion doesn’t hurt – this yet-to-be-published 
mystery by the pseudonymous AJ Finn has prompted twin bidding wars in the book 
and film worlds. Deadline’s scoop described it, would you believe, as a 
“Hitchcockian thriller [with] elements of The Girl on the Train and Rear Window 
and a strong role for an actress”, with a plot centered on a hard-drinking, 
agoraphobic woman who may or may not have witnessed an act of violence next 
door – a mightily familiar-sounding remix of ingredients from a veritable 
inkwell ofnoir.

The director name-checked most often in reviews for Taylor’s film, meanwhile, 
has actually been David Fincher, whose 2014 smash Gone Girl – drawn from 
another paperback phenomenon – played a more elegant game of bloodstained 
rug-pulling. Powered by an Oscar-nominated Rosamund Pike doing a particularly 
cool-blooded spin on the Hitchcock-blonde archetype, that film’s success 
prompted umpteen think pieces declaring Fincher the heir apparent to Hitch 
himself. Months later, that praise appeared to have gone to Fincher’s head when 
it was announced that he,Gone Girl <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl> 
writer Gillian Flynn and star Ben Affleck were to collaborate on a Strangers on 
a Train remake, titled simply Strangers, for Warner Bros. The project has since 
been pushed back indefinitely, but if and when it happens, watch as critics 
bend over backwards this time toavoid calling it “Hitchcockian”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fsplit-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-thriller-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Split%20trailer%3A%20James%20McAvoy%20plays%2023%20characters%20in%20one%20in%20psychological%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fsplit-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-thriller-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Split%20trailer%3A%20James%20McAvoy%20plays%2023%20characters%20in%20one%20in%20psychological%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fsplit-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-thriller-trailer-video&media=>
Split trailer: James McAvoy plays 23 characters in one in psychological thriller
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/28/split-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-thriller-trailer-video>
While we’re waiting for that, however, there’s plenty of twisty suspense to 
fill the time. No one has recently accused M Night Shyamalan of being 
Hitchcock’s heir apparent, but the references are coming thick and fast in 
early reviews – Shyamalan’s most generous in years – for his multiple 
personality disorder-themed thriller Split, which just surprise-premiered at 
Fantastic Fest.The Guardian’s Jordan Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/27/split-review-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-fantastic-fest-austin>
 sees shades of both Spellbound and Psycho in the film, which stars James 
McAvoy as a kidnapper with dissociative identity disorder. Fashion maven turned 
film-maker Tom Ford, on the other hand, doesn’t follow any particularly 
Hitchcockian storytelling template in his alluringly broken-backed melodrama 
Nocturnal Animals, but the stylistic hallmarks are present and correct: one 
half hard-bitten revenge drama, folded into a bittersweet postmortem of a 
romance, it’s a film fixated on the sensual trappings ofnoir, down to Abel 
Korzeniowski’s alternately swooning, sinister orchestral score.

Split review – James McAvoy is 23 shades of creepy in M Night Shyamalan chiller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/27/split-review-james-mcavoy-m-night-shyamalan-fantastic-fest-austin>
Moving across the Atlantic: music is also the first clear Hitchcockian imprint 
on Paul Verhoeven’s forthcoming Elle, a daringly kinked inversion of the 
rape-revenge thriller: composer Anne Dudley has slathered this whodunnit in 
stabby strings as a clear homage to the work of Hitchcock’s signature 
collaborator Bernard Herrmann. And Olivier Assayas’s sleek, strange ghost story 
Personal Shopper deftly incorporates classical suspense tropes into a 21st_
century context – it’s hard to say what Hitchcock would have made of a tense 
sequence involving phantom iPhone texts from the apparent beyond, but Assayas 
pulls it off with morbid wit and timing worthy of the master himself. The 
technology has shifted a little, but film-makers are still dialling M for 
murder.
 