
“Siri, give us a hint,” said Apple’s invitation to its media event next 
Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/27/apple-september-event-new-iphones-6s-siri>
. But few needed a hint to know that the chief executive, Tim Cook, will unveil 
new phones and iPhone software, plus a greatly improved Apple TV set-top box 
controlled via Siri, Apple’s voice-activated system.


Will Apple reveal the iPhone 6S on 9 September? Siri drops hints
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/27/apple-september-event-new-iphones-6s-siri>
Nor did experts need a hint to know that the new phones will look almost 
identical to last year’s larger-screenediPhone 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/17/apple-iphone-6-thinner-faster-slightly-cheaper-review>
 and6 Plus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/17/review-iphone-6-plus-apple>
, and probably be called the 6S and 6S Plus. Apple works in two-year ‘ticktock’ 
cycles, and last year’s bigger screens were the more dramatic tick.


Supply chain leaks suggest the latest models might have a feature called Force 
Touch – already used in some Mac computers and on its watch – that allows the 
device to sense and respond to the degree of pressure from a touching finger.


But what Siri can’t answer is how does Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> do it? How does the world’s most 
valuable company get people to keep on buying, and will the bandwagon ever stop 
rolling?

Unlike rivals such as Samsung, Sony, HTC and LG, Apple is consistently able 
not only to persuade loyal existing owners to buy new models but also attract 
those who previously used rival designs. In the second quarter of the year, 
while its biggest rivals saw year-on-year falls in handset sales, with 
disappointing performances from their flagship models, Apple experienced a 35% 
jump.


And although average smartphone prices are dropping, Apple’s remain the most 
expensive. While the rest of the industry is seeing decelerating growth –
expected by market intelligence firm IDC 
<http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25860315> to be 10% this year, 
down from 27.5% in 2014 – Apple has grown faster for three successive quarters.


Most expect that growth to continue through the rest of the year. Ben Wood, 
mobile analyst for research company CCS Insight, said: “Apple has the world at 
its feet. Even with only incremental, evolutionary improvements to the camera, 
processor and screen, it will be enough – the Apple machine keeps rolling on.”


Apple's ‘force touch’ and 'taptic engine' explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/11/apples-force-touch-taptic-engine-explained-haptic-technology>
Wood is not convinced Force Touch will be included – though Chinese rival 
Huawei this week beat Apple to the punch, showing a new phone with the same 
technology that was able to weigh an orange by its pressure on the screen. “We 
can’t be sure it will make an appearance,” said Wood. “The rumour mill gets 
completely out of hand. This time last year, people were saying the newiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> would have crystal sapphire 
displays; that didn’t happen. A radical redesign like Force Touch isn’t 
necessary.” Huawei offered super scratch-resistant sapphire screens last year, 
too, but soon discontinued them.

Some think the newer iPhones will not drive anything like the same growth as 
bigger screens did last year. John Butler, a senior analyst for Bloomberg 
Intelligence, said this week: “Apple will face tough sales comparisons in the 
next year, given the strength of the last upgrade cycle”. He thinks that is “a 
challenge that may prove too difficult to overcome.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fapple-customers-appetite-products-insatiable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F383f56712653d21b306117fb97d22b6b59b26f25%2F0_9_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Apple%20customers'%20appetite%20for%20its%20products%20insatiable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fapple-customers-appetite-products-insatiable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Apple%20customers%27%20appetite%20for%20its%20products%20insatiable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fapple-customers-appetite-products-insatiable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F383f56712653d21b306117fb97d22b6b59b26f25%2F0_9_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Apple vice president Phil Schiller introducing the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in 
September 2014. Photograph: XINHUA/SIPA/REX 
IDC even suggested iPhone sales would be marginally lower next year. It would 
be the first time there has been a year-on-year drop.


Chinese economy concerns wipe $40bn off value of Apple
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/22/apple-share-price-chinese-economy-mining-commodity>
With the iPhone generating 60% of Apple’s revenues, and perhaps more of its 
profits, that could seriously harm the $620bn (£410bn) Californian company. The 
possibility of economic slowdown in China also weighs heavily: it is one of 
Apple’s fastest-growing markets. Cook was prompted to email a reassuring 
outlook to the American TV business analyst, Jim Cramer, when the Chinese and 
US stock markets went into meltdown last month.


However, Carolina Milanesi, chief of research at Kantar ComTech, the consumer 
information company, thinks the future looks far less bleak. The key point is 
that Apple will drop the price of last year’s bigger-screened phones, 
encouraging those who have not upgraded to them to do so.

In the past 12 months, 32% of US iPhone owners upgraded; that was higher than 
in 2013-14 when it was just 22%, suggesting the larger-screened iPhone 6 was 
more attractive than its smaller cousins, theiPhone 5S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/18/iphone-5s-review-apple> and 
5C <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/18/iphone-5c-review-apple>. 

In China, larger screens mean accelerating sales, and there remain plenty of 
iPhone users in the US and China who have yet to buy. And that is before you 
count the users defecting from rival brands, who made up nearly a quarter of 
iPhone sales in Europe in the past three months, according to Kantar data.

Nokia: the rise and fall of a mobile phone giant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/03/nokia-rise-fall-mobile-phone-giant>
Wood likens Apple’s popularity to what he calls “Nokia myopia”. He said: “In 
the 1990s people would walk into the phone shop and ask for a Nokia because it 
fitted into their lives, they knew what they were getting. That’s kind of what 
Apple has achieved.”


Mention of Nokia might make some at Apple shiver, for the Finnish giant’s fall 
from grace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/03/nokia-rise-fall-mobile-phone-giant>
 as the world’s largest mobile phone maker was as sudden as it was complete – 
driven by the introduction of the iPhone and then multiple smartphones powered 
by Google’s Android software.


The parallel might not strike too much fear into the hearts of Apple 
executives. Smartphone software now envelops its users much more completely. 
“Apple adds layers and layers to keep people in there; it used to be music, 
then apps, now it’s health apps, and most recently there’s [streaming service]
Apple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/29/apple-music-everything-you-need-to-know>
. We’re even seeing evidence that people who leave for Android tend to come 
back.”

Apple admits it has 'homework to do' to improve Apple Music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/03/apple-music-improve-festival-streaming>
Apple has said it will offer Apple Music on Android – though the motive there, 
as with the iPod years ago, may be to create a “halo effect” to attract Android 
users to switch to the iPhone.


“I really see the iPhone as the Hotel California of smartphones,” said Wood. 
“Once you’re in, it is very difficult to leave.”


Apple TV

Besides new phones, Apple is expected to significantly upgrade its Apple TV 
set-top box, which has barely changed since it went on sale in March 2012. The 
key difference in the new one, expected to cost about $149, will be 
voice-activated searching (using Siri) and control across multiple sources of 
content such as Netflix and iTunes, plus the App Store allied to a 
motion-sensitive controller, rather like Nintendo’s Wii.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fapple-customers-appetite-products-insatiable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b5a51ef5f7bdc924084d8156581226a73d4a67e%2F0_126_2862_1717%2F2862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Apple%20customers'%20appetite%20for%20its%20products%20insatiable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fapple-customers-appetite-products-insatiable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Apple%20customers%27%20appetite%20for%20its%20products%20insatiable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fapple-customers-appetite-products-insatiable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b5a51ef5f7bdc924084d8156581226a73d4a67e%2F0_126_2862_1717%2F2862.jpg>
 The Netflix app icon showing on an Apple TV. Photograph: Dan Goodman/AP 
The changes look timely, if not overdue. Apple TV is outsold by challengers 
including Amazon and Google,according to market research firm Parks Associates 
<http://www.parksassociates.com/blog/article/pr-aug2015-steaming-media-landscape>
. Amazon’s Fire TV set-top box already has a voice-controlled interface, and 
Google’s Chromecast plug-in stick can be used to ‘cast’ content directly from a 
computer or phone to the TV. But there is plenty of room for growth, as only 
20% of US households with broadband have a streaming device, the report found.


The refreshed Apple TV could also add the capability to play games and other 
apps. With gaming already a huge pursuit on smartphones, the prospect of it on 
a TV is exciting to iPhone developers, who for years have been wishing for a 
new Apple platform for apps.


Dave Verwer, an independent developer of iPhone and iPad software, said: 
“Having the App Store on a TV-sized device is not just about consuming media. 
It’s about it being a games console, education platform, video conferencing 
system and so much more. As an app developer, that’s a very exciting 
opportunity.”

If the new model is as small as the existing one, it could be attached to the 
back of displays, Verwer noted. “That pushes it firmly into business and retail 
usage as well.”

 