
I am a fan by nature, and a pushy fan by choice: there is no pop culture I 
love that I haven’t forced friends to watch or listen to. But, even by those 
standards, I don’t think I’ve pushed any show as hard asThe Good Wife 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-good-wife>. A show about a disgraced 
Chicago politician and his faultless-but-ashamed wife doesn’t sound like much 
on paper, but it’s one of thebest things on television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/dec/04/good-wife-cbs-best-drama-tv>
, ever since it came to the UK in 2010. I am as in love with it now as I’ve 
ever been.

The obvious place for my affections to land was Alicia, the titular spouse, 
played byJulianna Margulies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/05/julianna-margulies-good-wife-alicia-florrick-the-new-yorker-festival>
 – a good girl who keeps showcasing an edge that runs a little jagged. I loved 
Kalinda (Archie Panjabi) before she hung up hersexy, knee-high boots of justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/20/archie-panjabi-kalinda-the-good-wife-interview>
 inseason six 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/bimadewunmi/why-are-you-still-not-watching-the-good-wife>
. I enjoy the gravel tones of Cary (Matt Czuchry), and the statement jewellery 
and assured walk of Diane (Christine Baranski), and – before he was cruelly 
ripped from us – the classicWill Gardner smirk 
<http://media.globaltv.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2015/01/The-Good-Wife-Josh-Charles-departs.jpg>
. I could go on. But more than anyone, I loveEli Gold 
<http://www.imdb.com/character/ch0228508/>: political consultant, campaign 
manager, chief of staff and silver fox of note.

The Good Wife: seven years of power-dressing – gallery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/jan/28/the-good-wife-seven-years-of-power-dressing-gallery>
As played by Scottish actor and national treasure Alan Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-cumming>, there’s nothing Eli can’t 
sell: possible electoral fraud, an opportunity to run for governor or state 
attorney, orkissing a younger woman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5YuPO9EhEDI> in a restaurant. He is by turns a 
slimeball, a bully and a master manipulator – but he is also a loyal friend, 
wickedly funny and even kind (as required). And then there’s that hair!

Eli is the friend I’d want if I were ever in a tight spot. Luckily, I know 
where to find him: Thursdays, More4, 9pm. Get in.
 