
Can you really fit your career onto two sides of paper? Ernst & Young doesn’t 
think so 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-business/11782564/CV-Success-in-the-modern-workplace-counts-for-more-than-that.html>
, recently becoming the latest large organisation to stop assessing candidates 
based on CVs. And they are not alone.

With new technology, online applications and networking websites like LinkedIn,
CVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> are struggling to remain relevant 
in today’s job market. So, with all these new recruitment tools popping up, is 
the CV in danger of extinction?

CVs aren’t always accurate

One of the main issues with traditional CVs is that it’s difficult for 
employers to get a sense of a candidate’s personality. If recruiters are 
shortlisting candidates based on their CV alone, they might be missing out on 
someone who is a better cultural fit for the role.


Another problem is that CVs are often unverified, and can be exaggerated. 
Around a third of jobseekers embellish qualifications to land a role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/lie-degree-cv-jobseekers-graduate>
. And without checking people’s claims, selecting those with the best CV might 
not result in the best candidate for the job.

Times are changing

LinkedIn addresses the issue of verifiability by allowing users to include 
references on their profile, backing up their claims. As a result some 
companies are allowing applicants to submit their LinkedIn profile in lieu of a 
CV.


But there is a legal aspect to consider with social media. While LinkedIn 
profiles can convey a better idea of the candidate’s personality and the type 
of work environment they are suited to, making a hiring decision based on 
someone’s social media accounts could lead to greater discrimination.


There are a number of new ways candidates now apply for jobs – such as video 
CVs, websites, and on Twitter. Online job applications are also popular – 
especially among large companies. These often involve online tests, which allow 
employers to test the skills needed. The downside is that these applications 
can be time-consuming and may put applicants off applying.


How to write the perfect application form
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/application-form-perfect> 
The future is skills-based

The recruitment process has been transformed by technological advances over 
the last 10 years and this is only going to continue. While the CV is no longer 
the only way to apply for jobs, it is still usually necessary for the first 
stage of applicants. The majority of job websites request candidates upload a 
CV and cover letter as standard, and this seems unlikely to change anytime soon.


CVs are not outdated yet, but are evolving to become a part of a broader and 
more rigorous recruitment process. Taking on a new starter is expensive, 
meaning companies are investing in more resources to ensure they make the right 
decision.


New technology is also allowing job candidates to display their skills in more 
creative and engaging ways – but this is usually in addition to a CV. Any 
format in which a company receives an applicant’s professional information 
means little unless they can truly demonstrate their value to that 
organisation. Ultimately, it’s how convincingly you display this value – 
whether by CV or online applications – which will decide whether or not you get 
the job.

Steve Girdler is managing director for candidate due diligence company 
HireRight <http://www.hireright.com/emea/>


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 