
If Johnny Manziel used his time wisely in Las Vegas over the weekend – or the 
blond-haired, bespectacled manbearing an uncanny resemblance to the Browns 
quarterback, at least 
<https://www.facebook.com/ESPNLasVegas/posts/330734480383733> – he went to a 
sports book and bet on two wild-card teams to meet in the Super Bowl.

Ten wild-card teams have reached the NFL’s biggest game since the league 
expanded the playoff format beyond just the divisional winners in 1970, and six 
of those teams have won the Lombardi Trophy. But no wild-card team has reached 
the Supe since the 2010Green Bay Packers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/green-bay-packers> beat the Steelers in 
Super Bowl XLV, and the title game has never pitted two wild-card teams against 
each other. Yes, not even Ravens-49ers in Super Bowl XLVII.

Just three years ago, both of those franchises were division winners. It’s 
true!
But this year’s NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> playoff bracket 
has a great shot at sending two wild-card teams to meet at Levi’s Stadium on 7 
February thanks to a mix of vulnerable top seeds and four very dangerous 
divisional runners-up. It’s not hard at all to imagine scenarios in which the 
Seahawks, Chiefs, Steelers and Packers make easy work of their higher-seeded 
conference foes over the next two weekends and set up an all-wild-card 
conference championship round.

OK, maybe not the Packers. 

But definitely the Seahawks. While the Patriots and Cardinals still have the 
best odds in Vegas <http://www.vegasinsider.com/nfl/odds/futures/> to win Super 
Bowl 50 at 9/2, Seattle isn’t far behind at 6/1. Whereas the Cardinals were 
very far behind Seattle on the scoreboard just a few days ago, getting blown 
out 36-6 at home in Arizona.

“We got beaten in every phase of the game,” said Arizona head coach Bruce 
Arians.

“We’re not in any way panicking or freaking out,” said quarterback Carson 
Palmer.

Fine. Arizona gets a bye in the first round. They don’t have to stress too 
much about the Seahawks on their bye week. Then they should very much panic and 
freak out, because Seattle could be slotted for Arizona in the NFC title game 
and they look just as good as the team that represented the NFC in the last two 
Super Bowls.

The Seahawks have won six of their last seven games – including victories over 
playoff teams Minnesota, their wild-card round opponent, Pittsburgh, and 
Arizona – by an average margin of 22 points. That’s a victory margin most often 
seen in football games between college powers and FCS cupcake opponents, not 
two professional teams. The Seattle defense has returned to its usual 
dominance, yielding seven points or less in three games since the beginning of 
December, whileRussell Wilson has continued to make the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/15/russell-wilson-game-manager-seattle-seahawks-nfl>
 that he deserves NFL MVP every bit as much as Cam Newton does. You know the 
chaste Wilson will at least get the vote ofold ladies in North Carolina 
<http://www.charlotteobserver.com/opinion/letters-to-the-editor/article52948820.html>
.

Right now, the Super Bowl is Seattle’s to lose. That said, other teams should 
not give up hope, as 11 months ago the Seahawks proved they can very much lose 
a Super Bowl no matter the odds.

While the Seahawks are peaking, the Chiefs have the longest win streak in the 
NFL at 10 straight. It seems easy to overlook Kansas City because they’re 
coached by Andy Reid. His teams have been flaming out in the playoffs since way 
back in the days when fellow former Eagles coach Chip Kelly was just an 
assistant at New Hampshire. And it’s easy to overlook Alex Smith. And pooh-pooh 
KC’s win streak for coming entirely against teams with losing records, save the 
8-8 Bills, the Landry Jones Steelers and a mid-November Denver Broncos team 
that was quarterbacked by Peyton Manning’s corpse.

But 10 wins in a row in the NFL is 10 wins in a row. Even the Seahawks lost 
two weeks ago to the lowly Rams. Carolina is only a game removed from a loss to 
the Falcons and the mighty Patriots have lost four of six. Kansas City has a 
good defense and an offense that protects the ball and can move it on the 
ground. They can also make some plays through the air now thanks to the 2015 
Chiefs finally deciding to adopt the newfangled position of wide receiver. 
Super Bowl champions have been made of less. If they win this weekend, the 
general response will be: “They only beat the Texans. I’m not impressed.” OK. 
Sure. But the Chiefs would be plenty happy to fly under the radar all the way 
through the Super Bowl, after which we could wake up and realize we live in a 
world where the reigning World Series and Super Bowl champs hail from a sports 
town that is mostly ignored.

Despite the 10-game win streak, the AFC wild-card team being called the “most 
dangerous” team in the playoffs 
<https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=steelers+dangerous&tbm=nws>
 is the Pittsburgh Steelers. And they very well may be. When Ben 
Roethlisberger, Antonio Brown, Markus Wheaton, Martavis Bryant, Heath Miller 
and whichever healthy body the Steelers have at running back are clicking, 
there’s not an offense that can stay with them. Pittsburgh’s problem is 
consistency. One week they’re unstoppable, the next they’re getting lit up by 
Ryan Mallett while Roethlisberger throws picks. Could the Steelers put three 
solid games together against weak AFC top seeds and put themselves in position 
to win a seventh Lombardi Trophy? Most definitely. Could they struggle to slip 
by the Bengals this week and then go to New England and give up 600 yards 
passing to Tom Brady, while Roethlisberger turns the ball over and Bill 
Belichick out-coaches Mike Tomlin so badly that people question if he’s 
cheating again? Most definitely.

The Steelers truly are dangerous. They can wow you or explode on themselves. 
They’re the JPP’s fireworks of football teams.

The Packers are theoretically dangerous, too, because they Aaron Rodgers. But 
without much of a line and without Jordy Nelson stretching the field – and with 
thatHollywood vixen Olivia Munn 
<http://profootballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/11/19/olivia-munn-calls-out-espn-for-aaron-rodgers-speculation/>
 on his arm! – 2015 Aaron Rodgers has looked more like Matt Flynn. In fact, the 
Packers are the only wild-card teamnot favored to win 
<http://www.covers.com/odds/football/nfl-spreads.aspx> in the first round.

Yet that first-round game is against Washington. Are we really ready to give 
the edge to a Dan Snyder-run NFC East team in a playoff game? Green Bay can win 
inWashington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-nfl-team>. Then 
maybe they take some momentum into Carolina to play a Panthers team that hasn’t 
been playing its best football. Who knows? These Packers could be using the 
classic Giants model: Look mediocre all season, have people call for your 
coach’s head ... and then win the Super Bowl. What we do know is that when the 
“worst” wil-card team in the whole field is quarterbacked by Aaron Rodgers, the 
high seeds have a lot to panic and freak out about, no matter what Carson 
Palmer says.

A wild NFL season being capped by two wild-card teams in the Super Bowl would 
be fitting. You can even feel confident betting on it to happen in Vegas, no 
disguise necessary.
 