
Will.i.am will swap his big chair on The Voice UK for the snow-covered peaks of
Davos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> next week, to seek support 
from world leaders for his charitable foundation.

The rapper and music producer-turned-tech investor will be rubbing shoulders 
with more than 40 heads of state and government asthe Swiss resort hosts the 
45th World Economic Forum <http://www.weforum.org/>. Will.i.am, or William 
Adams, will be promoting hisi.am.angel Foundation 
<http://iamangelfoundation.org/>, a charity that aims to transform lives 
through “education, inspiration and opportunity”. Instead of mentoring young 
singing hopefuls and bantering with Rita Ora, Adams will be lobbying the rich 
and powerful to embrace philanthropy to improve local communities, and meeting 
the press on Friday night.

Will.i.am is following in the snowy footsteps of Hollywood star Matt Damon, 
who attended WEF 2014 to seek funding for his charity, Water.org 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/21/davos-2014-buildup-live#block-52dec354e4b064c8346ec131>
.

Leaders of Europe’s major economies will also be attending the event. Angela 
Merkel returns to the throng after missing last year, whena skiing injury 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2535189/Crocked-German-chancellor-Merkel-soldiers-despite-fracturing-pelvis-ski-trip-takes-centre-stage-crutches-Epiphany-concert.html>
 kept her at home. France’s president François Hollande has been lured up the 
mountains for the first time, and Italy’s prime minister Matteo Renzi is 
breaking his own Davos duck.

David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, though, is 
not attending – the first time Britain’s prime minister has skipped a Forum 
meeting since 2007, having given special addresses in 2013 and 2014.

Facebook’s Sheryl Sandberg, Yahoo’s Marissa Mayer, Satya Nadella of Microsoft 
and Eric Schmidt of Google are all attending, as is Jack Ma, founder of China’s 
web giant Alibaba.

Despite the presence of Mayer, Sandberg, Merkel, just 17% of Davos delegates 
are female. WEF is trying to improve its gender balance, offering delegations 
an extra place as long as they bring at least one woman. Last year around 16% 
of the delegates were women.

This year’s WEF is titled “The New Global Context”, with a focus on climate 
change, economic growth, social inclusion, and the future of the internet. The 
former US vice-president Al Gore andChristiana Figueres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/christiana-figueres>, United Nations 
executive secretary, are pushing the private sector to take climate change 
seriously before the UN climate conference in Paris in December.

Davos regulars are used to trudging between venues in the small resort, where 
security is notoriously tight. This year, UBS is trying to encourage delegates 
to burn some shoe leather, handing out 1,000 electronic pedometers. If 
participants walk at least 6 km each during the event, the Swiss bank will 
donate 2,500 bicycles to children in rural South Africa to help them get to 
school.
 