
Don't discriminate against Prince William

Prince William <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-william> shouldn't be 
discriminated against at Cambridge University because of the circumstances of 
his birth, a professor has said.

William travelled to Cambridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2014/jan/07/prince-william-begins-agricultural-course-cambridge-university-video>
 to study a tailored 10-week agricultural course this week and has already been 
criticised bysome students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/31/william-at-cambridge-shame>.

Speaking to the Cambridge News 
<http://www.cambridge-news.co.uk/News/FIRST-PICTURES-Prince-William-arrives-at-St-Johns-College-as-duke-starts-life-as-Cambridge-University-student-20140107105019.htm>
, Prof Ross Anderson, of Cambridge University's Computer Laboratory, defended 
William's acceptance onto the course and warned against discriminating against 
the Prince.

He said: "Colleagues and I sometimes organise special courses for people from 
industry who want to learn about the latest research in our field. For this we 
charge them money. Whether they have any A-levels at all is no more relevant 
than the price of tea in China."

Anderson warned that Prince William "should not be discriminated against on 
account of the circumstances of [his] birth".

The university's decision to accept William as a student has caused 
controversy over the past few weeks, withsome students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/31/william-at-cambridge-shame> 
criticising his acceptance onto the course.

One Cambridge student said in the Tab 
<http://cambridge.tab.co.uk/2013/12/30/willi-really-prince-william-to-become-a-cambridge-student/>
 that: "Normally students need A*AA at A-level to gain entry to Cambridge 
University, whilst the Prince only achieved a mediocre ABC."

Red cards for laddish behaviour
 A football referee holds up a red card. Photograph: Reuters 
University professors have used red cards to discipline disruptive male 
students, according to a professor who has researched laddishness at university.

Research carried out by Prof Carolyn Jackson, of Lancaster University, focused 
on sports students. It found that some lecturers had resorted to using yellow 
and red cards, a technique used in primary schools, to combat laddishness.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> would first be 
threatened with a yellow card and would then be removed from the lecture if 
their behaviour didn't improve.

According to researchers, symptoms of laddishness included being loud, being a 
joker, throwing stuff, arriving late and being rude and disrespectful to 
lecturers.

Win for international students at Southampton uni
 Southampton University 
The student union at Southampton University has won a fight for international 
students to have fixed fees.

Up until now, fees were set by year rather than for the whole degree. This 
meant international students were paying higher fees every year of their 
studies.

David Gilani, president of the student union, says: "All students arriving 
from the 2015/16 year onwards will have fixed fees. This means that each 
student has certainty over what their degree will cost them."

Student halls hit by storms at Aberystwyth

On Monday around 150 students at Aberystwyth were evacuated from student halls 
after storms threatened their seafront digs. The students were put up by the 
uni in alternative accommodation at another campus, but have been allowed to 
return home after final safety checks.

Will Ray, an Msc student in remote sensing geography, lives in student 
accommodation on the seafront and was evacuated on Friday.

He says: 

"On Friday morning I was jolted awake by the building shaking. I live in the 
second floor flat and the waves were breaking over our window. At about 11am we 
lost power.

"In the four years that I've been studying here I've never experienced 
anything like this."

Ray says that the sea threw gravel up to the accommodation, and that the 
ground floor flats suffered from flooding.

Rebecca Davies, pro vice-chancellor for student and staff services, says: "The 
past few days have been difficult for those living in sea front halls and we 
are very pleased to finally be in a position to let everyone return to their 
accommodation."

Ceredigion hall of residence at Aberystwyth University before the storm
 Photograph: Aberystwyth University 

Ceredigion hall of residence at Aberystwyth University after the storm
 Photograph: Aberystwyth University 

Have you been affected by the bad weather? Tweet us pictures @gdnstudents (but 
of course, don't put yourself in danger), or share your experiences in the 
comments section below.
 