
William (Bill) Papas (1927-2000) was born in South Africa in 1927 to Greek 
immigrant parents. Age 20 he came to Britain to complete his art studies at St 
Martin's and Beckenham art colleges.

By the time he returned to South Africa in 1949 the Nationalist party was in 
power and the introduction of the firstapartheid laws 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/worldservice/africa/features/storyofafrica/12chapter7.shtml>
 meant that Bill opted to work for two of the main opposition publications, the
Cape Times <http://www.iol.co.za/capetimes> and Drum <http://drum.co.za/> 
magazine.

The political climate was difficult for anyone of liberal views. He worked as 
a freelance artist and reporter and in 1958 his coverage of Nelson Mandela's 
treason trials for theJohannesburg Star  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Star_%28South_Africa%29>was syndicated to the 
LondonObserver <http://observer.theguardian.com/> and other European 
newspapers. The following year he returned to Britain and joined the Guardian 
as deputy political cartoonist toDavid Low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gall/0,,712437,00.html>. Low was the most famous 
cartoonist of his time and made the newspaper a real talking point in the 1950s.

The Guardian was an early adopter of illustrative art and reproduced work by S
ir Francis Carruthers Gould 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Carruthers_Gould> of the Westminster 
Gazette <http://www.wakeling.demon.co.uk/page10-Tenniel.htm>, (Britain's first 
ever staff political cartoonist) andTenniel  
<http://www.wakeling.demon.co.uk/page10-Tenniel.htm>of Punch. However, the 
Guardian did not have its own political cartoonist until 1953 when Low was 
appointed.

The Times and Daily Telegraph did not employ political cartoonists for another 
decade.Les Gibbard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/20/les-gibbard-obituary>, Papas' 
successor remarked that by the 1960s the Guardian had become: " A dream 
shop-window for any political cartoonist. Almost without fail each cartoon was 
given bold prominence on either the front or back pages".

The front page series P.S.by Papas, containing the artist's first regular 
cartoons for the Guardian, first appeared in 1959. The single-column topical, 
or 'pocket' cartoons' were the first of their kind to appear in the paper.

In 1960 he abbreviated his signature to Papas and until 1962 he alternated 
with Low as political cartoonist. He took over completely when Low retired due 
to illness in April 1963.

During his eleven years at the Guardian Papas' cartoons portrayed many of the 
main issues of the decade including the nuclear arms race, the relationship 
between Britain and Rhodesia, the Vietnam War, the Middle East and of course 
news at home.

His cartoons were described as forceful but never personally vindictive. He 
told one interviewer in 1965: "I don't caricature too much. I don't see the 
point of dwelling on deformities. It's their policies, not the politicians, 
that count."

As an illustrator Papas worked mainly in pen and ink. A colleague described 
how he would disappear into his 'windowless hovel' of an office and produce a 
stylish drawing with his old fashioned dip-pen that summed up the day's news 
perfectly.
 Heath and Wilson election cartoon, January 28, 1964. Photograph: William 
Papas for the Guardian 
In this cartoon from 1966 Papas shows Prime Minister Harold Wilson weighed 
down with domestic and international problems but reaching the winning tape 
before newly elected Conservative leader, Edward Heath and Liberal leader Jo 
Grimmond.

When elected in 1964 Harold Wilson became the first Labour Prime Minister for 
thirteen years. He won with a very slim majority of five seats. On 27 January 
1966 the party won a convincing victory in the Hull by-election. This cartoon 
reflects the tide turning for Labour and in fact Wilson called an election two 
months after this cartoon was published and won with a majority of 97 seats.

The mouse in the cartoon above, holding a stop watch, was a frequent feature 
of Papas' later Guardian cartoons. In 1968 the paper held a competition to name 
the mouse and after receiving 2000 entries the name Theodore was chosen, which 
also happened to be the name of Papas' brother. The mouse became so popular 
that Papas later drew a political cartoon strip featuring it.
 Concorde cartoon, December 12, 1967. Photograph: William Papas for the 
Guardian 
In the Concorde cartoon above Theodore is captured looking up at Prime 
Minister Harold Wilson and General De Gaulle, President of France, as the two 
countries celebrated the world's first super-sonic airliner, theAnglo-French 
Concorde <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/20/les-gibbard-obituary>. 
This feat of engineering rolled out of its hangar in Toulouse on 11 December 
1967. At the time Britain was still negotiating with France to enter the 
European Economic Community.

Alongside the cartoons Papas also wrote and illustrated books for adults and 
children. He was a runner-up for the 1964, 1967 and 1968Kate Greenaway Medals 
<http://www.carnegiegreenaway.org.uk/greenaway/> from the Library Association. 

Peter Preston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/newsroom/story/0,11718,1104064,00.html>, Guardian 
editor 1975-1995 wrote in the foreword to thePapas politics people places 
exhibition <https://www.theguardian.com/newsroom/story/0,11718,1104064,00.html> 
held at the Guardian Newsroom in 2004: "With tremendous enthusiasm and innocent 
charm Bill would come in mid-afternoon and hover. Any ideas? Got a subject? And 
then as the evening wore on, he'd grow more anxious. Yes … here's the Wilson 
punchline that works. And suddenly he'd whir away until, there before you, was 
your idea turned into something close to art."

In 1969 Papas announced in cartoon form that he was taking an 'elongation 
holiday' from the paper. He moved to his father's home in Greece, concentrating 
on his painting and book illustration. His last political cartoon for the 
Guardian was published in 1970. Leaving behind the grey streets of London he 
spent the next 13 years sailing round the Mediterranean with his wife in their 
yacht and painted and exhibited his watercolours and continued to illustrate 
and write books. He also lived in the Middle East for a while and produced a 
book on Jerusalem.

Alan Coren <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/oct/19/radio.television>, 
former editor ofPunch <http://www.punch.co.uk/about/> described Papas as: "a 
highly distinguished artist … whose work … will make an important contribution 
to the journalistic history of that time."

Papas regarded himself as an artist and reporter of people, places and events: 
"I obtain immense satisfaction in realising a situation or movement with a 
simple pen stroke. I hope to be remembered as a chronicler."

Papas continued to write and illustrate books and from Portland, Oregon, where 
he finally settled, he set up his own self-syndication service, supplying 
political cartoons to the Los Angeles Times and other US and Canadian 
newspapers.

An original collection of Papas cartoons held by the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> can be accessed by appointment in the 
GNM Archive reading room in King's Cross, London. Other examples of Papas' work 
are held in the permanent collections of theV&A <http://collections.vam.ac.uk/>,
The British Cartoon Archive <http://www.cartoons.ac.uk/>and the Vorres Museum 
in Athens. Some of his cartoons were also chosen for the 1970National Portrait 
Gallery 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait-list.php?search=sp&sText=William%20papas>
 exhibition 'Drawn and Quartered: the world of the British newspaper cartoon 
1720-1970'.

More information on the life and work of Bill Papas can be found on the 
following pages:
William Papas obituary  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/jun/26/guardianobituaries.haroldjackson>
William Papas Collection in focus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/william-papas>
British Cartoon Archive biography of William Papas <http://British Cartoon 
Archive biography of William Papas>
Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>
More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachershttp://> 
page.
 