
A spate of disappointing company results and continuing concerns about the 
effectiveness of the US bank bail out plan have pushed leading shares lower 
once more.

But there were some bright spots. Building materials group Wolseley and 
electrical retailerDSG both moved sharply higher, the one on hopes it would 
raise money, the other on hopes it would not.

Wolseley <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wolseley> climbed 11.75p to 
218.75p after Citigroup suggested a £600m rights issue would ease its financial 
worries and put the company in a strong position when its markets recovered in 
the medium term. DSG, the owner of Currys and PC World, added 2.75p to 26p on 
talk it was telling the City it saw little need for a refinancing. After 
meeting DSG's management, analysts at Credit Suisse said chief executive John 
Browett "was relaxed, playing down any funding issues and whilst admitting 
there was still lots to be done, was generally pleased with the improvements 
seen to date within the UK businesses."

Overall though the mood was gloomy, the tone set early on by poor figures from 
BT, off 8.2p to a new low of 97p, and news that drinks group Diageo, down 30p 
to 877.5p, was cutting its full year earnings forecasts.British Land lost 27p 
to 456.25p after a larger than expected cash call of £740m at a deeply 
discounted 225p a share, accompanied by a 13% fall in third quarter profits.Rio 
Tinto slipped 30p to £19.39 as it ran into a row with shareholders following 
its much flagged plan to accepta near $20bn cash injection from China's Chinalco
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2009/feb/12/rio-china-mining>.

With Wall Street down around 140 points by the time London closed - despite 
better than expected retail sales figures for January - theFTSE 100 ended 32.02 
points lower at 4202.24. Investors are increasingly nervous about whether 
Barack Obama's moves to steady the ship with the bank rescue plan and economic 
stimulus package will prove to be sufficient.

There was a mixed response from the UK banks to these concerns. Royal Bank of 
Scotlandedged up 0.4p to 24p, Lloyds Banking Group added 3.5p to 90.9p and HSBC 
rose 6.5p to 533.5p, despite a note from JP Morgan saying the bank was likely 
to need a capital raising if it wanted to take part in the Obama bail out. But
Barclays slipped 3.5p to 105p.

Insurers were also weaker, with Legal & General losing 4.1p to 54.7p and 
Prudentialdown 20.5p to 328p.

InterContinental Hotels fell 33.5p to 498.5p as rival Marriott International 
reported a net loss in its fourth quarter, and warned of continued weakness in 
2009.

However some companies did manage to please investors with their updates. 
Medical equipment groupSmith & Nephew added 37.5p to 550.5p on the back of a 6% 
increase in full year trading profits, while interdealer brokerIcap rose 16.25p 
to 237.5p as it said it expected full year profits would be in line with market 
expectations of between £336m and £356m.

Elsewhere retailer WH Smith climbed 15.5p to 356.25p after analyst Nick Bubb 
at Pali International raised his recommendation from neutral to buy and his 
target price from 370p to 390p.

On the speculative front, Chloride was 1p better at 152.25p on rumours of a 
270p a share offer from US group Emerson Electric. Emerson had a bid at this 
level rejected last year, and traders questioned why it would come back again 
at the same level given how much the economic climate has changed in the 
interim.

Real bids emerged for computer games group Eidos, up 17.75p to 31.75p after a 
32p a share offer from Japan's Square Enix 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2009/feb/12/mergersandacquisitions-games>, 
and for Aim-listedRidge Mining. Ridge rose 16p to 47.5p as it said it was in 
talks about a takeover byAquarius Platinum, up 1.5p to 189.5p.

But medical imaging company Medicsight slumped 14.75p to 7.75p on news that 
the US Medicare agency ruled the company's CT colonography test would not be 
covered by state medical insurance payments for colorectal screening. The 
company maintained the ruling was not a final one, and it was lobby alongside 
its partners to overturn the decision.
 