

Buena Vista Social Club – Chan Chan



For almost two decades Buena Vista Social Club have been Cuba’s loudest 
cultural ambassadors. So in a year when the communist state and its powerful 
capitalist neighbour look set to restore full diplomatic ties, it’s fitting the 
band are hanging up their hats, instruments and dancing shoes. Mission 
accomplished, you might say. Their final lap of the world – dubbed the “Adios” 
tour –includes stops in Australia 
<https://www.facebook.com/orquesta.buena.vista.social.clubR/app_123966167614127>
 and features the last of the band’s surviving original members: 
dancer-turned-diva Omara Portuondo, trombonist Jesús “Aguaje” Ramos, trumpeter 
Guajiro Mirabal andlaúd <http://www.fernandezmusic.com/Laud.html> player 
Barbarito Torres. They’re also plugging new albumLost and Found 
<https://itunes.apple.com/au/album/lost-and-found/id959917942>, the first 
collection of unreleased tracks since their bestselling eponymous 1997 debut of 
nostalgic Cuban classics. Physically absent from the stage these days is Compay 
Segundo – that cigar-puffing, Panama hat-donning crooner who reduced ladies to 
Beatlemania levels of hysteria with his cute shuffle dancing. Segundo died in 
2003, aged 95, but his legacy lives on in songs like Chan Chan, a seductive son 
whose opening bars are an instant dinner-party starter.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtGbRZ73NvlY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtGbRZ73NvlY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtGbRZ73NvlY&media=>



Balkan Beat Box – Political Fuck

Israeli trio Balkan Beat Box <http://balkanbeatbox.com/> are the band most 
likely to get the crowds pogo-
ing, sweating and leaving Womadelaide’s Botanic Gardens turf in a sorry state. 
If Mano Negra hailed from Tel Aviv, this is what they’d sound like: Eastern 
European and Middle Eastern melodies beset by high-octane beats. And thanks to 
songs like Political Fuck – inspired by protest movements like Occupy and the 
Arab Spring – revolution has never sounded so appealing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZYvg8RetDeg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZYvg8RetDeg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZYvg8RetDeg&media=>



Sinéad O’Connor – Black Boys on Mopeds 

Sinéad O'Connor interview: 'I deserve to be a priest. Music is a priesthood'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/27/sinead-o-connor-interview-i-deserve-to-be-a-priest>
Long before she was offending the pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/21/sinead-o-connor-pope-photo>, 
Miley Cyrus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/03/sinead-o-connor-open-letter-miley-cyrus>
 and Prince (the pair are said to have come to physical blows), Sinéad O’Connor 
was taking aim at Margaret Thatcher. On her chilling acoustic ballad Black Boys 
on Mopeds, from 1990’s I Do Not Want What I Haven’t Got, O’Connor intones: 
“Margaret Thatcher on TV / shocked by the deaths that took place in Beijing / 
It seems strange that she should be offended / the same orders are given by 
her.” The Irish controversialist is still going strong as the anti-Miley Cyrus, 
as evidenced by her blazing video clip forTake Me To Church 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jMzY_KQIKjU> from last year’s bluesy album I’m 
Not Bossy, I’m the Boss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/07/sinead-o-connor-im-not-bossy-im-the-boss-album-review>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn14lwdpYkAA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn14lwdpYkAA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn14lwdpYkAA&media=>

Youssou N’Dour and Neneh Cherry – 7 Seconds



This 1994 duet saw the titan of African music, Youssou N’Dour, team up with 
Swedish-born Neneh Cherry for a song that achieved the very rare feat of 
putting “world music” at the top of mainstream music charts around the globe. 
Sung in Wolof, French and English, the song explores the first seven seconds of 
a child’s life, when he is still blissfully oblivious to the politics of skin 
colour. Cherry and N’Dour will both perform at Womadelaide – separately and, if 
we’re lucky, together. For N’Dour, who has been immersed in Senegalese politics 
in recent years (he evenentered the presidential race in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/03/youssou-ndour-senegal-presidential-election>
), this is his second return to the festival since he performed at the very 
first Womadelaide in 1992.

Neneh Cherry: “I’ve got this new music that, to me, feels better than anything 
else that I’ve ever done"
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/03/neneh-cherry-interview> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwqCpjFMvz-k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwqCpjFMvz-k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwqCpjFMvz-k&media=>



Jambinai – Time of Extinction


South Korean post-rock trio Jambinai are the sound of Korea’s past merging 
with its electronic, industrial future. Traditional Korean instruments like the 
piri (similar to an oboe), the haegeum (a vertically-held instrument with two 
silk strings played with a bow) and geomungo (a Korean zither) are used to 
create a postmodern racket. Time of Extinction is an apt title for this ominous 
instrumental piece. With its furious rhythm section anchoring a shrieky melody, 
it could easily soundtrack a dinosaur-slaying scene in a James Cameron film.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK6ABpjyc1Gs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK6ABpjyc1Gs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK6ABpjyc1Gs&media=>



Luzmila Carpio – Misk’i Takiy

Anyone who has spent time on long-distance buses in the Andes will be familiar 
with the traditional huayno music piped over the PA system, soundtracking the 
hairpin turns on precipitous mountain roads. Bolivian folk singer Luzmila 
Carpio – dubbed “the singing violin” – is a master of the genre’s high-pitched 
vocals, which she delivers for the most part in her native, ancient Quechua 
language. Carpio’s colourful indigenous costumes and sanguine songs about 
coexistence and Pachamama (Mother Earth) belie the fact she is also a fiercely 
political figure. Formerly the Bolivian ambassador to France, Carpio is also a 
vocal campaigner for indigenous culture and land rights.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D00QOB3gO9HI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D00QOB3gO9HI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D00QOB3gO9HI&media=>



Tara Tiba – My King My Moon

Tehran-born, Perth-based songstress Tara Tiba <http://www.taratiba.com/> has 
never been able to openly share her voice with her country of birth, having 
been raised in post-revolutionary Iran shortly after females were prohibited 
from singing in public. After moving to Perth in 2012, Tiba formed her own band 
and now performs jazz-style improvisations of classical Persian poetry by Rumi, 
Hafez and Baba Taher as well as new arrangements of traditional songs and 
original pieces. My King My Moon, from her debut album A Persian Dream, finds 
her giving new life to aseven decade-old love song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_mA_uc0LFok> by Persian-Jewish musician 
Morteza Neydavoud.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkbrAIiEGZkM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkbrAIiEGZkM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkbrAIiEGZkM&media=>



Public Service Broadcasting – Everest

Public Service Broadcasting keep calm and carry on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/06/public-service-broadcasting-keep-calm-and-carry-on>
Post-rock-meets-propaganda: that’s the musical formula adopted by London duo 
Public Service Broadcasting <http://publicservicebroadcasting.net/>. Their 
sound is quite literally cinematic – J Willgoose Esq and Wrigglesworth sample 
spoken-word messages from old public information films, then cast the 
voiceovers to euphoric post-rock andkrautrock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/mar/30/elektronische-musik-krautrock>
 soundscapes. On stage they perform in front of old TV sets that screen 
archival film footage. The band’s current obsession has informed their latest 
album,The Race for Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/22/public-service-broadcasting-race-for-space-review-go-the-other-side-apollo>
. But before that, Public Service Broadcasting were busy scaling cool new 
heights of earthly nostalgia on their 2012 single Everest, which sampled 
extracts from 1953 film The Conquest of Everest, a documentary about Tenzing 
Norgay and Edmund Hillary’s epic journey to “a cold white world”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvhgfzEm3CWU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvhgfzEm3CWU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvhgfzEm3CWU&media=>



Depedro – Nubes de Papel

Depedro <http://www.depedro.net/> is the moniker adopted by Madrid native 
Jairo Zavala for his indie-
folk solo project. Zavala is best known for his work with other bands – as the 
frontman for Spanish rockers Vacazul and 3000 Hombres, and as guitarist for US 
alt-country outfitCalexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2013/sep/17/calexico-interview-joey-burns>
. But when he puts on his Depedro hat, there’s a dash of a Latino M Ward or 
Andrew Bird about him, especially on beguiling songs like Nubes de Papel (Paper 
Clouds). We’re particularly besotted with its film clip, which tickles all our 
kitsch, vintage-European, Audrey Tautou-film fantasies.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWWvAIz1tTQE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWWvAIz1tTQE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWWvAIz1tTQE&media=>
 * Womadelaide  <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/>is on at Botanic Park in 
Adelaide from 6 to 9 March  