
Employers often say that young people lack the basic skills they need for 
employment. Alongside core numeracy and literacy, they want to see softer 
skills, such as communication and team working.

Our recent Ways into Work report 
<http://www.edge.co.uk/media/84926/city__guilds_ways_into_work_-_views_of_young_people_report.pdf>
 highlighted the disconnect between what young people are learning in school 
and what employers are looking for. It also emphasised the need for better 
links between education and employment.

The research, which gathered the views of about 3,000 young people aged 7-18, 
found that they are keen to engage with employers, and want to be equipped for 
the workplace.

Clearly there is an opportunity for employers to take ownership of the skills 
and education agenda, and direct it in a way that benefits themselves, school 
leavers and the economy. Employers know their training needs best, so they must 
be prepared to step up and work with key organisations in education and 
industry to ensure that young people are fit for future employment.

One way of achieving this is through workplace training. This is, by its very 
nature, specific to individual businesses and central to employee progression, 
so employers should be given more say in how it is designed and delivered. I 
wholeheartedly support the government's efforts to hand control back to 
employers to develop training that is appropriate for them through the Employer 
Ownership Pilot, which offers employers in England access to up to £250m of 
public investment to design and deliver their own training solutions.

Gone are the days of "a job for life", so the focus should be on externally 
recognised training so individuals can accumulate portable skills that allow 
them to progress in their careers.

Of course, some employers are already engaged in developing tomorrow's 
workforce.Apprenticeships <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/apprenticeships> 
are instrumental in plugging the skills gap. And more enlightened employers are 
investing in higher-level apprenticeships, providing a complete progression 
route to the highest levels of achievement.

By recognising organisations that have already taken ownership of their skills 
requirements – like many of those recognised in the National Apprenticeship 
Service's Top 100 Apprenticeship Employers List – others can be motivated to 
follow in their footsteps, generating economic growth both within business and 
society as a whole.

Chris Jones is the chief executive and director general of City & Guilds 
<http://www.cityandguilds.com>


This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional> in association with the 
National Apprenticeship Service <http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk>. To get 
more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly 
Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 