
I have to say it does seem slightly strange thinking about LA Without A Map, 
for the basic reason that it's now almost two years old and I'm already two 
projects further down the line. Last year I directed a German picture called 
Highway Society - which would probably best be described as a musical road 
movie - and now I'm preparing to shoot a documentary on the discovery of Brazil 
over the last 5000 years.

And there is a great deal of preparation involved, believe me. We're going to 
be filming for at least six months, travelling from Rio to the most 
north-easterly part of the country, so - as you can imagine - there are any 
number of loose ends to be tied up before we unpack the cameras.

The subject matter is pretty close to my heart, as I've been living in Brazil 
for almost 10 years now, and, while I still return to Helsinki on a regular 
basis, Rio is what I consider home. It's one of the things which attracted me 
to LA Without A Map: that feeling of being an outsider, venturing into the 
unknown (an unknown country, an unknown culture).

I remember reading Richard Rayner's book - from which the film is adapted - 
around the time I was leaving Finland, and it touched on a lot of themes which 
really resonated with me. I was, at that point, the outsider, struggling to 
balance my pre-conceptions with the reality of my new situation, and so the 
idea of turning this classical outsider story into an outsider movie became 
very appealing.

And that same feeling has also been unavoidable whenever I've dealt with the 
Hollywood movie industry the film deals with: then again, as a Finn living in 
Brazil and making movies wherever I feel the best stories are, I could hardly 
have expected anything else.

Â• Mika Kaurismaki's LA Without A Map opens tomorrow
 