
Star Trek suits are out and pineapple shirts are in as the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> seeks to keep the world’s most 
powerful leaders off the list of summit fashion disasters.


Apec summits: what the leaders wore - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2011/nov/14/apec-summits-what-leaders-wore-in-pictures>
Boldly ignoring the ridicule levelled at past costumes, the Philippines is 
continuing the spotty tradition of dressing the heads of the Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation (Apec) nations in the host country’s national garment.

Paul Cabral, the renowned Filipino designer, laboured for four months creating 
a traditional “barong” shirt for each of the 21 Apec leaders, embroidered with 
individual symbols of their country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fworld-leaders-to-don-pineapple-shirts-for-philippines-apec-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01f34d40a6213c41182180dee53f7da690e2ad4c%2F0_53_4005_2402%2F4005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20leaders%20to%20don%20pineapple%20shirts%20for%20Philippines%20Apec%20summit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fworld-leaders-to-don-pineapple-shirts-for-philippines-apec-summit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20leaders%20to%20don%20pineapple%20shirts%20for%20Philippines%20Apec%20summit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fworld-leaders-to-don-pineapple-shirts-for-philippines-apec-summit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01f34d40a6213c41182180dee53f7da690e2ad4c%2F0_53_4005_2402%2F4005.jpg>
 Filipino designer Paul Cabral shows off the ‘barong’ shirts he has designed 
for world leaders at this week’s Apec summit in Manila. Photograph: Jay 
Directo/AFP/Getty Images 
The shirts, semi-sheer and partially made from pineapple fibre, will be worn 
at the summit opening in Manila on Wednesday.

But shaking off the Apec red carpet’s reputation as a worst-dressed parade 
will be a tall order for Cabral if past attempts are anything to go by.

Last year, the tunics worn by the leaders in China went viral on social media 
for resembling Star Trek uniforms.

In the aftermath of the global financial crisis in 2008, the ponchos worn by 
the leaders in Peru were ridiculed as potato sacks, while global power players 
looked visibly uncomfortable two years earlier as they shuffled onto the stage 
for a photo-op wearing Vietnam’s “ao dai” tunics.

The tradition harks back to 1993 when US president Bill Clinton put his Apec 
colleagues in leather bomber jackets – the kind worn by second world war 
fighter pilots.

The “barong tagalog” holds a special place in a Filipino man’s closet, 
reserved for special events like weddings. It also serves as his burial shroud.

The cloth is made from the hard, spiked leaves from the pineapple’s crown, 
which are pounded and dried.

For the leaders’ shirts, Cabral mixed it with silk to make it more comfortable.

“This summit is the best showcase for the barong and for Filipino talent,” 
Cabral told AFP at his atelier in Manila, as he marked the finished garments 
for delivery to the presidential palace.

“The whole world is your audience, nothing can be more grandiose than that.”

Cabral said he was confident that his design would not be the butt of jokes. 

“I’m not at all worried. I just concentrated on my job,” he said.

Cabral said he studied the Apec leaders’ posture to come up with a design that 
both represents their country and suits their build.

US president Barack Obama’s tall frame will be draped with bold patterns from 
American renaissance architecture, he said.

The shirt of China’s Xi Jinping <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping> 
features tall bamboo with cascading leaves while Malaysia’s Najib Razak boasts 
warrior shields from Sarawak.

But the most important detail in the shirts for those wearing them may not be 
the intricate embroidery. Cabral said he secretly sewed a satin lining on the 
tough collars to prevent itching.

“We want the leaders to be comfortable,” Cabral said.

China says it has been 'restrained' by not seizing more islands in South China 
Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/china-says-it-has-been-restrained-by-not-seizing-more-islands-in-south-china-sea> 