
Global university rankings are a competitive business – not only for 
universities, but for the companies that research and publish them. They are 
simultaneously criticised and lauded. And while few can agree on which 
methodology is the most robust, there is consensus that global university 
rankings are here to stay, that no ranking is all encompassing and that their 
influence is growing. Students, universities and governments are taking note 
and action.

The first international rankings, the Academic Ranking of World Universities 
<http://www.shanghairanking.com/> or Shanghai Rankings, were published in 2003 
by Shanghai Jiao Tong University in China. These were initially used to 
establish the standing of Chinese universities internationally following the 
launch of a government initiative to create world-class universities.

But in today's more internationalised sector, governments across the world are 
using rankings to measure their global competitiveness. The Shanghai Rankings 
were soon followed by theQS World University Rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/world-university-rankings>
 andTimes Higher Education World University Rankings 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/>. With 
students and academics facing greater options and opportunities, the existence 
of three ready-made lists of the world's best universities have heightened 
competition the world over and governments are now paying closer attention, 
even utilising rankings to make policy decisions.

Education has become a top priority in emerging economies and many are looking 
to form partnerships with world leading universities. The Brazilian 
government's national scholarship programme,Science Without Borders 
<http://www.cienciasemfronteiras.gov.br/web/csf-eng/home>, aims to send 100,000 
students and researchers in primarily STEM subject areas to some of the world's 
best institutions. These partner universities were selectedbased on their 
position <http://www.nature.com/news/2011/110804/full/news.2011.458.html>in the 
QS and Times rankings. In an effort to ensure quality, India's University 
Grants Commission also requires any foreign university wanting to partner with 
Indian universitiesto be ranked among the top 500 in the world 
<http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2012-06-02/news/31983180_1_foreign-universities-foreign-varsities-twinning-programmes>
.

University rankings are also impacting immigration policy. With the number of 
internationally mobile studentsprojected to grow 
<http://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/229844/bis-13-1081-international-education-global-growth-and-prosperity.pdf%5D>
 due to changing demographics and rising incomes in developing countries, 
overseas students are big business. They contributed over £10bn to the UK 
economy in 2011-2012 alone. As a result the UK government is looking to attract
90,000 more overseas students by 2018 
<http://news.bis.gov.uk/Press-Releases/New-push-to-grow-UK-s-17-5-billion-education-exports-industry-690a3.aspx>
.

However, the current debate surrounding UK immigration policy has led to an 
increasingly negative perception among overseas students, making them feel 
'unwelcome'. This has led toa sharp decline in the number of Indian and 
Pakistani students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jan/11/fall-students-india-pakistan-immigration>
 studying in the UK. Immigration policy is also impactingthe recruitment of top 
academics 
<http://www.cambridge-news.co.uk/Cambridge/UKs-xenophobic-reputation-is-threat-to-Cambridge-Universitys-worldwide-reputation-20130516164128.htm>
 and researchers. France has capitalised on this and opened its borders to 
Indian studentsby easing visa restrictions 
<http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2013-07-05/europe/40390835_1_visa-norms-indian-students-uk>
.

Other countries looking to improve their standings in the rankings have also 
opened their borders. Countries such as Denmark and the Netherlands have 
changed their immigration laws to favour those who have graduated from top 
global universities. In points based systems, graduates from the highest ranked 
universities in the QS, Times and Shanghai Rankingsare awarded more points 
<http://www.nyidanmark.dk/en-us/coming_to_dk/work/greencard-scheme/>.

In a bid to make itself more attractive to international academics and 
expatriates, Russian authorities recently instituted a new legislation that will
recognise degrees from foreign universities 
<http://www.themoscowtimes.com/news/article/210-foreign-universities-diplomas-recognized/459356.html>
 that are among the top 300 inthese rankings. However, those students who have 
not graduated from top universities or from former Soviet republics (excluding 
Uzbekistan) will still need to undergo a lengthy certification process.

This development is in line with other initiatives the Russian government is 
introducing to improve its global competitiveness, such as sending more 
students abroad to study at elite universities. Russia is also taking steps to 
overhaul its own higher education sector as a result of its poor performance in 
the global university rankings. Following an independent audit of its 
universities,15 were selected to receive special grants 
<http://monitor.icef.com/2013/03/russia-begins-to-implement-new-higher-education-strategy/>
 to improve their compliance with rankings criteria.

Other countries such as Germany, France, Japan and Singapore have introduced 
similar programmes to improve their higher education systems and build 
world-class universities. In Asia in particular, the university rankings have 
created a 'reputation race', which sees both universities and governments 
closely monitoring the changing criteria for university rankings.

Making policy decisions based on university rankings is not a simple process. 
Global university rankings 
<http://www.eua.be/Libraries/Publications_homepage_list/EUA_Global_University_Rankings_and_Their_Impact_-_Report_II.sflb.ashx>
 have their limitations. The indicators and criteria used are not all 
encompassing and often measured via proxies. There is a greater overall 
emphasis on research than teaching, despite the context of rising tuition fees, 
when prospective students are looking for the complete package. This emphasis 
also puts universities that are more focused on the arts and humanities at a 
disadvantage due to the heavy weighting of citations to measure research 
influence.

Much of the controversy surrounding the university rankings concerns their 
methodologies 
<http://theconversation.com/dont-fall-into-the-rankings-trap-when-assessing-a-university-17124>
 and which is the most robust – or, conversely, most gameable. There are 
various shortcuts universities can take to improve their scores such as taking 
on part-time professors that are highly cited.

Ultimately, university rankings are a tool. When using a particular ranking, 
it is important to be aware of its limitations as well as its intended 
audience. While QS design their rankingsprimarily for students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/sep/10/qs-university-rankings-methodology-criteria>
, other rankings are aimed more overtly at university leadership. Any list only 
highlights a small percentage of the world's universities and as a result, many 
institutions, particularly in developing countries, are at a distinct 
disadvantage.

Like them or loathe them, however, university rankings seem to be here to 
stay. In Asia and Latin America, companies have begun to produceregional 
rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2012/may/29/top-50-asian-universities-2012>
. And with US president Barack Obama planning to create his own own 'Obamarank' 
league table of US universities in an attempt to nudge down the cost of college 
education, the global interest in ranking higher education only looks set to 
grow.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for thousands of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 