Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FidLG6jh23yE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FidLG6jh23yE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FidLG6jh23yE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It is a mark of where advertising budgets are these days that even 
Oscar-nominated directors can be persuaded to take a break from their day jobs 
to help flog sportswear. Alejandro González Iñárritu, previously responsible 
for Babel, Amores Perros and 21 Grams is unlikely to look back on Nike's new
Write the Future advert 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/media/video/2010/may/20/nike-world-cup-ad> as one of the 
high points of his career, but he can at least be satisfied that it is among 
the better World Cup offerings to hit our screens so far. Not thatthe 
competition has been stiff 
<http://www.footytube.com/video/pepsi-max-world-cup-2010-advert-37236>, mind.

Assembling a small horde of the most recognisable players taking part in this 
summer's tournament was always going to be the starting point for any such 
advert for Nike and on that front they certainly do not disappoint. Didier 
Drogba, Wayne Rooney, Cristiano Ronaldo, Fabio Cannavaro and Franck Ribéry all 
appear, as do a number of celebrities who won't be gracing South African 
pitches this summer, like Homer Simpson, Kobe Bryant and, erm, Ronaldinho. 
Always problematic when the sport refuses to co-operate with the product, eh 
lads?

The advert, a hefty three minutes long in its full version, steers us through 
a series of flashpoints in theoretical games in which the players show off 
their skills while fantasising about how glorious life will be if they triumph. 
It's every bit as glossy as you would expect, but there is a nice degree of 
self-awareness that prevents it going down the same route asCarlsberg's 
painfully overcooked offering 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/may/18/advert-review-carlsberg>
.

Rather than glorying in the hyperbole, Nike have the good sense to poke fun at 
it – highlighting the absurdity of stock values rising or crashing dependent on 
a country's footballing success and light-heartedly presenting a whole ward 
full of babies named after Wayne Rooney. Having wiled away more than one 
evening in front of Italian variety shows likeChiambretti Night 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IPnpX3pExkM&feature=related> in my lifetime, I 
would be lying if I said the image of Cannavaro being serenaded by a 
middle-aged man while surrounded by scantily-clad dancers didn't draw a snort 
of approval.

But whilst there are neat touches the advert does fall some way short of 
Nike's previous best efforts. It has neither the camp brilliance of Eric 
Cantona's "au revoir" beforefiring a shot through a devil's stomach 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BOM1k4oLGJU&feature=related>, nor the simple 
lightheartedness of Brazil's footballers enjoyinga kickabout in an airport 
terminal <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=munMGzeqCQE>. It doesn't even have 
Cantona talking nonsense ona boat that's about to sink 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PJnKObnmvnE>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FmunMGzeqCQE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FmunMGzeqCQE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FmunMGzeqCQE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Instead it feels a bit like something that has been done by the numbers, like 
everyone involved knew that what they were making was fine - unlikely to ruffle 
any feathers and certain, by dint of the players involved, to get plenty of 
coverage. The existence of articles like this one suggests they succeeded. And 
hey, at least itdoesn't have Terry Venables in it 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hjOvTArUqmQ>.

What they say: "Write the future."

What it means: If you've got the budget.
 