
The world’s largest collection of movie posters is expected to fetch at least 
$8m when it goes under the hammer in Los Angeles next month.

Collector Morris Everett Jr, from Cleveland, Ohio, is selling his treasure 
trove of more than 196,000 posters from more than 44,000 films. He claims it 
features artwork from almost every movie ever made since the dawn of American 
cinema in the early 1900s.

Highlights of the collection, which Everett began assembling in 1961, are a 
unique poster from the classic 1927 science fiction epic Metropolis, with an 
estimated value of $47,000, and original artwork from Hollywood golden age 
classics such as The Wizard of Oz, Breakfast at Tiffany’s and Gone with the 
Wind.

“I come from a collecting family and that was where my collection started,” 
Everett toldMail Online 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2839605/World-s-largest-collection-movie-posters-fetch-8M-auction.html?ITO=1490&ns_mchannel=rss&ns_campaign=1490>
. “I bought a collection of 6,000 pieces in the late 1960s and from then on I 
started buying up other people’s collections. It became my goal to collect a 
poster from every single English-speaking film ever made.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fworlds-biggest-film-poster-collection-auction-everett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416480932767%2F127f8bb8-7048-4667-88a3-2f1c07f4aff8-1020x796.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World's%20biggest%20film%20poster%20auction%20expected%20to%20top%20%248m&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fworlds-biggest-film-poster-collection-auction-everett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%27s%20biggest%20film%20poster%20auction%20expected%20to%20top%20%248m&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fworlds-biggest-film-poster-collection-auction-everett%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416480932767%2F127f8bb8-7048-4667-88a3-2f1c07f4aff8-1020x796.jpeg>
 The classic romance Casablanca (1942), starring Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid 
Bergman. Photograph: Morris Everett Jr collection 
“There were only two people in the world at the time collecting posters from 
every single title. They are both now dead and I acquired both their 
collections. There’s no other collection in the world that even comes close to 
mine in terms of its comprehensiveness, covering movie posters from 1907 right 
up to the present day.

“I want to see the collection go to a good home while I am living and save my 
family the trouble of dealing with 196,000 posters when I’m gone.

“It will be a strange feeling not owning it any more but at the same time 
there will be a small sense of relief at making life a little more simple.”

Joe Maddalena, owner of auction house Profiles in History, added: “The Morris 
Everett Jr Collection is the most substantial and significant vintage movie 
collection in the world and will feature several one-of-a-kind treasures never 
before offered to the collecting public. The items exemplify classic Hollywood, 
reflecting the true lure of Hollywood’s golden age.”

The auction is due to be held on 17 December 
<https://www.profilesinhistory.com/auctions/morris-everett-jr-collection/>. 
 