
Sir Martin Sorrell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-martin-sorrell>, the 
chief executive of WPP, has said businesses continue to underestimate the 
importance the Edward Snowden's NSA electronic surveillance revelations have 
had on consumer attitudes to privacy and security.

Sorrell, speaking at the Ad Week Europe conference in London on Monday, said 
the global advertising and marketing industry had failed to grasp the 
importance of the ramifications of the revelations to their clients.

"People understate the importance of Snowden and NSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa>," he said. "[They] underestimate the 
impact on consumers, and if you take the hacking going on – credit card 
information, etc – there are two things [going on]. One is privacy and the 
other is security or secrecy. If you solve the security thing – a hacker-proof 
system, which may be an oxymoron – if you can solve the safety issue, the 
privacy issue falls away."

Sorrell made the comments while in conversation with Robert Thomson, the chief 
executive of Wall Street Journal and Times publisher News Corp, who said that 
the company has been examining its advertising proposition to tighten security 
and privacy.

"The NSA controversy has heightened awareness of [privacy and security]," he 
said. "Being very transparent with clients, readers, customers about the 
[browsing] experience they are having and consequences of it.

"We have been removing third-party networks for our sites, those ads are also 
data-gathering mechanisms. We want to be more respectful of privacy and also 
want to monetise our audiences our way. Being more focused on privacy is not 
bad for business, it can be good."

Sorrell highlighted the importance of the privacy and security issue to global 
marketing by citingWPP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wppgroup> as an 
example: one-quarter of Sorrell's business, $5bn a year, comes from data and 
research services.

"We underestimate the importance of this, it worries me," he said. "Having 
access to data … is critically important. My point is that it is very important 
– people are underestimating its significance among consumers."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian> 
 