
Can Britlit be said to exist? Britart  
<http://the-artists.org/artistsbymovement/BritArt>is an accepted term, and 
Damien Hirst, Tracey Emin, Gillian Wearing et al were happy to be known as 
YBAs, if only for the publicity it brought them. But YBWs? Or OBWs? Or even 
M-ABWs? They're harder to imagine. Writers living in northern and western parts 
of our archipelago identify themselves as Scottish or Welsh (or Cornish), not 
British. The term is also unacceptable to Catholics in or from Northern 
Ireland: "British, no, the name's not right," Seamus Heaney politely demurred, 
when Andrew Motion and I included him inThe Penguin Book of Contemporary 
British Poetry 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Penguin_Book_of_Contemporary_British_Poetry> 
30 years ago. Most English writers, meanwhile, use the word British at best 
half-heartedly: it sounds inclusive – free of master-race arrogance, antagonism 
towards Celts or National Front jingoism – but it doesn't describe what we 
think we are or where we come from.

Britishness, in short, is a troublesome concept. But for a couple of weeks 
this summer, any troubles will be packed up in a red, white and blue kit bag as 
athletes from England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland smilingly compete 
under a common flag. Alongside the events in the sporting arena, there'll also 
be the Cultural Olympiad, with a range of plays, concerts, exhibitions and 
readings. Until 1948, cultural olympiads used to be competitive, with poets, 
musicians, artists and architects vying for gold (in that year Finland topped 
the medals table). Nowadays the emphasis is on global togetherness. Still, 
attention inevitably focuses on the host nation's artistic achievement. For the 
next few months we're under the spotlight. What do we amount to? And what makes 
our culture quintessentially British?

If the Hockney and Hirst exhibitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jan/03/david-hockney-damien-hirst-rival-exhibitions>
 are the British art world's contribution to 2012, in literature it's the 
exhibition being mounted at the British Library.Writing Britain: Wastelands to 
Wonderlands <http://www.bl.uk/writingbritain> will display 150 works spanning 
1,000 years – books, manuscripts, letters, sound recordings, videos, photos, 
maps, drawings. The exhibition doesn't pretend to be linear or completist – 150 
items in a single room cannot allow for a comprehensive history of our 
literature. But the hope is that the show will allow visitors "to read between 
the lines of great works of English literature, discovering the secrets and 
stories surrounding the works' creation".

There's already a little slippage there, with "English literature" used as a 
synonym for writing from Britain. But the curators, headed by Jamie Andrews, 
are pretty relaxed about this. National boundaries and ethnic origins aren't 
the point. There's room for Yeats, Joyce and Heaney here, as well as for 
Conrad, Verne, Poe and TS Eliot. The focus is on writing in English from or 
about these islands that evokes a sense of place: the literature of landscape. 
By putting writers from different eras in surprising conjunction, the 
exhibition highlights some revealing continuities in how our islands have been 
portrayed.

When politicians come up with quotes that effuse patriotic sentiment, they 
invariably cut them short, so as to lose the sting in the tail. The dying John 
O'Gaunt in Shakespeare'sRichard II is one of their favourites:

This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle, 
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, 
This other Eden, demi-paradise, 
This fortress built by Nature for herself 
Against infection and the hand of war,
This happy breed of men, this little world, 
This precious stone set in the silver sea, 
Which serves it in the office of a wall, 
Or as a moat defensive to a house, 
Against the envy of less happier lands,
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England …

Stirring stuff. But what Gaunt goes on to say is often forgotten – that this 
glorious England "is now leas'd out … like to a tenement or pelting farm" and 
"bound in with shame, / with inky blots and rotten parchment bonds". InDickens's
Our Mutual Friend, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/23/charles-dickens-favourite-mutual-friend>
 xenophobic triumphalism is similarly undermined through the figure of Podsnap. 
"No Other Country is so Favoured as This Country," he boasts to a Frenchman. 
"This Island was Blest, Sir, to the Direct Exclusion of such Other Countries as 
– as there may happen to be." Podsnap is an absurd figure, whose blindness to 
the failings of his country affords Dickens a lot of fun.

Angela Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/angelacarter> hankered "to 
live in a place that does not now, nor ever has had, the consciousness that it 
has been singled out for a special fate". But she was right to suspect that 
such a place doesn't exist. Every country has its myth of exceptionalism, and 
national character is one way of locating it. Podsnap talks of "a modesty, an 
independence, a responsibility, a repose", Orwell of "decency", others of 
civility and fair play. Others again mention our gentle, stoic defeatedness: 
"Hanging on in quiet desperation is the English way," as Larkin might have put 
it if Pink Floyd hadn't got there first. But the British can also be bellicose 
– John Bullish – and other far from flattering qualities have been assigned to 
the national character ("a gluttonous race … lumbering about in pot-bellied 
equanimity", said Carlyle). We're one thing but also the opposite. Uncertainty 
about what it means to be British is part of what Britishness means.

On the face of it, landscape is a less contentious means of definition, since 
our islands have distinct and indisputable features. But as well as large 
differences in climate and geography, there are politico-economic divisions 
too: Hull and Halifax have no more in common with the Highlands than they do 
with the Home Counties. When, in 1938, Orwell returned from Spain to the south 
of England ("probably the sleekest landscape in the world"), he was both moved 
by and contemptuous of the prettiness: "The industrial towns were far away, a 
smudge of smoke and misery hidden by the curve of the earth's surface. Down 
here it was still the England I had known in my childhood: the railway cuttings 
smothered in wild flowers, the deep meadows where great shining horses browse 
and meditate, the slow-moving streams bordered by willows, the green bosoms of 
the elms, the larkspurs in the cottage gardens." Only bombs could shatter "the 
deep, deep sleep of England", he thought, and shortly afterwards they did.

Orwell tries to resist the English pastoral idyll because he thinks it unfair 
to the rest of the country. John Clare feels no such awkwardness, only delight: 
"I love to peep out on a summer's morn / Just as the scouting rabbit seeks her 
shed". Edward Thomas delights in pastoralism too: when his express train pulls 
up at Adlestrop, he sees willows, willowherb and grass, and hears all the birds 
of Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire sing – a transcendent moment before the 
train moves on. "Lovely the woods, waters, meadows, combes, vales, / All the 
air things wear that build this world of Wales," singsGerard Manley Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gerard-manley-hopkins>, whose poems in 
praise of the "sweet especial rural scene" urge us to enjoy it while we 
can: "Have, get, before it cloy, / Before it cloud".

The British invariably perceive the countryside as being under threat, whether 
from bombs, developers, tourism, climate change or the passage of time. This 
makes our literature nostalgic – a land of lost content. There are legends of 
Arcadian plenitude – of Albion, Mercia, Elmet; of life under the greenwood 
tree, or in the highlands before the clearances, or in green valleys before the 
coming of industry; of shepherds piping to their flocks and milkmaids dancing 
in the dew; of Sir Gawain, King Arthur, John Barleycorn, Robin Hood, Rob Roy 
and (from the WelshMabinogion) Math, son of Mathonwy, who liked to rest his 
feet in the lap of a virgin. The gods of the earth seem to be extinct but then 
pop up again, rudely healthy and full of folk wisdom.Edward Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edward-thomas> meets one such man at 
hawthorn time in Wiltshire and is told his many different names:

The man you saw – Lob-lie-by-the- fire, Jack Cade,
Jack Smith, Jack Moon, poor Jack of every trade,
Young Jack, or old Jack, or Jack What-d'ye-call,
Jack-in-the-hedge, or Robin-run-by- the-wall,
Robin Hood, Ragged Robin, lazy Bob,
One of the lords of No Man's Land, good Lob, –
Although he was seen dying at Waterloo,
Hastings, Agincourt, and Sedgemoor too,
Lives yet. He never will admit he is dead.

He still won't admit it: in his latest incarnation he appears as the 
charismatic Johnny (Rooster) Byron inJez Butterworth's play Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2011/nov/02/jez-butterworth-jerusalem-video-interview>
.

The question for William Blake was whether Jerusalem could be built among dark 
satanic mills. The challenge for Rooster is how to stop the local council 
removing his caravan from its sylvan shade. Rural dwellers are always up 
against it, and so are rural writers, who by setting their work in the 
countryside are suspected of being out of touch with the realities of modern 
life. Books set on farms face a particularly stern test: anyone who has read
Stella Gibbons'sCold Comfort Farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/29/christmas-cold-comfort-stella-gibbons-review>
 may feel a giggle coming on. ButTed Hughes's Moortown Diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/dec/03/poetry.tedhughes> contains some 
of his best work. AndNell Leyshon's forthcoming novel, The Colour of Milk 
<http://www.newbooksmag.com/blog/post133-10149/articles.php>, narrated by a 
farmer's daughter in the 19th century, shows there's life in the genre still.

One landscape all four British nations have in common (as landlocked nations 
don't) is the seaside.Writing Britain gives it a fair showing, with Jane 
Austen, Matthew Arnold, Alan Bennett, John Fowles,Graham Greene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/grahamgreene>, Ian McEwan and Daljit Nagra (
Look We Have Coming to Dover!). Rivers meander through as well – George Eliot's 
Floss, Alice Oswald's Dart, everybody's Thames – and in the mountains there are 
glimpses of the Romantic sublime. But the literature of towns and cities looms 
largest, which reflects where the majority of the population has lived for the 
last two centuries. Dickens, Elizabeth Gaskell, Arnold Bennett, DH Lawrence, 
Alan Sillitoe: this is gritlit as much as it is Britlit, the blackened faces of 
miners, chimney sweeps and factory hands stirring writers, by the fireside, to 
complain on their behalf.

Homogenisation and ugliness in town planning – the urban equivalent of the 
rape of the countryside – are another source of complaint. "The jail might have 
been the infirmary, the infirmary might have been the jail, the town-hall might 
have been either, or both, or anything else", Dickens writes of Coketown, and a 
century later Keith Waterhouse's Billy Liar is similarly dismayed by 
Stradhoughton, which is "exactly like any other High Street in Great Britain. 
Woolworth's looked like Woolworth's, the Odeon looked like the Odeon, and the 
Stradhoughton Echo's [office] looked like a public lavatory in honest native 
white tile." Dismayed by the ugly advance of industry and the money-grubbing 
masses, Birkin, inLawrence's The Rainbow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/mar/19/rainbow-lawrence-rachel-cusk-rereading>
, dreams of living "in the chinks".

The chinks are always there, waiting to be discovered, and one likeable and 
perhaps defining aspect of Britishness is a capacity to find poetry in unlikely 
places. The Auden generation of the 1930s found it in pylons, the Northern 
Irish poet Derek Mahon found it in a disused shed in Co Wexford, and his 
predecessor Patrick Kavanagh found it, variously, in the green waters of a 
canal, "the functional ward / Of a chest hospital" and "the inexhaustible 
adventure of a gravelled yard". Thomas Gray got there before all of them with 
his elegy in a country churchyard, which speaks from an out-of-the-way spot in 
praise of overlooked lives.

The out-of-the-way and overlooked are the subject of Paul Farley and Michael 
Symmons Roberts's book of last year,Edgelands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/19/edgelands-farley-symmons-roberts-review>
, which escapes "the duality of rural and urban landscape writing, to explore 
[the] unobserved parts of our shaped landscape" – by which they mean (among 
other things) landfill sites, container yards, sewage works, power stations and 
radio masts. The notion of edgelands has left its mark on the British Library 
exhibition. So have the journeys, on foot, that Iain Sinclair, Robert 
Macfarlane and Will Self (among others) have undertaken to places where people 
aren't expected to walk – in Sinclair's case, for his bookLondon Orbital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/sep/21/featuresreviews.guardianreview6>
, round the M25. The French situationistGuy Debord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/mar/18/guy-debord-situationist-international>
 is said to be the father of psychogeography, but the BL exhibits put the art 
of walking in a context that's earlier and closer to home, one that stretches 
from John Gay and William Blake to Virginia Woolf, whose little-known book
Street Haunting 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/features/literary-haunts-virginias-london-walks-2254552.html>
 describes an ambling journey through London undertaken on the flimsy pretext 
of buying a pencil.

Woolf would probably have denied that her ambling, or indeed anything else she 
did, was connected to her being British. "As a woman, I have no country," she 
once said. "As a woman I want no country. As a woman, my country is the whole 
world." But even the most global-minded of writers are sentimentally attached 
to particular places. And nowhere is quite as anonymous as it first seems. 
That's true, especially, of the suburbs, traditionally caricatured as a 
non-place for non-U people – anodyne, featureless, lowbrow, conformist – but 
now recognised as somewhere writers can live without feeling that they've sold 
out. Actually, writers have always lived in the suburbs, and the BL exhibition 
mounts a strong team, fromThe Smiths of Surbiton to the Grossmiths of Upper 
Holloway, from Betjeman's Metroland to Ballard's Shepperton, and from 
Galsworthy and Chesterton to Hanif Kureishi.

In Ballard's later fiction, the terrain is more post-modern than suburban, 
consisting of shopping malls, flyovers, gated communities, airport terminals 
and underpasses. But living in Shepperton (just off the M3) was as much a spur 
to his imagination as growing up in Shanghai. One of the prize exhibits in the 
BL exhibition is the manuscript ofCrash. The opening page is an angry mess of 
loops, scrawls, arrows, additions, crossings out and "STET"s, with only the 
first sentence and one later phrase ("the erotic tenderness of a long-separated 
lover") surviving intact. If you didn't know that the novel was about carnage 
anddisjecta membra, you might guess.

Ballard liked Shepperton <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O9eGWMcvEUY> because 
no one invaded his space. Larkin, similarly, said the advantage of living in 
Hull was that when American research students looked at train timetables and 
realised how difficult it was to get there, they decided to bother some other 
poet instead. But literary pilgrims aren't easily discouraged. And a writer 
doesn't have to be dead to become part of the heritage industry. Ted Hughes's 
privacy was invaded by Plath fans, who'd gawp into his garden in Devon. 
Wordsworth suffered similarly at Rydal Mount: on holiday in the Lakes, the 
11-year-old John Ruskin and his parents went to chapel in Rydal so as to catch 
a glimpse of the great man. This was one reason why Wordsworth opposed the 
building of the Kendal and Windermere Railway: among the sights that the 
tourist hordes would have access to was him. In 1844, he wrote to Gladstone of 
his "consternation" at the proposed branch line, feeling it would "destroy the 
staple of the Country … prove subversive of its quiet, and be highly injurious 
to its morals". He also wrote a poem calling on Nature to rise up and protest:

Is then no nook of English ground secure
From rash assault? … if human hearts be dead,
Speak, passing winds; ye torrents, with your strong
And constant voice, protest against the wrong.

Not all writers are as nimbyist as Wordsworth. The Brontë sisters bought 
shares in the railways (Branwell even worked on them) andEliot, in Middlemarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/04/fiction.asbyatt>, while 
sympathising with the suspicion that all innovation is "likely to be against 
the poor man", lets Caleb put the case for railways to the local rustic labour 
force: "Somebody told you the railroad was a bad thing. That was a lie. It may 
do a bit of harm here and there, to this and to that; and so does the sun in 
heaven. But the railway's a good thing."

Such arguments for and against continue to this day: high-speed rail links, 
third runways, new motorway links – plus ça change, or rather the one thing 
that never changes is the fear that change will violate the land. Every nation 
has its conservationists, not to be confused with Conservatives. But perhaps 
the fear of what might be lost by change is more pronounced in British 
literature because our history goes back so far: newer nations have less of a 
past to be protective of, just as the young have less to be elegiac about than 
the old.

It's striking how many British writers seem to feel that some irrevocable loss 
– the end of history – has happened in their own lifetime. "The last days of my 
childhood were also the last days of the village," Laurie Lee writes in the 
final chapter ofCider with Rosie. "I belonged to that generation which saw, by 
chance, the end of a thousand years' life." Hughes wrote something similar to 
the photographerFay Godwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jan/08/margaret-drabble-fay-godwin>
, describing how during his childhood in the industrial north "the whole region 
just fell to bits, the buildings collapsed, the walls collapsed, the chapels 
were sold for scrap and demolished, likewise the mills … I realise now I was 
living in the last days of Pompeii." His hope was that her photos, along with 
his poems, might capture "the way the primeval reality of the region is taking 
over again from the mills, chapels, farms, pubs, bowling greens and 
reservoirs". The book they collaborated on,Remains of Elmet 
<http://www.faber.co.uk/work/remains-of-elmet/9780571278763/>, did just that:

Everything became very quiet.

The hills were commandeered
For gravemounds.

The towns and villages were sacked.

Everything fell wetly to bits …

Hughes regarded the first world war as a turning point in his valley, his 
country and its literature. Larkin said the same: "Never such innocence again." 
Having previously described himself as "⅝Welsh", Edward Thomas told a friend on 
the outbreak of war "I am slowly growing into a conscious Englishman". Just as 
the flower of the nation's youth died in the trenches, so a "native line" of 
poetry associated with Thomas perished with the arrival of modernism, whose 
chief practitioners came from Europe and America. Or so it was claimed in the 
1950s, by a Movement generation hostile to the influx of foreigners. Today, 
that influx is seen as a shot in the arm for indigenous literature – a 
revitalisation through the absorption of otherness. Later arrivals from the 
Caribbean, Africa and Asia had the same positive effect, enlarging and 
enriching the canon. Those of black or mixed heritage are still more prevalent 
on playing fields than on the page but our literary landscape would be 
unrecognisable without them, as theBritish Library 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/british-library> exhibition is careful to 
acknowledge.

In the end, all landscapes in literature, however well known to or diligently 
researched by the author, are invented landscapes. Their hills and valleys may 
have a basis in fact, but the novelist adds his own gradients. Hardy's Wessex – 
"a partly real, partly dream country", as he called it – is a good example. 
UntilFar From the Madding Crowd (1874), so he claims in a later preface to the 
novel, "it had never been heard of in fiction and current speech, if at all, 
and the expression 'a Wessex peasant' or 'a Wessex custom' would theretofore 
have been taken to refer to nothing later in date than the Norman conquest … 
The dream country has, by degrees, solidified into a utilitarian region which 
people can go to, take a house in, and write to the papers from. But I ask all 
good and idealistic readers to forget this, and to refuse steadfastly to 
believe that there are any inhabitants of a Victorian Wessex outside these 
volumes." His readers paid no heed. They still pay no heed.Hardy's Wessex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/jun/06/thomas-hardy-dorset-walking-guide>
 is an essential part of the literary tourist trail, along with theBrontës' 
Haworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/09/charlotte-bronte-jane-eyre>, 
Bram Stoker's Whitby,Robert Louis Stevenson's Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2011/aug/19/guardian-books-podcast-gothic-edinburgh>
,Dylan Thomas's Laugharne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2008/jun/15/culturaltrips.wales>, and 
platform 9¾ at JK Rowling's King's Cross.

Three years ago, in the Observer, the critic Kate Kellaway helpfully drew up a 
literary map of Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/28/1>, 
based on the places featured in contemporary fiction. Like the 
psychogeographers, our novelists were going for places not generally featured 
in books, she found, including Peterborough (Marina Lewycka's A Short History 
of Tractors in Ukrainian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/mar/19/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
) and Swindon (Mark Haddon's The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/apr/11/booksforchildrenandteenagers.features3>
). Sheffield (Lesley Glaister, Margaret Drabble, Philip Hensher), Birmingham 
(David Lodge, Jim Crace, Jonathan Coe) and Walberswick/Southwold (PD James, 
Julie Myerson, Esther Freud) also showed up strongly. As for London's fiction, 
Hampstead had ceded precedence to Highbury, Brockley, Willesden Green and other 
once-unfashionable areas.

Now the British Library, too, is planning a literary map of our landscape, 
with books of all ages and genres eligible for inclusion. The map will form 
part of the exhibition, and also feature on a website, where readers will be 
invited to add to it by nominating books associated with particular places. 
Every town in the British Isles has its scribblers, it's often claimed. Once 
the little flags have been put out to map incidences of literary activity, 
we'll discover if that's true.

Thirty years ago Angela Carter wrote a wonderful essay about how Empire Day 
(long gone now) used to be celebrated at her south London primary school, to 
the tune of "There'll always be an England". This taught her, she said, that 
"the idea of Britain was an English invention … Great Britain = Greater 
England. The greedy flag swallowed up its constituent parts." Soon one of those 
parts, Scotland, may extricate itself to become independent. Then the 
long-predicted break-up of Britain will finally happen and English poets can 
call themselves English again, as Tennyson, Housman, Sassoon, Auden and 
Betjeman did. In the meantime, there's the British Library exhibition to remind 
us what Little England and Outer Britain have in common – and what they don't.
 