
We moved to this flat in 1971 when Notting Hill Gate was a bit run down and 
full of bedsitters. Now prices have rocketed, but we like it and won't move. 
The desk was a dining-room table, which is spacious and what a writer wants. 
The typewriter might not be a word processor, but it can erase, which is all I 
need. I've written in my diary every day for the past 10 years.

On the diary is a horseshoe used as a paperweight, made by my grandfather, who 
was a farrier in Nottinghamshire. He's the main character in my novel A Man of 
His Time (2004). The horseshoe itself is uneven, specially made to fit a lame 
horse. When my mother was handing them down I said that's the one I want, and 
it's brought me a great deal of luck.

Alongside it is a communications receiver (made in Matlock) and below it the 
kind of wireless operator's Morse key I used in the RAF. I keep up my skill 
with Morse by taking messages from the radio now and again. It's a kind of 
therapy. When I can't write I tap out a few words to get me going, or sometimes 
as a plea to the gods to send another poem or novel.

Next to the steps is a bottle of Putinka - little Putin - vodka I picked up in 
Russia in 2005. My new book is a record of travels there from the 1960s, the 
bottle to remind me I'll need to be at the launch in October. Elsewhere on the 
shelves is my RAF cap badge, which gets a polish when I think of it, a model 
typewriter, a small library of books about Nottingham and a 22-volume Jewish 
encyclopedia which is wonderful, but whenever I look up one thing, I'm always 
sidetracked into reading about something else.

I'm usually at my desk by 9.30am. I have an hour's sleep in the afternoon and 
a couple of vodkas with supper, but I'm often still there at 10.30pm. I can't 
stand Radio 4, but have Radio 3 on most of the time. Sometimes I might just put 
in a comma in the morning, and take it out again at night. But that's the way 
it goes.
 