
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie

Five Star Billionaire by Tash Aw (Fourth Estate) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007494156>
 is a brilliant, sprawling, layered and unsentimental portrayal of contemporary 
China. It made me think and laugh. I also loveDave Eggers' The Circle (Hamish 
Hamilton) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241146484>
, which is a sharp-eyed and funny satire about the obsession with "sharing" our 
lives through technology. It's convincing and a little creepy.

William Boyd
 Breakfast with Lucien Photograph: PA 
By strange coincidence two of the most intriguing art books I read this year 
had the word "Breakfast" in their titles. They wereBreakfast with Lucian by 
Geordie Greig (Jonathan Cape) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224096850>
 andBreakfast at Sotheby's by Philip Hook (Particular) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846146251>
. Greig's fascinating, intimate biography of Lucian Freud was a revelation. 
Every question I had about Freud – from the aesthetic to the intrusively 
gossipy – was answered with great candour and judiciousness. Hook's view of the 
art world is that of the professional auctioneer. In an A-Z format, it is an 
entire art education contained in under 350 pages. Wry, dry and completely 
beguiling.

Bill Bryson

The Compatibility Gene by Daniel M Davis (Allen Lane) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846145148>
 is an elegantly written, unexpectedly gripping account of how scientists 
painstakingly unravelled the way in which a small group of genes (known as MHC 
genes) crucially influence, and unexpectedly interconnect, various aspects of 
our lives, from how well we fight off infection to how skilfully we find a 
mate. Lab work has rarely been made to seem more interesting or heroic. But my 
absolute book of the year is Philip Davies's hefty, gorgeousLondon: Hidden 
Interiors(English Heritage/Atlantic Publishing) 
<http://www.english-heritageshop.org.uk/mall/productpage.cfm/EnglishHeritage/_19279/-/London%20Hidden%20Interiors>
, which explores 180 fabulous London interior spaces that most people know 
nothing about, fromGeorge Gilbert Scott's wondrous chapel at King's College 
<http://www.victorianweb.org/art/architecture/scott/10.html> to L Manze's eel, 
pie and mash shop in Walthamstow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/30/walthamstow-pie-mash-shop-listed-l-manze>
. It is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Derek Randall and worth 
every penny of its £40 price.

Eleanor Catton 

My discovery of the year was Eimear McBride's debut novel A Girl Is a 
Half-Formed Thing(Galley Beggar Press) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780957185326>
: in style, very similar to Faulkner'sThe Sound and the Fury, but the broken 
ellipses never feel like a gimmick or a game. I was utterly devastated byColin 
McAdam'sA Beautiful Truth (Granta) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847088475>
, and utterly delighted byElizabeth Knox's sly and ingenious Mortal Fire 
(Farrar Straus Giroux) 
<http://www.amazon.com/Mortal-Fire-Elizabeth-Knox/dp/0374388296>. My favourite 
novel for children published this year was the marvellously funny and inventive
Heap House(Hot Key) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781471401565>
, written and illustrated by Edward Carey.

Shami Chakrabarti
 Return of a King 
Helping to judge this year's Samuel Johnson prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/04/samuel-johnson-prize-non-fiction-shortlist>
 meant getting stuck into some serious non-fiction. The six books that made the 
shortlist –Empires of the Dead (David Crane, William Collins), Return of a King 
(William Dalrymple, Bloomsbury) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408818305>
,A Sting in the Tale (Dave Goulson, Jonathan Cape) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224096898>
,Under Another Sky (Charlotte Higgins, Jonathan Cape) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224090896>
,The Pike (Lucy Hughes-Hallett, Fourth Estate) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007213955>
andMargaret Thatcher (Charles Moore, Allen Lane)  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780713992823>
– are among my favourites from 2013.Dalrymple's masterful retelling of the 
first Afghan war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/23/dalrymple-return-king-athill-review>
 had an eerie modern-day relevance, whileHughes-Hallett's portrayal of the 
fascist poet Gabriele D'Annunzio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/06/lucy-hughes-hallett-prize-biography-interview>
 was a sombre reminder of the perils of political extremism. On a completely 
contrary note, Goulson's case for the importance of bumblebees will live long 
in my memory for its sheer passion and scientific detail.

Sarah Churchwell

Janet Malcolm's Forty-One False Starts (Granta) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847088468>
 provides a masterclass on the art of the essay from one of its most formidable 
living practitioners – often, as with the title essay, by sharing object 
lessons in failure. These occasional pieces offer glimpses into the creative 
process, the writer's constant search for structure, order and consonance. Even 
when individual essays did not live up to Malcolm's rigorous standards, the 
collection as a whole shows how connections emerge from the workings of one 
memorably searching, restless, ruthless mind.

Jim Crace
 Birds & People 
The four non-fiction books I most valued this year have an unusual strength 
and depth in common; the single themes they profess to focus on are also the 
Trojan horses through which their writers smuggle in a whole wide world of 
instruction, knowledge and contemporary significance. They are:Spillover, David 
Quammen 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847920102>
's investigation of animal-to-human viruses (Vintage);Falling Upwards (Harper 
Collins), Richard Holmes 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007481064>
's history of ballooning;The Searchers (Bloomsbury), Glenn Frankel 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2013/jul/11/searchers-implacable-texas/>
's account of the 1836 abduction by Comanches of Cynthia Ann Parker and its 
unending aftermath; and Mark Cocker's loving and magisterial Birds and People 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224081740>
(Jonathan Cape).

Roddy Doyle

George Saunders's collection of stories, Tenth of December  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408837344>
(Bloomsbury), is spectacularly good. The stories are clever and moving, and the 
title story is the best piece of fiction I've read this year.The Searchers, by 
Glenn Frankel, is about the stories behind the story that became the classic 
John Ford film. It's a history of America, an exploration of racial 
intolerance, an account of how, and why, real events can become legends. It's 
also hugely entertaining – as well as huge. My favourite book this year is Paul 
Morley'sThe North (And Almost Everything in It) (Bloomsbury) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780747578161>
. History told backwards, a memoir, a love letter to Liverpool, several to 
Manchester; the book pushed me to go to the Lowry exhibition at the Tate and 
made me listen again to George Formby and the Buzzcocks. The book filled my 
head. It was much too long and occasionally irritating, but when I got to the 
end I wished there'd been more of it.

Richard Ford

James Salter's novel All That Is 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447238249>
 (Picador). Not in my (admittedly failing) memory have I read a novel that, at 
its crucialest moment, made me just stand straight up out of my chair and have 
to walk around the room for several minutes. Laid into the customary Salterish 
verbal exquisiteness and vivid intelligence is such remarkable audacity and 
dark-hued verve about us poor humans. It's a great novel.

Jonathan Franzen
 Command and Control 
My vote is for Eric Schlosser's Command and Control (Allen Lane) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846141485>
. Do you really want to read about the thermonuclear warheads that are still 
aimed at the city where you live? Do you really need to know about the 
appalling security issues that have dogged nuclear weapons in the 70 years 
since their invention? Yes, you do. Schlosser's book reads like a thriller, but 
it's masterfully even-handed, well researched, and well organised. Either he's 
a natural genius at integrating massive amounts of complex information, or he 
worked like a dog to write this book. You wouldn't think the prospect of 
nuclear apocalypse would make for a reading treat, but in Schlosser's hands it 
does.

Antonia Fraser

The Poets' Daughters by Katie Waldegrave (Hutchinson) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780091931124>
 is an engrossing study of Dora Wordsworth and Sara Coleridge. A double 
biography is an intricate pattern to achieve, but Waldegrave brings it off 
triumphantly: she also brings compassion as well as scholarship to her aid, so 
that at times the story is almost unbearably moving. After reading this book, I 
went right back to the paternal poetry and read it with fresh eyes. Olivier by 
Philip Ziegler (MacLehose Press) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857051196>
, published appropriately enough as the National Theatre celebrates its 50th 
anniversary, is another narrative that sweeps you along. While in no sense a 
hagiography – there is plenty of discreet criticism when necessary – it 
enriched my sense of this amazing multi-faceted, multi-talented man. When I 
watchHenry V, for the umpteenth time, I shall gaze into those brilliant 
enigmatic eyes with even more awe, and a certain amount of apprehension.

Stephen Frears

Best read of the year was Into the Silence (Vintage), Wade Davis 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099563839>
's account of the three unsuccessful Everest expeditions, through the back door 
of Tibet, culminating in the death of George Mallory in 1924. Men from the 
first world war showing endurance and a capacity for suffering beyond my 
comprehension. Maybe the prime minister should read it before he makes an idiot 
of himself. Oh andLove, Nina by Nina Stibbe (Viking) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780670922765>
. But I would say that since it's about my ex‑wife and our children. Letters 
from their Leicester nanny. Very funny and sharp.

Malcolm Gladwell 
 Charles Belfoure Photograph: pa 
I read so many books this year that I loved – Jeremy Adelman's biography of 
Albert O Hirschman,Worldly Philosopher  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780691155678>
(Princeton University Press),David Epstein's The Sports Gene (Yellow Jersey) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224091619>
, andJonathan Dee's magnificent A Thousand Pardons 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781472108333>
 (Corsair) – but my favourite was a novel I picked up entirely randomly, in an 
airport bookstore:The Paris Architect by Charles Belfoure (Sourcebooks Landmark)
 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781402284311>
. It is a beautiful and elegant account of an ordinary man's unexpected and 
reluctant descent into heroism during the second world war. I have no idea who 
Belfoure is, but he needs to write another book, now!

John Gray

Adam Phillips' One Way and Another: New and Selected Essays 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241145807>
(Hamish Hamilton). Writing of Ford Madox Ford's hero Tietjens inParade's End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/24/julian-barnes-parades-end-ford-madox-ford>
, who in the middle of a conversation suddenly wondered if he was in fact the 
father of his child but "proved his reputation for sanity" by going on talking 
without any sign of distress, Phillips comments: "As though sanity for this 
Englishman was about being apparently undisturbed by one's most disturbing 
thoughts." Witty and somehow liberating, it's a comment that could only come 
from Phillips. Covering a wide variety of topics – "On Being Bored", "First 
Hates", "On Success" and "The Uses of Forgetting" are just a few – these short 
pieces from the psychotherapist and critic will confirm him as the best living 
essayist writing in English.

Mark Haddon

The Great War edited by Mark Holborn, text by Hilary Roberts (Jonathan Cape) 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/book/227916/the-great-war-by-mark-holborn-and-hilary-roberts>
. A collection of photographs from the vast holdings of the Imperial War 
Museums. I have never seen or read anything that brings the first world 
war quite so vividly alive. Some of the events of 1914-1918 have been told and 
retold so many times that the whole conflict has, for many people, acquired an 
obscuring antique patina. This book strips it all away. It will make me seem a 
fool, perhaps, but I kept turning pages and thinking, my God, these are real 
people. These things actually happened.

Mohsin Hamid
 Basti 
Those unfamiliar with the American short-form master George Saunders should go 
out immediately and pick up a copy of his latest story collection,Tenth of 
December 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408837344>
. Wow. Sharp and fun. Also, we should all be grateful for the New York Review 
Books Classics series, which this year has brought us Frances Pritchett's 
English translation ofIntizar Husain's famous Urdu novel, Basti 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781590175828>
. Husain was nominated for the 2013 Man Booker International prize, and this, 
his best‑known work, deserves a UK publisher.

Robert Harris

In 1983, the 50-year lease on a safe deposit box on the island of Mallorca 
expired. It was opened and found to contain tens of thousands of pages of the 
diary of a minor German aristocrat, Count Harry Kessler (1868-1937), covering 
the years from 1880 to 1918. These have now been meticulously translated and 
edited byLaird M Easton, and the result is Journey to the Abyss 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/book/92043/journey-to-the-abyss-by-harry-kessler> 
(Vintage), a 900-page marvel. Kessler, an aesthete and amateur diplomat, 
travelled relentlessly between Paris, Berlin and London before the first world 
war and the list of his friends and acquaintances, each vividly described, is 
staggering: Bonnard, Cocteau, Nijinsky, Stravinsky, Diaghilev, Ravel, Rodin, 
Renoir, Gide, Monet, Mahler, Matissee, William Morris, Richard Strauss, 
Strindberg, Rilke, Verlaine, George Bernard Shaw, Hofmannsthal, Gordon Craig, 
Munch, Sarah Bernhardt, Max Reinhardt, George Grosz, Nietzsche (whose death 
mask he helps make), Walter Rathenau, Gustav Stresemann, HG Wells, Augustus 
John … And then comes August 1914 and Kessler – hitherto the most cultured 
companion – joins the Kaiser's army and briefly becomes a swaggering German 
nationalist. An important, underappreciated, unforgettable book.

Max Hastings 
 Hanns and Rudolf 
Thomas Harding's Hanns and Rudolf (William Heinemann) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780434022366>
 tells the story of how a young German Jewish refugee serving in the British 
army – the author's uncle – was responsible in 1945 for tracking down and 
arresting Rudolf Höss, commandant of Auschwitz and one of the most dreadful 
mass murderers of all time. Harding sketches the parallel lives of the SS 
officer with notable skill. The book is a moving reminder of what an 
extraordinary amount Britain gained by the Jewish flight from Europe in the 
1930s – it could have been still more had we offered a warmer welcome to a host 
of German scientists who moved on to the US.

Philip Hensher

Volume one of Charles Moore's Margaret Thatcher  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780713992823>
(Allen Lane) is an extraordinary reconstruction of a political way of life now 
completely vanished, written with a clear eye and full of incidental pleasures. 
(Not least about the surprising number of adoring gay men surrounding her at 
all stages.) The novel I enjoyed most wasRichard House's sensational 
pile-driver, The Kills 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447237860>
(Picador). Catching-up reading brought meTapan Raychaudhuri's superb memoir, 
The World in Our Time  
<http://www.thehindu.com/books/personal-memoir-as-social-history/article4068021.ece>
(HarperCollins India), not yet published in the UK, but full of the tumultuous 
life of the Bengal delta – a masterpiece.

Simon Hoggart

An Officer and a Spy by Robert Harris (Hutchinson) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780091944551>
. Hard to imagine a thriller where you know the ending before you pick up the 
book, but Harris's retelling of the Dreyfus case is as taut and exciting as 
anything by Forsyth or Follett. The tale is told through the eyes of Col 
Picquart, the head of "the statistical section" within the French secret 
service, who witnessed Dreyfus's degradation but gradually came to realise that 
another officer was the traitor. The story of how he went over the heads of his 
superiors, none of whom wanted to rock the ship of state, is gripping, the 
evocation of turn-of-the-century France appealing, and the ending is 
magnificently downbeat, a terrific anticlimax – if that's possible.

AM Homes

Woody Guthrie's Wardy Forty: Greystone Park State Hospital Revisited by 
Phillip Buehler (Woody Guthrie Publications, Inc) 
<http://www.woodyguthrie.org/mm5/merchant.mvc?Screen=PROD&Store_Code=TWGS&Product_Code=WGWF&Category_Code=BOOK>
 is a hauntingly beautiful book about the five years the American folk legend, 
songwriter and activist spent as a patient at the Greystone Park State Hospital 
in New Jersey. Guthrie, who had Huntington's disease, lived among the mental 
patients on ward 40. It was here that he was introduced to the 19-year-old Bob 
Dylan. Photographer Phillip Buehler, who has made a career of exploring 
20th-century ruins, first climbed into Greystone through a window. The beauty 
of the decaying building, thick curls of paint peeling off the walls, light 
seeping into long empty narrow patient rooms like cells, spurred his curiosity. 
He located Guthrie's files and, working with archivists and the Guthrie family, 
was able to put together a portrait of a man, a place and a point in American 
history when large state hospitals were all too often warehouses for humanity. 
There are notes from doctors indicating they had no idea who Guthrie was; or 
they saw him as a wanderer a vagrant, and thought his claims about songwriting 
were delusions of grandeur. A particular quote from Woody's son Arlo stayed 
with me – a patient tells Woody that he loved his bookBound for Glory. "You 
read my book?" Woody asks. "No, I ate your book," the patient says.

Barbara Kingsolver
 The Golem and the Djinni 
I love surprise finds, so I'll recommend two debut novels that swept me away. 
The Golem and the Djinniby Helene Wecker 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007480173>
 (Blue Door), has the detailed realism of historical fiction, the haunting feel 
of a folk tale, and is one of only two novels I've ever loved whose main 
characters are not human. (The other wasThe White Bone by Barbara Gowdy 
<http://us.macmillan.com/thewhitebone/BarbaraGowdy>.) And Susan Nussbaum's Good 
Kings, Bad Kings 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781780743851>
(out in March 2014 from Oneworld Publications) is a ferociously honest, funny, 
completely unstoppable trip through an institutionally corrupt home for 
disabled teenagers. I had no intention of going where they took me. That's the 
thrill of fiction.

David Kynaston

Kenneth Roy's The Invisible Spirit: A Life of Postwar Scotland 1945-75 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Invisible-Spirit-Post-War-Scotland/dp/0954652789> 
(ICS) is by someone who lived through the period but is admirably 
unsentimental. Well-informed, highly readable, slightly prickly, often 
opinionated – not least about the seriously flawed Scottish establishment – 
this feels like something that needed to be written.Ian Nairn: Words in Place 
(Five Leaves) by Gillian Darley and David McKie 
<http://www.lrbshop.co.uk/product.php?productid=65337&cat=0&page=1> – I am far 
from alone in having the awkward, melancholic architectural writer and 
broadcaster as one of my heroes: partly for his deep conviction that the built 
environment mattered, partly for his insistence – in defiance of modernist 
orthodoxy – that people mattered more. One day no doubt Nairn will get a 
heavy-duty biography, but for the time being this elegant, rather slighter 
treatment does the job with charm and just the right degree of critical 
affection.

John Lanchester

Nina Stibbe's Love, Nina 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780670922765>
, a collection of letters to her sister from the period in the mid-80s when she 
was working as a nanny, is funny and sharp and has a distinctive streak of 
wildness: no book this year made me laugh more. Also funny and sharp, though in 
a darker vein, isASA Harrison's he-said, she-said psychological thriller, The 
Silent Wife 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781472209344>
(Headline). Finally, the last entry in the funny-sharp stakes are the novels of 
Penelope Fitzgerald, which I've been reading thanks toHermione Lee's biography, 
Penelope Fitzgerald: A Life(Chatto & Windus) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701184957>
. The odd thing is that Lee's book has had more influence on my reading than 
anything else this year, even though I'm not going to read the biography itself 
until I've finished the novels. That's because I don't want prematurely to 
spoil the mystery of how Fitzgerald could have known so much about so many 
worlds, from pre-revolutionary Moscow to 60s theatre-school London to German 
Romanticism. (I think I can guess how she knew so much about houseboats and 
bookshops.) Last recommendation:Thomas Nagel's Mind and Cosmos: Why the 
Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly False  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mind-Cosmos-Materialist-Neo-Darwinian-Conception/dp/0199919755>
(OUP USA), an extraordinary and very controversial intervention in the current 
ructions about science and religion, from one of the world's most respected 
philosophers.

Mark Lawson

On either side of the Atlantic, two octogenarian grand masters of espionage 
fiction were on high form: John le Carré'sA Delicate Truth 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780670922796>
(Viking) and Charles McCarry'sThe Shanghai Factor 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781781855096>
(Head of Zeus) dramatise the cumulative consequences of decades of spying and 
lying by the victors of the second world war. Drawing on a lifetime of 
learning, and defying several life-threatening conditions, Clive James 
translatedDante: The Divine Comedy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447242192>
(Picador) into punchy, theologically serious and frequently funny verse. Julian 
Barnes reformed the conventional autobiography inLevels of Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224098151>
 (Jonathan Cape), combining essay, fiction and memoir in reflecting on the 
death of love, while Hermione Lee rethought the conventions of biography in a 
compelling account of the life and work (and overlaps between) of the until now 
underrated writer Penelope Fitzgerald. And, as readers migrate to the ebook, 
two lavishly produced volumes made the case for the physical book: a new 
edition (including the Olympic Flame bowl) of Thomas Heatherwick's thrilling 
design compendiumMaking 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780500290934>
 (Thames & Hudson) and JJ Abrams and Doug Dorst'sS. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/13/s-jj-abrams-doug-dorst-review> 
(Canongate): an astonishing interactive project that encloses secret books and 
secret readers within what seems to be a 1949 library book.

Penelope Lively

Hermione Lee's Penelope Fitzgerald: A Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701184957>
 is literary biography at its best – a masterly discussion of the work of that 
fine novelist and an illuminating account of the life of a complex and elusive 
person. I thought I knew both the work and the writer pretty well but have 
learned much – new insights into the novels, aspects of her life of which I 
knew nothing. Nobody does elderly men better than Jane Gardam.Last Friends 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408703670>
(Little, Brown) is the concluding volume in her trilogy about the legal pack – 
Feathers, Veneering, Fiscal-Smith – that began withOld Filth 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780349118406>
. Throughout the series Jane Gardam has switched viewpoints with extraordinary 
dexterity. Elegant, funny, unexpected –Last Friends ties things up. I am a 
long-time fan of Adam Thorpe. His versatility is remarkable – historical 
novels, shrewd forays into contemporary life. And now a thriller,Flight 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099539766>
 (Vintage). It zips from the Middle East to the Outer Hebrides – brilliant 
plotting, a mesmerising read.

Robert Macfarlane

Never a man to take a straight line where a diversion was possible, Patrick 
Leigh Fermor spent almost 50 years not-quite-finishing the final book of his 
trilogy describing his walk across Europe in the 1930s. It appeared this autumn 
asThe Broken Road 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781848547520>
(John Murray), two years after his death, brought to publication by Artemis 
Cooper and Colin Thubron. I opened it expecting disappointment – how could it 
be as good as its sibling volumes? – and ended it amazed. I read Eleanor 
Catton'sThe Luminaries 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847084316>
 (Granta) three times in my capacity as Man Booker judge, and each time round 
it yielded new riches. It is a vastly complex novel about investment and 
return, gift and theft, value and worth, which – in performance of its own 
ethics – gives far more than it appears to possess. Finally, in minimalist 
contrast to Catton's maximalist novel, I lovedWolfhou 
<http://www.corbelstonepress.com/wolfhou.htm> by Autumn Richardson and Richard 
Skelton, another exquisitely produced pamphlet of place-poetry from Corbel 
Stone Press, who work out of a cottage in the western Lake District.

Hilary Mantel 
 Penelope Fitzgerald Photograph: PA 
Indulge in a big and richly satisfying literary biography, from an artist in 
the form: Hermione Lee'sPenelope Fitzgerald: A Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701184957>
. It will send you back to the subject's own piquant and elusive novels. But 
perhaps a book of the year should be a mirror of the times? If so, feed 
righteous indignation on Damian McBride'sPower Trip: A Decade of Policy, Plots 
and Spin 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781849545969>
 (Backbite). Bankrupt of morals and bankrupt of style, it is a nonpareil of 
peevishness, and self-delusion shines from it like a Christmas star.

Pankaj Mishra

The most remarkable discovery for me this year was Kirill Medvedev's It's No 
Good <http://shop.nplusonemag.com/products/its-no-good> (Ugly Duckling Presse), 
a collection of poems and essays, a brilliant artistic and political response 
to the depredations of the Yeltsin and Putin era. Italo Calvino'sLetters: 
1941-1985 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/29/italo-calvino-letters-review> 
(Princeton Press) andCollection of Sand: Essays 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141193748>
 (Penguin Modern Classics) remind us of a type of writerly mind almost extinct 
in Anglo-America: worldly, invariably curious, quietly passionate and elegant. 
Julia Lovell's translations of Zhu Wen's stories inThe Matchmaker, the 
Apprentice and the Football Fan 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780231160902>
 (Columbia) yet again affirm him as one of the most interesting Chinese writers 
today. This was a particularly rich and exciting year in literary translations 
from Indian languages; the stories in Ajay Navaria's Unclaimed Terrain 
<http://navayana.org/unclaimed-terrain/> (Navayana Publications), and the 
novels by Sachin Kundalkar (Cobalt Blue 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Cobalt-Blue-Sachin/dp/0670086843>, Hamish Hamilton) 
and Shamsur Rahman Faruqi (The Mirror of Beauty 
<http://www.penguinbooksindia.com/en/content/mirror-beauty>, Hamish Hamilton) 
hint at the yet unrevealed depth and diversity of Indian literatures.

Blake Morrison
 The Pike 
Adelle Waldman's first novel The Love Affairs of Nathaniel P  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780434022328>
(William Heinemann) is memorable for its Austen-like wit, humour, social 
astuteness and scarily accurate insights into men. Rather than condemn the 
protagonist (a young New Yorker) as misogynistic and self-obsessed, Waldman 
sends him up, to devastating effect. Lucy Hughes-Hallett adopts a similar 
strategy in her terrific biography of the poet, seducer and fascist Gabriele 
D'Annunzio,The Pike 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007213962>
. The pace is hectic, as befits D'Annunzio's life, and I enjoyed the quote from 
the ex-lover who said his ideal would be an octopus with a hundred women's legs 
– but no head. Helen Mort'sDivision Street 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701186845>
 (Chatto & Windus) is an excellent first poetry collection – lucid, 
intelligent, politically aware, and loyal to the northern landscapes that 
inspired it. Dave Eggers'sThe Circle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241146484>
, about the abolition of privacy in the age of social media, is a must-read 
dystopian novel – the future it envisages has all but arrived.

Andrew Motion

Tim Dee's Four Fields 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224090728>
(Jonathan Cape) belongs in the tradition of "nature writing", but works with it 
too – putting its beautifully written sentences in the service of description 
and evocation, but using them to frame a serious conversation about 
environmental preservation and its opposites; it's a deeply attractive book and 
also an important one.Inside the Rainbow 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781870003957>
 (Redstone Press), edited by Julian Rothenstein and Olga Budashevskaya, is a 
survey of Russian children's literature from 1920-35, and the subtitle tells us 
what to expect: "Beautiful books, terrible times". Indeed. But brilliantly 
clever, seditious, amusing, brave and delightful books as well; their 
illustrations and jackets are all reproduced here to wonderful effect. JO 
Morgan's long poemAt Maldon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780957326651>
 (CB Editions) is a riff on the Old English poem, and owes something to 
Christopher Logue'sWar Music 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571209071>
 and Alice Oswald'sMemorial 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571274185>
 – but it is its own thing too: inventive, striking and memorable. And a 
reminder that Morgan is one of the most original poets around.

Edna O'Brien

La Folie Baudelaire 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846142901>
 by Roberto Calasso (Allen Lane) is a brilliant kaleidoscopic rendering of the 
tormented poet, his times and the city of Paris that "breathes" in his prose 
and poetry. We meet Baudelaire the dandy, his indecorous mistress Jeanne, both 
muse and vampire, his mother Caroline and his hated stepfather General Aupick, 
who, in the bloodshed of 1848, Baudelaire asked one of the insurgents to shoot. 
It is one of the most satisfying biographies I have ever read.Sylvia Plath: 
Drawings 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571295210>
 (Faber), lovingly compiled by her daughter Frieda Hughes, shows Plath's 
observation of everyday things – a thistle, a horse chestnut, the willows near 
Grantchester. It is also salutary to compare the austerity of her poetry with 
the rapture in her letters to her husband (included here), in which she 
envisages his presence "come day, come night, come hurricane and holocaust …"
Dear Boy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571284054>
 by Emily Berry (Faber): from the evidence here, this poet's imagination is 
rich, playful and restless, with the occasional note of anguish, which Plath 
would surely approve of, like a glimpse of the first crocus. Last, but by no 
means least, Donal Ryan'sThe Spinning Heart 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781781620069>
 (Doubleday Ireland) is funny, moving and beautifully written.

Susie Orbach

Alan Rusbridger's Play It Again: An Amateur Against the Impossible  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224093774>
 is a wonderful account of trying to learn a complex piano piece while running 
the Guardian at the time of WikiLeaks and phone hacking. I had to skip some 
of the accounts of the fingering he is learning but he eloquently expresses the 
struggle to take up the playing of this piece – the Chopin Ballade No 1 – and 
segues into fascinating accounts of different historic pianos and the 
idiosyncratic manner individual musicians use them, and his various "teachers", 
who mostly sound very strict, alongside the emergencies from the office. A 
parallel story of how newspapers can move forward in the digital age runs along 
the narrative. I am always curious about people's daily lives and their 
curiosities. This book gives both in abundance.

Ian Rankin

Kate Atkinson's Life After Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780552776639>
(Doubleday) is her most challenging, complex and compelling novel yet. A woman 
has the chance to live life over and over again in often surprising ways. No 
Booker listing: no justice. Louise Doughty'sApple Tree Yard 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571297887>
 (Faber) is ostensibly a courtroom drama that asks how its sensible, 
intelligent middle-class heroine ended up in the dock in a murder case – 
beguilingly written, steely and plausible and occasionally shocking. Niccolò 
Ammaniti was a new name to me.Let the Games Begin 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847679413>
(Canongate) is a wild ride with the fevered quality of Pynchon and Vonnegut as 
a party to end all parties sees the various characters vying to survive a 
grotesque uprising. It's a satire on contemporary culture, Italian politics and 
the writing profession itself. Funny, sharp, and really quite rude. In a 
similar vein, John Niven'sStraight White Male 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780434022861>
 (William Heinemann) is the story of a hugely successful Irish screenwriter and 
his gloriously incorrect behaviour. There are laughs aplenty, but Niven adds 
growing poignancy as his hero becomes self-aware. It is Niven's best book, and 
the protagonist is easily the match of John Self in Martin Amis'sMoney.

Ruth Rendell
 Stoner 
My choice isn't a new book, but it was reissued this year. I'm ashamed that 
I had never heard ofStoner 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099561545>
by John Williams (Vintage) until I found it in a bookshop three months ago. I 
was stunned by it, it's so good. And yet very little happens in it except joy 
and pain and sorrow in the American midwest, love and passion and the mistakes 
everyone makes. It's beautifully written in simple but brilliant prose, a novel 
of an ordinary life, an examination of a quiet tragedy, the work of a great but 
little-known writer.

Lionel Shriver

Three novels stand out for me in 2013: Visitation Street 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444778250>
 by Ivy Pochoda (Sceptre), set in Red Hook, Brooklyn; two girls venture out on 
a pink inflatable raft into the filthy East River and only one comes back. 
Great writing, great setting, beautifully rendered characters.The Son 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857209429>
 by Phillipp Meyer (Simon & Schuster): an epic set in Texas that uses, among 
other things, that white-man-raised-by-Indians routine, and yet incredibly it 
doesn't feel tired. Totally engrossing. Lastly, Claire Messud'sThe Woman 
Upstairs 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844087310>
(Virago), which teems with fury, and tells a tale of breathtaking betrayal. 
It's a great study as well in the (possibly?) unreliable narrator. You keep 
puzzling over whether this woman is completely off her head.

Helen Simpson

Hermione Lee's fascinating biography of Penelope Fitzgerald charts a life that 
travelled the full 360 degrees on the wheel of fortune – from early promise and 
privilege down to dramatic middle-aged doldrums then back up to a late-blooming 
two decades of literary productivity and success. I'm now reading Fitzgerald's 
last four novels, which are every bit as breathtaking as Lee's concluding 
chapters describe. I read Nikolai Leskov'sThe Enchanted Wanderer 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099577355>
 for the first time this year in a vigorous new translation by Richard Pevear 
and Larissa Volokhonsky. Admired by Chekhov, Gorky and Tolstoy, these stories 
seethe with picaresque unpredictability, outlandish but touching monologues and 
recklessly impulsive characters like the country girl turned femme fatale in
Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District.

Tom Stoppard

This is the time of year when I try in vain to remember what I was reading up 
to 12 months ago, and end up choosing three books I've enjoyed in the last 12 
weeks. In the present case, these areNature's Oracle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780198607274>
 by Ullica Segerstrale (OUP), a biography of WD (Bill) Hamilton, the 
evolutionary biologist whose insight into the operation of kin selection at 
gene level suggested how altruism might have emerged from natural selection; a 
hugely enjoyable novel,Bleeding Edge 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224099028>
 by Thomas Pynchon (Jonathan Cape), who, when he's in his hardboiled vein, 
writes the most entertaining dialogue in any year; andThe New York Times Book 
of Mathematics 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781402793226>
, which is what it sounds like: a century of news from maths written up for a 
general readership, and nobody does it better.

Colm Tóibín
 Titian Photograph: PA 
Titian: His Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007175826>
 by Sheila Hale (HarperPress) manages an intimate and careful study of Titian's 
body of work, plus an intricate knowledge of politics and art in 16th-century 
Venice and in the Europe from which Titian received his commissions. She 
captures Titian's vast ambition and does justice to his achievement, but also 
creates a portrait of an age. Reiner Stach'sKafka: The Decisive Years 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780691147413>
 andKafka: The Years of Insight 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780691147512>
 (Princeton University Press) are the second and third volumes of a 
three-volume biography. Stach reads the work and the life with minute care and 
sympathy. He has a deep understanding of the world that Kafka came from and the 
personalities who touched his life, and this is matched by an intelligence and 
tact about the impulse behind the work itself.

• This article was amended on 28 November 2013. The earlier version misspelled 
Roberto Calasso's surname as Galasso.
 