
Dissatisfaction with the banking sector over the last decade has led to 
numerous calls for the industry to change. Last month, the governor of the Bank 
of Englandspoke of 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/821.aspx> how 
the UK financial sector bears the scars of a market gone wrong, while others 
have highlighted how the oligopoly of our big five UK banks arenot only too big 
to fail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/28/banks-too-big-to-fail-regulate-financial-sector-accountability>
 and too big to jail, but simplytoo big to compete 
<http://www.kpmg.com/uk/en/issuesandinsights/articlespublications/newsreleases/pages/uk-big-five-highstreet-banks-face-too-big-to-compete-as-small-challenger-banks-secure-stellar-returns-says-kpmg.aspx>
 and unable to serve customers needs.


Transforming the system from within is one way to do bring about change, for 
example by turning The Royal Bank of Scotland into a network of local banks. In 
areport <http://www.neweconomics.org/publications/entry/reforming-rbs> 
published earlier this year, my colleague Tony Greenham demonstrated how doing 
this would transform the face of UK domestic retail banking and bring 
significant economic benefits in the process.

But there is also a second transformation picking up speed, one which comes 
from outside the financial establishment. This transformation is set not only 
to cut prices for business and consumers, but also to introduce a host of new 
services and opportunities beyond what even challenger banks – new rivals ofthe 
big lenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/01/uk-challenger-banks-aim-to-loosen-grip-of-big-four>
 – can be expected to deliver.

Civil society urges politicians to transform the finance system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jan/05/civil-society-politicians-transform-finance-system>
By combining recent technologies with age-old practices that now cover all 
areas of banking, new practices are emerging that go beyond what was previously 
possible. It short, it is now possible to bank without banks. Here’s how:

1. Peer-to-peer lending

This industry has been the poster child of innovative financial services for 
the last few years and is now well recognised by regulators and markets alike.
These lenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/feb/15/major-peer-to-peer-lenders-profiled>
, like Zopa, RateSetter and FundingCircle, are stepping into the arena that to 
most customers is the core business of banks: providing saving options and 
facilitating investment.

On the savings side, people who place their money through peer-to-peer 
platforms will receiveISA-like tax benefits from April 2016 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/personalfinance/savings/11489834/First-1000-of-peer-to-peer-returns-will-be-tax-free.html>
. On the investment side, even platforms that previously only focused on 
personal loans, such as RateSetter, are now moving into business loans. You 
might not expect lower rates there, but the aim of these platforms is to 
outperform banks with afaster turnaround of applications 
<https://www.ratesetter.com/borrow/business-loans>. What’s more, through deeper 
and more personal profiling of individual cases they can grant the kinds of 
loans to small businessesthat big banks aren’t bothered about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/22/rbs-business-loans-peer-to-peer-lending>
.

2. Innovative ways to pay

The rails that most of our transactions run on are currently provided by 
private institutions owned and governed by thebig incumbent banks 
<http://www.vocalink.com/about-vocalink/organisation.aspx>. This puts them in a 
gatekeeper position that effectively discourages them from investing and 
updating their technology and protocols to match the speed and ease of services 
you would expect in the twenty-first century. It also leads to high costs that 
lack transparency for users.

Even the banks that want to make a difference to small and medium businesses, 
such as credit unions, building societies and challenger banks, have to buy 
into these legacy systems. This sector is ripe for disruption and a host of new 
platforms are picking up the slack, offering substantial savings for customers.

How to build a 'lagomist' economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/apr/06/lagomist-economy-consumerism-quality-of-life>
Some, like PayPal and TransferWise, focus on ease and convenience to customers 
butstill link into the conventional system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/08/the-london-startup-rebooting-remittances>
 in the back-end. Others are building new sets of rails altogether. The small 
but highly innovativeBrixton Pound <https://brixtonpound.org/> offered mobile 
payments ahead of the high street bankswithout the need for a smartphone 
<http://brixtonpound.org/pay-by-text>. Bitcoin <https://bitcoin.org/en/> is 
still hitting the news regularly, with Cumbria University announcing last year 
that some of its students will be allowed topay their tuition fees 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-cumbria-25824968> using the digital 
currency.

However, the hype around its highly volatile currency has seen it now give way 
tofintech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/03/what-you-should-know-about-fintech-positive-powers-banking>
 – companies focusing on what the underlying technology is good at: direct 
transfers between account holders anywhere in the world without any middlemen. 
Despite big banks now trying to catch up by providing entrepreneurs with 
incubator facilities and capital, this is pretty much stilla start-up industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/fintech-startups-sustainable-financial-technology>
 with high risks but even bigger potential.

Islamic traders have used payments without banks for centuries through the 
Hawala network 
<http://www.n2moneymatters.com/2011/03/what-is-hawala-all-you-want-to-know.html>
. The Internet is about to bring such direct financial connectivity to all 
business and individuals as we speak, with outfits such asRipple 
<https://ripple.com/> and Stellar <https://www.stellar.org/> already the 
darlings of Silicon Valley.


3. Creating new money

It still comes as a surprise to many that money is not only transferred by 
banks, but alsocreated when providing loans 
<https://twitter.com/bankofengland/status/443763359293243393>. Peer-to-peer 
lenders and payments services only operate with the money that has been 
provided by banks at some point. So when liquidity in the economy is low, be it 
locally or even nationally, it requires a third set of innovations to fill the 
gap.


Beyond capitalism and socialism: could a new economic approach save the planet?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/apr/21/regenerative-economy-holism-economy-climate-change-inequality>
Complementary currencies do just that at close to 0% interest. They are only 
valid for businesses that signed up to their collaborative credit networks and 
are typically not exchangeable for national currency.The WIR-franc 
<http://community-currency.info/en/currencies/wir-bank/> in Switzerland has 
operated for over 80 years and serves close to 50,000 business all over the 
country. The city of Nantes in France just launched theSoNantes 
<http://www.sonantes.fr/> as an way to support SMEs in the region.

While these two examples happen to be run by banks – a cooperative in the case 
of theWIR <http://www.wir.ch/> and a local public bank in Nantes 
<http://creditmunicipal-nantes.fr/> – that both also offer services in 
conventional currencies to their clients,a banking licence is not required 
<http://communitycurrenciesinaction.eu/toolkit-legal-and-compliance/> to issue 
a complementary currency anywhere. Collaborative credit systems are typically 
run by regular service companies outside the scope of financial regulation. 
Some operate internationally and are publicly listed companies, likeBartercard 
<http://www.bartercard.com.au/>, which also operates in the UK, but most focus 
on a particular city or region. The international trade bodyIRTA  
<http://www.irta.com/>was founded in 1979 as a representative of the industry 
in the USA, but many more exist around the world.



 