
If you’ve ever tried sheepishly to get an Asos bag or Amazon box from office 
postroom to desk, you will be aware how borderline transgressive it feels. Some 
companies, overwhelmed with their employees’ online-shopping deliveries, have 
banned them. This week,the Times reported 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/uk/article4524688.ece> that several big 
banks, including HSBC, Citigroup and JP Morgan, have banned personal 
deliveries. Lots of other organisations, includinguniversities 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3194869/Employers-ban-staff-getting-parcels-delivered-work-post-rooms-t-cope-mountains-online-shopping.html>
 andgovernment departments 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/0a3326a8-6892-11e3-996a-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3icQQaCgc>
, have done the same in the past few years.

“There’s no doubt that the rise in internet shopping has changed the face of 
mailrooms,” says James Gilding, managing director of the document-management 
arm of Mitie, which runs outsourced mailrooms. Obvious personal items now 
account for between 30% and 40% of all incoming post. “Overall, we’re seeing an 
increase of around 20% on the previous year.”

This will only increase. This year in the UK, we are predicted to spend more 
than £50bn online. By 2023,research for Royal Mail estimates 
<http://www.royalmailgroup.com/sites/default/files/The%20outlook%20for%20UK%20mail%20volumes%20to%202023.pdf>
, 2.3bn parcels will be sent every year. And a large proportion are sent to 
people’s workplaces.

A number of other options are springing up, such as lockers in shops and 
petrol stations run by the likes ofAmazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> and InPost, and CollectPlus, 
which allows you to have items delivered to newsagents, shops and supermarkets 
in its network. Another company, Doddle, has opened collection points in or 
near train stations, so commuters can pop in on their way home.

Richard Wilding, professor of supply-chain strategy at Cranfield School of 
Management, would like to see drive-through collection points with 
numberplate-recognition technology. Having parcels delivered to work, he 
predicts, will become more difficult. “Many organisations now are starting to 
recognise the true cost of having to manage the reception of those deliveries.”

One company in Canary Wharf, he says, “was charging people £11 if [they] 
wanted anything delivered to reception. You have to take into account the cost 
of processing these deliveries”. A few years ago, when there were only a few 
deliveries, it wasn’t an issue; now, some companies are receiving hundreds of 
parcels a week. “Those have to be processed by the people within the 
organisation. That becomes more or less a full-time job. Then you’ve got a 
situation where your employer is funding your parcel-receiving. You’ve got the 
issue of security, and moving the item to that person. Immediately, you can see 
this is not a trivial thing.”

You might think that, because you have to spend all day at work, rather than 
waiting in for a courier – and, perhaps, because your boss is squeezing extra 
hours out of you – taking in the spoils of your retail therapy is a small perk. 
Could banning deliveries actually be counterproductive? “There is an 
impressively strong link between workers’ happiness and their productivity,” 
says Andrew Oswald, professor of economics at Warwick University and an expert 
on the economics of happiness. “Having cheery workers really does seem to have 
a payoff for the employer. Giving workers small freedoms makes a big difference 
to job satisfaction. Yet, small freedoms are inexpensive to offer, and I would 
have thought this one, about parcels, is a prime example.”
 