
Australia’s Treasury secretary has warned that young Australians are 
increasingly having to rely on the “bank of mum and dad” to get into the 
property market.

John Fraser said the problem had become so prevalent it was affecting parents’ 
superannuation decisions, saying they’re now saving later in life to help their 
children afford their own property.

Are millennials actually bad at saving or are houses just unaffordable?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/oct/18/are-millennials-actually-bad-at-saving-or-are-houses-just-unaffordable>
Appearing before a Senate estimates hearing on Wednesday, Fraser said 
intergenerational inequality was a “huge issue” in Australia, and a big factor 
was the amount of wealth in housing.

“This is the circle that we’ve got. Higher house prices, higher wealth, people 
feel far more comfortable about taking more debt. It’s a worry,” he said.

“The bank of mum and dad ... is becoming more and more prevalent.

“It has impacts on superannuation, where superannuation is going to. It has 
impacts on why people are saving in their older years to fund their children’s 
housing needs, not just to purchase but often rents, and it’s a concern.”

He said the problem was a global one, not unique to Australia, but the problem 
was extreme in global financial centres.

“I was in London recently, at the pub, and the issue’s the same. It’s how much 
you’ve got to give your kids to get them a start,” Fraser said.

Baby boomers have already taken all the houses, now they're coming for our 
brunch | Brigid Delaney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/baby-boomers-have-already-taken-all-the-houses-now-theyre-coming-for-our-brunch>
“London is worse than that. You’ve got no hope. I had a son who was over there 
as a primary school teacher, there’s no way he could have been a primary school 
teacher in London unless someone was picking up the tab for his rent, and 
that’s happening more and more.”


Fraser said the policy priority for Australian governments ought to be land 
release, and the supply of housing generally. He said that would be the best 
way to reduce price pressures.

Peter Whish-Wilson, Greens’ Treasury spokesman, said the situation would 
worsen without a serious policy response. He criticised Fraser for failing to 
provide concrete policy options.

I could get outraged by this boomer-millennial war, but I'd rather look at the 
evidence | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/18/i-could-get-outraged-by-this-boomer-millennial-war-but-id-rather-look-at-the-evidence>
“At least the Treasury secretary did not accept the premise put forward by 
Bernard Salt that the reason that younger people aren’t buying homes because 
they are blowing their income on smashed-avocado hipster breakfasts,” 
Whish-Wilson said.

“Twenty-five-to-34 year olds are less well off than the same age group a 
decade ago and every other older age group has significantly increased in 
wealth. He accepted this was true but could only talk in the abstract on how we 
could address it.

“Investors are using their property-delivered wealth and generous tax 
concessions to outbid an entire generation who are losing hope at ever being 
able to own their own home,” Whish-Wilson said.

Earlier this week, the demographer Bernard Salt said in the Australian that 
millennials could buy their own houseif they just stopped going to “hipster 
cafes” 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/life/weekend-australian-magazine/moralisers-we-need-you/news-story/6bdb24f77572be68330bd306c14ee8a3#itm=taus%7Cnews%7Caus_authors_index%7C1%7Cauthors_storyBlock_headline%7CBernard_Salt%7Cindex%7Cauthor&itmt=1476657066628>
 and eating avocado on toast.

He later said he was only speaking metaphorically 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04cf1mt>.
 