


A threat to remove Adele and the Arctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys> from YouTube should be 
investigated by the European Commission, according to the independent record 
labels they are signed to.

The desperate plea for intervention – supported by the likes of Billy Bragg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/billy-bragg> and Radiohead's guitarist Ed 
O'Brien – comes amid an escalating row about the fees that YouTube is prepared 
to pay artists signed to independents.

Bragg accused the Google-owned site of "shooting itself in the foot" by trying 
to strong-arm indies into deals on low rates, in a dispute that has taken on an 
extra edge becauseYouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> 
wants to launch an online service to compete with Spotify.

"They are in danger of launching a streaming service that lacks the innovative 
and cutting edge sounds that independent artists bring. Would music fans be 
willing to pay for such an inferior product? I don't think so," Bragg said.

O'Brien, whose band Radiohead <https://www.theguardian.com/music/radiohead> 
once sold its In Rainbows album by asking people to pay whatever they thought 
it was worth, said marginalising indies meant a digital music world catering 
only to big names and corporations.

"Indie artists and labels are at the cutting edge of the future of music," 
O'Brien added. "To restrict them in this way is to risk creating an internet 
just for the superstars and big businesses."

Faced with such high profile lobbying YouTube argues its online platform has 
become hugely important to help musicians build their fanbases. The company 
said that it has hundreds of successful commercial arrangements in place with 
record labels around the world.

But the Worldwide Independent Network (WIN), a trade body representing 
independent labels worldwide, is so frustrated with YouTube's negotiating 
stance that it will lodge a formal complaint on Wednesday with the European 
Commission over the site's tactics.

WIN represents 850 labels in the UK including Beggars Group – owner of labels 
including XL Recordings, which is home toAdele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> and The White Stripes – and Domino, 
which has signed Franz Ferdinand as well as Arctic Monkeys.

Other acts threatened by the YouTube ban include Radiohead, Queens of the 
Stone Age, Vampire Weekend, Goldfrapp, The Prodigy, Nitin Sawhney, The xx, 
M.I.A. and Grimes.

Three large music companies dominate the industry – Universal, Warner Music 
and Sony Music, known as the majors. In an attempt the match their clout in 
negotiations with digital media giants such as YouTube, the remaining 
independent labels negotiate collectively, but often complain that they 
struggle for the best commercial terms.

They say YouTube is trying to cut out Merlin, the body that represents them in 
rights deals, and is instead making direct approaches to individual independent 
labels with a "non-negotiable" contract for its proposed streaming service.

The labels say they have allegedly been threatened that if they don't sign on 
YouTube's terms they could find their music videos blocked. Alison Wenham, 
chief executive of WIN, said: "We have been hearing from many companies across 
the world who are expressing fear, displeasure, outrage and confusion at the 
phone calls, letters and bullying they seem to be receiving from YouTube 
employees."

A YouTube spokesman said the site "provides a global platform for artists to 
connect with fans and generate revenue for their music", adding: "We have 
successful deals in place with hundreds of independent and major labels around 
the world, however we don't comment on ongoing negotiations."

Google and YouTube's sheer size mean that the group is frequently the target 
of regulatory and legal actions. A ruling by a European court ruling forced
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> to allow users to demand 
inadequate or irrelevant personal information be removed from search results, 
known as the "right to be forgotten".

Wenham, who is also chairman of UK indie music sector trade body AIM, said the 
European complaint marks a "first step" in a global campaign in which small 
labels would use their artists to campaign against the digital giant.

"Our fellow trade associations around the world, representing tens of 
thousands of independent companies, also take issue with the actions of 
YouTube," she said.

John Enser, partner at law firm Olswang, said: "Music services offered by big 
tech companies, not just in terms of YouTube but also iTunes, have often 
offered 'take it or leave it' terms to indie labels.

"While it is understandable that YouTube cannot devote resources to thousands 
of negotiations of small contracts, the indies do have a body, in the form of 
Merlin, that negotiates deals for them.

"For YouTube not to offer terms to Merlin on a similar basis to those it 
offers to the three remaining traditional majors does appear to give them a 
case to answer to the competition authorities."

YouTube's plans to go head to head with Spotify, Deezer and other subscription 
music services have been rumoured for some time.

In March the New York Post reported that the new service would be called Music 
Pass, and would be likely to cost $5 a month in the US with ads or $10 a month 
for an ad-free version.
 