
The Zendens 
<http://www.sportweek.fr/loisirs/glamour/0/bolo-clio-zenden-couple-glamour-ligue-1-54281.html>
 have been in the news recently. Just after Mrs Zenden, also known as the model
Clio Pajczer <http://www.cliopajczer.com/>, told So Foot magazine of her 
embarrassment that her parents owned a Renault with the same name (and yes, 
that was the interview's highlight), husband Bolo was revealed asMarseille's 
highest-paid player <http://maxifoot.fr/articles/6848/>, earning a monthly 
€263,500 (£243,000). Just as well for the Dutchman, then, that he was man of 
the match in Marseille's3-1 win at Paris Saint-Germain 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kI09Qqy0gbo>, a result that opens up the title 
race even more followingLyon's shock 2-0 capitulation at home to Auxerre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y034ZOWmQSE>.

Zenden was a controversial choice to start the game ahead of Mamadou Niang and 
Hatem Ben Arfa - L'OM's next two highest earners on £203,000 and £185,000 
respectively - but he scored the first goal, was then brought down in an 
incident that earned Zoumana Camara a red card and he took the resulting 
free-kick from which Bakary Koné scored to put L'OM 2-1 up. "The red card and 
the goal that followed were the turning points," said the PSG coach Paul Le 
Guen, while Eric Gerets added: "I can just imagine the criticism I would have 
got for picking Zenden if we had lost."

In recent years, the rivalry between the two clubs 
<http://www.allpsg.com/news-7681.html> has been dominated by matters off the 
pitch: PSG fans smashed Marseille's team bus windscreen in November 2004, while 
two years later PSG coach Laurent Fournier suggested their dressing-room had 
been contaminated; later that season, L'OM responded to a fans' ban by taking a 
reserve team to Paris and getting a 0-0 draw. And all because, according to the 
bookOM-PSG, PSG-OM, les meilleurs ennemis 
<http://www.amazon.fr/OM-PSG-PSG-OM-meilleurs-ennemis-rivalit%C3%A9/dp/2842705467>
, ex-Marseille president Bernard Tapie had created a rivalry because he wanted 
Marseille to have domestic rivals to keep the 1993 European Cup winners on 
their toes.

The build-up was more about the players' salaries. PSG's wage list was also 
leaked 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/psg-foot-paris-saint-germain/101-000-eur-par-mois-en-moyenne-10-03-2009-436779.php>
, with Claude Makélélé (£258,000 per month) and Ludovic Giuly (£240,000) the 
top earners, while other notables were flop Mateja Kezman third with £231,000 
and top-scorer Guillaume Hoarau down in 15th, bringing in a monthly £74,000. 
"We are the ultimate losers as when we asked about Hoarau, his advisers asked 
us to pay twice as much," said Marseille's president Pape Diouf, who told
Fabulous Sport <http://darren.blog.canal-plus.com/> that among his previous 
jobs, which included delivery boy, street cleanerand postman, he was also an 
underwear model.

Zenden admitted that his former side Liverpool's 4-1 win over Manchester United
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/mar/16/premier-league-manchester-united-liverpool-rafael-benitez-alex-ferguson>
 had inspired Marseille. "We watched the Liverpool game and said, 'That's what 
we've got to do against them,'" he said. "There was intelligence and character 
in our play and that was good to see," said Gerets, who claimed to have seen 
3,000 policemen outside the L'OM hotel the night before the game. "I didn't 
realise how big this game was until I saw that."

Mention should also go to Englishman Tyrone Mears, standing in for Laurent 
Bonnart at right-back, who in his first league start kept Jérôme Rothen quiet. 
"We messed up the match and have taken a blow to the back of our heads, but 
we'll pick ourselves up," said Le Guen, who didn't change the team following 
Camara's 53rd-minute dismissal "because I didn't want to".

Marseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> and PSG are now one 
point behind Lyon after the leaders lost at home to Auxerre, a team that a few 
weeks ago were looking like relegation candidates. Lyon have now lost four in a 
row: the last time that happened was 18 years ago, when a certain Raymond 
Domenech was in charge. "I was very surprised that they played the same team 
which lost [5-2] to Barcelona," said winning coach Jean Fernandez, "I guess 
Claude Puel was looking for a reaction." He didn't get one, and the result 
could have been worse had Hugo Lloris, lucky to stay on the pitch after 
bringing down Kévin Lejeune late on, not stopped Cédric Hengbart's subsequent 
spot-kick.

These are worrying times for the champions who, wrote France Football, "were 
not only beaten in Barcelona, they were crushed, humiliated and then spat out 
again". The club sacked their double-winning coach last summer and might end 
this season empty-handed. They have made mistakes, such aslosing Fred in January
 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090306~sep~075405~sep~fred-pas-fan-de-ligue-1.html>
 without bringing in a replacement, while the signing of Frédéric Piquionne, 
bought at Puel's request, seems bizarre as he has started only six games. 
"Right now, we're short of top-quality centre forwards," admitted former hero 
Sonny Anderson, now working for Lyon as a strikers' coach. "If Karim Benzema 
gets injured, we're in real trouble."

The only good news for Lyon this week was Benzema's promise to stay at the club
 <http://www.rmc.fr/edito/sport/73366/benzema-je-reste-a-lyon/> next season, 
though with question marks over Puel's decisions and the home crowd booing the 
team off the Gerland pitch, Benzema's future is, for once, not Lyon's biggest 
concern. "I know the papers will say Lyon are in crisis now but we're not," 
said Jean-Alain Boumsong, who went off injured at half-time. Benzema was not so 
sure. "We are in some danger," he admitted.

Elsewhere, improving Sochaux moved out of the relegation zone with a 2-1 win 
over Nancy 
<http://video.google.fr/videoplay?docid=-7283130557500829754&ei=f2u-Sd-XG4~sep~-qwL3jdDDBQ&q=sochaux+2+nancy+1&hl=fr>
, whose coach Pablo Correa had his resignation refused after the match, which 
was a fifth loss in seven. Bordeaux are three points behind Lyon afterbeating 
Nice 2-1 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d4t86B7s1G8>, Caen lost 1-0 to Lille 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sxQWnVvj3xw> while Monaco's Igor Lolo scored in 
injury-time tobeat Toulouse 3-2 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tTxmMc58Kv8>.

Lyon's former coach Alain Perrin was unhappy as another late goal cost 
Saint-Etienne as they lost 1-0 atGrenoble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/grenoble>. Les Verts are back in the 
bottom three and this is the third game in four they have dropped points by 
conceding in injury-time (they did the same in the 2-2 draw at Monaco and the 
1-1 draw against Bordeaux). That's good news for Werder Bremen, their Uefa Cup 
opponents this week. "The Uefa Cup has become a drag and we're not going to 
play to qualify against Bremen," said Perrin. "Will the fans be upset? Well, 
they won't want to see us in the second division next season." He has since 
retracted those comments.

This week sees the French Cup quarter-finals and Domenech's latest squad 
announcement for the World Cup qualifiers against Lithuania. For once, though, 
all the talk is about a title race that is finally wide open. Four points 
separate the top six sides and Lyon still have to play Marseille, PSG and
Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux>. Laurent Blanc's team 
look to have the easiest run-in and could yet surprise us all.

Results, Week 28: Monaco 3-2 Toulouse, Le Mans 2-2 Rennes, Caen 0-1 Lille, 
Nantes 1-1 Lorient,Sochaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sochaux> 2-1 
Nancy, Valenciennes 3-2 Le Havre, Bordeaux 2-1 Nice, Lyon 0-2 Auxerre, Grenoble 
1-0 Saint-Etienne, PSG 1-3 Marseille.
 