
“The first sound in the mornings was the clumping of the mill-girls’ clogs 
down the cobbled street.” This opening line is the sound of a great writer 
finding his authentic voice. With absolute confidence, after several false 
starts, the matureGeorge Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/11/georgeorwell.classics> takes 
charge of this idiosyncratic account of working-class life from his first page.

Formerly Eric Blair, he was now writing with the urgency of a freelance with a 
much-needed commission, and also as a man just back from a journey through the 
industrial wastes of Yorkshire and Lancashire in the depths of the Great 
Depression.

He was honest about himself as a refugee from the middle class, via Eton, 
Burma and the dosshouses of Paris and London

Orwell had been signed up in the spring of 1936 for perhaps as little as £50 
(plus expenses) by Victor Gollancz, the leftwing publisher who had championed
Down and Out in Paris and London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/04/george-orwell-jail-time-unseen-court-records>
. Gollancz wanted a “condition of England” title to include in hisLeft Book Club
 <https://www.theguardian.com/education/2001/jul/29/highereducation.news>, a 
bookselling experiment he had started to develop at the beginning of 1936. In 
fact, when Orwell delivered his manuscript at the end of the year, Gollancz was 
confronted with rather more than he’d bargained for, an infuriating but always 
compelling, personal quest by one of the strangest and most complicated figures 
in English literature.

The Road to Wigan Pier  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2011/feb/20/george-orwell-wigan-in-pictures>
falls into two parts, a travelogue describing Orwell’s journey through three 
northern towns, and a matching, but much more contentious, quest of heart and 
mind. It was, declared its author, a “political book”, a mix of reportage and 
political commentary with a dash of autobiography. Orwell’s contemporaries such 
asCyril Connolly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview2> 
noted that, henceforth, he would be a socialist, but a socialist with an aura 
of secular saintliness that some found affected, even comical. And yet, with 
all its weaknesses, it would prove to be a milestone in his creative 
development.

In the age of Corbyn, is the time right for another Road to Wigan Pier?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/21/age-of-corbyn-is-the-time-right-for-another-road-to-wigan-pier>
Orwell’s long-term publisher, Fred Warburg, described it as “one of the most 
contradictory books ever written”, which is another way of saying that, as well 
as writing outstanding reportage from “Wigan Pier”, Orwell was willing to be 
honest about himself as a refugee from the middle class, via Eton, Burma and 
the dosshouses of Paris and London. In these pages, finally, he began to carve 
out his peculiar place as a British literary socialist, and to reconcile 
himself to himself.

The first half opens with a brilliant, stand-alone chapter about the Brookers’ 
tripe shop-cum-lodging house, No 22 Darlington Street. From the squalor of 
working-class Wigan, Orwell plunges into meetings with the unemployed, with 
slum-dwellers, with coalminers, and dockers.

Anxious to return to his future wife, Eileen O’Shaughnessy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/dec/10/georgeorwell.classics>, Orwell 
spent just two months in the north, and finally took the train home, closing 
his travels with a scene glimpsed from his railway carriage, the unforgettable 
image of a working-class woman trying to unblock a drain:

At the back of one of the houses a young woman was kneeling on the stones, 
poking a stick up the leaden waste pipe which ran from the sink inside and 
which I suppose was blocked… She looked up as the train passed, and I was 
almost near enough to catch her eye … it wore the most desolate, hopeless 
expression I have ever seen… She knew well enough what was happening to her – 
understood as well as I did how dreadful a destiny it was to be there in the 
bitter cold, on the slimy stones of a slum backyard, poking a stick up a foul 
drainpipe.

The second half of Wigan Pier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/20/orwell-wigan-pier-75-years> is 
much more uneven, and famously provocative. Even now, Orwell’s private 
encounter with English socialism can seem shocking. His determination “to see 
what mass unemployment is like at its worst” was principally to do with his own 
quest, a journey that was, he writes, “necessary to me as part of my approach 
to socialism”.

For before you can be sure whether you are genuinely in favour of socialism, 
you have got to decide whether things at present are tolerable or not 
tolerable, and you have got to take up a definite attitude on the terribly 
difficult question of class.

Orwell is never less than self-lacerating. On the class question, he 
eviscerates himself: “The real reason why a European of bourgeois upbringing 
cannot without a hard effort think of a working man as his equal is summed up 
in four frightful words: the lower classes smell.”

The Wigan of George Orwell – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2011/feb/20/george-orwell-wigan-in-pictures>
From here, an admission that continues to shock, and having described his 
adolescent self as “an odious little snob”, he confesses his deep sense of 
inadequacy: “I had not much grasp of what socialism meant, and no notion that 
the working class were human beings… I could agonise over their sufferings, but 
I hated them and despised them whenever I came anywhere near them.”

In conclusion, having fretted neurotically over the condition of domestic 
socialism, and his obligations towards it, he arrives at a kind of armistice in 
the war with himself: “To sum up – there is no chance of righting the 
conditions I described in the earlier chapters of this book, or of saving 
England from fascism, unless we can bring an effective socialist party into 
existence.”

Rarely, in English literature, has a writer flayed himself so mercilessly in 
print, or published so many hostages to fortune. But the upshot of this 
uniquely strange book was a kind of creative liberation: Eric Blair, who was 
now unequivocally George Orwell, had found his voice and his identity. For the 
rest of his active life – barely 10 years – he would write as a British 
literary socialist. From this declaration of intent come his masterpieces:
Homage to Catalonia <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/homage-to-catalonia.html>,
Animal Farm <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/animal-farm-16.html> and, finally,
Nineteen Eighty-Four 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nineteen-eighty-four.html>. It’s arguable 
that withoutThe Road to Wigan Pier 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/road-to-wigan-pier-2.html> none of these 
would have been possible.

A signature sentence


“And then perhaps this misery of class-prejudice will fade away, and we of the 
sinking middle class – the private schoolmaster, the half-starved freelance 
journalist, the colonel’s spinster daughter with £75 a year, the jobless 
Cambridge graduate, the ship’s officer without a ship, the clerks, the civil 
servants, the commercial travellers and the thrice-bankrupt drapers in the 
country towns – may sink without further struggles into the working class where 
we belong, and probably when we get there it will not be so dreadful as we 
feared, for, after all, we have nothing to lose but our aitches.”

Three to compare


JB Priestley: English Journey 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/english-journey.html> (1934)
Robert Byron: The Road to Oxiana 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/road-to-oxiana.html> (1937)
Richard Hoggart: The Uses of Literacy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/uses-of-literacy.html> (1957)

The Road to Wigan Pier is published by Penguin (£9.99). Click here to buy it 
for £8.19 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/road-to-wigan-pier-2.html>
 