
Titanic Centre

Titanic Belfast (titanicbelfast.com <http://www.titanicbelfast.com/Home.aspx>, 
adults £13.50, children £6.75, families £34), housed in a new £97m building in 
the Titanic Quarter, tells the story of how the ship was built and launched in 
Belfast. The exhibition has nine interactive galleries – visitors can walk 
through the original Harland & Wolff shipyard gates, take a six-minute Shipyard 
Ride through different parts of the ship, with the sounds of riveting and 
smells of metal burning, and see replicas of the first-, second- and 
third-class cabins. There's also a glass floor with video footage of the 
Titanic on the seabed.

Next door, the Titanic Slipways, where the ship and her sister ship Olympic 
were built, have been landscaped with lights, grass and decking to show the 
outlines of the actual ships. A few minutes away is Titanic's Dock and 
Pump-House (titanicsdock.com <http://www.titanicsdock.com/>, tickets from £5 
adults, £3 children, £12 families), where you can peer down into the 880ft 
graving dock where Titanic sat for her final fit out. The best way to explore 
the Titanic Quarter is to take a tour – a two-hour walking tour includes access 
to the Dock and Pump-House and also to the Harland and Wolff drawing offices 
(0754 648 9874, titanicwalk.com <http://www.titanicwalk.com>, adults £12, 
children £5-£8, families £30). 

Meanwhile, at the Titanica exhibition at the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum 
in Cultra, east of the city, you can also hear audio recordings of stories told 
by the survivors, and there is an exhibition of some original artefacts that 
were recovered from the ship, including a porthole and soup tureen (nmni.com 
<http://www.nmni.com/uftm#TITANICa--The-Exhibition>.from £6.50 per adult and £4 
per child, £13-£18.50 families).

The MAC
 titanic scenes from the british wreck commissioners enquiry 
On 22 April the MAC arts centre will open with a new play by Belfast-born 
playwright Owen McCafferty about the Titanic Inquiry. The script of the play, 
Titanic: Scenes From The British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry 1912, is based on 
survivors' testimony given at the inquiry in London. The hearing took 36 days 
and involved nearly 100 witnesses; this courtroom drama retells some of the 
human stories of bravery and frailty from the disaster. The Mac is in the buzzy 
St Anne's Square behind St Anne's Cathedral (see below).
• 10 Exchange Street West, St Anne's Square, themaclive.com 
<http://themaclive.com/whats-on/titanic/>. Tickets available from 22, 23 and 24 
April from £9.50

Titanic themed pubs and restaurants

As well as official events, the city's pubs and restaurants have also jumped 
on the Titanic bandwagon – with varying degrees of, er, taste. The Merchant 
Hotel (028-9023 4888,themerchanthotel.com 
<http://www.themerchanthotel.com/index.php/offers-and-events.html>) has been 
transformed into a "ship", the RMS Merchant, for the month of April. The 
five-star hotel has nautical bunting and RMS Merchant flags and staff are 
dressed in nautical uniforms. Guests checking in for the Titanic Experience 
package will receive a boarding pass with their key card and can have a Gin and 
Titonic cocktail (oh, yes!) in the "A-Deck bar". There's also a nine-course 
tasting menu based on the flavours of 1912, including dishes such as cold 
asparagus truffle vinaigrette, poached oysters, champagne and orange sorbet, 
and turbot and lamb à la Francaise (£85 with recommended wines, £65 without).

Over at the five-star Culloden Hotel in Holywood, there's a special – wait for 
it – Sips Ahoy! Titanic Afternoon Tea similar to that served onboard to 
first-class passengers, with sandwiches, pastries, Harlequin biscuits and 
Titanic cupcakes (£22 per head, 028-9042 1066,hastingshotels.com 
<http://www.hastingshotels.com/culloden-estate-and-spa.html>). Also in 
Holywood, Rayanne House is offering a Titanic banquet of nine courses, with 
everything from champagne-laced asparagus to foie gras and truffle and cream of 
barley soup finished with Bushmills whiskey and cream (£69 per head, various 
dates,rayannehouse.com <http://www.rayannehouse.com/TitanicMenu.aspx>).

The Linen Hall Library
 The Titanic leaving Belfast to start her trials, pulled by tugs. Photograph: 
Topical Press Agency/Getty Images 
Founded in 1788, the Linen Hall, formerly a linen warehouse, is Belfast's 
oldest library. Entry is free and the cafe is currently running an exhibition 
of work by Belfast-born artist Terry Bradley, which features striking paintings 
of the faces of men who worked in the dockyards inBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> and Dublin 100 years ago. The library 
also has a small exhibition of Titanic memorabilia and posters on show until 30 
April.

On 19 April, Dr John Welshman, who wrote Titanic: The Last Night of a Small 
Town <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Titanic-Last-Night-Small-Town/dp/0199595577> 
(published last month), will give a talk about the stories of passengers and 
crew who survived (including the second officer, a first-class governess and a 
mother in third class) and what happened to them in the years afterwards.
• 17 Donegall Square North, free, linenhall.com 
<http://www.linenhall.com/programme.asp> 

Land Of Giants at the Titanic Slipways

Rehearsals are under way for this outdoor summer event which will tell the 
story of the many giants of Belfast and Northern Ireland – from Finn McCool 
(the legendary warrior who built the Giant's Causeway) and Jonathan Swift's 
Gulliver (said to have been inspired by Cavehill which overlooks the city) to 
the Titanic and Olympic ships and the landmark Harland and Wolff shipyard 
cranes, also known as Samson and Goliath. The locations have been landscaped 
and lit to mirror the shape of the two ships that were built there, and a 
special stage made of shipping containers will be constructed. The audience 
will stand, divided between the two slipways, and at each end a crane will lift 
aerial performances into the air. During the 45-minute show, which starts at 
dusk, there will also be a specially commissioned animated film projected onto 
the Titanic Belfast building behind the slipways, as well as circus, music and 
pyrotechnics. 
• 30 June 2012, doors open 9.30pm, £10 adults, £6 concessions, £28 families, 
Titanic Slipways Saturday 30th June 2012.landofgiants.info 
<http://www.landofgiants.info/>; tickets from gotobelfast.com 
<http://www.gotobelfast.com/whats-on/event/land-of-giants>
 