
Great coming-of-age memoirs have a potency rare in literature, and can be just 
as influential as great novels.Richard Wright 
<http://www.biography.com/people/richard-wright-9537751>, outstanding in both 
genres, was an important 20th-century African American writer, renowned for his 
1940 novel,Native Son <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/native-son.html>. 
Together withLangston Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/23/langston-hughes-harlem-house-art-collective-renee-watson>
 andRalph Ellison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2008/nov/28/new-york-usa-books>, Wright was 
crucial in forging an authentic literary consciousness for the black community 
as it struggled to escape decades of oppression after the civil war.

The bestselling Black Boy <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-boy.html>, 
published in 1945 (its original title had been Black Confession), explored the 
background toNative Son, but was also a visceral and unforgettable account of a 
young black man’s coming of age in the American south in the bitter decades 
before the civil rights movement.

Full of vivid scenes and arresting vignettes, it begins with four-year-old 
Richard (“angry, fretful and impatient”) setting fire to the family home, a 
brilliant opening that establishes young Wright as a fiery protagonist. Indeed, 
he presents himself throughoutBlack Boy as a rebel, at odds with both his 
ailing mother, his faithless, improvident father and tyrannical “Granny”. After 
the fire, the Wright family headed to Memphis, Tennessee where they lived in “a 
brick tenement”.

The white south said it knew ‘niggers’ ... well, the white south had never 
known me – never known what I thought
Richard Wright 
Young Richard goes to school; his father deserts the family and his sons are 
put into care. Eventually, they move to Arkansas, where Wright broods on “the 
cultural barrenness of black life”. For him, however, there is not even the 
consolation of religion. He’s an atheist. In church, when his fellows sing: 
“Amazing grace, how sweet it sounds”, he is humming under his breath: “A 
bulldog ran my grandma down.”

Slowly, Wright’s mature character formed itself: “At the age of 12 I had an 
attitude toward life that was to endure, that was to make me sceptical of 
everything while seeking everything, tolerant of all and yet critical.”

This lifelong spirit, he writes, “made me love burrowing into psychology, into 
realistic and naturalistic fiction and art, into those whirlpools of politics 
that had the power to claim the whole of men’s souls.”

Thus driven, and to escape the shocking racism of the south, it becomes his 
ambition to head north to Chicago as soon as he can afford the trip. But first, 
he must start out in life as a young black man in Memphis.

The first half of Wright’s “confession” is set exclusively in the south; the 
second part, describing his Chicago experiences, entitled The Horror and the 
Glory, was originally part of a longer book with the working title American 
Hunger. For various commercial considerations, Wright’s publishers requested 
that he focus on his Mississippi childhood and drop the final (Chicago) 
chapters. American Hunger becameBlack Boy, and would not be published with all 
parts fully restored until 1991, when the Library of America issuedBlack Boy 
(American Hunger).

The British, Vintage edition, though incomplete, is faithful to the 1945 
edition. It subtly mythologises Wright’s African American upbringing and 
fearlessly confronts southern racism. For Wright, coming of age was all to do 
with claiming and celebrating his identity as a black man. The south, he 
declared, in a fierce passage, had only allowed him “to be natural, to be real, 
to be myself” through a negative form of self-expression, “in rejection, 
rebellion, and aggression”. He continues:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fblack-boy-richard-wright-100-best-nonfiction-books-civil-rights-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff715f606474a1f5db21f165340b8a4ca194ec102%2F0_924_2480_2452%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=100%20best%20nonfiction%20books%3A%20No%2036%20%E2%80%93%20Black%20Boy%3A%20A%20Record%20of%20Childhood%20and%20Youth%20by%20Richard%20Wright%20(1945)%0D%0A%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fblack-boy-richard-wright-100-best-nonfiction-books-civil-rights-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=100%20best%20nonfiction%20books%3A%20No%2036%20%E2%80%93%20Black%20Boy%3A%20A%20Record%20of%20Childhood%20and%20Youth%20by%20Richard%20Wright%20%281945%29%0D%0A%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fblack-boy-richard-wright-100-best-nonfiction-books-civil-rights-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff715f606474a1f5db21f165340b8a4ca194ec102%2F0_924_2480_2452%2F2480.jpg>
 ‘Men should be able to confront other men without fear or shame’: Richard 
Wright. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The white south said that it knew ‘niggers’, and I was what the white south 
called a ‘nigger’. Well, the white south had never known me – never known what 
I thought, what I felt. The white south said I had a ‘place’ in life. Well, I 
had never felt my ‘place’; or, rather, my deepest instincts had always made me 
reject the ‘place’ to which the white south had assigned me. It had never 
occurred to me that I was in any way an inferior being.

As a youngster in small-town Jackson, Wright knew only too well what it meant 
to be a “nigger”, a second-class citizen. He worked as a porter in a clothing 
store; next he worked for an optician; then he moved to a drugstore, sweeping 
the sidewalk. But he had a fundamental problem. He “could not make subservience 
an automatic part of my behaviour”.

Finally, in November 1925, he arrived back in Memphis. This was not Chicago (a 
journey he could not yet afford), but it was a start. He began to read, 
educating himself by studying the MemphisCommercial Appeal. Here, he stumbled 
on the work ofHL Mencken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/feb/26/biography.features>, and had his 
Damascene moment:

Yes, this man was fighting, fighting with words. He was using words as a 
weapon, using them as one would use a club. Could words be weapons?

Indeed they could. Better still, Mencken was introducing the young writer to a 
new world:Spinoza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2011/feb/07/spinoza-philosophy-god-world>
, Gustave Flaubert, Tolstoy, Mark Twain, Thomas Hardy, TS Eliot, and many more. 
“Were these men real? And how did one pronounce their names?” Wright was 
hooked. Soon after this, he set off for Chicago:

I was leaving without a qualm, without a single backward glance. The face of 
the south I had known was hostile and forbidding, and yet out of all the 
conflicts and the curses… I had somehow gotten the idea that life could be 
different, could be lived in a fuller and richer manner... If I could meet 
enough of a different life, then, perhaps, gradually and slowly I might learn 
who I was, what I might be.

Wright’s closing words evoke the rhetoric of the civil rights movement, making 
a surprising and unexpected link between himself andMartin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/apr/06/archive-1968-martin-luther-king-non-violence>
. He has, he writes, “a hazy notion that life could be lived with dignity, that 
men should be able to confront other men without fear or shame, and that if men 
were lucky in their living on earth they might win some redeeming meaning for 
their having struggled here beneath the stars.”

A signature sentence

“A quarter of a century was to elapse between the time when I saw my father 
sitting with the strange woman and the time when I was to see him again, 
standing alone upon the red clay of a Mississippi plantation, a share-cropper, 
clad in ragged overalls, holding a muddy hoe in his gnarled, veined hands – a 
quarter of a century during which my mind and consciousness had become so 
greatly and violently altered that when I tried to talk to him I realised that, 
though ties of blood made us kin, though I could see a shadow of my face in his 
face, though there were echoes of my voice in his voice, we were forever 
strangers, speaking a different language, living on vastly different planes of 
reality.”(page 32)

Three to compare

Ralph Ellison: Invisible Man 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/invisible-man.html> (1952)
James Baldwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/25/100-best-nonfiction-books-notes-of-a-native-son-james-baldwin>
:Notes of a Native Son 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/notes-of-a-native-son.html> (1955)
Malcolm X (with Alex Haley): The Autobiography of Malcolm X 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/autobiography-of-malcolm-x-2.html> (1965)

Black Boy is published by Vintage (£9.99). Click here to buy it for £8.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-boy.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 