
A loose coalition of more than 100 countries, including the US and European 
nations, is pushing for an early phase-out of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), a 
powerful greenhouse gas that if left unchecked is set to add a potentially 
disastrous 0.5C to global temperatures by the end of the century.

Global coral bleaching event might become new normal, expert warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/22/global-coral-bleaching-event-might-become-new-normal-expert-warns>
At a meeting in New York on Thursday, world leaders called for 
<http://www.state.gov/e/oes/rls/pr/2016/262236.htm> an “ambitious phase-down 
schedule” for HFCs, which are commonly used in refrigerators and air 
conditioning systems, and pledged adaptation money for developing nations where 
HFC use is rapidly increasing.

“The growth in some HFCs is extraordinarily fast right now so it’s critical 
that we have an ambitious agreement,” a White House official told the Guardian. 
“This is an extraordinarily important opportunity.”

Concerns over the gaping ozone hole over Antarctica spurred countries to agree 
to phase out chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), an ozone-depleting gas found in 
fridges and aerosols, in the 1987 Montreal Protocol.

While this proved successful – scientists recently forecast the ozone layer 
may wellbe completely healed by the middle of the century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/30/ozone-layer-hole-appears-to-be-healing-scientists-say>
 – CFCs have been routinely replaced by HFCs, which trapthousands of times more 
heat <http://climatenexus.org/learn/science-primers/hfcs-and-montreal-protocol> 
in the Earth’s atmosphere than carbon dioxide.

Their growing use in developing countries could mean they account for nearly 
20% of all emissions by 2050. The replacement of HFCs could prove crucial if 
the world is to avoid dangerous runaway climate change, driven by a temperature 
rise of 2C or more.

The new coalition of nations, which will push for an early phase-out of HFCs 
at a gatheringin Rwanda next month 
<http://climate-l.iisd.org/events/28th-meeting-of-the-parties-to-the-montreal-protocol/>
, includes the US, all 28 European Union nations, all 54 countries in Africa 
and South American nations including Argentina and Colombia.

The US is proposing that growth in HFC use be “frozen” at 2021 levels and then 
scaled down so that it is largely eliminated by 2050. China wants a later 
peaking date, at 2025, but is still considered part of an early drawdown group 
when compared to other Asian nations. India is the most reluctant, having 
pushed for a 2031 date.

A group of 16 countries, including the US, UK, Japan, Germany and Australia, 
has agreed to provide $27m next year to help support an early end to HFCs. 
Private philanthropists have pitched in even more, pledging $53m to efforts to 
promote energy efficient alternatives.


“This effort to reduce potent greenhouse gases known as hydrofluorocarbons 
while cutting energy waste and costs is a great example of the critical role 
innovation can play in addressing climate change while prioritizing 
international development,” said the Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates, one of 
the donors.

“This initiative is a great opportunity for the public and private sectors to 
work together to solve a critical problem.”

Jamshyd Godrej, chairman of Indian multinational form Godrej & Boyce, said a 
phase-out of HFCs would provide India with “significant energy and financial 
savings for consumers, industry and government”.

The growing use of air conditioning and refrigeration risks undermining 
international efforts to cut emissions to avoid dangerous heatwaves, extreme 
weather and sea level rise.

Worldwide power consumption for air conditioning alone is forecast to surge 
33-fold by 2100 as developing world incomes rise and urbanization advances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/26/cold-economy-cop21-global-warming-carbon-emissions>
. By mid-century people will use more energy for cooling than heating.

“Most people tend to think of energy in terms of heat and light and 
transport,” said Toby Peters, visiting professor of power and the cold economy 
at the University of Birmingham, last October.

“But more and more, it’s going to be about cold. Demand for cold is already 
huge, it’s growing fast, and we’re meeting it in basically the same way we’ve 
been doing for a century.

“Cold is the Cinderella of the energy debate. If we don’t change the way we do 
it, the consequences are going to be dramatic.”

 * This article was amended on 23 September 2016 to correct that Bill Gates is 
a donor via his own personal wealth, not his foundation.
 