
Blackfriars Bar & Kitchen

All bare floorboards and pine furniture, its fixtures a little worn and 
peeling, a signed picture of Terry Wogan above the optics, this bar (and 
basement live music venue) feels a bit 1990s. However, there is nothing dated 
about its beer. Five cask pumps serve ales from across the UK, including beers 
from Scottish micros that were new names to me, such asMòr 
<http://www.morbrewing.co.uk/home.php>, Fallen <http://www.fallenbrewing.co.uk/>
 andTryst <http://www.trystbrewery.co.uk/>. The latter’s pale Nelson Sauvin was 
excellent, stridently bitter and melon-y, but with none of the ‘rotten fruit’ 
flavours you sometimes get from the Nelson Sauvin hop.

Despite the slightly tongue-in-cheek billing - “The cool, sexy beers you 
should be drinking.” – various chalkboards run through a bottled beer menu 
which has clearly been collated by someone who knows and loves great beer. All 
the star names of the modern craft scene are present: Odell’s and Flying Dog 
from the US, Norwegians Nøgne Ø, as well as the best of the British new wave: 
Siren, Partizan, Kernel, Redchurch, Wild Beer etc. Throw in Weihenstephaner’s 
dunkel and weissbeer on draught, and you have a bar where beer-lovers of all 
stripes could happily wile away a few hours.
• Pint from £3.30. 38 Bell Street, 0141 552 5924, blackfriarsglasgow.com 
<http://www.blackfriarsglasgow.com>

Meat Bar

Don’t be put off by the fact that people are eating, this is as much a bar as 
it is a restaurant. One where drinkers, I am assured, are always welcome. Which 
is a relief as, alongside its guest, craft-keg pump and a dedicated William 
Bros. tap, Meat Bar has a solid, 40+ bottled list, split pretty evenly between 
established Scottish (Fyne, Brewdog, Harviestoun etc.) and US (Brooklyn, Goose 
Island, Anchor) craft beer exponents.

A schooner – they don’t serve halves, curiously – of Anarchy Brewing’s 
unfined, unfiltered Urban Assault pale ale (£3), was beautiful, full of sharp, 
prickly, grapefruit and mango flavours. It was as dry and acerbic as Quentin 
Crisp and as tropical as the Man From Del Monte. It was just a pity I couldn’t 
sit there all day. This dimly-lit basement space - light glinting off whisky 
bottles behind the bar; the music a palatable mix of Dylan, Doves, Velvet 
Underground – is the kind of cocooned bolt-hole where anyone would love to 
hideaway for a long misspent afternoon.
• Pint from £3.50. 142 West Regent Street, 0141 204 3605, themeatbar.co.uk 
<http://www.themeatbar.co.uk>

Drygate
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F18%2F10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405516016389%2Fdc43d5e6-2cae-47d3-8a04-4161c69d8046-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20best%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F18%2F10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20best%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F18%2F10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405516016389%2Fdc43d5e6-2cae-47d3-8a04-4161c69d8046-1020x612.jpeg>
Incongruously located within Tennent’s huge Wellpark brewery complex in 
Glasgow’s East End, Drygate may be funded by sales of Scotland’s 
biggest-selling fizzy pish, Tennent’s lager, but be in no doubt: it is a craft 
beer nirvana. Launched in May, it is co-owned by Tennent’s overlords, C&C 
Group, and junior partners, William Bros. Brewing, and the complex includes, 
variously, a microbrewery producing Drygate beers; a bar with 24 draught beers 
and a selection of over 200 bottles; a remarkable bottle shop; and space – 
hence the unwieldy tag-line, “an experiential brewery” – for everything from 
meet-the-brewer and beer appreciation events, to tutored brewing sessions on 
the Studio Kit, which allows members of the public to create their own beers.

However cynical you may be about C&C’s motives for all this (a debate for 
another time), it is difficult not to be wowed by the vast choice at Drygate 
and disarmed by the geeky enthusiasm of the staff. After we had got chatting 
about the beers, the barman brought over a few tasters for me. Among those, a 
Roosters/Odell’s collaboration, The Accomplice (loads of pine, ripe melon, 
citrus and barbed-wire bitterness) and Kernel’s Amarillo rather puts Drygate’s 
own Gladeye IPA in the shade. It was perfectly pleasant, but more of a zesty, 
sherberty West Coast pale than a true IPA, to my tastebuds. Drygate’s beers are 
also available to takeaway at £1.90 a bottle.

As you can imagine, the keg-dominated bar (four cask pumps), is a who’s who of 
the world’s hottest brewers, from Italy’s Birra del Borgo to Sierra Nevada, 
Bristol’s Arbor to Sussex’s Burning Sky. A few relative oddities, such as 
Harbour’s dunkel bock, will please those who are jaded by hop-loaded, US-style 
beers. Prices can get silly – for instance, the Decadence Stout from London’s 
(in my opinion, so-so micro) Weird Beard was £6.50-a-pint, but there is plenty 
of choice around £3.50-£4.50. If the beer range is difficult to argue with, 
then the space itself – and, indeed, the confusing messages it sends out – may 
be more divisive. It’s very post-industrial: exposed air ducts, wire-cage 
partitions, views into the brewery, big communal tables, but done in a polished 
way (Aretha and Stevie Wonder on the stereo, swanky glassware, upmarket food). 
A lot of money has been spent smoothing out any rough edges. Initially, Drygate 
may look like a hastily knocked-together, grassroots endeavour, but, of course, 
this is pre-packaged hip, a clever simulation of a genuine independent, DIY 
micro. One which, judging by the steady traffic on a Thursday lunchtime, 
tourists will love. Is Drygate faking its street cred? To an extent, yes. Would 
I go again? Definitely.
• Pint from £3.50. Drygate Brewery, 85 Drygate, 0141 212 8810, drygate.com 
<http://www.drygate.com>

The State

This traditional city-centre pub – dark green leather banquettes; pewter 
tankards dangling from a grand central bar – may appear to hold little 
attraction for buccaneering craft beer drinkers. But among the pub’s seven 
immaculately kept real ales, you can generally find something tasty and 
exciting, as well as more sedate offerings from, for example, Thwaites and 
Cameron’s. Specifically, the State regularly has Oakham beers on the bar. This 
Peterborough outfit was using big-hitting American hops back when the young 
upstarts at Kernel or Brewdog were still drinking Ribena, and Oakham’s Citra – 
in perfect form on this visit - remains the definitive take on that hop. All 
gooseberry sharpness, lychee and scintillating bitterness, it is a modern 
classic. As well as its real ales (Alchemy and Green Jack were other 
interesting names on the board), the State is also a big whisky pub, and, 
therefore, a good stop-off if you would like to combine the two.
• Pint from £3. 148-148A Holland Street, 0141 332 2159

Munro’s

Pub purists will hate Munro’s. I wasn’t 100% sold on it myself, as a place. 
Just over a year old, this Maclay’s Inns pub feels very much like a corporate 
pub company’s idea of contemporary cool. But I can forgive a lot, in terms of 
self-consciously ‘funky’ design and blaring indie tunes, for the sake of good 
beer, and, in that regard, Munro’s is persuasive. Kernel’s Biére de Table 
(£4.40-a-pint, so not extortionate for Kernel), Fourpure’s pils and Arbor’s 
E-Bomb – a slightly grainy, citrusy summer refresher – were the pick, on this 
visit, from four craft keg and three cask lines. The bottled beer list is 
sound, if unsensational, with the odd bottle or two from Camden Town, Redchurch 
and WildBeer <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/beer> adding a little 
spice to the mix, alongside more predictable inclusions from Brewdog, William 
Bros. and Brooklyn. The staff were super-keen to offer samples and advice, 
incidentally, and Munro’s hosts irregular beer-related events, such as 
tap-takeovers and meet-the-brewer events.

As well as Munro’s, Maclay Inns also owns the Three Judges 
<http://www.threejudges.co.uk>, a much-loved, nine-pump West End real ale pub , 
and the recently refurbished Southside brewpub,Clockwork Beer Co. 
<http://www.clockworkbeercompany.co.uk>. The latter is but a javelin’s throw 
from Hampden Park, which will host the track and field events during the 
Commonwealth Games.
• Pint from £3.20. 185 Great Western Road, 0141 332 0972, munrosglasgow.co.uk 
<http://www.munrosglasgow.co.uk>

The Squid & Whale 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F18%2F10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405516130709%2Ffc402e65-da4a-461d-9d28-a35b4d3e1d24-2060x1262.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20best%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F18%2F10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20best%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F18%2F10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405516130709%2Ffc402e65-da4a-461d-9d28-a35b4d3e1d24-2060x1262.jpeg>
A busy, trendy bar and Mexican cantina – which explains the decorative cacti, 
less so its impressive soundtrack of niche electronica – the Squid & Whale is 
big on cocktails but also carries a serviceable craft beer range. In the 
fridges, you will find (but, of course) a large selection of William Bros. 
bottles, one Mexican craft beer, Red Pig (a bit like a Scottish 80 
shilling-style beer, apparently), and others from the big US craft breweries, 
Brooklyn, Anchor, Founders, Sierra Nevada. This concentration on the more 
commonplace and easily-available names in modern craft beer does mean that the 
prices are, refreshingly, sane. The 7.2% hop-bomb that is Founder’s Centennial 
IPA, full of ripe honeydew melon, peach and purse-lipped, wormwood bitterness 
was just £4.25.
• Bottles from £3.40. 372-374 Great Western Road, 0141 339 5070, squidwhale.com
 <http://www.squidwhale.com>

Inn Deep
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F18%2F10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405520941921%2F848617d5-38a8-454b-b53d-aa11c538394f-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20best%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F18%2F10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20best%20craft%20beer%20pubs%20in%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F18%2F10-best-craft-beer-pubs-glasgow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405520941921%2F848617d5-38a8-454b-b53d-aa11c538394f-1020x765.jpeg>
Given the ubiquity of its beers in Glasgow’s bars, you might wonder why 
Alloa’s William Bros. felt the need to open one of their own. But they did, 
and, not unsurprisingly, Inn Deep is a cracker. Whether by accident or design, 
its fridges seem to contain not just the biggest names in craft beer, but, 
arguably, and more specifically, the best beers (Kernel’s London Sour, 
Beavertown’s Gamma Ray, Marble’s Dobber), from each of those A1 micros. In the 
modern pantheon, these are iconic beers.

Elsewhere, across three cask and eight keg lines, real geeks (with money to 
burn!), will be thrilled by obscure imports from the likes of Sweden’s 
Omnipollo, Austrian’s Bevog and Germany’s BrauKunstKeller – all of which were 
hovering around £4-a-half. I settled instead, for William Bros. own Joker IPA 
which, whilst it delivers all the bracing bitterness you expect, lacked the 
true multi-layered tropical fruit complexity of the best new wave IPAs. 
Incidentally, Inn Deep itself is a cool space. Built into an arch beneath 
Kelvinbridge, it has a riverside terrace area that feeds into Kelvingrove Park.
• Pint from £2.90. 445 Great Western Rd, Kelvinbridge, 0141 357 1075, 
inndeep.com <http://www.inndeep.com>

Brel Bar 

If less discriminating mates have dragged you into the noisy, neon-flashing 
cluster of restaurants and bars around Ashton Lane, Brel Bar may prove a 
lifesaver. As the name suggests, Brel originally majored on Belgian beers and 
it retains a core of gems from Belgium and Germany. For instance, Rochefort 10, 
Tripel Karmeleit, Chouffe IPA, Paulaner and Schofferhoffer’s hefeweizen. 
However, that range has since expanded to include a cask pump rotating beers 
from Glasgow brewery, Kelburn, Joker IPA on keg, and a modest but high-quality 
range of US/UK craft beers. Thornbridge’s legendary Jaipur and Halcyon were two 
nice surprises. Kelburn’s Pivo Estivo couldn’t quite compete with those, but I 
could have happily downed several pints of this easy-drinking pale 
(lemony-sour, lingering bitterness).

Dimly-lit, all glazed brick and dark wooden panelling, Brel feels like a 
boozy, no-frills, no-nonsense late-night drinking den of the type I love. That 
was heightened by a thumping soundtrack of rockabilly and primitive rock ‘n’ 
roll (the bartender in the Cramps t-shirt clearly had control of Spotify). Yet, 
out back, it has a large and lovely beer garden, where the atmosphere could not 
be more serene. On a warm summer’s night, it is the perfect place to escape the 
crowds.
• Pint from £3.40. Ashton Lane, 0141 342 4966, brelbar.com 
<http://www.brelbar.com>

The 78

In Finnieston, craft drinkers would likely gravitate to the local outpost of 
theBrewdog chain <http://www.brewdog.com/bars/glasgow>. However, if you are 
looking for an experience unique to Glasgow, the 78 is a far more interesting 
option. A vegan cafe-bar – and, on Thursday nights, a reggae and dancehall 
hotspot – it serves vegan-friendly and often organic beers from William Bros. 
(12 bottles and three weekly rotating cask beers), Sam Smiths and Scottish 
brewery Black Isle. Be warned, though, such eco-friendly drinking does not come 
cheap. £5.05 for a bottle of Black Isle’s fine, but far from mind-blowing 
organic blonde, isn’t so much steep as vertical.
• Pint from £3.30. 10-14 Kelvinhaugh Street, 0141 576 5018, the78cafebar.com 
<http://www.the78cafebar.com>

West 

Amid the beautiful parklands and grand buildings of Glasgow Green (a short cab 
ride or leisurely walk from the city-centre), you will find West, a 
Bavarian-style bierkeller, brewery and restaurant. All of its beers – five of 
which were available on this visit – are brewed in accordance with the German 
Purity Law of 1516, the reinheitsgebot, and West concentrates on central 
European beer styles: various lagers (such as the helles/pils hybrid, St Mungo, 
or its unfiltered Wild West), hefeweizen, dunkel and malty, Viennese-style red 
beers. Although, its GPA, an American chinook-hopped kölsch, is an interesting 
deviation. I sampled a half of West Berlin, a Berliner Weisse-style wheat beer. 
Sharp and acidic at first giving way to a distinctive sweet banana flavour, it 
was decent drinking – if a little meek compared to the growing band of ‘London 
sour’ tributes to this Berlin style.

On a sunny lunchtime, West was clearly gearing-up for a very busy day, as 
drinkers spilled out on to the (ironically, in this huge park), astroturfed 
terrace. They had even put Post Office-style barriers up to, presumably, manage 
the expected queue at the bar. However, despite that popularity, I do have a 
couple of criticisms. Primarily, the bottled beer choice at West is negligible. 
Understandably, it wants to showcase its own beers, but given the number of 
serious beer fans who must come here, that seems a little narrow-minded. A 
specialist selection of great German and Czech beers would only add to West’s 
appeal. Secondly, the practice of charging more for two halves than a pint (eg. 
Hefeweizen, £2.05 half, pint £3.80), is not acceptable. Whatever the excuse.
• Pint from £3.50. Templeton Building, Glasgow Green, 0141 550 0135, 
westbeer.com <http://www.westbeer.com>

• Accommodation in Glasgow was provided by the Arthouse Hotel, one of the 
ABode Group’s townhouse properties (129 Bath Street, Glasgow, G2 2SZ, 0141 221 
6789,thearthouseglasgow.co.uk <http://www.thearthouseglasgow.co.uk>). Rooms 
from £79 B&B. Travel between Manchester and Glasgow was provided byFirst 
TransPennine Express <http://www.tpexpress.co.uk>.
 