
King's College, Cambridge 

With so many Christmas concerts around, it says a lot that the King's 
Christmas Eve service has an audience (via the BBC World Service) from 
Australia and Angola to Norway and Nigeria. The idea forNine Lessons and Carols 
- or readings interspersed with carols - started out as a small gathering in a 
wooden hut in Truro in 1880. Its original purpose was to keep local men out of 
the pub on Christmas Eve. Numerous churches adopted the snazzy format, but 
King's made it their own and now their world-beating choir is, for many people, 
the sound of Christmas. There are all the traditional favourites, notably the 
solo boy treble singing Once In Royal David's City, but also a new musical 
offering each year: 2010 is the turn of the Finnish composer Einojuhani 
Rautavaara <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einojuhani_Rautavaara> to dream up a 
seasonal carol. And it all happens in one of the most atmospheric and beautiful 
chapels in Europe, with its exquisite fan-vaulted ceiling. Be warned, though: 
queues start early – get there by 9am or you haven't got a chance of getting in.

• Nine Lessons and Carols, King's College, Cambridge, 24 December, 3pm, 
kings.cam.ac.uk 
<http://www.kings.cam.ac.uk/events/chapel-services/nine-lessons.html>

Birmingham

This year, the 12 elaborately-bearded, black cassock-wearing members of the 
Russian Patriarchate Choir of Moscow 
<http://www.singers.com/choral/Patriarchate_Choir.html> (watch them and weep 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=39eBIX3PYL0>) have decided to celebrate 
Christmas in Birmingham. If the authentic sound of ancient Russia is what 
you're after, this is the concert for you with Russian Orthodox Church music 
performed unaccompanied, as Russian Church law dictates. Until recently, it was 
virtually impossible to hear much of this music, even inside Russia. The 
programme includes several traditional folk songs, many of which lay in 
obscurity for centuries and were later suppressed by the Soviet regime. This 
choir is well-known for its deeply sonorous singing-style, conjuring up images 
of golden, onion-domed cathedrals, glinting icons, and darkly snowy Russian 
nights. All delivered from the comfort of Birmingham Symphony Hall.

• Russian Patriarchate Choir of Moscow by Candlelight, 7 December, 7:30pm at 
Birmingham Symphony Hall, tickets from £5 to £20, thsh.co.uk 
<http://www.thsh.co.uk/view/russian-patriarchate-choir-of-moscow>

Versailles
 Chateau de Versailles in snow. Photograph: Gilles Rigoulet/Hemis/Corbis 
Vocal group The Sixteen <http://www.the-sixteen.org.uk> has performed Handel's 
Messiah over 150 times. The piece is ubiquitous, especially at Christmas; 
certainly it's Handel's best-known work. Harry Cristophers and his choir are 
fresh from TV appearances on the BBC's Sacred Music series. This concert, given 
in the gloriously gilded surroundings of the royal chapel in theChateau de 
Versailles <http://www.chateauversailles.fr>, is bound to be a showcase for 
early music at its best - a million miles away from the inauthentic, 
mass-voiced Messiahs that period performance aficionados get so steamed up 
about (see Santander below). Sure to be an evening of restrained, pure and 
jaw-dropping beauty, from a fine group honed over a quarter of a century.

• Handel's Messiah, The Choir and Orchestra of The Sixteen, conductor Harry 
Christophers, Royal Chapel of the Château de Versailles, 22 December,
chateauversailles-spectacles.fr <http://www.chateauversailles-spectacles.fr>, 
tickets from €35-€130. Eurostar (eurostar.com <http://eurostar.com>) has 
returns from £69. From Paris you can take an "RER C" train to within five 
minutes' walk of Chateau de Versailles, alighting at Versailles-Rive Gauche. 
Hotel Mercure Versailles Chateau (accorhotels.com 
<http://www.accorhotels.com/gb/hotel-1909-mercure-versailles-chateau/index.shtml>
) has doubles from €94 (£80).

Gdansk

The Baltic seaside town of Gdansk plays host to some fine singing this 
Christmas. Of course, there's the obligatory performance of Handel's Messiah 
(see below). But, more interestingly in this concert from thePolish Chamber 
Choir <http://www.eng.polskichorkameralny.pl/629-4822b90029fd6.htm>, there's 
also a chance to hear the Magnificat and Nunc Dimittis by the Polish composer 
Pawel Lukaszewski. He was born in 1968 in Czestochowa in southern Poland, a 
place teeming with religious imagery, icons and pilgrims. His musical 
personality is intense and dark, sometimes harrowingly so, but it's never less 
than exhilarating to delve into one of his dramatic scores.

• Magnificat annual Christmas concert in Gdansk, Polish Chamber Choir, St 
Nicholas Church, 18 December, 8pm,eng.polskichorkameralny.pl 
<http://www.eng.polskichorkameralny.pl>. Ryanair (ryanair.com 
<http://www.ryanair.com>) flies Stansted to Gdansk from £14.89 one way. Borum 
hotel (hotelbonum.pl <http://www.hotelbonum.pl>) has doubles from PLN233 (£51).

Dresden
 Striezelmarkt Christmas market, Dresden. Photograph: Arno Burgi/Dpa/Corbis 
When the chanting of the Kreuzchor <http://www.kreuzchor.de/english/chor.php> 
drifts out of the wide doors of theKreuzkirche church 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kreuzkirche>, weaving their way between the 
richly decorated food stalls of the Old Market, the inhabitants of Dresden know 
that Advent has arrived. Every year for more than half a millennium, the city's 
central square has been transformed into a Christmas wonderland: theDresden 
Striezelmarkt <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Striezelmarkt>. Horribly kitschy or 
charmingly traditional, depending on how you look at it, Dresden delivers 
Christmas in spades and its venerable boy choir will be performingChristmas Eve 
Vespers with members of the Dresden Philharmonic, helping to get everyone in 
the festive mood. You can almost smell the glühwein, roasting sausages and 
gingerbread from here.

• Christmas Vespers with the Dresden Kreuzchor, 24 December, 2.15pm and 4.30pm,
kreuzchor.de <http://www.kreuzchor.de>. Germanwings (germanwings.com 
<http://www.germanwings.com>) flies from London Stansted, Belfast, Birmingham, 
Cardiff, East Midlands and Edinburgh to Dresden from £183.98 return.Hotel Am See
 <http://www.hotelamsee.de> has doubles from €95 (£81).

Riga

If it's new music you're after this Noel, pack up and head to Riga. The 
Latvian Radio Choir <http://www.radiokoris.lv/index.php?&15> are close to the 
source of the latest choral music, much of it coming from Eastern Europe and 
Scandinavia. The choir's idiomatic singing is perfectly suited to a programme 
of music by Stanley Kubrik's favouriteGyörgy Ligeti 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gy%C3%B6rgy_Ligeti>, the contemporary Swedish 
composer Anders Hillborg <http://hillborg.com/> and the world's best-loved 
choral composer, the 80 year-old Estonian "holy minimalist"Arvo Pärt 
<http://www.arvopart.info/>. All this newly-minted choral work is performed 
alongside music far more ancient: a series of medieval Gregorian chants.

• Night Prayer, The Latvian Radio Choir, Schola Cantorum Riga, conductor 
Sigvards Kļava, Dom Church, 12 December, 8pm, ticketsbilesuserviss.lv/eng 
<http://www.bilesuserviss.lv/eng/concerts/muzika/klasika/?concert=74076>. 
Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>) flies from Stansted to Riga from 
£27.98rtn. Old City Boutique Hotel (oldcityhotel.lv <http://www.oldcityhotel.lv>
) has doubles from €65 (£55).

Gozo, Malta

Within the ancient citadel walls of the Gozitan capital Victoria stand three 
monasteries of the Franciscan, Capuchin and Augustinian orders. St Augustine's 
is one of the town's loveliest buildings, with four imposing white statues 
guarding the doors of this Baroque gem. Just when the monastery was built isn't 
clear, but it was mentioned in the Augustine Order's registries of 1453. Since 
then, it has resisted earthquakes and papal orders to have it closed, and the 
monks have quietly kept going. Each year they hold a candlelit christmas 
concert given by theSchola Cantorum Jubilate – a local choral outfit, this year 
celebrating its tenth anniversary. One of the bonuses of attending is that you 
can, if you wish, spend the night – they have a few rooms which, during the 
rest of the year, are used for pilgrims on private retreats.

• Carols by Candlelight, Schola Cantorum Jubliate, St Augustine 's Monastery, 
Gozo, 4-5 December, 7.30pm,scjchoir.com <http://www.scjchoir.com>. Anyone 
interested in spending the night at the monastery should call for more details 
or bookings on + 79450950. Tickets for the concert available at D'Amato Records 
Shop in Valletta (damatorecords.com <http://www.damatorecords.com>) or Bargate 
Bookshop in Victoria. easyJet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) flies to 
Malta from Liverpool, Manchester, Belfast, Gatwick and Newcastle from £64.98 
return. Gozo Bed & Breakfast (gozobedandbreakfast.com 
<http://www.gozobedandbreakfast.com>) has doubles on Gozo from £52.

Copenhagen
 Nyhavn Christmas market, Copenhagen. Photograph: Monica Wells 
PCL/SuperStock/Corbis 
Danish vocal group Ars Nova <http://www.arsnova.dk/en> are known for mixing 
things up, performing music with ancient Jewish texts, Indian ragas and 
aboriginal works. What remains the same - whatever the musical material - is 
their finesse as a group. Directed byPaul Hillier <http://www.paulhillier.net>, 
one of vocal music's great conductors, they bring finesse, pinpoint accuracy 
and immaculate tuning to whatever they do. TheirChristmas Story concert 
features readings and music from typically diverse sources: Gregorian chant, 
motets and folk songs from Italy, America and Denmark.

• The Christmas Story, Ars Nova, conductor Paul Hillier, Garnisons Kirke, 8 
December, 8pm, 100 DKK,arsnova.dk <http://www.arsnova.dk>. Easyjet (easyjet.com 
<http://wwww.easyjet.com> fies Gatwick to Copenhagen from £29.99 one way. Hotel 
Fox <http://www.hotelfox.dk> has doubles from £100 anight for a two-night stay

Santander

To Spaniards, Santander is one of the jewels of Cantabria with its beautiful 
bay and gorgeous coastal views. Sparkling British early-music outfit, the
Gabrieli Consort and Players <http://www.gabrieli.com>, along with their 
dynamic director Paul McCreesh, are visiting Spain's northern coast for one 
night only, to performHandel's Messiah in riotously inauthentic fashion. 
McCreesh and his musicians take over thePalacio de Festivales de Cantabria 
<http://www.palaciofestivales.com>, joining a stellar bunch of soloists 
(including soprano Susan Gritton and bass Matthew Rose), along with six 
Cantabrian choirs and one from the Basque Country for what promises to be a 
communal singsong on a huge scale. Audience participation is all part of the 
deal, so get your vocal chords ready. Altogether now: "Hallelujah! Hallelujah! 
Hallelujah; Hallelujah; Halle-lu-JAH!"

• Handel's Messiah, Paul McCreesh and the Gabrieli Consort and Players, 
Palacio de Festivales de Cantabria, Santander, 19 December. Tickets from €9 – 
€21. Book via the website:palaciofestivales.es <http://www.palaciofestivales.es>
, or call + 34 942 361 606. Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://ryanair.com>) fly to 
Santander from Stansted from £39.978 return. The Vincci Puertochico (
hotelvinccipuertochico.com <http://www.hotelvinccipuertochico.com>) has doubles 
from £69.

Leipzig

Bach's Christmas Oratorio may well be the most optimistic musical statement of 
Christian belief ever written. It's a piece ringing with joy, brimming with 
evangelical zeal. At the same time, the music is underpinned by gently 
insistent dance rhythms that get your feet tapping along. Its passionate and 
rich scoring for Baroque orchestra includes trumpets and drums, which should 
resound spectacularly in the acoustic of theTomaskirche 
<http://www.thomaskirche.org/r-index-en.html> in Leipzig. This was Bach's own 
church where he devotedly worked from 1723 until his death in 1750, and his 
remains lie buried here, in front of the altar.

• Johann Sebastian Bach: Christmas Oratorio, Cantata no 1, Thomanerchor 
Leipzig with Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra and Conductor Georg Christoph Biller, 
Tomaskirche, Leipzig, 25 December. The choir's carol concerts are on 20, 21 and 
22 December. For information and tickets, email: thomasshop@thomaskirche.org, 
or call + 49 341 222 24 200.Lufthansa <http://www.lufthansa.com/uk/en/Homepage> 
flies to Leipzig from Heathrow £179 return. The Adagio Hotelwb.adagiohotel.de 
<http://www.wb.adagiohotel.de/wb/pages/en/adagio/hotel/hotel-adagio.php> has 
doubles from £64.

• Suzy Klein presents Suzy Klein's Sunday Morning on Radio 3 and anchors the 
BBC Proms on Radio 3 and BBC4

• This article was amended on 17 November 2010. The original said that Bach's 
remains 'lie in the [St Thomas's] church grounds". This has been corrected.
 