
Beverley, East Yorkshire

When approached across parkland from the west, Beverley pulls off this neat 
trick of making you think you’re in a Jane Austen novel. It causes a tremor of 
disorientation. Is this right? And then come the cobbled streets, the gracious 
Georgian residences, the top-notch church in the middle that has yet to be 
converted into a pub or a nightclub – that’s Beverley Minster, a gothic 
masterpiece. Look out for the 14th-century Percy tomb. Are we in the 21st 
century? No, of course not. Mind you, the good old days have their drawbacks. 
Once, searching for food at midday, I came across a fish and chip shop with a 
“Closed for lunch” sign on the door. Fortunately, not all establishments are so 
old-fashioned. Saturday sees a good market and there are some tremendous 
festivals: the folk music and literature festivals are consistently worth 
attending. But it’s the town’s gentle Georgian ambience that delights: break 
out the walking canes and crinoline, and stroll. Even Austen’s Lady Catherine 
de Bourgh would be impressed.

Eat and drink
Star local eaterie is James and Kate Mackenzie’s Michelin-starred Pipe and 
Glass <http://www.pipeandglass.co.uk/>, where you can grab a posh sandwich or 
indulge in top-notch modern British cuisine. That’s a few miles out of town, 
but if you’re looking for lunch closer to the centre, tryVanessa, a cafe and 
deli <http://www.vanessadelicafe.co.uk/>, or the cycling-themed Café Velo 
<http://cafevelobeverley.co.uk/>.

Stay
The best accommodation is in those gracious Georgian homes, now B&Bs. Both The 
5 Eastgate <http://the5eastgate.co.uk/> (doubles from £60 B&B) and Newbegin 
House <http://www.newbeginhousebbbeverley.co.uk/> (doubles from £85 B&B) get 
great reviews.

Kirkby Lonsdale, Cumbria
 Ruskin’s view, near Kirkby Lonsdale. Photograph: George Hopkins / Alamy/Alamy 
For many years Kirkby Lonsdale was a town that visitors could not quite place: 
it was in Cumbria but not the Lake District, it looked like Yorkshire but was 
not the Dales. Now, with recent additions to both of those national parks, the 
town finds itself in the centre of a massive swathe of protected land that 
stretches right across the north. This new-found status is well-deserved. It’s 
a pretty stone-built place on the River Lune with some excellent walks – stroll 
over to Ruskin’s view, for example, or take a day to explore up Barbondale. It 
also makes a great base for cycling and touring, with the Three Peaks, Dentdale 
and Ingleton within easy reach.

Eat and drink
On that walk, don’t miss the Barbon Inn <http://www.barbon-inn.co.uk/> for a 
decent pit stop. Back in town theLunesdale Bakery 
<https://www.facebook.com/Lunesdale-Bakery-105239746233918/> is an old 
favourite with cyclists who love its hearty soups and homemade bread and cakes, 
whileCrossing Point Cafe <http://www.crossingpointcafe.co.uk/> does good 
breakfasts and majors on local ingredients like Lune Valley smoked salmon. In 
the eveningAvanti <http://www.baravanti.com/> is a stylish Italian bar and 
restaurant.

Stay
There are some good hotels, including the Sun Inn <https://www.sun-inn.info/> 
(doubles from £99 B&B) and theRoyal Hotel 
<http://www.royalhotelkirkbylonsdale.co.uk/> (doubles from £95 B&B).




Pickering, North Yorkshire
 The North Yorkshire Moors Railway. Photograph: Alamy 
Those who saw the recent Dad’s Army film and marvelled at the charms of 
Walmington-on-Sea … should know that it was actually filmed in Pickering, which 
was neither on Hitler’s hitlist nor on the coast. You can see why the location 
scouts got excited: there’s acres of stone and cobble, a real steam locomotive 
railway station (catch the puffer to Whitby on theNorth Yorkshire Moors Railway 
<http://www.nymr.co.uk/>), some delightful pubs and plenty to do in the 
hinterland – theNorth York Moors national park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/23/north-york-moors-national-park-rangers-guide>
, including the mountain biking centre of Dalby Forest. They even have asecond 
world war weekend <http://www.glendalehouse.co.uk/pages/wartime.htm>, an event 
that allows parents to dress in period costume and wave their children off as 
evacuees. What’s not to like?

Eat and drink
Middleton Tea Parlour <http://www.middletonteaparlour.com/> is a little out of 
town, but worth the detour for its classic afternoon teas: all china and 
doilies. If you’re close to the centre, Pickering is well-blessed with cafes: 
tryMr Wilf’s <http://wilfward.org.uk/mrwilfscafe/> or Botham’s 
<https://www.botham.co.uk/bakery/Pickering-Shop-and-Tea-Room.html>. For dinner 
head toWillowgate Bistro <http://www.willowgatebistro.co.uk/> for hearty 
steaks, Yorkshire puddings and lighter fare too.

Stay
The White Swan <http://www.white-swan.co.uk/> (doubles from £159 B&B) is 
reliably excellent. For B&B tryBramwood <http://www.bramwoodguesthouse.co.uk/> 
(doubles/twins from £79B&B), handy for the centre of town.




Wareham, Dorset
 Photograph: Alamy 
It’s incredibly quaint, sits on a riverside and is one of England’s few 
remaining Saxon-walled towns. Wareham also makes a fantastic base for exploring 
the stunning surrounding area. “On a windy winter’s day, the nearby Dorset 
countryside might make you feel far from the madding crowds,” says reader 
vonZeppelin– a nod to local legend Thomas Hardy. This includes the villages of 
Wool, West Lulworth and Moreton, as well as the Dorset countryside around it, 
from Wareham Forest – great for cycling – to the Jurassic coast – perfect for 
beachcombing with the family – as well as the mysteriousBlue Pool 
<http://www.visit-dorset.com/things-to-do/the-blue-pool-p127283>, famous for 
its ever changing colours.

Eat
Wareham has plenty of pubs and tea rooms to choose from. For a sizzling 
breakfast or hearty lunch, both made from local Dorset produce, head to theSalt 
Pig cafe <http://thesaltpig.co.uk/restaurant>. The Old Granary restaurant 
<http://theoldgranarywareham.co.uk/> has pride of place on the quayside.

Stay
The Quay Inn <http://www.thequayinn.com/> (from £45pp B&B) is an obvious 
choice if you want to be right in the centre, whileBradle Farmhouse 
<http://www.bradlefarmhouse.co.uk/> (doubles from £85 B&B), in a picturesque 
valley five miles south of Wareham, is a B&B in a beautiful 19th century stone 
farmhouse.

Aberystwyth, west Wales
 Photograph: Alamy 
The mid-Wales town was very popular among our readers. JulesBywaterLees 
described it as “stunning”, while MarilynLewis praised its many small eateries, 
the amazingNational Library <https://www.llgc.org.uk/>, the Aber Arts Centre 
<http://www.aberystwythartscentre.co.uk/> and a coastline “to die for”. Being a 
university town, Aber remains busy and lively throughout winter. To make the 
most of the landscape, which is popular with cyclists and mountain bikers, 
visitors should take a walk along theCeredigion Coast Path 
<http://www.ceredigioncoastpath.org.uk/>, which runs through Aber.

Eat and drink
The same views can also be enjoyed from inside modern bar and pizza joint 
Baravin <http://www.baravin.co.uk/>, while other foodie spots include deli 
restaurantUltra Comida 
<http://www.ultracomida.co.uk/page/restaurants/aberystwyth> and harbour front 
seafood cafePysgoty <https://pysgoty.co.uk/home/>.

Stay
The contemporary Gwesty Cymru <http://www.gwestycymru.com/> hotel (doubles 
from £90 B&B) is a cosy eight room bolthole, with an award-winning restaurant.

Pitlochry, Perthshire
 A view from the summit of Ben Vrackie, five miles from Pitlochry. Photograph: 
William Starkey/GuardianWitness 
“Pitlochry is stunning at this time of year,” says reader littleyellowsiskin, 
listing the “train station, theatre, beautiful walks and lovely river” as 
reasons to visit. This far north you’ll need to wrap up warm in winter when 
exploringAllean Forest 
<http://scotland.forestry.gov.uk/forest-parks/tay-forest-park/allean>, with 
views ofLoch Tummel 
<https://www.visitscotland.com/info/towns-villages/loch-tummel-p253651> – one 
of the most famous views in Scotland – as well asFaskally Woods 
<https://www.visitscotland.com/info/towns-villages/faskally-wood-p249271> and 
thePass of Killiecrankie <http://www.nts.org.uk/Property/Killiecrankie/>, a 
riverside walk through a steep gorge, which, during winter, offers an 
atmosphere of silence and solitude, with the snow dotted with deer, squirrel 
and otter tracks.

Eat and drink
There’s lots of cosy places to eat in Pitlochry, from Hettie’s Tearooms 
<http://www.hettiesteas.co.uk/> for cakes and scones to the Logierait Inn 
<http://www.logieraitinn.co.uk/> (weekends only) for a hearty meal.

Stay
There’s an abundance of B&Bs in Pitlochry (and a hotel in a castle, if you 
want to treat yourself). We recommend taking a look at theCraigatin House and 
Courtyard <https://www.craigatinhouse.co.uk/> (doubles from £102 B&B), a large, 
award-winning B&B, orDerrybeg <https://www.derrybeg.co.uk/> (doubles from £80 
B&B), a modern eight-room B&B with views of the Tummel Valley.

Stamford, Lincolnshire 
 Photograph: Getty Images 
Described as “the finest stone town in England” by poet John Betjeman, 
Stamford, was the first area in England and Wales granted conservation status 
(in 1967) and there are over 600 listed buildings. No surprise the idyllic 
Georgian market town has been used as the set for several period dramas, 
including the BBC’S Middlemarch in 1993 and the 2005 film of Pride and 
Prejudice. It may be perfectly preserved, but this is no sleepy backwater. The 
thriving town centre has a weekly street market selling everything from fresh 
produce to home made preserves, linen and lingerie, and a number of quirky 
independent retailers: fashionistas will want to head straight toAttic 
<http://atticofstamford.co.uk/>, while Chez Soi 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Chez-Soi/114231338634193> sells an eclectic 
range of furniture and household goods. The town has over 30 pubs and some 
great restaurants. Perhaps no surprise then that one of Stamford’s more famous 
visitors was Daniel Lambert, at over 52 stone the fattest man in England. He is 
immortalised by a portrait in the George Hotel, and his remains lie in the 
neighbouring St Martin’s churchyard. To avoid a waistline as vast as Lambert’s, 
take a stroll through the bucolic Water Meadows, or up to Burghley House, a 
magnificent Elizabethan stately home.

Eat and drink
The George Hotel <http://www.georgehotelofstamford.com/>, an ancient coaching 
inn, is the perfect place for a traditional roast.The Tobie Norris 
<http://www.kneadpubs.co.uk/our-pubs/the-tobie-norris> is a great spot for a 
pint of real ale, whileNo 3 The Yard <http://www.no3theyard.co.uk/> has a 
modern British-inspired menu. And make sure you pick up some Lincolnshire 
sausages and pork pies from award-winning butchersNelsons 
<http://www.nelsonsbutchers.co.uk/>.

Stay
The Bull and Swan <http://www.hillbrookehotels.co.uk/the-bull-and-swan/> and 
theWilliam Cecil <http://www.hillbrookehotels.co.uk/the-william-cecil/> both 
offer doubles from around £100 B&B.

Chepstow, Monmouthshire
 Chepstow Castle on the River Wye. Photograph: Alamy 
It may be best known for its race course, but Chepstow has plenty more to 
commend it for a short break. Its position on the England-Wales border has 
ensured a turbulent history, embodied in the impressive remains ofChepstow 
Castle <http://cadw.gov.wales/daysout/chepstow-castle/?lang=en>, which sits on 
a lofty crag overlooking the River Wye. The castle’s Great Tower keep was 
commissioned by William the Conqueror and the wooden castle doors are the 
oldest in Europe, dating back 800 years. The town centre has no shortage of 
attractive Georgian and Victorian buildings, many of which have been converted 
into restaurants and independent shops. Don’t forget to bring your walking 
boots: several long-distance walking routes pass by the town, includingOffa’s 
Dyke Path 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/06/walking-guides-uk-long-distance-footpaths-grand-union-canal>
 and theWye Valley Walk <http://www.wyevalleywalk.org/>, which will take you 
through the wooded Wye Gorge to the ethereal ruins ofTintern Abbey 
<http://cadw.gov.wales/daysout/tinternabbey/?lang=en>, six miles away.

Eat and drink
The Lime Tree Cafe <http://limetreecafe.co.uk/> is a popular spot with locals 
– it serves everything from burgers to tapas via Indian street food.

Stay
The Three Tuns <http://threetunschepstow.co.uk/> (doubles from £85 B&B) is an 
atmospheric old inn dating back to the 1600s, with great views of Chepstow 
Castle. Rooms have wooden floors, original fireplaces and there are real ales 
and live music in the bar at weekends.

Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk
 Shops in the old town of Bury St Edmund. Photograph: Quentin Bargate/Getty 
Images 
“I come to bury St Edmunds not to praise it!” quipped reader BluTone, but 
there is much to praise in this Suffolk market town. It may be small but it 
packs plenty in: from the elegant cathedral ofSt Edmundsbury 
<http://www.stedscathedral.co.uk/> to the beautiful Abbey Gardens in the 
grounds of what was onceone of the most powerful monasteries in the land 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/bury-st-edmunds-abbey/>. 
There’s the last example of a working Regency playhouse in the country, the
Theatre Royal <https://www.theatreroyal.org/>, and a much-loved independent 
cinema,the Abbeygate <http://www.abbeygatecinema.co.uk/>, complete with 
reclining seats, sofas and a cool cafe/bar. There’s also a thriving 
twice-weekly street market (Wednesdays and Saturdays) and a great selection of 
independent shops tucked away in the medieval lanes and Georgian squares. The 
town has been brewing beer for almost a thousand years: the popularGreene King 
Tour <https://www.greenekingshop.co.uk/brewery-tours/> (£12pp) takes visitors 
around the town’s 1930s brewhouse, ending with a tasting session.

Eat and drink
The low-key location on a quiet residential street and rustic decor of Pea 
Porridge <http://peaporridge.co.uk/> belie the ambitious nature of the menu, 
which puts a firm emphasis on nose-to-tail eating: expect creative dishes like 
slow-cooked rabbit, pig’s cheeks braised in sherry and veal belly.

Stay
The Angel Hotel <https://www.theangel.co.uk/> (doubles from £130 B&B) was 
mentioned in Charles Dickens’ Pickwick Papers but today it’s been reinvented as 
a contemporary boutique hotel with smart rooms and a good brasserie which makes 
the most of Suffolk produce such as smoked salmon from Orford and venison from 
the Elveden estate.

Barnard Castle, County Durham
 The Bowes Museum. Photograph: Alamy 
Barnard Castle received an enthusiastic endorsement from reader ID6912820: 
“Absolutely lovely town on the River Tees with excellent food places and 
independent shops”. The town is dominated by theruined Norman castle 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/barnard-castle/> which gave it 
its name, but culturally the jewel in the crown has to be theBowes Museum  
<http://www.thebowesmuseum.org.uk/>, a French-style chateau which houses an 
extraordinary collection of fine and decorative art, including works by El 
Greco, Goya and Canaletto. When you’ve finished exploring its many treasures, 
(don’t miss the 18th century silver swan automaton which preens itself at 
regular intervals), take a walk along the Tees and out into the beautiful 
Teesdale countryside, which inspired Walter Scott’s epic poem Rokeby.

Eat and drink
Il Palazzo <http://www.ilpalazzoitalian.co.uk/> is attractive Italian 
restaurant with an extensive menu of pizza, pasta and seafood dishes that’s 
popular with locals.

Stay
Homelands Guesthouse <http://www.homelandsguesthouse.co.uk/> (doubles from £90 
B&B) is a welcoming and well-run B&B in a terraced stone house in the centre of 
town.

This article was amended on 13 December 2016: Beverley’s impressive gothic 
masterpiece is a minster, not a cathedral.
 