
1 Glasgow School of Art walking tour

Sometimes the best people to tell you about the cultural life and history of a 
city are the people actually creating it, so the GSA’s walking tours are led by 
the school’s students. The Glasgow miracle walk takes visitors from the 1970s 
to the present day, showing how new artists, designers and architects have 
contributed to the city’s cultural regeneration, while the Glasgow style tour 
will take you around some of the city’s most iconic buildings, including the
Charles Rennie Mackintosh building, being rebuilt after last year’s fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/15/glasgow-school-of-art-architect-restore-mackintosh-masterpiece-shortlist>
.

gsa.ac.uk/visit-gsa/city-walking-tours/timetables-tickets/ 
<http://www.gsa.ac.uk/visit-gsa/city-walking-tours/timetables-tickets/>. Tours 
start next month, although group bookings are available now. Tickets: £9.75 
adults, £8.00 concessions, £4.75 per child.Group prices start at £85.

2 Liverpool Slavery History 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/historyandhistoryofart> Trail


Eric Scott Lynch started researching his walking tour of Liverpool at 14, when 
he dropped out of school and started working as a bell boy. Describing himself 
as a “Liverpool-born black man, an active trade unionist and retired senior 
shop steward”, Eric uses the tours to educate visitors and residents about the 
history of African enslavement in relation to the city. From the Cammell Laird 
shipyard, which supplied warships to the confederates, to Martins (formerly 
Heywood’s) Bank on Water Street, which was founded on slave money, and helped 
slave traders to get rich, the tour teaches walkers about this sometimes 
uncomfortable, often hidden past of a great northern city.

slaveryhistorytours.com <http://www.slaveryhistorytours.com/>Tours are 
available all year. To book call 0151 709 7682. Costs £7 for adults and £5 
under 15. Not suitable for children under 8.

3 The Corris Mine Explorers, Wales

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmar%2F14%2F10-unusual-walking-tours-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1426004533540%2Fc2a1fcbe-a439-4e95-bf3e-68990e7449ac-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20unusual%20British%20walking%20tours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmar%2F14%2F10-unusual-walking-tours-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20unusual%20British%20walking%20tours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmar%2F14%2F10-unusual-walking-tours-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1426004533540%2Fc2a1fcbe-a439-4e95-bf3e-68990e7449ac-1020x612.jpeg>
 1940s miners take a break down a Welsh slate mine. Getty Photograph: Getty 
A two-hour trek through an abandoned Welsh slate mine might not sound like 
that much fun. But led by your knowledgeable guide, Mark, the Corris Mine 
adventure is a fascinating glimpse into a dark world of sweat, slate, social 
history and industrial decline. You might even stumble across an old piece of 
machinery or a miner’s candle and cigarette packet.corrismineexplorers.co.uk 
<http://www.corrismineexplorers.co.uk/> From £12 per adult and £8 per child.

4 Manchester’s radical women


As part of Manchester’s Wonder Woman festival 
<http://www.creativetourist.com/festivals-and-events/wonderwomen/>, the teacher 
and historian of the left,Michael Herbert, will be leading a special tour 
called Up Then Brave Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2012/oct/03/salford-manchester>. 
As well as the suffragettes, the tour will take in Owenite feminists, socialist 
women, Mary and Lizzy Burns – women writers on the Manchester Guardian – 
Elizabeth Gaskell and the Manchester Society of Women Artists. Herbert, under 
the bannerRed Flag Walks <https://redflagwalks.wordpress.com/>, also runs a 
range of walking tours aimed at “taking radical history onto the streets”, 
which are advertised on his blog.

Next tour: Saturday 28 March, 11.30am. Advanced booking recommended: 
redflagwalks@gmail.com. Tickets: £7.

5 CS Lewis, JRR Tolkien, Alice in Wonderland and Harry Potter tours, Oxford


Hardly lacking in literary characters, it’s not surprising to hear that this 
city hosts a number of book-related walking tours. The Lewis and Tolkien tour 
takes in the colleges where the two writers worked, the small wooden carving in 
the door on St Mary’s Passage said to have inspired the The Lion, the Witch and 
the Wardrobe, and The Eagle and Child pub. There is also a When Alice Met Harry 
tour every month that explores Christ Church College and meadow where Harry 
Potter was filmed and Lewis Carroll told stories to his young companion, the 
inspiration for Alice in Wonderland.

visitoxfordandoxfordshire.com/official-tours/ 
<http://www.visitoxfordandoxfordshire.com/official-tours/>. Next Lewis and 
Tolkien tour: 22 March; next Alice and Harry tour: 17 April. Themed tours cost 
£10 for adults and £7 per child. Harry Potter tours cost £15 per adult and £10 
per child.

6 The Sheffield Visually Impaired Walking Group


This is a local walking group for people in and around Sheffield. They welcome 
visually impaired walkers as well as sighted walkers who would like to 
volunteer to act as guides as they explore Sheffield and the Peak District. 
Guides will get half a day’s training but if you think it’s something you’d be 
interested in doing, then Christine Hewitt, the chairperson, suggests you 
simply go along a couple of times first to see if you like it. Don’t forget to 
wear good walking shoes and pack waterproofs, a drink and a picnic.

Visit sviwg.co.uk <http://www.sviwg.co.uk/>. Donations gratefully received.

7 Historic Toilet Tour, York

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmar%2F14%2F10-unusual-walking-tours-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1426004359091%2F96dc049c-3545-472b-a900-6e0599ba5d32-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20unusual%20British%20walking%20tours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmar%2F14%2F10-unusual-walking-tours-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20unusual%20British%20walking%20tours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmar%2F14%2F10-unusual-walking-tours-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1426004359091%2F96dc049c-3545-472b-a900-6e0599ba5d32-2060x1236.jpeg>
 York Minster seen from a city street. Photograph: Christopher Thomond/Guardian 
From Roman toilets and Viking cesspits to the first women’s toilet built in 
1896 in Silver Street (it took that long because “respectable ladies” were 
expected to stay at home), this is a fascinating social history via York’s 
waterworks. Led by local historians, the Historic Toilet Tour is one of the 
special walks put on by York Walk. yorkwalk.co.uk <http://yorkwalk.co.uk/>. 
Next tour: 6 April. £6 adults, £5 children and other concessions.

8 A History of Terror, Belfast


Conflict tourism is a tricky subject, so Mark, a Belfast resident and social 
anthropology scholar, decided to set up a non-political, non-partisan walking 
tour of the city centre to highlight the lost human stories of the Troubles. 
The tour, which is about more than just murals and peacelines, lasts about two 
hours and includes the sites of several attacks that took place between 1971 
and 1976. Some of the content may not be suitable for young children.

Go to deadcentretours.com <http://www.deadcentretours.com/>. £15 per person. 

9 Towie and Depeche Mode tours, Essex


There are two very different coach tours exploring the strange cultural clash 
that is modern Essex. Take your pick: the Depeche Mode tour of Basildon, guided 
by friends and associates of the Essex synth pioneers, or a vision of Essex now 
in the four-hour Towie coach tour, which describes itself as “the most ‘reem’ 
way to see the sites” of this reality television juggernaut.

Depeche Mode tour basproductions.co.uk/bp/event/bas-2015-dm-bus-tour 
<http://basproductions.co.uk/bp/event/bas-2015-dm-bus-tour>. The next tour is 
on Saturday 27 June. Tickets £15.
britmovietours.com/bookings/the-only-way-is-essex-tour-towie-tour 
<http://britmovietours.com/bookings/the-only-way-is-essex-tour-towie-tour/>. 
Tickets £26.

10 Real Ale Walk, Birmingham


Finally, it may have more canals than Venice, but Birmingham has an impressive 
selection of pubs serving real ale. Led by a qualified Heart of England Blue 
Badge Guide, this walk – strictly for over 18s – lasts about two and a half 
hours and will take you around some of the Jewellery Quarter’s finest pubs 
including the Lord Clifton, the Red Lion and the Wellington.

To book a tour, visit: birmingham-tours.co.uk/birmingham-real-ale-walk 
<http://www.birmingham-tours.co.uk/birmingham-walking-tours/birmingham-real-ale-walk/>
 or call 0121 4272555. Tickets: £10 per person and £200 for groups.
 