
After a seemingly endless parade of campaign announcements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/12/hillary-clinton-running-for-president-says-campaign-chairman>
 andabandonments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/21/lindsey-graham-drops-out-republican-presidential-race>
,debates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/datablog/2015/dec/16/republican-debate-candidates-consolidate-support-voters>
 and stump speeches – not to forget weekly controversies bornfrom the mouth of 
Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/12/who-if-anybody-is-advising-donald-trump>
 – the 2016 presidential election is finally upon us.

US presidential election 2016: the state of the Democratic race as the year 
starts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/02/us-presidential-election-2016-guide-democrats-hillary-clinton-bernie-sanders>
Starting next month, voters will finally begin to cast their ballots. Here are 
the key dates to circle on your calendar as election day draws near.

1 February 

The first contest of the 2016 election cycle will be the Iowa caucuses. The 
traditional saying is that there are three tickets out of Iowa, meaning that 
only the top three finishers in each party’s caucuses have a chance of securing 
the nomination. That might not be true this year – though there are only three 
Democrats running, there are a dozen Republicans still in the race – but Iowa 
may represent the last gasp of struggling candidates like DemocratMartin 
O’Malley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/06/martin-omalley-interview-cities-baltimore-maryland>
 and RepublicansMike Huckabee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/08/mike-huckabee-iowa-caucus-pizza-ranch>
 andRick Santorum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/25/rick-santorum-interview-slow-build-this-process-has-a-way-of-weeding-out-candidates>
. Such campaigns are going all-in in the Hawkeye state, in the hope of a 
dramatic resuscitation.

9 February

Just nine days later, New Hampshire’s first-in-the-nation primary will be a 
key indicator of how long each party’s contests will go. On the Democratic 
side, a win by Vermont senator Bernie Sanders overHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> could lead to an extended 
campaign. A victory by the former secretary of state in the Granite state could 
end the Democratic primary early. On the Republican side, a win by businessman 
Donald Trump could set off a long and chaotic primary contest.

20 February 

There are two contests on this day. The GOP holds the first-in-the-south 
primary in South Carolina, while Democrats hold caucuses in Nevada. South 
Carolina,famous for ugly and vicious politics, 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2012/01/21/forced-abortions-and-other-south-carolina-dirty-tricks.html>
 will be an important contest as top-tier candidates like Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio 
and Trump face off in a southern state which is home to a significant 
population of veterans. Furthermore, Nevada will be an important test of Bernie 
Sanders’ strength outside of Iowa and New Hampshire.

1 March

The SEC primary – aka “Super Tuesday” – is named after the Southeastern 
Conference in college football. It will feature primary elections in six 
southern states. Other states, including Massachusetts and Minnesota, will also 
hold contests that day. Candidates like Cruz and Trump have long been 
campaigning in southern states; a decisive performance could elevate one such 
hopeful as a clear frontrunner.

15 March 

Republican National Committee rules require early primaries to award delegates 
to the convention in Cleveland proportionally. This changes on 15 March. 
Starting then, states can become winner-takes-all, the top vote-getter 
receiving all the delegates. Florida and Ohio vote on 15 March and are 
winner-takes-all. With Florida boasting two presidential candidates in Jeb Bush 
andMarco Rubio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio> and Ohio’s 
governor, John Kasich, running too, these contests could prove key benchmarks. 
It’s likely they will be must-wins for any home state candidate still 
participating.

7 June

The last primaries of 2016, with five states including California and New 
Jersey holding elections. Normally, primaries on 7 June are an afterthought. 
However, in a topsy-turvy Republican contest that has defied all expectations, 
these contests could yet be decisive.

18 July

The Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> convention 
begins, in Cleveland. It could be the first contested convention since 1976, if 
no candidate has attained the necessary majority of delegates. If things are 
not quite so exciting, this will still mark the unveiling of the Republican 
platform and the vice-presidential nominee.

US presidential election 2016: the state of the Republican race as the year 
begins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/01/us-presidential-election-2016-republican-candidates-donald-trump-ted-cruz-marco-rubio>
25 July 

The Democratic convention in Philadelphia is likely to be far less chaotic. 
However, in addition to the unveiling of the vice-presidential nominee, it is 
likely to be filled with fierce ideological debates. The influence of Bernie 
Sanders’ insurgent presidential run will continue to be felt throughout the 
party.


26 September 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F03%2F2016-us-presidential-election-calendar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20026b480f10f7ccf3adce06daa5bb959c7c6a54%2F0_319_3874_2322%2F3874.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20US%20presidential%20election%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F03%2F2016-us-presidential-election-calendar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20US%20presidential%20election%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20how&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F03%2F2016-us-presidential-election-calendar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20026b480f10f7ccf3adce06daa5bb959c7c6a54%2F0_319_3874_2322%2F3874.jpg>
 Moderator Jim Lehrer interrupts Mitt Romney and Barack Obama during their 
first presidential debate. Photograph: Michael Reynolds/EPA 
The first presidential debate will take place at Wright State University in 
Dayton, Ohio. There will be three debates between the presidential candidates 
and one for the vice-presidential candidates. The first debate of 2012 proved 
momentous: Barack Obama gave a subpar performance which allowed Mitt Romney to 
elbow his way into the lead. The momentous part, though, was the improvement in 
the president’s performance that was provoked by the debate.

8 November

Finally, on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, well over a 
hundred million Americans will go to the polls to elect the next president of 
the United States.






 