
More asylum seekers have now reached Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> by boat in 2016 than in any previous 
year on record.

Nearly 171,000 people have arrived in Italy from north Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> since the start of the year, 
according to statistics compiled by the UN refugee agency and the Italian 
government. As of Monday, the total had surpassed the previous record of 
170,000, set in 2014.

Migration <https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration> flows in the eastern 
Mediterranean between Turkey and Greece have been drastically reduced after 
improvements in Turkish policing, increased threats of deportation from Greece, 
and the closure of a humanitarian corridor between Greece and Germany.

But Europe’s deterrent strategy has failed to cut migration in the central 
Mediterranean between Libya and Italy, with the Italian route once again 
becoming the main migrant gateway intoEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

European navies, including Britain’s, have focused on a military-style 
response, sending frigates to arrest smugglers in international waters.

'They were psychopaths': how chaos in Libya fuels the migration crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/17/they-were-psychopaths-how-chaos-in-libya-fuels-the-migration-crisis>
Libyan smugglers have responded by sending passengers on board inflatable 
dinghies that are piloted by migrants themselves, reducing smugglers’ exposure 
to arrest and allowing their business to continue as normal.

The Libyan civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/16/libya-gaddafi-arab-spring-civil-war-islamic-state>
 has weakened the country’s law enforcement agencies, some of whom are 
complicit in the smuggling, leaving European governments without viable Libyan 
partners in their fight against migration.

The chaos there also gives migrants more incentive to leave for Europe; in 
previous years they could more easily find work and stability inLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>.

Pressure on transit countries in the Sahara desert, through which many African 
migrants pass before reaching Libya, has had no effect. Flows through Niger, 
the country to Libya’s south, increased in 2016, despite Niger introducing new 
anti-smuggling laws at the request of the EU.


Displacement in north-east Nigeria, where 1.4 million people have been forced 
to fleeBoko Haram <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram>, may 
contribute to sustained levels of migration towards Europe in the future.

The numbers coming to Europe are nevertheless insignificant compared with 
flows within Africa itself. Just 3.3% of the world’s displaced Africans have 
reached Europe. More than 93% remain within their home continent.
Arrivals chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-28T12:52:58/embed.html>
The majority of migrants bound for Italy are fleeing poverty, wars and 
dictatorships inNigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, Eritrea, 
Sudan and the Gambia. Syrians no longer use the Libyan route.

The breakdown of law and order has significantly worsened living conditions 
for foreign workers in Libya since 2011. Many report conditions tantamount to 
slave labour, while hundreds have been kidnapped for ransom, and sometimes 
tortured.

A recent survey of new arrivals in Italy by the International Organisation for 
Migration found that 70% of respondents had been exploited to some degree 
during their journey to Europe.

Other recent IOM research shows that the majority had not intended to travel 
to Europe when leaving home, but had been forced to change their destinations 
due to extenuating circumstances such as the Libyan civil war.
 