
Mark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> 
started 2016 with a cookie cutter message of hope. “As the world faces new 
challenges and opportunities, may we all find the courage to keep making 
progress and making all our days count,” he wrote on his Facebook wall on 1 
January. He and his wife, Priscilla Chan, had just had their daughter, Max, and 
had been sharing warm and fuzzy photos of gingerbread houses and their 
dreadlocked dog Beast over the holiday season.

Then 2016 happened. As the year unfurled, Facebook had to deal with a string 
of controversies and blunders, not limited to: being accused of imperialism in 
India, censorship of historical photos, and livestreaming footage of human 
rights violations. Not to mention misreported advertising metrics and the 
increasingly desperate cloning of rival Snapchat’s core features. Things came 
to a head in November, when the social network was accused of influencing the 
US presidential election through politically polarized filter bubbles and a 
failure to tackle the spread of misinformation. The icing on the already 
unpalatable cake wasPope Francis last week declaring that fake news is a sin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/pope-compares-fake-news-consumption-to-eating-faeces-coprophilia>
.

Fake news: an insidious trend that's fast becoming a global problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
This was Facebook’s annus horribilis. Mark Zuckerberg must long for the day 
when his biggest dilemma was deciding which greyT-shirt to wear on his first 
day back at work 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10102616790362931&set=a.529237706231.2034669.4&type=3&theater>
.

It wasn’t all bad. None of these controversies made a dent on the bottom line; 
Facebook had a bumper year for advertising revenue, and the$3bn investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/21/mark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-end-disease>
 to tackle “all diseases” (no big deal) through the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative 
was well received.

But this year has revealed how difficult it has become for the social network 
to stand behind its mission to “make the world more open and connected” when 
the decisions it makes can be so divisive.

Unprecedented power

Thanks to its 1.79bn users and how much it knows about them, Facebook rakes in 
billions in advertising. In the first three quarters of this year, the company 
made almost $6bn in profit – a big jump from a mere $3.69bn in 2015. “They have 
perfected advertising in a way that makes it extremely enticing. It’s so easy 
to place an ad and get immediate results,” said media expert Gordon Borrell, 
whose analysis suggests that Facebook has taken$1bn away from print publications
 
<https://www.poynter.org/2016/a-look-at-facebooks-billion-dollar-2016-hit-on-the-news-ecosystem/440471/>
 in the past year. For every new dollar spent by brands online, a whopping 85 
cents goes to Facebook and Google at a time when traditional publishers are 
facing layoffs.

Some believe Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> has 
become too big to be regulated effectively.

“We don’t have the right regulatory paradigm for these globe-striding 
technology giants,” said Carl Miller, research director at the Centre for the 
Analysis of Social Media at the thinktank Demos. “We treat them like neutral 
utility companies but they are value-maximising commercial entities.”

Facebook is a monopoly with too much power, argues author and activist Robert 
McChesney. “When you get companies this big they are not just a threat to 
democracy, but they are also a threat to capitalism. They suck investment 
capital and profits away from smaller businesses and screw over the competitive 
sector.”

He has an extreme solution: if Facebook can’t be regulated effectively, it 
should be nationalised to ensure it acts in the interest of the public.

When you get companies this big they are not just a threat to democracy, they 
are also a threat to capitalism
Robert McChesney 
McChesney scoffs at the suggestion that Facebook is acting democratically by 
serving its many users. “That’s self-serving garbage,” he said.

Does it not make a difference that Mark Zuckerberg is a principled CEO with 
good intentions? Not according to McChesney: “I am sure the people who produced 
napalm thought they were doing a good service to protect the free world.”

Digital colonialism

One of 2016’s earliest missteps was Facebook’s mishandling of Free Basics. The 
company pitched Free Basics as a way to give internet access, and all the 
wonderful benefits it can unlock, to the world’s poorest people. The catch: it 
wasn’t real internet access, but a selection of apps and services curated by – 
and always including – Facebook. In February, the Indian government rejected 
Free Basics over its violation of the tenets of net neutrality following a 
public debate in which Facebookwas accused of digital colonialism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/11/marc-andreessens-colonialism-tweet-silicon-valley-facebook-india>
. It was an expensive and embarrassing blow for the social network and 
indicative that not everyone finds its brand of Silicon Valley 
techno-utopianism palatable. To compound the issue, Facebook board member Marc 
Andreessen reacted on Twitter with the tone-deaf and contemptuous line: 
“Anti-colonialism has been economically catastrophic for the Indian people for 
decades. Why stop now?”

Nitin Pai, director of the Takshashila Institution, an Indian thinktank, and a 
critic of Free Basics, said: “Facebook and Mark Zuckerberg must take a long, 
hard look at what are the values it wants to strengthen or weaken in this world 
... Unlike other multinational firms that merely sell goods and services to 
people across the globe, Facebook enables connections among them. It cannot 
take the usual, and usually untenable, ‘we are apolitical’ route to 
international business.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb058890f280f089223e442928817d98a138aea9%2F0_0_5422_3253%2F5422.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20the%20year%20Facebook%20became%20the%20bad%20guy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20the%20year%20Facebook%20became%20the%20bad%20guy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb058890f280f089223e442928817d98a138aea9%2F0_0_5422_3253%2F5422.jpg>
 Facebook is a monopoly with too much power, some argue. Photograph: Sergei 
Konkov/TASS 
Indeed, so political are Facebook’s global expansion plans that they are said 
to be working ona “censorship” tool that would allow them to operate in China 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/22/technology/facebook-censorship-tool-china.html>
 once again.

Censorship and accountability

Censorship has been a running theme on Facebook in 2016. Despite insisting it 
is not a media company and is not in the business of making editorial 
judgments, Facebook, it seems, is all too happy to censor content when that 
content violates its own policies or at the request of police. This has led to 
a number of high-profile blunders in 2016, including theremoval in September of 
the iconic Vietnam war photograph “napalm girl” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/facebook-deletes-norway-pms-post-napalm-girl-post-row>
 from a Norwegian journalist’s post and the deletion of abreast cancer 
awareness video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/20/facebook-bans-swedish-breast-cancer-awareness-video-for-being-offensive>
 in October. In both cases, human moderators made bad judgment calls that the 
algorithm then enforced across the site – to widespread criticism.

Facebook's profits soar as it continues to swallow online advertising market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/02/facebook-profits-triple-online-advertising-publishing>
In August, Facebook deactivated Korryn Gaines’ profile during an armed 
standoff with police at therequest of the Baltimore County police department 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/03/korryn-gaines-facebook-account-baltimore-police>
. Gaines, who was later killed by police, had been posting to the social 
network after barricading herself inside her apartment and aiming a shotgun at 
police. The incident highlighted the existence of anemergency request system 
<https://www.facebook.com/records/x/login/> that police can use to get Facebook 
to take content down without a court order if they think someone is at risk of 
harm or death.

Elsewhere, Facebook suspended live footage from the Dakota Access pipeline 
protests and disabled Palestinian journalists’ accounts; there were also 
reports it had removed Black Lives Matter activists’ content.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fzuckerberg-accused-censorship-facebook-deletes-napalm-girl-photo-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zuckerberg%20accused%20of%20censorship%20after%20Facebook%20deleted%20%E2%80%98napalm%20girl%E2%80%99%20photo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fzuckerberg-accused-censorship-facebook-deletes-napalm-girl-photo-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zuckerberg%20accused%20of%20censorship%20after%20Facebook%20deleted%20%E2%80%98napalm%20girl%E2%80%99%20photo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fzuckerberg-accused-censorship-facebook-deletes-napalm-girl-photo-video&media=>
Zuckerberg accused of censorship after Facebook deleted ‘napalm girl’ photo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/sep/09/zuckerberg-accused-censorship-facebook-deletes-napalm-girl-photo-video>
The lack of transparency over this process led to a coalition of more than 70 
human and civil rights groupsdemanding that Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/31/facebook-human-rights-censorship-civil-rights-mark-zuckerberg-aclu>
 be more transparent about its takedown processes and arguing that censorship 
of user content depicting police brutality at the request of authorities “sets 
a dangerous precedent that further silences marginalized communities”.

Reem Suleiman of the not-for-profit organisation SumOfUs added: “There’s a lot 
of doublespeak. Zuckerberg talks about being a human rights defender and 
champion of civil liberties protection. He hung a Black Lives Matter banner 
outside of Facebook. These are ideals that the company is claiming to promote, 
so it’s totally fair to hold them to account.”

Suleiman fears that under Trump’s administration, surveillance and silencing 
of minorities, particularly Muslims and undocumented immigrants, could become 
more commonplace. “Facebook has an ethical duty to protect its users,” she said.

Effect on the election

None of 2016’s controversies have rattled Facebook as much as the criticism 
that its failure to clamp down on fake news combined with the way its algorithm 
places users in polarized filter bubbles shaped the outcome of the presidential 
election.

“It’s crazy that Zuckerberg says there’s no way Facebook can influence the 
election when there’s a whole sales force in Washington DC that does nothing 
but convince advertisers that they can,” saidauthor Antonio García Martínez 
<https://www.amazon.com/Chaos-Monkeys-Obscene-Fortune-Failure-ebook/dp/B019MMUAAQ>
, who used to work in Facebook’s advertising sales department. “We used to joke 
that we could sell the whole election to the highest bidder.”

We used to joke that we could sell the whole election to the highest bidder
García Martínez, who used to work in Facebook ad sales 
In the runup to the election, misinformation and fake news – such as articles 
suggesting Hillary Clinton was a murderer or that the pope endorsed Trump – 
proliferated on social media so feverishly that evenBarack Obama said it 
undermined the political process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/barack-obama-fake-news-facebook-social-media>
. Macedonian teenagers built a cottage industry of pro-Trump fake news sites, 
motivated by the advertising dollars they could accrue if their stories went 
viral.

Widespread outrage over the issue led to an internal mutiny and an 
uncharacteristic climb-down from Zuckerberg. Having initially denied any 
responsibility, he wrote anapologetic post 
<https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10103269806149061> outlining ways the 
platform would tackle the problem, including building tools to detect and 
classify misinformation.

This, combined with the cases of censorship, points to the inevitability of 
Facebook accepting it is a media company and not just a neutral technology 
platform.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F172e170dc623c3e8863939dc2854f7bc9f5c6983%2F0_0_3395_2037%2F3395.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20the%20year%20Facebook%20became%20the%20bad%20guy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20the%20year%20Facebook%20became%20the%20bad%20guy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F172e170dc623c3e8863939dc2854f7bc9f5c6983%2F0_0_3395_2037%2F3395.jpg>
 Some believe that Facebook has become too big to be regulated effectively. 
Photograph: Dado Ruvic/Reuters 
“Mark Zuckerberg is now the front-page editor for every news reader in the 
world. It’s a responsibility he’s not choosing to accept,” Martínez said.

Claire Wardle, from First Draft News, thinks that is changing. “They may not 
have said it yet, but 2016 is the year Facebook recognized they are a 
publisher.” The company is simply reluctant to admit it because “it’s a 
nightmare”.

“We’ve never had a global newspaper in 192 countries, with all these different 
legal and cultural contexts and languages,” she said.

She points out that Facebook has been very diligent at policing the platform 
for sexual content and bullying, but now has to do the same for misinformation 
with a combination of expert human judgment and software. It’s not going to be 
easy and marks a huge cultural shift for Facebook. “Algorithms aren’t yet smart 
enough to make these decisions. Facebook needs to be honest about that,” she 
said.

Harvard Business School professor Ben Edelman added: “They need to grow up ... 
There are duties that come with their size and revenue. Facebook spends more on 
beer and ping-pong tables than on professionals to vet the quality of the 
material they show to users.”

Problems to come

As we draw towards the end of 2016, Facebook faces a number of looming 
challenges, including the fact – admitted in earnings calls this year – that 
the core site has reached saturation point for advertising. “They’ve squeezed 
the newsfeed lemon as far as it will go,” Martínez said. This means it will 
need to find other ways to make money, presumably through the other companies 
it owns, including WhatsApp and Instagram, or through virtual reality – if it 
is to continue growing at the same pace.

On the horizon is also the threat of Snapchat – a rival that has continually 
taunted Zuckerberg because of its overwhelming popularity with tastemakers in 
their teens and 20s. He tried, and failed, to buy it for $3bn in 2013, and 
since then Facebook has obsessively copied its younger, cooler competitor.

The company will also have a public relations battle on its hand when the 
movie The Circle, starring Tom Hanks and Emma Watson, launches in 2017. The 
film, based on David Eggers’ book, is a cautionary tale about an omniscient, 
privacy-violating Silicon Valley technology company that has subsumed Facebook, 
Google and Twitter. The dark and dystopian future it portrays is likely to 
create mainstream discussion about the ethics and intentions of these companies.

Zuckerberg can draw some comfort from the fact that this intense scrutiny is 
likely to pass. “Facebook is a relatively young company and will experience 
similar growing pains any maturing company faces as it navigates the teenage 
years,” said Forrester analyst Jessica Liu.

Wardle agrees. “Facebook is where Google was five years ago, and in five 
years’ time we’ll be having this conversation about Snapchat.”
 