
Not all iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 7s are born 
equally, according to new tests, which appear to show the cheapest, 32GB 
versions are significantly slower than the more expensive 128 or 256GB versions 
and that some have much poorer 4G reception.


Testing by both GSMArena 
<http://www.gsmarena.com/the_32gb_iphone_7_plus_uses_a_substantially_slower_storage_our_tests_show-blog-20943.php>
 andUnbox Therapy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qW2-TIbcTIg> found that the 
speed of the storage within the 32GB iPhone 7 is significantly slower than that 
in the more expensive 128GB iPhone 7. Reading data from the storage of the 32GB 
version of the iPhone 7 was 200MBps slower than the 128GB version, 656MBps and 
856MBps respectively. The difference in read speed over 600MBps is unlikely to 
be noticeable in day-to-day usage.

However, writing to the storage – saving data including photos, videos, music, 
apps or any other type of file – was found to be significantly slower on the 
32GB iPhone. The 128GB iPhone 7 wrote to memory at 341MBps, but the 32GBiPhone 7
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-7> was over eight times slower 
at just 42MBps.

GSMArena found similar results 
<http://www.gsmarena.com/the_32gb_iphone_7_plus_uses_a_substantially_slower_storage_our_tests_show-blog-20943.php>
 in its testing of the iPhone 7, with a 32GB iPhone 7 Plus reaching write 
speeds of only 39.6MBps compared with a 128GB iPhone 7 writing at speeds of 
308MBps.

Meanwhile, testing of different versions of the iPhone 7 Plus have also 
apparently revealed discrepancies in their cellular performances. According to
New York-based Cellular Insights <http://cellularinsights.com/iphone7/>, which 
conducted tests using networking equipment, the iPhone 7 Plus smartphones with 
model numbers A1778 and A1784, including those available in the UK and Europe, 
performed noticeably poorer than those with model numbers A1660 and A1661, 
including those available in the US.

A1778 and A1784 iPhone 7 Plus smartphones have an Intel modem chip that 
connects them to the 4G network, while the A1660 and A1661 models use a modem 
supplied by Qualcomm, a common supplier of modems and processors to many 
Android smartphones, including the new Google Pixel.

The Intel iPhone 7 Plus models showed at least 30% worse network performance, 
and in some cases as poor as 75% worse, than the Qualcomm iPhone 7 Plus models. 
This performance gap means that the Intel iPhone 7 Plus models will have poorer 
4G reception than the Qualcomm versions and slower download and upload speeds.

Milan Milanović from Cellular Insights said 
<http://cellularinsights.com/iphone7/>: “In all tests, the iPhone 7 Plus with 
the Qualcomm modem had a significant performance edge over the iPhone 7 Plus 
with the Intel modem. We are not sure what was the main reason behind Apple’s 
decision to source two different modem suppliers for the newest iPhone.”

In Cellular Insights further testing, it showed that the Intel iPhone 7 Plus 
models had worse reception than the iPhone 6S in the majority of signal 
conditions.

Most of the time users blame mobile phone operators when the signal drops out 
on their smartphone or data speeds are slow, but the testing indicates that 
depending on smartphone model, it might not always be the fault of the network 
provider.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> did not reply for request 
for comment.

• iPhone 7 review: how good can a phone be if the battery doesn’t last even a 
day? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/23/iphone-7-review-poor-battery-life>

• iPhone 7 Plus review: 2014 called – it wants its phablet back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/03/iphone-7-plus-review-apple-newest-smartphone-phablet>

• This article was amended on 25 October 2016 to correct references to Mbps to 
MBps.
 