
Twenty people have been killed in confrontations between protesters and 
security forces in Kinshasa, the capital of theDemocratic Republic of the Congo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo>, UN officials believe, hours after 
the end of the second five-year term of the president, Joseph Kabila.


A government spokesman said the death toll was nine.

Opposition leaders called for demonstrations overnight after Kabila refused to 
step down at midnight, and accused the 45-year-old former guerrilla commander 
of carrying out a coup d’état.

On Tuesday police and soldiers fired live ammunition in Kinshasa, as 
opposition activists burned tyres, threw stones and attacked an office of the 
ruling party. Violence was also reported in the southern city of Lubumbashi, 
where at least two deaths were reported: one protestor and a policeman who was 
lynched by an angry crowd.

Ida Sawyer, a Human Rights Watch researcher in Kinshasha, said on Twitter that 
at least 26 people were killed by security forces in clashes in the capital, 
Lubumbashi, Matadi and Boma.
Ida Sawyer (@ida_sawyer) 
#CongoCrisis <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CongoCrisis?src=hash>: At least 26 
people killed by security forces during protests today in Kinshasa,Lubumbashi, 
Matadi+Boma. Other reports TBC-@hrw <https://twitter.com/hrw> 
pic.twitter.com/lrCOUwFHlq <https://t.co/lrCOUwFHlq>
 <https://twitter.com/ida_sawyer/status/811331695790080000> December 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ida_sawyer/status/811331695790080000> 
In a video message released overnight, the senior opposition leader Etienne 
Tshikedi called on Congolese people to peacefully resist an “illegal, 
illegitimate leader” who he said had committed treason by holding on to office.

Protests expected on Monday were quelled by a massive security presence, the 
restriction of internet access and a wave of arrests. Human rights campaigners 
said about 110 people had been detained across the DRC in the four days before 
Kabila’s mandate expired. Up to another 100 are thought to have been arrested 
in the last 24 hours.

Outside one police station in the Njili neighbourhood of Kinshasa, about 20 
young men were under guard on a concrete platform, hands tied behind their back.

At a nearby hospital, staff reported a death and two injuries in the morning’s 
violence. The full death toll from the violence is very difficult to ascertain: 
medical staff are under instructions not to disclose information, and security 
forces routinely dispose of bodies secretly, local human rights officials and 
activists say.

José Maria Aranaz, a representative of the UN human rights office in Kinshasa, 
told Reuters: “On the issue of deaths, it looks bad. We are reviewing 
allegations of up to 20 civilians killed, but [the information] is pretty 
solid.”

Most of the arrests occurred overnight as security forces moved through 
neighbourhoods known to be opposition strongholds. “The soldiers came and were 
going from house to house picking people up,” one resident in the Matete 
district of Kinshasa told the Guardian.

In nearby streets, young men burned tyres before being chased away by police, 
and scattered shots rang out. Police and heavily armed soldiers confronted 
protesters across burning barricades, and the district headquarters of Kabila’s 
political party was set on fire by a crowd, prompting a barrage of teargas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fdrc-protests-grow-as-kabila-clings-to-power-despite-his-term-ending%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fdfd0372be5e1e1586801e7e9a9d591db44fbe9%2F0_79_3482_2089%2F3482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='20%20dead'%20in%20DRC%20protests%20after%20president's%20term%20expires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fdrc-protests-grow-as-kabila-clings-to-power-despite-his-term-ending%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2720%20dead%27%20in%20DRC%20protests%20after%20president%27s%20term%20expires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fdrc-protests-grow-as-kabila-clings-to-power-despite-his-term-ending%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fdfd0372be5e1e1586801e7e9a9d591db44fbe9%2F0_79_3482_2089%2F3482.jpg>
 Residents chant slogans against President Joseph Kabila during demonstrations 
in the streets of Kinshasa. Photograph: Thomas Mukoya/Reuters 
Roads were empty across Kinshasa, which appeared to be shut down for a second 
consecutive day. Thousands of troops and dozens of armoured vehicles were 
deployed at strategic points. There were similar scenes elsewhere across the 
country.

Ministers and supporters of Kabila say logistical and financial problems mean 
fresh elections cannot be held until 2018. Until then, Kabila – who has 
completed two terms in power and is prevented by the constitution from running 
for a third – has a constitutional duty to remain in office, they claim.

Sami Badibanga, the new prime minister, called for calm and asked security 
forces to show “discipline and restraint”. In September more than 60 people 
died when security forces opened fire on an opposition march.

“We will work in a spirit of frank cooperation with the international 
community to face the social and economic challenges and arrive at transparent 
and credible elections,” Badibanga said.

A ban on gatherings of more than 10 people did not appear to apply to small 
convoys of pro-government supporters who took to the streets in the afternoon.

“Our president is a patriot. It is calm today. Most of the population is with 
Kabila,” said Ali Warial, 33, who organised one rally in the Njili 
neighbourhood.

Protesters said they would intensify their efforts. “We are going to protest 
until the last possible moment. We are proud of our country. We want power for 
the people, of the people,” said François, a 27-year-old teacher in Matete.

Talks between the government and opposition factions brokered by the Catholic 
church are suspended and due to restart later this week.

Tshisekedi, the opposition leader, stopped short of calling for mass 
demonstrations – which would almost certainly result in significant bloodshed – 
and said he would respect the “timetable decided by the bishops”. Though he has 
a loyal following on the streets, the opposition is fragmented and faces a 
determined administration that is supported, for the moment, by a powerful 
security establishment.

Congo on a knife-edge as opposition leader calls for Kabila to step down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/congo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down>
The crisis has been building for many months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/congo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down>
. Negotiations and protests have intensified as the end of Kabila’s mandate 
approached. Washington and European capitals have sought to put pressure on 
Kabila to hold elections and have imposed sanctions on members of his close 
circle.

There is little doubt there is widespread discontent at Kabila’s rule. High 
inflation, the devaluation of local currency and flagging investment is causing 
deep economic hardship throughout the country, where two-thirds of the 
estimated 70 million population live on less than £1.50 every day.

“It’s impossible to live. There are no jobs, there is no trade, and food is 
more and more expensive. We are surviving only by struggling every day,” said 
Mary, a 38-year-old housewife in Matete.

Observers fear the crisis could plunge DRC, which has never known a peaceful 
transfer of power since gaining independence from Belgium in 1960, into a 
prolonged period of instability.

Many fear a return to the civil wars that killed an estimated 5 million people 
between 1997 – when the dictator Mobutu Sese Seko was ousted after a 32-year 
rule – and 2003.

Supporters of Kabila insist he has no intention of clinging to office. Barnabé 
Kikaya, the president’s chief diplomatic adviser, denied there was any plan to 
change the constitution to allow a third term, as several other African leaders 
have done in recent years.

“If we had wanted to change the constitution to allow a third term, we would 
have already done it,” he said.

 