
Councils will have doubtless anticipated a number of challenges when they 
volunteered to care for several hundred unaccompanied child refugees from the 
Calais refugee camp – but not that they’d face rising charges from some 
independent fostering agencies on the cost of placements.

According to Dave Hill, president of the Association of Directors of 
Children’s Services (ADCS), the influx of lone children brought to the UK since 
the Calais refugee camp was dismantled in October has led to a shortage of 
available placements. As a result, local authorities struggling to find scarce 
placements have seen charges increase significantly.

Typically, Hill explains, his council, Essex, has been able to buy supported 
lodgings placements for older looked-after children (who tend to be over-16) at 
a cost of around £250-£400 per week. Recently however, certain independent 
foster care agencies have been charging councils between £800 and £1,000 a week.

“I think it’s completely outrageous,” says Hill.

This unexpected financial pressure puts extra strain on councils that have 
already told government that funding for the national transfer scheme for 
unaccompanied children comes nowhere near meeting their actual costs. And it 
compounds their difficulties at a time when the need to find homes for children 
whose ages range from under 10 (Hill says the youngest unaccompanied child 
identified in the Calais camp was just six) up to 17, is posing an 
extraordinary challenge for child protection social workers across the country.

 Latest figures show that more than 70,000 children are already in care across 
the UK, the highest number since 1985, which means councils are embroiled in a 
never-ending search for sufficient placements to meet existing demand.


Around 320 unaccompanied children arrived in the initial period after the 
Calais refugee camp was torn down and charities estimate that dozens more have 
been transferred from France in the past two weeks. The Home Office has 
confirmed that more than 750 unaccompanied minors have arrived to date. Local 
authorities are now pleading for new foster carers to come forward: one city, 
Bristol, is holding public meetings in a bid to inform local residents of the 
children’s needs and encourage people to sign up.

The role of social work in the refugee crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/15/social-work-refugee-crisis>
Under the national transfer scheme, by which councils inform the Home Office 
how many unaccompanied children they are willing to take, Bristol is supporting 
54 children, including three who recently arrived under theDubs amendment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
 – one Ethiopian and two Eritrean girls. “Dubs” children are truly alone: they 
have no family waiting to welcome them and must be entirely supported by the 
state. Bristol has said it will take seven more.

So with such pressure on foster placements, where do the children end up 
living? “We’re taking a needs-led approach,” says Ann James, head of service 
for children in care and care leavers. “If a post-16 child needs a foster 
placement, that’s what we’ll deliver, and if someone can be more independent 
then we can offer supported lodgings or sometimes smaller shared accommodation 
with peripatetic support.”

There is, James emphasises, “a huge commitment” to keep unaccompanied children 
within the city. “This is a really diverse community and the ability to place 
young people near to people from their own community is very important.”

The scarcity of placements makes this ambition tough to achieve, and is why 
local authorities are often dependent on commercial fostering providers who can 
sometimes offer a place when a council’s own supply has run out.

There has, however, been criticism that Bristol council has been slow to 
respond to offers of help. Local resident Shazia Malik has enough space to take 
in two children and says she contacted the council in September but is 
frustrated that, despite ringing to check on progress, no one from the council 
has so far been in touch. “We are having to build our capacity to be able to 
respond to the flood of goodwill,” is James’s careful response.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fa-moment-of-crisis-agencies-urged-to-pull-together-to-support-child-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32db9cb315e05d0b6e198b262f9e02e6a91ce43f%2F0_93_1616_970%2F1616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20moment%20of%20crisis'%3A%20agencies%20urged%20to%20pull%20together%20to%20support%20child%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fa-moment-of-crisis-agencies-urged-to-pull-together-to-support-child-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20moment%20of%20crisis%27%3A%20agencies%20urged%20to%20pull%20together%20to%20support%20child%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fa-moment-of-crisis-agencies-urged-to-pull-together-to-support-child-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32db9cb315e05d0b6e198b262f9e02e6a91ce43f%2F0_93_1616_970%2F1616.jpg>
 Croydon residents welcome child refugees arriving from Calais earlier this 
year. Photograph: Citizens UK 
In Glasgow, the council adopted the concept of “kinship care” to increase its 
ability to look after unaccompanied minors arriving from abroad. Its new 
families for unaccompanied children initiative will work with faith communities 
throughout the city to provide homes for more children as they arrive, in a 
system similar to that which exists throughout the country when children are 
placed with relatives rather than foster carers if they cannot be safely looked 
after by their parents.

“This is a departure from the norm,” acknowledges the council’s leader, Frank 
McAveety, “but in the face of a humanitarian crisis we have to break new 
ground.”

Yet while Glasgow is drawing on the goodwill of local citizens to create 
greater capacity, and Bristol’s welcome for refugee children has been 
galvanised by a skilled group of activists from the charity Citizens UK, other 
councils have taken the decision not to accept any unaccompanied children at 
all.

This is because while the Home Office says it has “substantially increased” 
the levels of funding to care for unaccompanied children – with an additional 
£60,000 available for each region, according to a spokesperson – council 
leaders insist that the funding on offer meets barely 50% of the cost of 
looking after a child who has arrived in the country alone.

Social workers' response to Europe's refugee crisis a testament to human hope
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/nov/23/refugee-crisis-europe-austria-social-work>
The shortfall is why Leicestershire, the lowest funded county council in the 
country already buckling under savage budget cuts, has said it will take no 
more children at present. “We’re currently caring for around 58 young 
unaccompanied asylum seekers, including seven under the national scheme,” said 
Ivan Ould, cabinet member for children and families. “These are extremely 
vulnerable children and we’ve set up a specialist social work team to look 
after them, and started a campaign to recruit specialist foster carers.

“Reluctantly, the council has decided to pause its involvement in the national 
scheme, until the government can resolve the serious funding and practical 
issues involved.” Leicestershire has calculated that, as currently funded, 
taking its “share” of unaccompanied children would cost £2m a year, at a time 
when it is being asked to save £100m by 2020 on top of the £135m saved in the 
past five years.

Holding the home secretary, Amber Rudd, to her promise to take half the 
unaccompanied children in the Calais camp, Citizens UK wants the UK to bring 
1,000 unaccompanied children to this country by Christmas. In his capacity as 
ADCS president, Hill has written to all local authorities asking them to take 
three or four children each so the expense of looking after them can be fairly 
shared.

Hill believes that “at a moment of absolute crisis” all agencies must pull 
together to care for children properly – and that includes commercial 
providers. “It’s going to be difficult to find these children places,” he says, 
“and what it requires is partnership and cooperation – and putting children at 
the centre of things.”

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 