
I don’t remember exactly what I thought Dodie Smith’s I Capture the Castle was 
about before I read it. I was in my early 30s and it was one of those books I 
had been dimly aware of as part of the reading landscape of other people’s 
childhoods, likeAnne of Green Gables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/29/fiction.margaretatwood>: a 
perfectly nice thing to read at the time, I thought, but not necessarily 
something to seek out in later life. I probably assumed it was historical and 
worthy, some sort of wholesome adventure book. I knew Smith had writtenThe 
Hundred and One Dalmatians, so there was another connection to childishness. I 
imagined something with a tinge of Enid Blyton, all pink cheeks, lashings of 
this and that and people being either absolute bricks or beastly. Then one day 
I found myself staying in a house without a book to read, saw a copy on the 
shelf and read the first page.

“I write this sitting in the kitchen sink. That is, my feet are in it; the 
rest of me is on the draining-board, which I have padded with our dog’s blanket 
and the tea-cosy. I can’t say that I am really comfortable, and there is a 
depressing smell of carbolic soap, but this is the only part of the kitchen 
where there is any daylight left. And I have found that sitting in a place 
where you have never sat before can be inspiring – I wrote my very best poem 
while sitting on the hen-house. Though even that isn’t a very good poem. I have 
decided my poetry is so bad that I mustn’t write any more of it.”

Only 122 words and you have a character there, speaking in your ear: honest, 
funny, contradictory, alive. There’s that famous first line of course, but more 
than that, the way she conveys the character and her milieu without it feeling 
stagey. We learn that what we’re reading is the journal of 17-year-old 
Cassandra Mortmain, an aspiring novelist. Letters and diaries as a device in 
fiction tend to make me itchy (and novels about novelists normally bring me out 
in a rash): it’s just so difficult to get right. Often you get a diary or a 
letter that doesn’t read like one, or if by some chance it does, flattens out 
the storytelling. But what Smith does is make that voice the creator of the 
world. Things come into being through their relationship to her and we never 
doubt any of it for a moment.

The final lines of the book, as Cassandra fills the last space, are a throb of 
some­thing so nebulous as to be ghostlike

We learn that Cassandra is attempting to “capture” the people around her as 
practice for writing a novel and so we meet her father, James Mortmain, a 
novelist who saw success with his experimental novel,Jacob Wrestling. Now, 
after a decade of writer’s block, he spends all of his time not writing in the 
gatehouse, frozen in contemplation of the many outrageous events in his life, 
which include a short imprisonment after threatening his first wife with a cake 
knife and assaulting a neighbour who tried to intervene. His second wife, 
Topaz, is an artist’s model who communes with nature by walking naked in the 
rain at midnight, speaks with an affected deep voice, plays the lute and wants 
desperately to be Mortmain’s artistic muse. Cassandra likes her because of her 
kindness, but this doesn’t stop her wondering whether the reason she looks so 
extraordinarily young is “because her expression is so blank”. We also meet 
Rose, Cassandra’s beautiful older sister, desperate for the romance of a Jane 
Austen novel, who is “particularly fetching by firelight because she is a 
pinkish gold, very light and feathery”. Then there is a “cumbersome” younger 
brother, Thomas, who like Cassandra herself is “tolerably bright”, and Stephen 
the lodger, the son of their former maid, who is besotted with Cassandra and is 
described as “fair and noble-looking but his expression is just a fraction 
daft”.

They are all living in a mouldering castle in Suffolk, in a picturesque but 
very real kind of poverty, selling the furniture to survive. Smith is brilliant 
on the horror of margarine, cold rice, brussels sprouts and years of unpaid 
rent which hangs over the family, threatening to take away the leaky roof over 
their heads. If it wasn’t for the income and home-grown vegetables they get 
from Stephen, they would be in real trouble.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Frereading-i-capture-the-castle-sex-money-evie-wyld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bd4dd8ac727c2ca2488957db01f90fed31b9125%2F0_0_2100_2768%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20story%20with%20sex%20and%20money%20at%20its%20heart'%3A%20Evie%20Wyld%20on%20I%20Capture%20the%20Castle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Frereading-i-capture-the-castle-sex-money-evie-wyld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20story%20with%20sex%20and%20money%20at%20its%20heart%27%3A%20Evie%20Wyld%20on%20I%20Capture%20the%20Castle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Frereading-i-capture-the-castle-sex-money-evie-wyld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bd4dd8ac727c2ca2488957db01f90fed31b9125%2F0_0_2100_2768%2F2100.jpg>
 Dodie Smith in 1931 Photograph: Hulton Archive 
There is a wonderful exchange near the beginning of the book when Rose reveals 
dramatically that she would consider selling herself on the streets, only to be 
told that this is unlikely to work in deepest Suffolk. Rose bursts into tears, 
with Cassandra speculating it’s because she has lost faith in ever meeting any 
marriageable men, “even hideous, poverty-stricken ones”. We’re left in no doubt 
that this is a story with sex and money at its heart.

So it’s a godsend when two extremely eligible American brothers, Simon and 
Neil Cotton, become the Mortmain’s new landlords and come to visit. In an 
appropriate move for an Austen-obsessed young woman, Rose immediately decides 
she will marry Simon, the richer elder brother.

What follows is an increasingly absurd and energetic plot in which Rose 
behaves at first like a demented Bennet sister in order to woo Simon, before 
the whole thing accelerates into a kind of surreal farce, involving a fur coat 
mistaken for a bear and everyone realising they’re actually in love with 
everyone else. But it’s not really about the plot; it’s about that wonderful 
voice. The story takes place between March and October; and the book itself is 
neatly split into three sections: The Sixpenny Book, The Shilling Book and The 
Two-Guinea Book, reflecting the financial optimism of the family as they fall 
in with the Cottons. Smith brilliantly evokes the shift in voice as Cassandra 
leaves childhood and enters adulthood.

As the book moves on, Cassandra looks back with yearning to her time of cold 
rice and brussels sprouts and reading by precious candlelight and not thinking 
overly about the world outside the castle. As she sits in a cafe in London with 
Heloise the dog, and orders a lamb cutlet just to pass the time, you feel her 
sadness for something lost and unreachable in the past. Smith wrote the book 
while living in California during the second world war. I think one of the 
things I responded to so strongly, being half English, half Australian, is that 
feeling of sadness buried deep in the English landscape. “So many of the 
loveliest things in England are melancholy,” says the younger Cotton brother.

In fact, though the form is essentially comic, the entire thing is fretted 
with all sorts of sadness, one of which is the death of Cassandra’s mother when 
she was a child: “Mother died eight years ago, from perfectly natural causes. I 
think she must have been a shadowy person because I have only the vaguest 
memory of her and I have an excellent memory for most things.” Those two 
sentences contain a huge amount, enough for other novelists to hang entire 
novels upon, but there is a lightness of touch also. Smith had written a series 
of hit plays before she wrote her first novel and she has a dramatist’s insight 
into how you can use the things characters don’t say, the obvious cracks in 
their versions of themselves, to tell you who they are. The whole novel is a 
brilliant example of prose written with the energy of dialogue. Smith spent 
several years rewriting it, auditioning every line, and it shows.

The book has the act of writing at its heart, with Cassandra’s father’s 
failure to write a novel and the various characters’ attempts to help him 
propel his plot forwards – at one point Cassandra and her brother trick James 
Mortmain into staying locked in the tower until he has written at least 50 
pages. Mortmain is a brilliantly conceived character, appalling but 
charismatic, a sort of affectionate tyrant with a penchant for biscuits, 
continually trying to trick everyone, and himself, into thinking he’s writing 
again. Then there is Cassandra’s developing sense of herself as a writer – at 
one point when Rose is upset, she writes, “I really ought to have gone over and 
comforted her, but I wanted to set it all down here. I begin to see that 
writers are liable to become callous.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Frereading-i-capture-the-castle-sex-money-evie-wyld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff46802bd4000d47f613261d6ded0693bbf3bb4b4%2F0_100_2869_1721%2F2869.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20story%20with%20sex%20and%20money%20at%20its%20heart'%3A%20Evie%20Wyld%20on%20I%20Capture%20the%20Castle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Frereading-i-capture-the-castle-sex-money-evie-wyld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20story%20with%20sex%20and%20money%20at%20its%20heart%27%3A%20Evie%20Wyld%20on%20I%20Capture%20the%20Castle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Frereading-i-capture-the-castle-sex-money-evie-wyld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff46802bd4000d47f613261d6ded0693bbf3bb4b4%2F0_100_2869_1721%2F2869.jpg>
 Romola Garai (Cassandra Mortmain) and Henry Thomas (Simon Cotton) inI Capture 
the Castle. Photograph: Allstar/BBC 
The end of the novel is something that I come back to time and time again. I 
find endings very slippery, as there is an urge to tie everything up and seal 
it off by the final paragraph. In both my novels, I wanted to leave large 
aspects uncertain. What Smith does is to use the traditional comedic structure 
to suggest that the two eligible women will – in some configuration – end up 
with the two eligible men.

The final lines of the book, as Cassandra fills the very last space and 
declares the journal forever finished, are a haunting chant, a throb of 
something so nebulous as to be ghostlike. “Perhaps it would really be rather 
dull to be married and settled for life. Liar! It would be heaven.

“Only half a page left now. Shall I fill it with ‘I love you, I love you’ … 
No. Even a broken heart doesn’t warrant a waste of good paper…”

Then, just a short paragraph later, once she has given herself a stern talking 
to: “A mist is rolling over the fields. Why is summer mist romantic and autumn 
mist just sad? There was mist on Midsummer Eve, mist when we drove into the 
dawn.

He said he would come back.

Only the margin left to write on now. I love you, I love you, I love you.”

I Capture the Castle captures a young woman in that fleeting moment when she 
understands the world and her place in it.

• Evie Wyld is the author of After the Fire, A Still Small Voice and All The 
Birds, Singing. I Capture the Castle has been republished as part of the 
Originals, a new series celebrating the first and the best in the young adult 
genre from Penguin.
 