
It’s 10pm and I’m standing towards the front of a 60-person queue in the 
underpass at the entrance to theSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> Opera House. Flanked by 
snaking roped lanes, in anticipation perhaps of a much larger crowd, a quiet 
buzz rustles through the polite sprawl of mostly young 20-somethings, ranging 
from the diehards to the curious.


As part of BingeFest at the Sydney Opera House this weekend, performance art 
trioShia LaBeouf <https://www.theguardian.com/film/shia-labeouf>, Säde Rönkkö 
and Luke Turner are inviting visitors to deliver to the artists a message that 
begins with the words: “And in the end …”

Shia LaBeouf, Dan Harmon and Serial producer lead Bingefest lineup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/07/shia-labeouf-dan-harmon-and-serial-producer-lead-bingefest-lineup>
Between the hours of midnight and 6am, one by one, audience members enter the 
auditorium of the Joan Sutherland theatre and respond to this request in any 
way they see fit.

The two young women at the very front of the line have pink and blue fluoro 
hair and matching dresses printed with a pattern of LaBeouf’s face. A little 
further along, a group of friends prepared for the long wait, sit on the 
concrete playing Uno. A quiet man behind me has arrived alone and looks a 
little nervous. He says he likes the Transformers movies but hasn’t done 
anything like this before and couldn’t get any of his friends to come with him. 
He scrolls down Instagram looking for inspirational quotes, hoping he can take 
his phone into the auditorium so he doesn’t forget what he wants to say.

A 21-year-old from Texas, who helped film the trio’s previous project 
#takemeanywhere, has flown all the way to Sydney with his friend to say hi to 
LaBeouf, Rönkkö and Turner. As we wait in the line, he shows me the Harambe 
memorial tattoo he just got emblazoned on his upper right knee and 
enthusiastically quips about the trio’s work, “It’s all about sincerity and 
making connections”.

In this sense, the performance experience has already begun. Temporary 
friendships are struck through the common experience of waiting and thinking 
about a single proposition.

Ticking through everyone’s mind is a list of potential endings to the sentence 
“And in the end …” It’s a brilliant question, one that asks the thinker to 
reduce everything down to its essential elements and helps spur on the four 
hours of waiting in a meditative sort of haze.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fand-in-the-end-shia-labeoufs-latest-performance-art-project-asks-the-big-question%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6b172d94fe171f82a1eff43a3b172d2af8782ac%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='And%20in%20the%20end%20%E2%80%A6'%20Shia%20LaBeouf's%20latest%20performance%20art%20project%20asks%20the%20big%20question&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fand-in-the-end-shia-labeoufs-latest-performance-art-project-asks-the-big-question%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27And%20in%20the%20end%20%E2%80%A6%27%20Shia%20LaBeouf%27s%20latest%20performance%20art%20project%20asks%20the%20big%20question&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fand-in-the-end-shia-labeoufs-latest-performance-art-project-asks-the-big-question%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6b172d94fe171f82a1eff43a3b172d2af8782ac%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
 And in the End at Sydney Opera House as part of Bingefest 2016. Photograph: 
Daniel Boud 
At its most earnest, the proposition asks, what is life in its simplest form? 
What is the most basic thing I care about? What’s left when you strip back the 
worries and stresses of everyday life? At its most banal, it’s a proposition 
that elicits a sense of 21st century futility, sarcasm and wit, a rejection of 
the profound in a world that often feels like there’s too much going on to be 
able to make any definitive claims.

 As the hours tick by, a rhythm emerges: every few minutes, the next person in 
line disappears, microphone in hand, through the heavy wooden auditorium door. 
We see on the live feedandinthend.operahouse.com.au 
<http://andintheend.sydneyoperahouse.com/> a muted exchange between the 
audience member and the artists. The sentence is read out by one of the artists 
and then flashes in large red ticker-tape across the outside of the Sydney 
Opera House, beamed out an empty midnight Sydney.

“AND IN THE END, YOU DO WHAT YOU DO”. “AND IN THE END, I GUESS I JUST REALLY 
NEED A HAIR CUT. THAT’S ALL I GOT MAN”. “AND IN THE END, GRETCHEN TOTALLY MADE 
FETCH A THING”. “AND IN THE END, IT’S ONLY THE BEGINNING”.

One guy spends 10 minutes in there, running around, gesticulating wildly. 
Another woman comes out and bursts into tears.

At 2.30am I find myself, finally, at the front of the line, mic in hand, door 
looming ahead of me, totally at a loss for what to say. Through the door, I 
enter into the dimly lit auditorium. A cinematic experience, faced with three 
looming figures on stage. I choose a seat and wait. “Um, should I just say the 
thing?”

“You can do whatever you want.” Shia says. We exchange pleasantries. There is 
a pause.

“And in the end, it was the chicken.” I’m not sure if they get it. I stand up 
and walk out.

Shia LaBeouf embarks on a digital road trip: #TAKEMEANYWHERE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/may/25/shia-labeouf-embarks-on-digital-road-trip-takemeanywhere>
What you are left with, after this bizarre, almost boring experience, is 
perhaps what is most profound: your catalogue of thoughts that didn’t make the 
cut. Everything you didn’t say, after waiting and thinking for four hours. 
There’s something ominous about the three figures on stage. Even though 
audiences are invited to do anything, the artists are physically positioned as 
the god-like arbiters of an intensely constructed exchange. It’s a work that 
plays to everyone’s desire for 15 seconds of fame, a desire to feel heard, to 
participate in something greater, to find meaningful connection through the 
cult of celebrity. What it tells us about ourselves is somewhat disappointingly 
but perhaps reassuringly everything we already knew.

Upon leaving, I look back one last time at the red tickertape across the 
Sydney Opera House and read, “AND IN THE END, NOT A SINGLE PERSON QUESTIONED 
IT”.

• And in the End takes place again at Sydney Opera House at 10pm on 18 
December and 6am on 19 December
 