
Alicia Garza was in a bar in Oakland, California, drinking bourbon when the 
verdict came in. It was July 2013 and she had been following thetrial of George 
Zimmerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/14/george-zimmerman-trial-trayvon-martin>
, a neighbourhood watch volunteer in Sanford, Florida, who had shot dead a 
17-year-old African-American by the name of Trayvon Martin in February of the 
preceding year. Martin had been unarmed, on his way back from a 7/11 
convenience store where he had just bought himself an iced tea and a bag of 
Skittles.

There had, of course, been shootings of young black men before. But this one 
had a particular resonance. Garza had a younger brother of a similar height and 
build to Martin. She felt it could just as easily have been him.

In the bar, Garza, her husband and her two friends had been checking their 
phones for updates from the trial. The jury had been deliberating for 16 hours 
on Zimmerman’s fate. When theverdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/07/george-zimmerman-trial-trayvon-martin-parents>
 was announced, she learned of it first through Facebook: not guilty of second 
degree murder and acquitted of manslaughter.

“Everything went quiet, everything and everyone,” Garza says now. “And then 
people started to leave en masse. The one thing I remember from that evening, 
other than crying myself to sleep that night, was the way in which as a black 
person, I felt incredibly vulnerable, incredibly exposed and incredibly 
enraged. Seeing these black people leaving the bar, and it was like we couldn’t 
look at each other. We were carrying this burden around with us every day: of 
racism and white supremacy. It was a verdict that said: black people are not 
safe in America.”

Garza logged on to Facebook. She wrote an impassioned online message, 
“essentially a love note to black people”, and posted it on her page. It ended 
with: “Black people. I love you. I love us. Our lives matter.”

Garza’s close friend, Patrisse Cullors, read the post in a motel room 300 
miles away from Oakland that same night. Cullors, also a community organiser 
working in prison reform, started sharing Garza’s words with her friends 
online. She used a hashtag each time she reposted:#blacklivesmatter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/01/black-lives-matter-civil-rights-movement-ferguson>
. The following day, Garza and Cullors spoke about how they could organise a 
campaign around these sentiments.

“A call to action,” says Garza. “To make sure we are creating a world where 
black lives actually do matter.”

The revolution will be live-tweeted: why #BlackLivesMatter is the new model 
for civil rights | Khalil Gribran Muhammad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/01/black-lives-matter-civil-rights-movement-ferguson>
They reached out to Opal Tometi, another activist they knew in the field of 
immigrant rights. The three women started by setting up Tumblr and Twitter 
accounts and encouraging users to share stories of why#blacklivesmatter 
<http://blacklivesmatter.com/>. Garza made protest signs with block capital 
letters and put them in the window of a local shoe shop. Cullors led a march 
down Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills with a banner emblazoned with the same 
hashtag. The slogan started gaining traction.

Then, on 9 August 2014, a little over a year after Zimmerman was allowed to 
walk free from court, 18-year-oldMichael Brown was shot dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/10/police-fatal-shooting-black-teenager-angry-crowd-st-louis-suburb>
 by a white police officer in Ferguson, Missouri. Officer Darren Wilson had 
fired 12 rounds. Brown had been unarmed.

Protests broke out the day after Brown’s shooting. There was some unrest and 
looting. Cars were vandalised, commercial properties broken into. Police 
officers in riot gear took to the streets. Watching the drama unfold on TV, 
Garza had that same sickening feeling she’d had when she heard of Trayvon 
Martin’s death. Along with Cullors and Tometi, she organised a “freedom ride” 
to Ferguson under the auspices of the #blacklivesmatter campaign. More than 500 
people signed up from 18 different cities across America. When they reached 
Ferguson, Garza was astonished to see her own phrase mirrored back at her on 
protest banners and shouted in unison by people she had never met.

When a grand jury announced Darren Wilson would face no indictment  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/24/ferguson-police-darren-wilson-michael-brown-no-charges>
in the matter of Brown’s death, a group of protesters chanting “Black lives 
matter” shut down a local shopping mall. Later, after a spate of further deaths 
of unarmed black men, the phrase started appearing on T-shirts and mugs and 
badges. In December,Hillary Clinton used the phrase  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/17/hillary-clinton-torture-is-wrong-and-yes-black-lives-matter>
in a speech delivered at a human rights gala. It was referred to in television 
programmes – an episode ofLaw & Order; the finale of Empire. By January 2015, 
the American Dialect Society had declared #blacklivesmatter as their“word” of 
the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/13/blacklivesmatter-2014-word-of-the-year>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Fblacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437144155375%2F55ff7763-badd-4a8c-9405-df16154a687e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23BlackLivesMatter%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20a%20new%20civil%20rights%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Fblacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23BlackLivesMatter%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20a%20new%20civil%20rights%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Fblacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437144155375%2F55ff7763-badd-4a8c-9405-df16154a687e-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Alicia Garza in San Francisco, May 2015: ‘We have a lot of leaders, just not 
where you might be looking for them. If you’re only looking for the straight 
black man who is a preacher, you’re not going to find it.’ Photograph: Kristin 
Little 
In June, following the shooting of nine people  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/21/charleston-church-where-nine-black-churchgoers-were-killed-to-reopen>
by a suspected white supremacist in a church in Charleston, the activistBree 
Newsome climbed the flagpole 
<http://www.charlotteobserver.com/news/local/article25654843.html> outside the 
statehouse in Columbia, South Carolina and removed the Confederate flag. Her 
actions were tweeted and retweeted under the hashtag #blacklivesmatter. At a 
subsequent eulogy for the victims of the church shooting,President Barack Obama 
paid tribute to black churches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/26/obama-charleston-eulogy-pinckney-amazing-grace>
for being a place where children were “taught that they matter”. There are now 
over 26 Black Lives Matter chapters across the United States. From one 
heartfelt Facebook post, it has spawned a new civil rights movement.

Garza has been astonished by the response. “This wasn’t something that we – 
you know…” She pauses. “We didn’t have a strategic plan.”

Black America is in a state of protest. The 21st-century civil rights 
movement, exemplified by the action taken by Garza and those like her, is 
democratic in its aims and agile in its responses. It is fuelled by grief and 
fury, by righteous rage against injustice and institutionalised racism and by 
frustration at the endemic brutality of the state against those it deems 
unworthy.

In almost every area of society, black Americans remain disadvantaged. 
Education? Forty-two percent of black children are educated in high-poverty 
schools. Employment? The unemployment rate for black high-school dropouts is 
47% (for white high-school dropouts it is 26%). Housing? Although black people 
make up just 13.2% of the US population, they account for 37% of the homeless. 
Voters’ rights? One in every 13 African Americans of voting age is 
disenfranchised because of a felony conviction – a rate more than four times 
greater than the rest of the US population. In fact, African Americans now 
constitute nearly 1 million of the total 2.3 million jail population and are 
incarcerated nearly six times as often as white people.

Despite the election of America’s first black president in 2008, those 
profound structural fissures remain. But although the challenges might be 
similar, the new civil rights movement is tackling them in new ways compared to 
the 20th-century movement. The most notable difference is that, in 2015, there 
are no leaders in the conventional sense: no Martin Luther King or Malcolm X, 
no single charismatic voice that claims to speak for the many. Several people I 
interview insist this is a strength: they make the bleak point that, 
historically, single leaders of civil rights movements have almost always been 
assassinated. They have also been male.

“We have a lot of leaders,” insists Garza, “just not where you might be 
looking for them. If you’re only looking for the straight black man who is a 
preacher, you’re not going to find it.”

Instead, the new civil rights movement combines localised power structures 
with an inclusive ethos that consciously incorporates women, lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender and queer activists. DeRay Mckesson, one of the most 
high-profile activists with a Twitter following of 176,000, is a gay man. Garza 
identifies as queer (her husband is transgender).

The new movement is powerful yet diffuse, linked not by physical closeness or 
even necessarily by political consensus, but by the mobilising force of social 
media. A hashtag on Twitter can link the disparate fates of unarmed black men 
shot down by white police in a way that transcends geographical boundaries and 
time zones. A shared post on Facebook can organise a protest in a matter of 
minutes. Documentary photos and videos can be distributed on Tumblr pages and 
Periscope feeds, through Instagrams and Vines. Power lies in a single image. 
Previously unseen events become unignorable.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLfXqYwyzQpM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLfXqYwyzQpM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLfXqYwyzQpM&media=>
 The death of Eric Garner 
Events like the arrest of a 43-year-old man named Eric Garner, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2014/dec/04/i-cant-breathe-eric-garner-chokehold-death-video>
 who was placed in a chokehold for 15 to 19 seconds by a white police officer 
on the sidewalk of Staten Island, New York, in July 2014. Garner can be heard 
on mobile phone video footage saying, “I can’t breathe” a total of 11 times and 
was pronounced dead in hospital an hour later. The video went viral. “I can’t 
breathe” became a totemic phrase for protesters. The basketball player LeBron 
James wore a T-shirt with the words emblazoned across the front and was praised 
by President Obama for the act.

Events like a pool party in McKinney, Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/13/texas-pool-party-incident-mckinney-housing-segregation-race>
 in June where a white police officer threw a 14-year-old black girl to the 
ground, pinning her down for several minutes, before pulling a gun on two 
teenage boys. A bystander filmed the fracas, posted it on YouTube where it was 
viewed almost 500,000 times before being picked up by all the major news 
channels. The officer was suspended and later resigned.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DljGsFoN9wyw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DljGsFoN9wyw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DljGsFoN9wyw&media=>
 The McKinney pool party incident. 
Events like this were happening before – as many activists say, “there’s a 
Mike Brown in every town” – but it is only now that technological advances and 
digital savvy have ensured the dots are joined.

“Social media’s significance is that it is recognising different incidents 
that might have gone unnoticed and sewing them together as a coherent whole,” 
says Ethan Zuckerman, the director of the MIT Center for Civic Media and the 
author ofRewire: Digital Cosmopolitans in the Age of Connection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/21/rewire-zuckerman-untangling-krotoski-review>
. “And that means we’re forced to recognise very serious structural issues.”

Social networking sites are used disproportionately by young, black Americans 
– 96% of African-American internet users aged 18-29 use a social network of 
some kind. Forty per cent of the same group say they use Twitter – 12% more 
than the comparable figure for young white people. According to Todd Wolfson, 
the author ofDigital Rebellion: The Birth of the Cyber Left, the new civil 
rights movement has important precursors in grassroots uprisings such as the 
Arab spring and Occupy: “The Cyber Left is about flattening hierarchies, 
flattening governance processes, combined with using the logic of social 
networks for deep consensus building.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Fblacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436970321516%2F878a09da-2770-4fde-9d46-fb24a8636920-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23BlackLivesMatter%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20a%20new%20civil%20rights%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Fblacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23BlackLivesMatter%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20a%20new%20civil%20rights%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Fblacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436970321516%2F878a09da-2770-4fde-9d46-fb24a8636920-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Activist DeRay Mckesson updates his website and posts updates to Twitter from 
a McDonald’s in Ferguson. Photograph: Getty Images 
Kwame Rose, a 21-year-old civil rights protester from Baltimore, agrees: 
“Social media plays a big part in everything. I find out information, I put it 
on Twitter, it starts trending the more people talk about it and then the 
institutions start feeling the pressure.”

It is no coincidence that the majority of these new digital activists are in 
their 20s – internet natives, brought up in the online age, versed in the 
politics of revolution. Mckesson composes his speeches in tweets to ensure the 
soundbites can be shared in 140 characters. One community organiser I speak to 
says with a straight face that “a youth activist means up to the age of 35”. 
When I ask another about her attitude towards violence, she replies coolly: 
“What is violence? Is violence denying people proper access to food, housing 
and healthcare? If you’re referring to rioting, I guess it’s a reaction to the 
system in which we live. The state is violent.”

Although #blacklivesmatter was the original call to action, it is only one 
tributary in a larger, fast-flowing river. Other organisations have sprung from 
a shared sense of unease, such as the Coalition Against Police Violence, which 
is run by two female activists, or theBlack Youth Project 100 
<http://byp100.org/>, which has chapters across the country and campaigns 
against the use of racially motivated force, or the Florida-based Dream 
Defenders, which has mobilised communities against racial profiling and state 
oppression, and which started before Black Lives Matter. These activists 
communicate and link up online, minting a solidarity through social media that 
gives their separate voices mass focus and power.

As a result, says Steven Pargett, the communications director for Dream 
Defenders: “There are fewer gatekeepers, in terms of being able to tell our own 
stories.” He points out that during the protests in Ferguson, activists could 
take to Twitter to highlight the contradictions between police reports and 
eyewitness accounts. So while the TV networks were reporting on incidents of 
rioting and looting, real-time tweets from protesters on the ground claimed 
that the police had been firing tear gas and rubber bullets into groups of 
peaceful protesters.

In April, a similar thing happened in Baltimore. There were protests in the 
city following thedeath of 25-year-old Freddie Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/23/freddie-gray-death-police-clash-with-protesters-for-second-night-in-baltimore>
, who fell into a coma while in police care and later died of spinal injuries; 
the full autopsy has yet to be released. On the evening of 28 April, Kwame Rose 
was watching the coverage on television. He was “riled up” by what he saw: 
inflammatory language, talk of “riots” and no mention of the community 
initiative that had taken place earlier that day to try and clean up the 
streets.

“When the media started saying ‘tensions were high’, they were lying,” he 
tells me over Skype, peering out from beneath a pristine black baseball cap.

At 9.30pm, he went out with a group of organisers to help get people off the 
streets in time for the curfew. They asked some police to drop their riot gear 
and hold hands in prayer. It was, says Rose, “very calm”. Then he stumbled 
across a TV crew from Fox News. They were there to film the mustachioed 
talkshow host Geraldo Rivera who was attempting to interview a state senator 
among the crowds. Rose confronted Rivera about Fox News’s “biased” account of 
what was happening.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOwHvCy-a-Pg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOwHvCy-a-Pg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOwHvCy-a-Pg&media=>
 Kwame Rose confronts Geraldo Rivera. 
“You’re not here reporting about the boarded-up homes and the homeless 
people,” he said, in an impassioned, impromptu speech caught on video. “You’re 
not reporting about the poverty levels up and down North Avenue… you’re here 
for the ‘black riots’. You’re not here for the death of Freddie Gray.”

The clip was shared on Twitter. When Rose woke up on Wednesday morning, the 
video had been picked up by the World Star Hip Hop aggregating blog.

“That’s a big thing,” Rose says now, shaking his head. At the time, he had a 
job as the doorman of a big hotel chain. When he got to work that day, his 
general manager told him the film was all over the TV. He lost his job as a 
result of the attention.

When Kwame was growing up, his father, “Big Rose”, had taught him about civil 
rights history. Now, Kwame realised, he was fighting the same fight. He quotes 
James Baldwin by way of explanation: “To be black and conscious in America is 
to be in a constant state of rage.”

“I see what’s being done and I’m mad about it,” he says. “It’s an attack on 
black masculinity. You see it all the time [in the mainstream media]. When 
Dylan Roof [the suspect in the Charleston church shooting] was arrested, you 
see all these baby pictures of him. We are the same age. After the Rivera 
video, I was called every other name than the one my parents gave me. Dylan 
Roof was ‘a lost child’. Mike Brown, at 18, was ‘a troubled black man’.”

Indeed, when Brown was gunned down, the photo initially used by some of the 
rightwing media was one taken from below, throwing his face into half-shadow, 
showing him glowering at the camera making aV sign 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=michael+brown+shot&newwindow=1&espv=2&biw=1673&bih=1010&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0CAYQ_AUoAWoVChMImMOD9JXixgIVqgXbCh36UQl3#imgdii=TSB8YL-hMl69vM%3A%3BTSB8YL-hMl69vM%3A%3BCdiiGYjOP-4d4M%3A&imgrc=TSB8YL-hMl69vM%3A>
. It was widely interpreted by conservative pundits as a gang-related gesture. 
There were other pictures available, including one of Brown as a chubby-cheeked 
teenager in headphones and a Varsity jacket. Thousands of people took to 
Twitter to post contrasting images of themselves, posing the question as to 
which would be chosen if they became the subject of a news report under the 
hashtag#IfTheyGunnedMeDown <http://iftheygunnedmedown.tumblr.com/>

“This was a way of saying ‘Hey, mainstream media, you’re doing something 
really bad! Here’s this pattern, what are you going to do about it?’” says 
Ethan Zuckerman from MIT. “What’s interesting is it didn’t get talked about to 
me. But the newspapers moved away from this problematic image [of Michael 
Brown].”

It was a perfect example of new civil rights activism: online pressure brought 
to bear on a single potent issue with high visibility. Similar action ensured 
the removal of the Confederate flag from the South Carolina statehouse in the 
wake of the Charleston church shooting. Because so many of the new generation 
of activists are young and smart and technologically engaged, there is a 
restless, inventive energy to their campaigns, which can be started with little 
more than an iPhone. With the dissemination of information online, there is 
greater accountability. The mainstream has fewer places to hide.

Since Brown was killed in the street in Ferguson, several other unarmed 
African Americans have been the victims of fatal violence at the hands of the 
police –Tamir Rice in Ohio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/11/tamir-rice-police-officer-murder-charge>
,Tony Robinson in Wisconsin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tony-robinson-shooting> and Walter Scott 
in South Carolin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/walter-scott-shooting>a, 
to name only a few. Online activism has ensured we know the victims’ names and 
that they are linked in our collective mind.

Until now, deaths like these were viewed as a chronic problem, endured by 
local communities yet largely hidden from broader public consciousness. But the 
rise of a new generation of digital activists such as Garza, Mckesson, Rose and 
others, has created a sense of emergency in America. Fatalities at the hands of 
police are now front-page news. They can no longer be ignored.

Samuel Sinyangwe’s earliest experience of racism was at elementary school. He 
grew up in Orlando, Florida in a predominantly white community and he remembers 
being beaten up by an older kid and being called the N-word in the playground. 
He had soccer practice just down the road from whereTrayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trayvon-martin> was shot.

“I used to go to that same 7/11 [as Martin] every day for a packet of 
Starburst,” he says, talking from his home in San Francisco. “It could have 
been me. It really could have been anyone who looked like me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Fblacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437145986051%2Fe1992dcb-ffeb-4ab4-8f45-bdfb837447a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23BlackLivesMatter%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20a%20new%20civil%20rights%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Fblacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23BlackLivesMatter%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20a%20new%20civil%20rights%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Fblacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437145986051%2Fe1992dcb-ffeb-4ab4-8f45-bdfb837447a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Protesters hold signs during a march and rally for Florida teenager Trayvon 
Martin in 2012. Photograph: Julie Fletcher/AP 
When the Ferguson protests erupted, Sinyangwe felt a similar sense of 
injustice at the fate of Michael Brown and Trayvon Martin as many of those who 
took to the streets. But, he says, there was no comprehensive data available on 
police shootings “so we couldn’t get into the place of having a 
solutions-driven conversation”.

Sinyangwe, a 25-year-old Stanford graduate, data scientist and policy analyst, 
had the necessary skills-set to fill the gap. He had been following DeRay 
McKesson’s live-tweeting from Ferguson (“Tear gas feels like extreme peppermint 
tingling” and “Really bad car accident. Looting across from it. Pray for me”) 
and tweeted him. The two of them spoke on the phone. Along with fellow 
activist, Johnetta Elzie – an important presence in the movement – they set up
Mapping Police Violence <http://mappingpoliceviolence.org/>. The aim was to 
collate all the necessary statistical information on police killings 
nationwide, with a particular emphasis on black deaths at the hands of police.

It was a gargantuan task. Sinyangwe set about sourcing the core data from the 
three largest crowdsourced databases on police killings in the country and then 
comparing these to social media, police and local newspaper reports in order to 
identify the race of 91 percent of all victims. Within four months, the site 
went live.

The results were shocking. Sinyangwe’s work claimed that at least 1,149 people 
were killed by police in 2014, and that 304 of these – 26% – were black. Black 
people were nearly three times as likely as white people to be killed by police 
in 2014 and at least 101 of them were unarmed, according to Sinyangwe’s record. 
In March 2015, 36 black people were killed by police – one every 21 hours, and 
a 71 percent hike in numbers from the previous month.

(When the Guardian launched The Counted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
, a long-term investigative project, providing the most comprehensive database 
of officer involved deaths in the US ever published, which includes deaths in 
police custody and victims hit by vehicles, they found the tally for the same 
month to be 37 black Americans with 113 deaths across all ethnicities.)

Compiling the data was, says Sinyangwe, deeply depressing. For one of the 
pages on the site, he posted individual photos of unarmed victims killed by 
police in 2014, along with their stories. “All of that is incredibly heavy and 
sobering,” he says. “You’re reading these stories of people who were chased 
down for riding a bike in the street. However, it’s work that needs to be done.

“We have been holding a mirror up to the nation. And we’ve shown what has been 
going on for a very long time: that we are being brutalised. That the state is 
being violent against us… The nation is now aware of the problem. Whether we 
can agree on a solution or not is another question but at least they 
acknowledge something is going on and that’s a great first step.”

But what happens after that first step? Zuckerman warns that although social 
media can give the illusion of empowerment, it also runs the risk of diverting 
attention away from the knottier problems of longer-lasting policy change.

“We’re at a moment where trust in our major institutions is at an all-time 
low,” he says. “When you start losing trust in those institutions, you start 
losing your ability to change things.Social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> is a place where people feel 
they can move the wheel, and they’re right – they can change the representation 
of a gun victim in mainstream media. They can build momentum around removing 
the Confederate flag. But the fear is that it might be harder to make these 
much bigger structural changes in education or wage policy or to have a 
conversation about our gun culture.”
 Deray Mckesson in a tweeted picture from Selma, Alabama. 
Some fear that certain actions are little more than publicity-seeking. When 
DeRay Mckesson recently visited South Carolina in the wake of the Charleston 
shooting, wearing the bright blue Patagonia body-warmer he wears to protests, 
several residents took to Twitter to express their anxiety that his presence 
would stir up unrest and created the#GoHomeDeray hashtag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/21/deray-mckesson-twitter-charleston-gohomederay>
.

Oprah Winfrey, too, publicly aired her concern in an interview with People 
magazine at the beginning of the year. “It’s wonderful to march and to 
protest,” she said. “What I’m looking for is some kind of leadership to come 
out of this to say: ‘This is what we want. This is what has to change.’” On 
Twitter, she was condemned as being “out of touch”.

It is perhaps inevitable, as a movement gains in ground and size, that 
divisions will appear, that its focus will become messier. Alicia Garza talks 
of how #BlackLivesMatter has been appropriated by other, well meaning groups 
who have tried to adapt the message to state that“All Lives Matter” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/20/2014-black-lives-matter-because-they-did-not>
.

“The reality, of course, is that they do,” Garza says, “but we live in a world 
where some lives matter more than others. ‘All Lives Matter’ effectively 
neutralises the fact that it’s black people who are fighting for their lives 
right now.”

And then there are the inter-generational tensions. Some younger activists are 
wary of being dubbed “the new civil rights movement” because such a label 
undermines the traumatic nature of what is being faced in the present moment by 
black Americans and also because the new movement has not yet had the chance to 
mature, making any comparison unbalanced. Some resent the reverence accorded 
men such as Al Sharpton, Jesse Jackson and Harry Belafonte, who, in their eyes, 
represent a bygone era and who turn up in cities to hold press conferences only 
after the hard protest work has been done on the ground. They fear that the 
peaceful protests advocated by these elder statesman have little impact; that 
change will only be achieved by more assertive action.

Last December, there was a march organised by Sharpton’s National Action 
Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2014/dec/13/police-killings-protests-washington-new-york-live-coverage>
 in Washington DC. Johnetta Elzie was one of several younger campaigners who 
climbed on to the stage, yelling into the microphone “We started this!” In the 
crowd, someone else held up a sign stating in vivid green letters: “We, the 
youth, did not elect Al Sharpton our spokesperson. Have a seat.”

When I speak to Jesse Jackson, he is sanguine about such incidents.

“Well some of them [the younger generation of campaigners] are respectful and 
some of them aren’t,” he says, talking over a crackling phone line just after 
attending the funeral service for the Charleston Nine. “But you’re not 
protected from racism by age or by class. The fact is, there’s no hiding place. 
We’ve got to work together.

“There’s been nothing more dynamic in America over the last 12 months than 
these mass marches. There’s a backlash. This is a mammoth backlash and it needs 
to happen.”

And there is evidence of real change if you look for it: charges were filed 
against six Baltimore police officers in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/21/six-baltimore-police-officers-freddie-gray-indicted>
 relating to the death of Freddie Gray and it is likely that police reform will 
be an unavoidable subject in the forthcoming presidential campaign. But Freddie 
Gray is still dead. So are many more black people who died in police custody 
this year. That’s the real issue.

Back in Oakland, Alicia Garza is reflecting on how much has happened since her 
original Facebook post, which became the hashtag that launched a thousand 
protests. Progress has been made, she says, and yet there is so much further 
left to travel.

“I have to be honest,” she says. “I feel like I live in a constant state of 
rage and I think a lot of black people do… It’s more than depressing to me. It 
makes me angry, particularly when people try to deny it’s happening.”

When she was younger, Garza wanted to be an architect. She liked the idea of 
“figuring out how to create something from nothing”. And, in truth, she and her 
two friends have ended up doing just that. Not by building a house, but by 
building a movement from the foundations up.
 