
A week rarely goes by when we don’t hear how public services are taking the 
brunt of government cuts. We hear how the NHS is in crisis, social care and 
housing is in short supply, charities are left trying to plug the gaps with 
limited resources and what it means for those in need. However, all too often 
we ignore the effect the cuts have had, and continue to have, on the well-being 
of the workforce.

Stress in public services: how do you unwind? Share your photos and stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2015/jun/09/stress-in-public-services-how-do-you-unwind-share-your-photos-and-stories>
Over the next four weeks, the Guardian Society Professionals networks will be 
focusing on the staff who deliver vital public services. Our project – Clock 
Off – will explore the physical and mental wellbeing of employees in the public 
and voluntary sectors, including your stories and advice on how to switch off.

This project began with a survey of 3,700 employees, 
<http://gu.com/p/49tty/stw> and found that 95% of public and voluntary sector 
staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2015/jun/10/almost-all-charity-staff-work-beyond-their-contracted-hours-survey-finds>
 surveyed work beyond their contracted hours, 93% say they experience stress in 
relation to their work and, on average, staff are working an extra seven hours 
each week.

The coalition of sites and their communities , including the Healthcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network>, Social Care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network>, Voluntary Sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network>, Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network> and Public Leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network> networks, will be looking 
at topics such as stress, mindfulness, pay, work-life balance, health, trauma 
and much more.

Society Professionals also want to hear from you. Tell us how you manage your 
work-life balance on social media with the hashtag #ClockOff and share your 
stories and photos viaGuardian Witness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55758699e4b019d982cba85e>.

To find out more visit the Society Professional’s Network homepage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals>
 