
One of Britain’s first “digital detox” companies is planning to expand its 
programmes to include teenagers as concern grows at the number of young people 
apparently unable to withdraw from the online world.

The website of Time To Log Off <http://www.itstimetologoff.com/> offers 
punters the chance “to reconnect with the world offline, leaving you relaxed 
and energised to return to your daily life”. So far it has specialised in detox 
breaks for adults, but its first teenage weekend will open in Somerset during 
the Easter holidays.

Smartphones are stealing our time. This new year, I want to claim it back | 
Marcus Gilroy-Ware
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/smartphones-time-new-year-apps-resolution-facebook>
Founder Tanya Goodin has toured secondary schools to talk to children about 
managing their online time in a healthier way. “More and more have been coming 
up to me and asking ‘How do I know if I’m addicted?’” she said, “and ‘How much 
time is too much time online?’ A bit of logging off and mindfulness before they 
launch into the summer exam season ought to be a good experience.”

Goodin carried out a survey of more than 500 young people aged 13 to 18. Of 
those, 29% said they spent more than eight hours a day online while 36% 
admitted they regularly fell asleep with their phone or laptop in bed. 
Two-thirds (67%) said they went to their phone when they were bored and nearly 
60% revealed they used their phone as a crutch in an uncomfortable social 
situation.

Eliza, 16, a year 11 pupil in Hampshire, is one of those keen to sign up. She 
is currently revising for her mock GCSEs, but is struggling to get anything 
done. The problem, she says, is that she cannot stay off her phone for more 
than 20 minutes. “I’m constantly checking it and flicking through stuff. I wish 
I could bring myself to delete all my apps, or just turn the phone off, but I 
can’t. It’s quite scary,” she says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fyour-phone-is-seducing-you-and-youre-paying-the-price-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446566245222%2FKP_582263_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20phone%20is%20seducing%20you%2C%20and%20you're%20paying%20the%20price%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fyour-phone-is-seducing-you-and-youre-paying-the-price-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20phone%20is%20seducing%20you%2C%20and%20you%27re%20paying%20the%20price%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fyour-phone-is-seducing-you-and-youre-paying-the-price-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446566245222%2FKP_582263_crop_640x480.jpg>
Your phone is seducing you, and you’re paying the price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/nov/04/your-phone-is-seducing-you-and-youre-paying-the-price-video>
“Once you get into the habit you’re always waiting – there’s always a set 
amount of ‘likes’ you’re trying to get. There’s always certain standards you 
have to meet. There’s a lot of pressure in that sense.”

Getting children off screens is already big business in China. Places like 
Beijing’s Daxing Internet Addiction Treatment Centre, founded by a former 
officer in the People’s Liberation Army, are run more like military boot camps 
than retreats. The children are woken at 5am and there is a focus on 
discipline, obedience and silence (sometimes even solitary confinement).

“The kids get dragged there kicking and screaming”, says Goodin, who says her 
camps will take a softer approach. Activities will focus on team building, 
silent walks and creative pastimes like photography, painting and cookery. As 
with her adult retreats, the teenagers will be required to leave all their 
devices at the door.

“I imagine it will be quite bad tempered and snarly to start with,” she says. 
“The first 24 hours are the most difficult but then I expect them to adapt very 
quickly.”

At £500 for a three-night stay, it will not be accessible to all. “It’s only 
going to happen for children with parents who are switched on enough to care, 
or able enough to afford it,” says Shelagh O’Connell, head of English at a 
prominent west London school. O’Connell, who has been teaching English for 20 
years, has seen a major dip in the attention span of her pupils over the past 
five years and believes much of it is down to a rampant social media culture.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2F2016-year-in-viral-videos-social-media-crazes-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20the%20year%20in%20viral%20videos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2F2016-year-in-viral-videos-social-media-crazes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20the%20year%20in%20viral%20videos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2F2016-year-in-viral-videos-social-media-crazes-video&media=>
2016: the year in viral videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/28/2016-year-in-viral-videos-social-media-crazes-video>
“The children have to be plugged into their social feed all the time, so 
they’re caught in a bubble,” she says. Pupils are less able to memorise poetry 
verses, take dictated notes in class or even make simple observations, like 
describing the colours of autumnal leaves.

“Teaching has become focused on keeping kids’ attention and always having 
visuals in front of them,” she says.

O’Connell agrees with Goodin that children are more clued up about technology 
dependency than many adults give them credit for. One of her pupils was so 
concerned about failing a series of crucial exams that he gave her his mobile 
phone for safe keeping between Easter and study leave, she says.

“He was coming in well slept and polite, and he didn’t ask for it back,” adds 
O’Connell. “He passed the exams and his mother was really grateful to me 
because she hadn’t had to battle him at home.”

So should schools be looking at their own digital detox initiatives, 
especially around exam times?

Dr Richard Graham, a consultant psychiatrist at the Nightingale hospital in 
London, thinks so. Digital detox retreats in Somerset will be good for “washing 
out the toxins,” he says. But schools need a “system-wide approach, with clean 
times and clean zones where everyone switches off”.

With exams looming, Eliza, for one, would welcome something that forces her to 
resist her social media impulses. “It all started off as a place to make new 
friends, but it’s turned into something that’s more about seeking validation,” 
she says. “I don’t know why I put myself through it.”
 