
Sixty-two years ago today, the combination of a severe storm and high spring 
tide brought catastrophe to the east coast of England, as the water rose to six 
metres above sea level and overwhelmed the land. The Dutch had it even worse, 
with the loss of 1,800 lives – they called it theWatersnoodramp, the “flood 
disaster”. But Suffolk and Essex suffered badly, too, with 307 deaths in all, 
including 38 at Felixstowe, 37 in Jaywick, and 58 on Canvey Island.

A couple of documentaries appeared around the time of the 60th anniversary of 
the flood but compared with the commemoration of the 2004 Asiantsunami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tsunami2004> the coverage was modest. There 
wasn’t the footage; the only survivors with memories of the event were past 
pension age, and the loss of life was on a smaller scale. But perhaps another 
factor explains the neglect: resignation to the idea that the North Sea is 
destined to wreak havoc periodically and that nothing can be done to prevent it.

A recent unpublished Environment Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/environment-agency> analysis suggests 
as much, predicting that 7,000 homes, with a total value of more than £1bn, 
will be lost over the next century – 800 in the next 20 years. The current 
consensus is to let them fall into the sea (with no compensation for 
homeowners), since the cost of protecting them is too great. In some areas a 
shoreline management policy of “holding the line” or “managed retreat” will 
muffle the blow. But huge damage will be done in the east, where rising sea 
levels and a “soft” coastline have already claimed many a clifftop home.

Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is 
part of the problem. But it’s no use pretending the problem is new. “This year 
also,” theAnglo-Saxon Chronicle records in 1099, “the sea flood sprung up to 
such height, and did so much harm, as no man remembered that it ever did 
before. And this was the first day of the new moon.” Further flood disasters 
were recorded in 1236, 1251, 1551, 1690, 1703, 1736, 1881, 1897 and on through 
the 20th century.

The most vivid accounts of the 1953 flood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2013/jan/31/devastation-east-anglia-1953-flood-in-pictures>
 came from unlikely sources. One wasHilda Grieve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jan/31/east-anglia-new-risk-sea>, 
an archivist in the Essex Record Office, who for her bookThe Great Tide tracked 
the tide, hour by hour, as it came down the coast, and drew on a vast 
collection of witness statements. A handful of these border on the comic – like 
the firefighter rescuing a woman on Canvey Island who won’t stop talking (“I 
had to tell her to shut her mouth because the water was up to her neck”). More 
commonly, they are tragic, like the father remembering the son who died in his 
arms: “After a while he did not speak any more and appeared to go to sleep.”

Another account of the flood, so far unpublished, is the 18,000-word diary 
kept by PJO Trist, Philip John Owen Trist to give him his full name, who worked 
for the Ministry of Agriculture and was responsible for the clean-up operation. 
His remedial work included flying over flooded farmland and surveying the 
damage: “From Orford to Iken, the flooded level of about 2,400 acres was a 
pathetic sight … Below the Minsmere cliff, known to thousands who have had tea 
and bathed there, the shingle beach was almost unrecognisable … Poor Minsmere! 
Once again she lay drowned in a sea of salt.”

Trist had the right name for the job. His diary is full of sadness – for 
cattle and livestock swept away, for the thousands of rabbits lying dead in the 
marshes, for the poisoning of arable land by salt water (out of 4,000 acres 
flooded, only about 200 bore a crop in 1953). But perhaps the key moment comes 
when he momentarily forgets the “visions of mud and men and water” as he drives 
through the park at Boulge Hall, near Woodbridge, to the churchyard whereEdward 
FitzGerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/dec/29/poem-week-edward-fitzgerald>
 lies buried, and imagines “the peace of his lazy days up and down the Deben”. 
It’s Trist’s way of measuring depredation against a more benign image derived 
from literature. And there’s certainly no shortage of such images: every 
British coastline has its legends (of shipwrecks, piracy and selkies) but the 
stretch from Cromer to Felixstowe is among the most documented – and the most 
heavily populated with writers.

FitzGerald grew up in Suffolk and spent most of his life there. It was in a 
cottage on the family estate at Boulge Hall that he translated the Rubáiyát of 
Omar Khayyám and conjured an alternative notion of the east – not wintry storms 
and bleakness but camels, desert, a convivial jug of wine. Persia and 
Woodbridge don’t have much in common but the original poem’s emphasis on 
mortality (“I came like water and like wind I go”) and its evocation of a 
paradise in the wilderness resonated with FitzGerald. The translation 
eventually made him famous, but by then his passion was for sailing rather than 
literature: he bought a yacht, the Scandal, then a herring-lugger, and would 
sail from the Deben to Lowestoft or over to Holland. The land felt mean and 
enclosed to him; society, too. But he loved the open water – and, rather than 
being buried, would have liked his ashes to be scattered on the sea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fblake-morrison-literature-imperilled-east-coast-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422549907930%2F03e5196c-bfd9-4bb0-b8e8-7536953019e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Drowned%20in%20a%20sea%20of%20salt%E2%80%99%20Blake%20Morrison%20on%20the%20literature%20of%20the%20east%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fblake-morrison-literature-imperilled-east-coast-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Drowned%20in%20a%20sea%20of%20salt%E2%80%99%20Blake%20Morrison%20on%20the%20literature%20of%20the%20east%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fblake-morrison-literature-imperilled-east-coast-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422549907930%2F03e5196c-bfd9-4bb0-b8e8-7536953019e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pilgrimage through East Anglia in the 1990s … WG Sebald. Photograph: Ulf 
Andersen/Getty Images 
Or so WG Sebald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wgsebald> claims in The 
Rings of Saturn, after visiting FitzGerald’s grave during his pilgrimage 
through East Anglia in the 1990s. The coastal chapters of the journey are 
eventful: Sebald encounters a herd of swine at Covehithe, sees a couple having 
sex on the beach below (“the man’s feet twitched like those of one just 
hanged”), and has a kind of panic attack on Dunwich Heath. But the overall mood 
is one of melancholy, because the erosions of time and place have destroyed the 
buildings and aspirations that interest him: “The east stands for lost causes,” 
he writes, “you can sense the immense power of emptiness.” The nadir comes at
Shingle Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/jun/08/shingle-street-walking-guide-suffolk>
, “the most abandoned spot in the entire region, which now consists of just one 
wretched row of humble houses and cottages and where I have never encountered 
one single human being.” It’s an unduly bleak view of a place I find haunting 
and beautiful. But it’s true that the beauty is whatWB Yeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wbyeats> would call a “terrible beauty” – 
not least because of the rumours that began in 1940 and persist to this day of 
a thwarted German invasion, and the loss of hundreds of lives.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fblake-morrison-literature-imperilled-east-coast-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422531829603%2Fc6da4370-10c9-4cfc-bc48-165c37bd0550-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Drowned%20in%20a%20sea%20of%20salt%E2%80%99%20Blake%20Morrison%20on%20the%20literature%20of%20the%20east%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fblake-morrison-literature-imperilled-east-coast-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Drowned%20in%20a%20sea%20of%20salt%E2%80%99%20Blake%20Morrison%20on%20the%20literature%20of%20the%20east%20coast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fblake-morrison-literature-imperilled-east-coast-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422531829603%2Fc6da4370-10c9-4cfc-bc48-165c37bd0550-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Covehithe beach in Suffolk. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe/Guardian 
Less in doubt is what happened at Dunwich, a once thriving medieval city later 
reduced by storms and floods to a tiny fishing village (now the only fishing is 
done by solitary anglers). Dunwich began to decline in 13th and 14th centuries, 
and there are photos of the last of its eight churches, All Saints, gradually 
disappearing into the sea between 1904 and 1919.Edward Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edward-thomas> gives a snapshot on a visit 
in 1908:

Oh Dunwich is beautiful. I am on a heaving moor of heather and close gorse up 
and down and ending in a sandy cliff about 80 feet perpendicular and the black, 
peat-strewn fine sand below. On the edge of this 1½ miles away is the ruined 
church that has half fallen over already. Four arches and a broken tower, pale 
and airy.

George Crabbe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/14/britten-george-crabbe-drowned-voice>
 remains the most celebrated poet of the Suffolk sea and of its power to 
destroy lives. But many other poets have written about it since: Frances 
Cornford, with her “far-off gulls like risen souls”;Alun Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/feb/09/featuresreviews.guardianreview24>
, briefly stationed there during the second world war;Andrew Motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion>, who tells of the legend of the
Orford Merman <http://www.norfolkcoast.co.uk/myths/ml_orfordmerman.htm>; Anne 
Beresford,Katrina Porteous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/aug/18/poetry.features1>, Anthony 
Thwaite <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/anthony-thwaite>, Michael Hamburger
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jun/11/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
 and more. Many novelists, too, have set their fictions on the Suffolk coast,PD 
James <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pdjames>, Ruth Rendell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ruth-rendell>, Esther Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/31/esther-freud-author-interview-mr-mac-and-me>
 andJulie Myerson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/julie-myerson> among them. 
Julia Blackburn is about to publish two books set there – one a long poem in 
which grief over her husband’s death is offset by descriptions (and photos) of 
murmurations of starlings aboveWalberswick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/may/20/gowalk.guardianspecial30>
, the other a life of the Norfolk fisherman and artistJohn Craske 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/29/2015-books-non-fiction-most-eagerly-awaited-aa-gill-alexander-mcqueen>
. Then there are the visitors, with their passing impressions:Carlyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/feb/09/biography.highereducation>, Hardy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomashardy>, Gissing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/george-gissing> and – least passingly – 
Swinburne, whose long poem,By the North Sea, strikes a note of Sebaldian gloom: 
“A land that is lonelier than ruin,/ A sea that is stranger than death.”

Swinburne swamps his poem in such morbidity that he deserves the fun poked at 
him byCraig Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/02/craig-brown-lost-diaries-parody>
, another east coast resident, in one of his clerihews: “Algernon Swinburne/ 
Let his skin burn./ He forgot the Skin Factor Five/ On a trip to Covehithe.” 
But he was one of the earliest writers not only to document coastal erosion, 
but to see it as a metaphor for human mortality: “Like ashes the low cliffs 
crumble,/ The banks drop down into dust.” In an age of rising sea levels and 
climate change, the east coast’s vulnerability is ever more apparent, which may 
be why writers are drawn to it – in a spirit of protection not exploitation. If 
they can’t shore up actual defences, they can, through language, conserve the 
cliffs and beaches under attack. AsJohn Donne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/may/21/john-donne-love-conscience-martyrdom>
 said, ‘if one clod is washed away, Europe is the less.’

• Blake Morrison’s new collection of poems, Shingle Street, is published by 
Chatto on Thursday. To order a copy for £8 (RRP £10) go to
bookshop.theguardian.com <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/shingle-street.html> 
or call Guardian book service on 0330 333 6846.
 