
Angela Merkel and François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> have responded curtly but 
defiantly after Donald Trump cast further doubt on his commitment to Nato and 
gave strong hints that he would not support EU cohesion once in office.

“We Europeans have our fate in our own hands,” the German chancellor said 
after the publication of the US president-elect’s interviews with the Times and 
German tabloid Bild. “He has presented his positions once more. They have been 
known for a while. My positions are also known.”


Related: Donald Trump's first UK post-election interview: Brexit a 'great 
thing' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>

In the Times interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
, Trump complained that Nato had become “obsolete” because it “hadn’t taken 
care of terror” – a comment laterwelcomed by the Kremlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/germany-hits-back-at-trump-criticism-of-refugee-policy-and-bmw-tariff-threat>
. He suggested that other European countries would follow in Britain’s 
footsteps and leave the EU.

Hollande, the French president, retorted by saying Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> did not need to be told what to 
do by outsiders.

“Europe will be ready to pursue transatlantic cooperation, but it will based 
on its interests and values,” Hollande said on Monday. “It does not need 
outside advice to tell it what to do.”

Germany’s foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, said the criticism of 
Nato had caused concern in the political and military alliance. “I’ve spoken 
today not only with EU foreign ministers butNato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> foreign ministers as well and can 
report that the signals are that there’s been no easing of tensions,” he said.

Other senior members of Merkel’s government were quick to defend Germany’s 
policies after Trump criticised the chancellor’s handling of the refugee crisis 
and threatened a 35% tariff onBMW <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bmw> 
cars imported to the US.

Responding to Trump’s comments that Merkel had made an “utterly catastrophic 
mistake by letting all these illegals into the country”, the deputy chancellor 
and minister for the economy, Sigmar Gabriel, said the increase in the number 
of people fleeing the Middle East to seek asylum in Europe had partially been a 
result of US-led wars destabilising the region.
 BMW factory in Spartanburg, South Carolina. Photograph: Bloomberg/via Getty 
Images 
“There is a link between America’s flawed interventionist policy, especially 
the Iraq war, and the refugee crisis; that’s why my advice would be that we 
shouldn’t tell each other what we have done right or wrong, but that we look 
into establishing peace in that region and do everything to make sure people 
can find a home there again,” Gabriel said.

“In that area, Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and Europe 
are already making enormous achievements – and that’s why I also thought it 
wasn’t right to talk about defence spending, where Mr Trump says we are 
spending too little to finance Nato. We are making gigantic financial 
contributions to refugee shelters in the region, and these are also the results 
of US interventionist policy.”

John Kerry, the outgoing US secretary of state, also responded tartly to 
Trump’s criticisms of Merkel, warning him he would need to rein in his views 
once he took office.

“I thought, frankly, it was inappropriate for a president-elect of the United 
States to be stepping in to the politics of other countries in a quite direct 
manner,” Kerry told CNN’s Christiane Amanpour. “As of Friday, he’s responsible 
for that relationship.

“But I think we have to be very careful about suggesting that one of the 
strongest leaders in Europe - and one of the most important in respect of where 
we are heading - made one mistake or another.”

Gabriel, who is expected to run as the centre-left candidate against Merkel in 
Germany’s federal elections in September, said Trump’s election should 
encourage Europeans to stand up for themselves.

Related: Donald Trump's German interviewer is bête noire for the left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/trumps-german-interviewer-is-bete-noire-for-the-left>

“On the one hand, Trump is an elected president. When he is in office, we will 
have to work with him and his government – respect for a democratic election 
alone demands that,” Gabriel said.

“On the other hand, you need to have enough self-confidence. This isn’t about 
making ourselves submissive. What he says about trade issues, how he might 
treat German carmakers, the question about Nato, his view on theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> – all these require a self-confident 
position, not just on behalf of us Germans but all Europeans. We are not 
inferior to him, we have something to bring to the table, too.

“Especially in this phase in which Europe is rather weak, we will have to pull 
ourselves together and act with self-confidence and stand up for our own 
interests.”

The German foreign ministry rejected Trump’s criticism that creating “security 
zones” in Syria would have been considerably cheaper than accepting refugees 
fleeing the war-torn country.

“What exactly such a security zone is meant to be is beyond my comprehension 
and would have to be explained,” said Martin Schäfer, a spokesman for the 
German foreign ministry.
 Brexit supporters at a pro-EU rally. Trump said Brexit vote was a good thing. 
Photograph: Luke MacGregor/Reuters 
Schäfer also rejected Trump’s labelling of the EU as a “vehicle for Germany”. 
He said: “For the German government, Europe has never been a means to an end 
but a community of fate which, in times of collapsing old orders, is more 
important than ever.”

Hints of a fundamental shift in US trade policy sent shockwaves through German 
politics and business.

In his interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/angela-merkel-refugees-policy-donald-trump>
, Trump indicated that he would aim to realign the “out of balance” car trade 
between Germany and the US. “If you go down Fifth Avenue, everyone has a 
Mercedes Benz in front of his house, isn’t that the case?” he said. “How many 
Chevrolets do you see in Germany? Not very many, maybe none at all … it’s a 
one-way street.”

Asked what Trump could do to make sure German customers bought more American 
cars, Gabriel said: “Build better cars.”

Related: A guide to Trump-speak: think 'bloke talking loudly in the pub' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/a-guide-to-trump-speak-take-it-seriously-but-not-literally>

Shares in BMW, Daimler and Volkswagen fell on Monday morning following Trump’s 
comments. BMW shares were down 0.85%, shares in Daimler were 1.54% lower and 
Volkswagen shares were trading 1.07% down in early trading in Frankfurt.

All three carmakers have invested heavily in factories in Mexico, where 
production costs are lower than the US, with an eye to exporting smaller 
vehicles to the US market.

A BMW spokeswoman said a BMW Group plant in the central Mexican city of San 
Luis Potosi would build the BMW 3 Series from 2019, with the output intended 
for the world market. The plant in Mexico would be an addition to existing 3 
Series production facilities in Germany and China.

But Gabriel said on Monday that a tax on German imports would lead to a “bad 
awakening” among US carmakers since they were reliant on transatlantic supply 
chains.

“I believe BMW’s biggest factory is already in the US, in Spartanburg [South 
Carolina],” Gabriel, leader of the SPD, told Bild in a video interview.

“The US car industry would have a bad awakening if all the supply parts that 
aren’t being built in the US were to suddenly come with a 35% tariff. I believe 
it would make the US car industry weaker, worse and above all more expensive. I 
would wait and see what Congress has to say about that, which is mostly full of 
people who want the opposite of Trump.”
 