
A US intelligence officer operating in a dangerous part of the world prepared 
this week forDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s 
presidency by making a pact with a colleague: they resolved to disobey any 
order to commit torture.

The two officers’ pledge reflects a wider debate within the national security 
bureaucracy, as some officials – concerned by Trump’s authoritarian 
inclinations – debate whether to quit in protest at his electoral victory or to 
remain at their post in the hope of checking impulses they consider dangerous.

What will President Donald Trump do? Predicting his policy agenda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-policy-immigration-agenda-healthcare>
During his election campaign, the president-elect mooted a string of 
controversial measures, any one of which would signify a major shift in US 
policy: reviving the use of torture, targeting the families of terrorism 
suspects, mass deportations, a ban on Muslims entering the US, expanding 
domestic surveillance, the indefinite detention of American terror suspects, 
bombing “the shit” out of the Islamic State.

Officials in the US military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military>
, intelligence services, diplomatic corps and federal law enforcement have told 
the Guardian that Trump’s suggestions represent such a departure from the norms 
of American governance that they are contemplating internal resistance or a 
career change.

One source said he was “fearful” of Trump in a way he has never been of an 
American national security figure, out of concern that Trump does not 
understand the “tertiary consequences” of decision-making on a global stage.


Speaking anonymously for fear of reprisal, all the officials interviewed by 
the Guardian cautioned that they spoke only for themselves.

Some said their anxiety over Trump was not shared by co-workers, particularly 
younger ones, who appreciate what one called Trump’s “bluntness”.

Surveys of the US military show substantial support for Trump 
<http://www.militarytimes.com/articles/this-poll-of-the-us-military-has-gary-johnson-tied-with-donald-trump-in-the-race-for-president>
, which also existswithin the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/fbi-leaks-hillary-clinton-james-comey-donald-trump>
. The federal immigration agents’ unionendorsed 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/trackers/2016-09-26/immigration-union-ice-backs-trump-for-president-trump-campaign>
 Trump.

Other officials said they believed that the realities of office would force 
Trump to moderate his positions, or expressed confidence that the national 
security bureaucracy was sufficiently resilient to check presidential overreach.

While Congress passed a law in 2015 designed to prevent a return to CIA torture
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/cia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation>
, human rights activists have long observed that torture was illegal before 
9/11.

But several wondered if they would be able to serve in a Trump administration 
–particularly if instructed to transgress moral or legal boundaries meant to 
protect civil rights and liberties.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
The public faces of national policy are the cabinet secretaries, agency chiefs 
and their immediate deputies. Below them are the political appointees who 
comprise the senior ranks of government.

Their choices are made for them during inauguration and the transition of 
power: they leave to make room for the picks made by the election’s victor.


But those tasked with implementing policy are in no such position.


Critical to the functions of the government’s most life-or-death enterprises, 
they are formally apolitical and provide expertise and continuity across 
administrations.

Several of those who spoke to the Guardian described themselves as reeling 
from an electoral outcome they did not anticipate and the imminent arrival of a 
president they considered manifestly unqualified.

“For those who expected Hillary to win, it’s shock and awe, so to speak,” one 
US official said.


Career security officials said that they were considering entrenching 
themselves in positions where they can serve as a check on Trump – either 
through direct advice to superiors or through the bureaucratic obstruction that 
features in every administration.

There, they would be able to rally allies in other agencies and on Capitol 
Hill. Some drew encouragement from the bipartisan opposition to Trump over 
national security that featured in the campaign.


In the course of the campaign, dozens of national security and foreign policy 
officials from former Republican administrations pledged inopen letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/08/republicans-donald-trump-warning-letter-bush-reagan>
 or public statements that they would not serve under Trump.


In August, 50 Republican foreign policy and national security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/05/hillary-clinton-military-endorsements-trump>
 officialssigned an open letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/08/republicans-donald-trump-warning-letter-bush-reagan>
 warning that Trump “would be the most reckless president in American history”.

However, one of them, Philip Zelikow, who served in both Bush administrations, 
said he did not believe the Trump team would ultimately have difficulty filling 
administration posts in foreign policy and national security.

“I don’t think they will have any trouble at all. I can personally identify a 
great deal of people who will be available – some of whom I respect 
professionally,” Zelikow said, but he added: “I hope [the Trump team] don’t 
make some of the unfortunate choices that will be offered to them.”

As counselor to secretary of state Condoleezza Rice from 2005 to 2007, Zelikow 
was an internal critic of the conduct of the Iraq war and the treatment of 
suspected terrorist captives in an increasingly divided Bush administration.

“There are a large number of officials from Bush 43 [George W Bush’s 
administration] who will have no problem serving,” he said. “They will choose 
people from one side of that divide – the side of the administration that 
tended to align with the more nationalist, more unilateralist figures in that 
administration.”

Attitudes on such bureaucratic slow-walking vary by the observer’s politics. 
Rightwingers seethed at the state department’s opposition to the invasion of 
Iraq under Bush. Leftwingers did the same when the Pentagon obstructed the 
closure of Guantánamo Bay under Barack Obama.

Yet outreach to career security officials is a key component of civil 
libertarian groups’ plan to constrain Trump.


Obama has handed a surveillance state and war machine to a maniac | Trevor Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/president-trump-national-security-nuclear-arsenal>
Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> activists spent 
Obama’s presidency warning the White House that it was institutionalizing mass 
surveillance, drone strikes, indefinite detention and expanded executive power 
– all tools that risked disaster in the hands of a reckless successor. Almost 
as soon as Trump was elected, they began planning their response.


Trump and his senior aides “may not care about human rights, but there are 
people at OSD who do”, said John Sifton of Human Rights Watch, referring to the 
Office of the Secretary of Defense. “The pilots don’t want to blow up children.”


Human Rights Watch and its allies are planning to press Obama to take steps in 
the twilight of his presidency designed to constrain his successor.


They seek to urge Obama to issue security-related memoranda defining acts that 
constitute torture or sharply stipulating what secret programs require 
congressional notification. While Trump is free to repeal a predecessor’s 
executive action, the memo would create encumbrances or embarrassments for his 
administration’s legal staff should it emerge that he abrogated their bounds.


Such constraints, however imperfect, could add to what experts believe is a 
coming “power struggle” between traditionalist and Trumpian camps on foreign 
policy.


“There is going to be a power struggle within the Republican party between his 
camp and many of the mainstream foreign policy experts and officials. They will 
try to make the case that he should have a more mainstream foreign policy, and 
they may offer to come in to help run it,” said Thomas Wright, the director of 
the project on international order and strategy at the Brookings Institution.


“The big early test in Trump’s transition will be whether or not he 
compromises and goes with those people or whether he sticks with people who 
have been with him to date and try to implement his worldview.”

 