
It was the night the music died. I was 19 and had come to the Glastonbury 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury> with my girlfriend. We 
were looking forward to 1984’s headline act the Smiths. But then it rained. 
Quite a lot.

The sky was thunderous, the lanes turned to rivers of mud. We hiked miles into 
the campsite, in a wall of leaden rain, past ranks of drug dealers. It was like 
fleeing Saigon. Then it got worse. I had claimed that I knew all about camping. 
I did not. We struggled in the merciless rain, in mounting darkness, to 
assemble our tent. The poles wouldn’t stay up and the ropes and pegs just 
baffled us. We ended up huddled in the mud under a flapping bit of filthy nylon.

Next morning we fled, and never saw the Smiths (“a legendary year”, music 
critics tell me). Running away from Glastonbury was the start of my gradual 
alienation from pop culture. Maybe it even helped to turn me into an art critic 
who prefers Klee to Kanye. Subsequent milestones in rock disillusion included 
the time I visited Jim Morrison’s grave in Paris and felt depressed by the 
fans’ “tributes”, while all the other poets and heroes buried in the Père 
Lachaise cemetery appeared forgotten. Even that was not The End, as Jim would 
say. No – the last stab of betrayal and nausea at the bloated carcass of 
rock’n’roll was seeing U2 play at Wembley and noticing how much of the venue 
was given over to corporate entertainment. I told myself I had more important 
things to do in my life than rock’n’roll.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492812032%2F1c41aff3-92ed-4a04-a2f5-43b870c40f94-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492812032%2F1c41aff3-92ed-4a04-a2f5-43b870c40f94-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Smiths on stage at Glastonbury in 1984. Photograph: Paul Slattery/Retna UK 
This year, though, I agreed to step back in time, rewrite my past, reverse my 
disillusion – and head back to Glastonbury. When the Tor’s breastlike mound and 
phallic tower appeared on the horizon through the bus window, my heart stopped. 
There was not a hint of rain. The sun filled the sky with sapphires and the 
fields with emeralds. How often do you get a second chance at your youth? Would 
I somehow be able to regain Glastonbury lost, and become the raver I failed to 
be at 19?

I strode on to the Glastonbury site in the golden afternoon, found a spot with 
a view of the Tor and put up my tent in 10 minutes flat. Ha ha, Glasto! This 
time I’d got a pop-up tent. I then sat down for some quick preparatory reading 
from a book about Hieronymus Bosch’s lurid late medieval masterpiece, The 
Garden of Earthly Delights. This great painting is a vision of three possible 
worlds. One is the Garden of Eden, a landscape of natural bliss. Another is 
Hell, a landscape of torment. But the hardest place to understand is the scene 
of utopian joy and carnival that fills the central and largest panel, where 
people feast on giant strawberries, prance naked, crawl through glass tubes, 
ride wild animals and generally cavort. This is the terrestial paradise, or 
Garden of Earthly Delights. But are these people freeing their minds or losing 
them?

It seemed a suitable picture to ponder. I had a vague idea the festival might 
prove a Garden of Earthly Delights. (“Have you been to the giant strawberry 
field yet? It’s just past Arcadia, up the hill … Everyone’s really getting 
mashed on huge strawberries …”) I was soon to find out how right my hunch was 
that Bosch predicted Glastonbury.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492083435%2F23a571d7-153a-4157-9c86-5846a5c1782b-1869x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492083435%2F23a571d7-153a-4157-9c86-5846a5c1782b-1869x2040.jpeg>
 The Garden of Earthly Delights by Hieronymus Bosch. Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis
By sunset – a glowing, nearly cloudless sunset – that first evening I was in a 
sweating, swaying, swarming crowd at Glastonbury’s Unfairground, loomed over by 
giant, grotesque dolls with evil baby faces. Its attractions included Bez’s 
Acid House – yes, that Bez – among a parodic, over-the-top variety of 
fairground Americana. You could try the test-your-strength machine or shoot at 
sea monsters for prizes. What looked like a hall of mirrors turned out to be a 
shaking, surrealistic dance tent where metallic-faced, male go-go dancers 
robotically got the crowd going. Soon my body started jerking about in an 
unexpected and unfamilar way. Shit, I wasdancing.

It was like being inside a big and seriously strange work of art. The 
Unfairground is, in fact, the creation of the Mutoid Waste Company, a 
“legendary scrap-pile art and party collective”. Well, I found it legendary. 
There is something agreeably demonic about their sprawling, energised, living 
art installation. All it lacks is a freak show – or were we the freaks? Pushing 
into the enthusiastic crowd in the tiny tent holding Wango Riley’s Travelling 
Stage, I caught the end of a set by a thrashingly loud and coruscatingly funny 
band called the Men That Will Not be Blamed for Nothing. Steampunk is an 
overused word, a cultural cliche, but it seems the best way to describe a band 
who get the audience to sing along to a song about the Victorian engineer 
Isambard Kingdom Brunel.

What larks. Mock Americana blending with Victorian rock schlock under the 
greenest of trees in the light of the silvery moon. Glastonbury, I found to my 
delight, is not just about huge global stars playing to thousands on the 
Pyramid stage. The vast site, spreading over hill and through dale, is a 
midsummer night’s dream of unexpected entertainments. Through the Unfairground 
I reached Shangri-La, the most sought-after of these – in fact, the whole of 
Glastonbury seems to pass through its cubist bar, boisterous dance tents and 
thematic decorations. This year’s theme is Revolution. Yeah, right. That seemed 
to mean designer graffiti in its labyrinth of discos, and people round its live 
stage waving placards. One demanded: “More oxygen for everyone.” I am not 
entirely sure that was a joke.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492440048%2F44ab3a6c-9390-42f9-a972-9e9ad144b0c0-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492440048%2F44ab3a6c-9390-42f9-a972-9e9ad144b0c0-2060x1374.jpeg>
 The Unfairground at Glastonbury. Photograph: Andy Hall 
The Green Fields are full of people who hope to change the world with laughter 
therapy, radical midwifery, whittling, ironmongery, “Ogham stones”, yoga and 
plant-growing. “Growing your own food is the most radical of acts,” insists the 
Nutshell Garden. But surely the 1970s sitcom The Good Life had already tried 
that road to revolution. I think the people fighting the carbon culture by 
launching candle-powered steamboats (that will show the steamboat industry!) 
have a better chance.

Glastonbury is full of the urge to do good. This is not hypocrisy. As Rob 
Young recounts in his book Electric Eden, that idealism goes back to the very 
first Glastonbury Fair in 1971, which attempted through music, community and 
well-being to activate the hidden ley-line energies of the Glastonbury 
landscape, with its legends of King Arthur and Joseph of Arimathea. The Pyramid 
stage created for that original Fair was meant to channel Earth energies 
through its sacred pyramid form. So Glastonbury without hippies would not be 
itself.

Greenpeace, too, has a hefty presence – including a massive ship – and 
ecological consciousness is constantly urged on revellers, with messages on the 
big stage screens before bands go on. As I write this, I have just received a 
tweet from the festival urging me not to wee on the grass because it pollutes 
the river. But could it not be argued that the greenest thing to do would be 
not to cover this lovely landscape with the world’s greatest rock festival to 
begin with? And if you want people to piss responsibily, why not give them 
proper toilets instead of reeking, rancid, horrific booths that, if the 
festival went on for more than a few days, would add another bit of steampunk 
in the form of a cholera outbreak?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435494450719%2F0a05c623-3f3d-40d7-b13c-4316c3cf21cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435494450719%2F0a05c623-3f3d-40d7-b13c-4316c3cf21cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Brittany Howard, the lead singer of Alabama Shakes. Photograph: Hannah 
McKay/EPA 
There are proper loos in the restricted hospitality areas, of course. Nice if 
you have access, which I did. But I don’t have any objection to this 
astonishing festival accepting some sponsorship and schmoozing some people, 
such as me. After all, you need a bit of help from your friends if you are 
going to create a Garden of Earthly Delights.

That is what this place is. It is not the spiritual power centre of the new 
Avalon and it is not likely, as people thought it could when it was invented, 
to overturn the social order with guitar solos, let alone drum’n’bass. No. This 
a space of pure hedonism. I have never seen so many people getting mashed up, 
rammed or having such a jolly good time. I am a morose critic, but I was 
dancing through the night, high on the sheer commitment to pleasure that is 
Glastonbury’s true raison d’être. With its glowing fairground tower topped by 
an Arabian Nights viewing platform in the area known as the Park, a giant robot 
spider pumping out dance music in Arcadia, its fairy glades and New York 
nightclub where they give you a moustache, its stone circle and, most of all, 
these masses of people pursuing oblivion, Glastonbury resembles The Garden of 
Earthly Delights visually as well as in its sheer monstrous abundance.

That first night was bliss, and so was the weather. I set out from my tent the 
next morning without a coat. What could possibly go wrong? Already my feet were 
covered in blisters because I’d left my home with no footwear but wellies. I 
tried to ignore this first sign of my Glastonbury curse, or idiocy – was I to 
prove, just like the first time round, too soft for the hard work of festival 
pleasure?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492626290%2Fbf3edae7-2563-46e3-ba3f-02c99abb3be8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492626290%2Fbf3edae7-2563-46e3-ba3f-02c99abb3be8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dancing at Block9. Photograph: David Levene/Guardian 
That afternoon, the Alabama Shakes were laying down some stirring, soulful 
rock from the Pyramid stage. “And yes, we really are from Alabama,” explained 
their wondrous leader, Brittany Howard. Then it started to rain. Just a shower, 
but a Somerset summer shower comes down in oceanic quantities, driven in your 
face by the wind. I was soon soaked and freezing, my T-shirt sticking to me. It 
was like being embraced by a dead fish. Out of all the people in the huge 
crowd, why was I alone stupid enough to have no rain gear?

A hike to the tent to get my coat, and I was back watching Mary J Blige, just 
in time for the next mighty downpour. The ground was now a squelching, slippery 
mess of mud and discarded beer cans (pleas to use the recycling bins having hit 
deaf ears).Next act was Motörhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/26/motorhead-at-glastonbury-2015-review-lemmy>
. Just as the veteran heavy metal noisemakers took the stage, the rain stopped. 
By the time guitarist Phil Campbell was halfway through a beguilingly corny 
solo, the sun suddenly broke out behind the band, illuminating the Pyramid with 
the kind of sublime natural display that seemed to fulfil the festival’s 
mystical roots. So what does that mean? That God loves metal? That the devil 
has not just the loudest music but the best weather?

The sheer aggression and elan of Motörhead seemed the kind of music festivals 
were invented for. Massive drum solos, walls of feedback, soaring electric 
volume and Lemmy standing there impassively in shades, telling the world: 
“We’re Motörhead. We play rock and fuckin’ roll.” Great. Loud and to the point. 
But the damping seemed to have put a chill in the air. It set into my spirits, 
too. How much more enjoyment could I take?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492707557%2F0936f9ad-a5ee-4a48-8209-400c79b4a2dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492707557%2F0936f9ad-a5ee-4a48-8209-400c79b4a2dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An owl tries to eat a sandwich. Photograph: Andy Hall/Guardian 
I got lost looking for the Park stage and missed almost all of Sharon van 
Etten’s performance. What I did hear was visceral and lingering. Van Etten’s 
words have a Patti Smith-like vitality. It was a shame to miss her just because 
the site was so huge, and my feet were hurting, and it was like a war walking 
through the mud. It is not that it rains unusually frequently at Glasto. It is 
just that all those feet on what is, in reality, a farm produce epic mud very 
quickly. It is a kind of gourmet mud, with many rich varieties of texture and 
viscosity. Just like the stuff you try not to look at in the toilets.

Fun – it’s such hard work. There are so many dancefloors, pounding through the 
night, so many bars and burger joints. What about a library and a museum in 
this tented city, just for a change of pace?

Glastonbury is awe-inspiring. It delighted me. And then I felt sick, as if I 
had eaten too many giant strawberries. From a hillside above the Park stage, I 
watchedJamie xx’s lasers and lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/27/jamie-xx-at-glastonbury-2015-review-a-sunset-backed-journey-through-sound>
 compete with the glowering, majestic twilight sky. Visually, the scale of 
Glastonbury as a spectacle truly rivals Bosch’s fantastic landscape. The crowd 
were dancing amid a city that would soon vanish; an artificial paradise where, 
for a few days, anything seems possible. Glastonbury is a work of art. It is a 
masterpiece. And, like Bosch’s masterpiece, it is a stupendous enigma.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492923946%2Fff04bbcd-d695-4ca8-8863-51539d66145e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Glastonbury%20is%20a%20work%20of%20art.%20It%20is%20a%20masterpiece%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fglastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435492923946%2Fff04bbcd-d695-4ca8-8863-51539d66145e-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The Caravan of Lost Souls. Photograph: Gary Calton/Guardian 
• This article was amended on 2 July 2015 to correct the name of the Men That 
Will Not be Blamed for Nothing.

 