
We were a Congress of Racial Equality 
<http://www.history.com/topics/black-history/congress-of-racial-equality> 
student group (we called ourselves Core) – Bernie Sanders was our president – 
and we were occupying the offices of George Beadle, the university’s president. 
I’m sitting on the floor, on his left, in a pale sweater with a black bob. We 
were protesting against the segregation of some of the university’s private 
housing in Chicago. We stayed for several days, sleeping on the floor, until it 
changed its policy. Which it did.

These were early days in the civil rights movement, and this was one of the 
first college sit-ins. We were amazingly well-behaved. I was studying history, 
and read Aristotle to while away the hours. During the day, I baked and sold 
brownies at the student union for the Turn Toward Peace organisation, which was 
raising money to send buses to Washington for a rally. When I found time for my 
schoolwork, who knows.

I grew up in New York, a “red diaper baby”, so-called because my parents were 
lefties. I picked Chicago because it had a politically active student body and 
was intellectual, too. Bernie was a year above me. We moved in different 
circles; my friends and I were politically to his left. If you’d told me he 
would run for president one day, I’d have said, “Oh yeah, right!” He was a 
swell guy, a nice Jewish boy from Brooklyn, but he wasn’t terribly charismatic. 
One of his strengths, though, was his ability to work with a wide group of 
people, even those he didn’t agree with.

There was controversy earlier this year as to whether this is Bernie Sanders 
addressing the floor or another student leader, Bruce Rappaport 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2016/02/11/stop-sending-around-this-photo-of-bernie-sanders/?utm_term=.6579db245fd9>
. This photo featured inBernie’s campaign video for his Democratic nomination 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qyee_sxJpXc>, even though a year earlier four 
Chicago alumni hadcome forward to say it wasn’t him 
<http://time.com/4108379/bernie-sanders-photo-civil-rights/>. The photographer, 
Danny Lyon – himself a big name in the civil rights movement – later confirmed 
it was Bernie, even if his campaign team says they’re “not 100% sure”. But 
Rappaport’s former wife is sure it’s Rappaport. I think it suits Bernie’s 
detractors to try to undercut his civil rights credentials.

‘I kept my eyes firmly above the chin’: Peter Stanford poses nude for artist 
Spencer Tunick, 17 July 2005
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/26/spencer-tunick-naked-art-newcastle-photograph>
I first saw this image on Facebook earlier this year, and thought, “That sure 
looks like me.” I sent it to several friends and they all said, “Of course it’s 
you – you haven’t changed a bit.”

After this, I stayed active in the peace movement. I marched into Montgomery 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Selma_to_Montgomery_marches> in 1965, but missed 
theMarch on Washington 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/March_on_Washington_for_Jobs_and_Freedom> in 
August 1963 because I went to Europe and fell in love with it, Britain 
especially, even though the food was inedible. After I left Chicago, I did a 
master’s, got married, had kids, then went to law school in the early 70s. I’ve 
now taught law for 35 years, with a break for a PhD. I retired to the UK, but 
unretired a few years ago, because I was bored. I now teach part-time at 
Southampton University, and spend a lot of time with my grandsons.

I’ve followed Bernie’s career and backed him in the primaries. His supporters 
were so passionate, but there weren’t enough of them. Even so, he did better 
than anyone could have expected. And his success has had a positive effect: the 
Democrats are now making concessions to the kinds of thingshe was fighting for.

• Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com <>
 