
Here is a page from my elementary school math book [see below] from the Afghan 
civil war era (1992 – 2001). At the bottom of the page, the teacher’s guide 
notes that the instructor “must ask about the names, usage, andquantity of the 
above items.” The word “quantity” is the only math-related term. It is 
mentioned at the end of the series. The names and usages of the ammunitions are 
given pride of place.
 Hashimi’s school math book, with a list of names and usages of ammunitions. 
In language classes, while “A” was for “Allah”, the rest of the Dari or Pashtu 
alphabets included war-related components such as“T” for “Toopak” (gun), “Sh” 
for “Shamsheer” (sword), “J” for “Jihad,” “M” for “Mujahid,” and “Ta” for “Talib
.” Every book promoted war, violence, and guns. Math problems were asked as, “A 
group ofMujahideen are on the frontline. Three of them are on duty at the 
checkpoint. Each has a box that consists of sixty bullets. In the fight against 
the infidels, the firstMujahid fired 24 bullets, the second 40, and the third 
16. Write the total number of bullets fired and the numbers that are 
remaining.” Sometimes such questions were even expanded, “If a total of 19 
infidels were killed with a single shot by the braveMujahideen, how many 
bullets missed?”

That’s how Afghan children were taught in the refugee camps in Pakistan. The 
students who were left inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> were only taught religious 
subjects. All the scientific, extra-curricular, and art classes were erased 
from the curriculum. Literature and poetry, however, were not completely 
forgotten. Each morning, the students were lined up to read aloud a patriotic 
poem and to recite a religiousTaraana (song). I remember the Taraana that was 
once sung by a student on the loudspeaker. Everyone praised him for his gifted 
talent as his soft voice echoed:

Oh, my Mujahid brother, I’m a Muslim,

 Lying injured at the infidels’ prison

***

Though known as the “graveyard of empires,” lab mouse for various regimes, 
safe haven for terrorist groups and opium, Afghanistan is also the land of 
poetry, storytelling, fables, folktales, and proverbs. It’s the birthplace of 
Rumi, motherland of Avicenna, realm of Gul Pacha Ulfat, love-land of 
Rabia-e-Balkhi, empire of Mahmood Ghaznawi, and the land of Ahmad Shah Abdali, 
the founder of Afghanistan and a poet himself.

Until the early 19th century, many of the former rulers shared an intense 
interest in poetry

Until the early 19th century, many of the former rulers shared an intense 
interest in poetry. King Amanullah’s father-in-law, Mahmud Tarzi is known as 
the “Father of Afghan Journalism.” In October 1911, Tarzi founded
Seraj-al-Akhbar,the first ever newspaper in Afghanistan, which published 
biweekly until January 1919. Tarzi and King Amanullah were modern thinkers who 
opposed religious extremism and worked for reforms and secularization until the 
government was overthrown by a coup in 1929. Tarzi fled to Turkey and resided 
there until he died in 1933. However, poetry still lives in and nourishes this 
country, much like its beautiful year-round perennial flowers. The Narinj Gul, 
or Orange Blossom, Poetry Festival in Jalalabad has been celebrated for more 
than 60 years now. In Kandahar, there is the Anar Gul, or Pomegranate Blossom, 
Poetry Festival. These annual traditions provide opportunities for writers and 
poets to recite their work in front of thousands of people from across 
Afghanistan. The writings reflect on love, peace, solidarity, youth, 
corruption, illiteracy, causalities, incompetent government, destruction and 
wiping out the seeds of hatred, discord, and disunity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fhow-can-they-write-about-anything-but-pain-the-writing-life-in-afghanistan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F771727eefc82162c9d4a6eddb00175ff8159e6d6%2F0_0_768_350%2F768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='How%20can%20they%20write%20about%20anything%20but%20pain%3F'%20The%20writing%20life%20in%20Afghanistan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fhow-can-they-write-about-anything-but-pain-the-writing-life-in-afghanistan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27How%20can%20they%20write%20about%20anything%20but%20pain%3F%27%20The%20writing%20life%20in%20Afghanistan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fhow-can-they-write-about-anything-but-pain-the-writing-life-in-afghanistan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F771727eefc82162c9d4a6eddb00175ff8159e6d6%2F0_0_768_350%2F768.jpg>
 Clockwise from far left: Mahmood Ghaznawi, Rabia-e-Balkhi, Gul Pacha Ulfat, 
Avicenna, Ahmad Shah Abdali, Mahmud Tarzi, Rumi Photograph: Guardian 
***

Afghanistan’s literary foundation has been built on “oral literature,” except 
for the works of a few legendary writers. I come from a family where fables, 
proverbs, and stories were quoted regularly to convey messages. Now, my brother 
is a published Pashtu language poet and my younger sister writes in Dari. On 
the other hand, I write short stories in English. I believe we inherited the 
stimulus from our mother. She was uneducated – she could not write nor read 
with the exception of the Holy Quran and some otherDuas(Islamic prayers) – but 
she was blessed with a miraculous art of storytelling. “It reminds me of this 
story…” was a familiar expression of hers. In 2010, when I was twenty years 
old, we lost her to cancer, but in all those years I don’t recall her repeating 
the same story or proverb except to emphasize the message or to bring out new 
meaning in a different context. She was raised with folktales too. Her mother 
told us of women usingTappa orLanday (two-line poems) to express anger, pain, 
and affection, young-lovers narrating aNaara to express a crush, grandmas 
tellingNaakal or Qessa to put children to sleep, clergies delivering Moonajat 
to express devotion.

This still is the culture in many of the remote villages. Such stories have 
been transferred from generation to generation by word-of-mouth. Luckily, some 
writers and publishers, like Operation Mercy Afghanistan, Danish Publications 
Afghanistan, and Aksos Bookstore are now giving this oral literature a new life 
in print.

***

In Afghanistan, we do not write for fun, passion, or money but to express the 
immeasurable pain inside

In Afghanistan, we do not write for fun, passion, or money but to express the 
immeasurable pain inside. Maybe that’s how the actual writing is. There must be 
something discomforting to be disclosed. At least, that’s how we see it. 
Rabia-e-Balkhi, probably one of the first female poets, was in love with a 
slave. Her brother, Hares did not approve of this. In the process of expressing 
her unbearable longing for Baktash, she started writing. She is said to have 
written her last poems with her blood in the bathroom she was locked in. A 
friend of mine is a writer and a social activist; he produces his best work 
after he has witnessed injustice, discrimination, or wrongdoing. It seems to be 
a common incentive among the contemporary Afghan writers– recent writings are 
filled with the pain, agony, and suffering of the Afghan people. That’s how my 
writing journey started too. My first story depicted the reality of a forced 
marriage. I write to portray cultural practices that are based on 
superstitions, norms, and traditions. When I re-read my own work, I find it 
melodramatic, more a Greek tragedy than a work of the 21stcentury. It can’t be 
helped. I feel like there is an inner voice reaching out to me, dragging me to 
write. The writing receives its inspiration from true stories around me. I hear 
the characters’ dialogues, find them haggling with salesmen, cursing the 
government, or striving to prevent a mischief. There are nights when I can’t 
fall asleep unless I first put my thoughts on paper. By the time I’m done with 
the story, some pages are wet-dried.

Perhaps the last several decades of wars, the rise and fall of regimes, the 
shootings, and the lack of peace have killed our creativity. A friend of mine 
finds it hilarious to anonymously play a loud AK-47 shooting ringtone during 
the crowdedJuma prayers or to shoot a glass building with a rocket launcher to 
see how the glass will shatter. One of my friend’s uncles, an elderly man, 
still keeps extra food and sacks of wheat in his basement out of fear that a 
fight may break out and for days no one will be able to go out. Our minds are 
distracted with the disturbances of wars. Afghans in the remote provinces still 
build their walls thick to prevent casualties in case of a rocket strike. In a 
country where people are born and killed in wars and social disorders, how can 
they write about anything but pain?

***

Since the beginning of the 19th century, over twenty different flags have been 
flown over Afghanistan by rulers, monarchs, kings, Emirs, and presidents. This 
also means that over twenty dissimilar political and social ideologies have 
been practiced. Each ruler exercised his own restrictions on the ways people 
lived, including freedom of speech and writing. The reason many rulers held 
strong interests in poetry was that poets were paid to flatter them and to 
praise their empires, castles, and armies. Anyone writing against the state was 
hanged, murdered, or exiled.

Self-censorship has ancient roots in Afghan history, though writers seem 
always to find a way to speak up. In the fables that our grandmother told us, 
the lion could be personified as the “cruel king”; the fox as the flattering 
clerk; the wolf as the wise minister; sheep, goats, and cows as the 
inhabitants. This can’t be done in the 21st century. Therefore, writers 
disguise themselves through pen names. It reminds me of this proverb, “As long 
as there’s a head, many hats can be worn.” It refers to the legend of a man who 
was threatened to death if he refused to give his beloved hat to the thief. He 
hesitated initially and then handed the hat to him and whispered, “If there’s 
life in my head, there will be many hats.”

***

There’s a saying, “Anything is possible in Afghanistan.” Journalists are 
regularly beaten, novelists can’t write freely, and newspapers are warned. Even 
though the eras of religious and communist extremism are gone, artists are 
commonly ill-treated and excoriated.According to the Afghanistan Journalists 
Center <http://afjc.af/english/>, 47 journalists, writers, and media workers 
have been killed or murdered since 1994; thirteen have been abducted and 
fifteen jailed. They are mostly Afghans. A few are expat journalists. The 
current Unity Government of Afghanistan is made up of both open- and 
closed-minded individuals. That’s probably another characteristic of post 
conflict societies and ongoing war zones where the warlords are empowered to 
restore a temporary peace. Writing, reporting, or even posting against a single 
political figure, current or deceased, might put your life at risk. Such fears 
limit the writing capabilities of authors inside the country.

It is very easy for writers to be labeled “racist” or Kafir (infidel) in 
Afghanistan

The high demand for writing about Afghanistan in the recent years has given 
birth to Afghan writers in exile or the so called foreign “experts on 
Afghanistan” that have too little understanding of the actual country and its 
culture. In addition, it is quite astonishing how the recent regimes 
self-censored themselves and the inhabitants. Communists strictly prohibited 
religious Islamic books and executed intellectuals who were considered threats 
to the government; following that, the Taliban regularly burned stacks of 
“non-Islamic” books in public places all over the country. The current 
government also seems to act blindly toward the accomplishments of many artists 
and sometimes even tries to censor them. Recently, the social activist and 
writer Masood Farzan was warned by a government official that his intentions, 
evident in Facebook posts and comments, were hostile to and aimed at 
overthrowing the current government. Masood responded, “If the government is 
that weak that it can be overthrown by my Facebook posts, let it be overthrown!”

***

Although Pashtu and Dari are the languages of love, poetry, literature, and 
proverbs, they are also the languages of wars, criminals, warlords, and human 
rights violators. Afghans are constantly the victims of their own languages and 
words. For instance, hundreds of Pashtuns were killed after they were unable to 
pronounce, “Qo-root,” a type of dried Afghan whey. They were asked to pronounce 
the word in order to differentiate them from other ethnicities, and when they 
could only say, “Koo-raat,” they were killed by having nails hammered into 
their heads. I learned how to say both words exactly the way they should be 
pronounced; many parents taught their children the same.

Now, there are two other present-day words that have divided the country, 
including the Parliament, ministries, courts, and even academic institutions:
Pohantoon and Danishgah. They both mean “university,” except the latter has a 
more Iranian root and emergence. Parliamentarians have fought over these words, 
undergraduate students have stabbed each other with knives, friends have become 
enemies, neighbors have turned into strangers, and classmates have grown into 
foes for opposing use of one of the other. Language is a symbol of power in 
this part of the world. When I tell my friends that my brother is a published 
Pashtu poet, some ask, “why not a Dari one?” I respond, “My sister writes in 
Dari.” To provide further justification, I add, “And I write in English. And I 
hope that one day; one of my siblings will become an Uzbek writer.”

I have traveled a long path (of wars, poverty, and illiteracy) to writing, and 
so did many of my fellow Afghan writers

I feel so relaxed writing in English. I do not think of ending up with a word 
that would conflict with the other national language of Afghanistan, nor will I 
anger my close friends. I was driven into writing when I started reading. I 
read my first English language book,For One More Day 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/for-one-more-day.html> by Mitch Albom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/may/01/dividedbyacommonliteraryl>
, several times during the year I stayed with an American host family in 
Highlands Ranch, Colorado. I spent numerous hours in the Douglas County 
Library. Not having standard libraries in my own country, I was inclined to 
read as much as I could. Thus, libraries hosted me as much as my host family 
did.

***

It is very easy for writers to be labeled “racist” or Kafir (infidel) in 
Afghanistan. Some of the most well-known current writers and social activists 
are Barry Salaam, Emal Pasarlay, Musa Zafar, Majeed Qarar, Masood Farzan, Lina 
Rozbeh, Shaista Sadat Lameh, Wais Barekzai, and Fahim Tokhi. Depending on their 
writings and statuses, they are branded as linguistic, ethnic, or tribalistic 
bigots; fascists, nationalists, xenophobes, xenophiles, atheists, or 
self-loathing Afghans.

It is hard to believe but there are still good writers who strongly support 
the harsh former regimes of the country, including the Taliban, the communists, 
and the interventionists from neighboring countries, but just like the 
residents of the country, the writers, too, are divided. They are as political 
as the government officials.

This leads to the question whether a writer is neutral or not. Maybe my mother 
was right when she quoted, “One’s own flaw is between the shoulders.” You can’t 
see it. The writers are probably blind to their flaws. Or maybe writing in 
Afghanistan is inherently biased. Even if you are an individual who does not 
take sides, your ethnicity, tribe, language, and peers will make you 
prejudiced. For instance, if one of the above writers regularly writes in one 
of the two national languages other than his/her own native language, the 
followers accuse him/her of not valuing the language.

Social activism and writing go hand-in-hand in Afghanistan. Afghan writers 
tend to circulate their works in bits and pieces over Facebook. Only a small 
number of writers have books of their own. This could be due to the lack of 
readership and publishing opportunities. When my brother and I were assessing 
various publishing companies for reprinting his collection of poems, we came 
across a number of bookstores that volunteered to sell newly printed books only 
if the writers provided the books to them free of cost. In a war-torn country 
like Afghanistan, there is little demand for books; people prefer to read short 
(at times biased and discriminatory) Facebook statuses and Twitter posts 
instead.

***

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
I have traveled a long path (of wars, poverty, and illiteracy) to writing, and 
so did many of my fellow Afghan writers. We will cling to it and do our best 
not to lose the opportunities we have. The culture of expressing our own point 
of view is nourishing. The number of both male and female writers is 
increasing. There’s also an active community of female writers, including the 
members of the Afghan Women’s Writing Project. Unfortunately, there are other 
groups of writers and social activists on the rise. When I read their work, I 
think of the schoolbooks from the civil war era. And yet their work is perhaps 
even more destructive and dangerous. The citizens of this country are provoked 
against each other by young writers who inject poisonous and prejudiced 
feelings into the minds of their own ethnic groups. They use their creativity 
in publishing discriminatory writing, posting racist videos, creating Facebook 
pages and closed groups slandering other ethnicities. At least, the civil war 
books asked for unity against a foreign force. These writers and social 
activists are dividing the country into pieces.

Maybe these writers are the products of those civil war books and education?

Or, are they producing another generation with far more destructive ideologies 
than their own?

 * Fazilhaq Hashimi is an Afghan author writing in English. His work, 
including the short story If I Heard Her Right, has been featured in The Gifts 
of the State, New Writing from Afghanistan (Dzanc Books) and Electric 
Literature. He studied at the American University of Afghanistan and recently 
relocated, along with his wife, to Colorado, where he is working on several new 
stories.
 