
I was a freshman at Swarthmore College, Pennsylvania, when I first encountered 
theStudent Nonviolent Coordinating Committee 
<http://www.blackpast.org/aah/student-nonviolent-coordinating-committee-1960-1973>
, and it changed my life. I used to catch a bus at weekends to Cambridge, 
Maryland, to work with an inspirational civil rights activist calledGloria 
Richardson <http://www.blackpast.org/aah/richardson-gloria-1922> (no relation), 
who was working with SNCC – pronounced “snick” – to desegregate the city’s 
public places. I liked the sound of SNCC’s work, so I left Swarthmore, 
supposedly for one semester, to work at its national office in Atlanta. I never 
went back.

I grew up in New York state, where my father was a respected union man. The 
racism I encountered was palpable but subtle: teachers in seventh grade trying 
to put me in secretarial college, even though I was bright; people I did 
babysitting for assuming I’d do the dishes (they would never ask that of a 
white girl). There was no blatant segregation, but people would make it 
uncomfortable for you. Despite this, I grew up thinking the police were on my 
side. The south was different; it was racist and segregated, even after the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964, and I knew I could be arrested for the slightest 
thing.

I could type at 90 words a minute and do shorthand, so I made myself useful in 
the SNCC office. It was a hub of activism, filled with brilliant black people 
who knew how the world worked. I learned more there than I ever would have at 
college. It was an inclusive organisation; they valued everybody and made group 
decisions. I was never made to feel stupid, even though I was 18 and pretty 
naive. I learned the importance of checking your facts, and developed a strong 
sense of self. And I realised that if you do nothing, nothing changes.

We staged regular sit-ins, like this one photographed by the great Danny Lyon 
<http://time.com/3787324/danny-lyon/>, in all-white restaurants like this 
Toddle House <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toddle_House>. They followed 
a similar pattern: the staff got angry and refused to serve you; the police 
arrived and asked you to leave; we refused, and went limp as we were taken to 
the county jail. I would be detained for five or six days, but I had it easy: I 
was never beaten.

‘I started to bawl. He handed me back’: Leonard Cohen swings Lucca Joy 
Barratt, 1993
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/14/leonard-cohen-baby-lucca-joy-barratt>
We made $9.64 a week, and were fed and housed by local families or in dorms 
paid for by the office. We’d often have parties to let off steam.

Today, young black men are still arrested for no reason, but thanks to social 
media people can film arrests and hold the police to account. I understand 
people’s anger, and that throwing a brick will make you feel better. But my 
advice to black teenagers is to do something constructive: get involved in 
local organising; go into schools and give tutorials. Think: “What will most 
help my community right now?”

I’m now a documentary film-maker, activist and work with universities. I’m 
also a director of theSNCC Legacy Project <http://www.sncclegacyproject.org/>. 
I’ve written about the dangers of focusing on the heroics of individuals in the 
civil rights movement, such asDr King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king>, as I think it’s more 
important to focus on ordinary folk. If you believe it’s only amazing people 
who are doing great things, you don’t realise you can do it, too. The reason 
people teach the great man theory is it immobilises you: then they’ve got you.

• Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com 
<mailto:thatsme@theguardian.com>
 