
Three of us are sitting at the kitchen table at Billy and Isobel Muir’s 
farmhouse on North Ronaldsay: Robert, the photographer, me, and Billy. Isobel 
is making lunch. Or she’s trying to make lunch, but Billy keeps getting up and 
down to look for things, shifting the framed pictures of grandchildren from the 
mantelpiece, moving the Herd Register For Female Bovine Animals three inches to 
the left. He’s grumbling under his breath.

After a couple of minutes, Muir comes up with a file, a collection of letters 
congratulating him on receiving an MBE in 2009. The citation is for “services 
to North Ronaldsay”, but as I flick through, it becomes clear that none of the 
correspondents seems able to decide exactly which services they should be 
congratulating him for. Some letters thank him for his 45 years as a keeper for 
theNorthern Lighthouse Board <http://www.nlb.org.uk/>. Others praise him for 
preserving the island’s rare breed of seaweed-eating sheep. A couple talk about 
his work as a retained firefighter and his conservancy of the island’s historic 
buildings. A handwritten note from a friend says he’s glad Muir has been 
recognised for the way he dances an eightsome reel.

If Buckingham Palace had really tried to itemise the services Muir provides, 
the citation would run to several pages. It would be quicker to describe what 
he doesn’t do: he doesn’t nurse, and he won’t preach. But on the island of 
North Ronaldsay, he does almost everything else. He’s both firefighter and 
air-traffic controller, he does the contracting for the wind turbines, sits on 
the local council, the island trust and the Crofting Commission, collects the 
rubbish, refuels and fixes everyone’s cars and farm machinery, builds houses, 
does electrics, plumbing and stonemasonry, manages the lighthouse holiday 
cottages and takes tours of the light. “Oh, I’m not doing as much as I used 
to,” he says. “I’ve scaled back tremendously.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42fd91db0660293a77cb253262fee9429af855e1%2F0_0_5671_3781%2F5671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42fd91db0660293a77cb253262fee9429af855e1%2F0_0_5671_3781%2F5671.jpg>
 Muir in his role as a retained firefighter. Photograph: Robert Ormerod for the 
Guardian 
Up in the small communities of the far north of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, most people double up with jobs 
because it’s the only way to make the local economy work. So the vet might also 
be a fisherman, the ferry staff could just as well be midwives, and the joiners 
might double as funeral directors. But even by Orkney’s profligate standards, 
Muir takes things to extremes. He is a one-man employment boom, a single-handed 
nation state. Or, just as likely, he’s a 67-year-old Atlas holding up a failing 
island with a big yellow digger and the sheer strength of belief.

After lunch, Muir puts his plate aside and turns to Isobel. “I’m getting 
decrepit,” he says. “I hardly could get up the lighthouse today.” This is a 
barefaced lie. Robert, who’s in his 20s, said Billy scampered up the 176 tower 
steps at twice the speed he did. So does Isobel want him to start taking it 
easy? “Of course I want him to cut back. I want him to retire.” Billy mimes 
shock. “Hell, no!” he says. “Retire? No, no, no! I’m far too young for that.” 
If he did retire, who would do the work? “I don’t know. The younger generation.”

And that, really, is the heart of the matter. Because there is no younger 
generation. North Ronaldsay is the last of the Orkneys, the northernmost island 
before Shetland and Fair Isle. Around 50 people live here full time, plus 
another 20 or so second-homers. Nearly all the full-timers are well into 
retirement age, which means that Muir and a handful of others do all the jobs 
because there’s nobody else – and because he loves this place with the whole of 
himself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F381e2c23189aa8cdf4a8b3a8b84f1ced73f67474%2F0_0_5662_3775%2F5662.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F381e2c23189aa8cdf4a8b3a8b84f1ced73f67474%2F0_0_5662_3775%2F5662.jpg>
 Tending the sheep. Photograph: Robert Ormerod for the Guardian 
Muir disappears into the sitting room again and returns with a box full of 
bright-yellow stationery bearing the JCB logo. “Rubbers, pens. Rulers.” He 
rakes over them. “You get freebies from the county show to make you buy more.” 
What, so they give you a pencil and you buy a JCB? Isobel turns. “He did. He 
bought a digger. He went off on his own to the county show and bought a digger 
without ever telling me. The phone rings and there’s my friend saying she’d 
just passed the JCB stand and she’d seen a huge digger with a label with ‘Sold: 
WT Muir’ on the bucket. That was the first I heard of it.”

Muir puts the box down, smiling, not even slightly sheepish. As far as he’s 
concerned, that digger has more than earned its keep. “I do everything with the 
JCB. I pound the sheep, I put up fenceposts, I round the cattle up, I feed 
them, I take the bales to the field.” He looks at Isobel. “What more do I do? I 
use it to take me to meetings. Someone said I used it as a bicycle.”

“That’s about it,” says Isobel. “A very expensive bicycle.”

***

To the non-Orcadian, North Ronaldsay is an acquired taste. From the air, it’s 
a long skinny slip of land curved round to the right and divided by dry-stone 
walls into squares and rectangles. Down at ground level, it’s like arriving in 
a bizarre kind of geological operating theatre, where all the things that make 
up what most people usually think of as a landscape have been removed. Imagine 
a patch of land and then take all the flesh off it. Take the hills away, and 
then the rivers. Take the hedges and the trees, the ploughed or growing fields. 
What you’re left with is the skeleton of an island, the barest bones of earth.

Without trees, it feels as if there aren’t any seasons. There’s nothing to 
mark the passage of the year except maybe a row of snowdrops or daffodils, or 
the grass turning bright or dull. Nobody grows any arable crops here any more, 
so there’s no ploughing and no harvest. The fields are square, and all the 
places where green stuff might normally be are full of grey-brown granite 
instead. The long stone enclosures for gathering and sorting the sheep – the 
pounds – look like somethingAndy Goldsworthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/aug/17/andy-goldsworthy-interview-folkestone-triennial-times-square-rain>
 made with a hangover. Even the Norse-ish place names sound like a mouthful of 
pebbles: South Gravity, Ire’s Taing, Viggay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd71a83fd210beea3d3d9706a9dca774f31cd7f71%2F0_0_5446_3631%2F5446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd71a83fd210beea3d3d9706a9dca774f31cd7f71%2F0_0_5446_3631%2F5446.jpg>
 On air-traffic control duty. Photograph: Robert Ormerod for the Guardian 
Still, it’s amazing how much interest you can generate with just three 
elements. The winds up here can hurl a grown man flat and send whole hen houses 
with all their occupants whirling out towards the US. Beyond the north-eastern 
corner, there’s a long flat slab of rock sticking right out into the middle of 
a shipping lane, which must have wrecked as many ships as Cornwall. The payback 
for all this ruthless beauty is a place that feels as if it belongs to another 
dimension. When the wind and the sea are up, there’s so much water in the air 
that it’s difficult to tell which is which; when you come back from North 
Ronaldsay, it feels as if you’ve been beaten back to a cleaner, clearer version 
of yourself.

That clarity affects other things. Everything here is both simpler and more 
complicated. There is a shop, a couple of bars but no pub, and no garage. 
Everyone orders their weekly groceries from the supermarkets on the mainland 
and gets them delivered on the plane. There is a nurse on the island, but a GP 
comes over for only a few hours a week. Everyone orders their weekly groceries 
from the supermarkets on the mainland and gets them delivered on the plane. The 
nurse comes over for a few hours a week. The little six-seater Loganair plane 
functions as bus, train, post van and delivery van. Without that subsidised 
service, and without Muir and a handful of others, the island would fail.

The plane ride alone is an exercise in bureaucratic zen. At Kirkwall airport, 
you walk up to the Loganair office, ask if there’s space on the next flight, 
and a woman wearing office clothes and a hi-vis jacket tells you yes or no. You 
and the other four passengers stand around chatting and, 10 minutes later, you 
all walk out to the tiny plane. The pilot turns and says, “Hello. Everyone 
ready?”, taxis down the runway, and after half an hour over a sunlit sea, you 
arrive. Outside a hut, three men in brown firefighters’ uniforms are leaning 
against the wall, watching. Sometimes it’s raining, sometimes it isn’t. You get 
out. That’s it. £21 return. No airport security, no iris-recognition, no 
pat-downs, no x-rays, no safety drill.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9160a9b0b24eef9ef250c5218aad0e3c5b7b5cd4%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9160a9b0b24eef9ef250c5218aad0e3c5b7b5cd4%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Greeting the six-seater plane from Kirkwall. Photograph: Robert Ormerod for 
the Guardian 
But for all the simplicity of being here, it’s modern life that is killing 
North Ronaldsay. Muir, Robert and I sit in the lighthouse cottages picking over 
a large tin of shortbread and the Statistical Accounts – the 18th-century 
equivalent of Google Analytics – a detailed record of every village and parish 
in Scotland. In 1787, there were 64 houses on North Ronaldsay with an average 
of six people per household. By the end of the 19th century, there were more 
than 500 inhabitants. Now there’s barely a tenth of that. What happened?

Some clues lie in Muir’s own life. He was born here in 1948, when “there was 
no electricity, there was no water in your house, no toilets – it was all very 
basic, really. If you wanted water, you had to go to the well and carry it 
home. Eventually, we had a pump – that was quite a step forward: you could have 
piped water in your house.” Then came generators, bringing light and heat, then 
television. “You could have your TV and, more significantly, you could have a 
deep freeze. That was a major breakthrough because everything before that had 
to be salted or fresh.”

So, even in a place then stuffed with people, self-sufficiency was a 
prerequisite. “You couldn’t go to Kirkwall every day. You had the ferry once a 
fortnight when I was a boy, and you had a mail boat three times a week. The 
ferry might be storm-stayed up to a month, too. We can still get that today.” 
The island got hydroelectricity in 1983, and almost all the houses were fitted 
with bathrooms. More recently there have been mobile masts and broadband, 
though the connection is so bad that working from home is almost impossible. 
Muir’s daughters did their best to stay on the island, but have now settled 
with their families on the mainland.

* * *

North Ronaldsay primary school has two teachers and one pupil. Teigan Scott is 
10, and her specialist subject is hamsters. Her parents came here from the 
larger island of Lewis five years ago when the council built a couple of homes 
for young families. One family moved on after a year, but the Scotts have 
stayed. David does the roads, digs the graves, coordinates the airfield, works 
for the fire service and acts as handyman at the bird observatory. Maureen was 
working as a carer, but that came to an end when all her charges died of old 
age.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bd25a7b5d1494d2e9b3670c1fbf232cd943d058%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bd25a7b5d1494d2e9b3670c1fbf232cd943d058%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The island post office. Photograph: Robert Ormerod for the Guardian 
Teigan’s two sisters are older; one is at college in Glasgow, and Maxine, 14, 
commutes weekly from Kirkwall secondary school. Maureen blames the declining 
population on the lack of affordable housing. By mainland standards, North 
Ronaldsay seems like real-estate Christmas (last year there was a croft with 
13.4 acres, several outbuildings and a Neolithic burial site on the market for 
£120,000), but it’s still beyond the means of most families. The neighbouring 
island of Papa Westray (Papay), which used to face exactly the same problems as 
North Ronaldsay, turned things around by offering cheaper housing and improving 
communications. Though smaller than North Ronaldsay, they’ve gone from 65 
residents in 2001 to 90 today.

What’s it like to live here all year round, when the flights can’t get through 
and the sea rises so high it’s as if it’s going to pull the whole island 
adrift? Maureen shrugs, relaxed. “We’ve had only one really bad gale since I’ve 
been here, when the winds were over 90mph. There have been only a couple of 
days where I wouldn’t want to go out walking.”

And the bonuses? Maureen appreciates the size of the island and the 
opportunity for more family time. Plus, she says, “I like not having loads of 
supermarkets and shopping centres around me, because the kids grow up not 
thinking that they need to have something. It’s not that my kids don’t have 
junk, but they don’t get it in a constant stream. Other kids seem to need it 
like they need air. I wanted them to know the difference between needing it and 
just wanting it. And also to open their minds up to something different. If 
they’re living in a place where there aren’t loads of kids, whatever they 
decide they’re interested in, they don’t have to clear it with their peer 
group. It shows them it’s OK to be different. You can’t help but be different 
as the only child at the school – but it means that being different in other 
areas of their life isn’t such a big leap.”

***

That evening after dinner, Muir drives Robert and me over to the lighthouse 
cottages. There are two lights on North Ronaldsay. Dennis Head, the older and 
lower of the two, was built in 1789 and decommissioned in 1809. In 2006, it was 
entered into a BBC Restoration appeal for which £300,000 was raised. Two 
centuries of guano was cleared out, the scaffolding went up… and nothing 
happened. Now the money has gone and the light stands untouched, encased in 
quills of scaffolding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F653ce5844d47d269cdf22f4061bb6aab51e8bf18%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F653ce5844d47d269cdf22f4061bb6aab51e8bf18%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
 Muir tends the lighthouse. Photograph: Robert Ormerod for the Guardian 
The newer lighthouse, lit in 1854, stands a little further away. It is dark 
and we find ourselves driving through the middle of a cloud, the air so 
saturated with moisture that when wisps of cloud slide across the headlights, 
it looks like wind made visible. Summer fog stops flights more often than 
winter gales.

As we approach the light, we can see the windows lit up in a row like buttons 
on a uniform. The beam turns slowly, and we’re caught beneath a great 
encircling arc of brilliance, silently watching the mist drifting and the 
lantern’s revolutions. Once in a while, a bird flies into the beam, a sudden 
fleck of white against the darkness. Somewhere out there is the sea.

Muir describes standing in the lantern room of the lighthouse in the early 
hours of a spring morning with a mist down over the island. As the sun rose, 
the mist rose, too, sliding over the windows and trailing away. He watched as a 
few birds began to break through, heading towards the sun. Then thousands 
exploded out of the clouds, as if the sky had been holding them down and they 
had just been released. “I’ve seen some bonnie things in my time,” he says 
fondly.

Has he ever wanted to live anywhere else? “No, not particularly. I go to 
Kirkwall and, if I have things to do, I love it. But the minute I’ve done all I 
want to do, I think, my God, I want to get home again, I’m wasting my time 
here.” He is silent for a minute or two. Both of us look out at the tower, the 
light touching us and moving on. “If I had my time again, I would do it all 
just the same. I wouldn’t change a thing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd79dc3fc9a0c2ff810d2c4a61a5a73f5c01b8df%2F0_0_5065_3618%2F5065.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20doing%20as%20much%20as%20I%20used%20to%E2%80%99%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20with%2020%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fmeet-man-with-20-jobs-north-ronaldsay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd79dc3fc9a0c2ff810d2c4a61a5a73f5c01b8df%2F0_0_5065_3618%2F5065.jpg>
 Relaxing at home with his wife, Isobel. Photograph: Robert Ormerod for the 
Guardian 
We drive over to the light and climb the 176 steps again, Muir ahead of Robert 
and me the whole way, to stand beside the majestic Fresnel lens. The glass 
throws colour against our faces, twisting us upside down or making us vanish 
like a magic trick. Up here, on a night like this, the question isn’t why you’d 
want to be here, but why you’d think of being anywhere else.

No matter how well he carries it, Muir can’t hold this place up for ever. Does 
he really think the island population might get too low to be viable? “It’s a 
continual danger that, but what the devil do you do? The real challenge is to 
create work. I’ve been lucky in my lifetime – I’ve had more work than I can 
do.” But that’s because you keep taking on more tasks, I say. Come to think of 
it, we never did get to the bottom of exactly how many jobs you do. I think we 
ran out of… “Time,” he says, and laughs.

• This article was amended on 16 March 2016 to correct Billy Muir’s age from 
77 to 67 and to remove a reference to a dispute about a lighthouse restoration. 
An earlier version also said the island had no shop or post office and that a 
nurse came over for a few hours a week. It has a shop, post office and a 
full-time nurse; a GP visits once a week.
 