
In the late afternoon of Friday 12 July 2013, in the calm, modern maternity 
wing of North Tyneside general hospital, 16-year-old Peter Bertram made a video 
of his mother holding his newborn baby brother. Peter’s video, made on his 
mother’s phone, lasts just over five minutes. In it, Annie Bertram, 33, sits in 
a hospital chair cradling her sleeping six-day-old son, Huw. Her long, chestnut 
hair is pulled back in a band; she looks exhausted. “Mamma’s just back from 
court,” she says, in a soft geordie accent. “I tried really hard to keep you. 
My barrister wanted me to agree to them taking you away, but I said I would 
rather fight and lose, because then at least I’d know I’d fought.”

Annie strokes Huw’s tiny hand with one finger. “Please don’t ever think you 
didn’t mean the world to me. Because you did. And you do.” Tears roll down her 
cheeks. “And I so want you to have a good life and to be happy, and I can’t 
bear” – her voice breaks – “the thought of anybody hurting you.” Huge sobs 
shake her. The baby, eyes closed, sleeps on, his face turned peacefully towards 
his mother.

Earlier that day, Annie had left the hospital to attend Newcastle family court 
in a last, desperate effort to be allowed to keep her baby. Social workers at 
North Tyneside council had applied for an interim care order. If approved by a 
judge, this would mean social services could remove Annie’s baby and put him 
into foster care, pending a longer-term plan for his future. Huw was Annie’s 
fifth child; three of the others, aged seven, eight and 16, had been subject to 
care applications at various points in their lives. Rosie, four, spent periods 
with her father. In December 2012, as soon as social workers discovered Annie 
was pregnant, they told her they intended to remove the baby at birth.

The foster carer who came to the hospital to take the baby is still haunted by 
the sound of Annie's screams

Against accepted good practice, the hearing was in front of a judge unfamiliar 
with her history. “She was older, and looked very forbidding,” Annie recalls. 
“She didn’t look at me other than to get exasperated when I didn’t understand a 
question.” She was still in pain and bleeding from the birth, and her milk had 
come in and soaked her top as she answered questions for an hour. Her 
barrister, whom she’d met only a few minutes earlier, didn’t seem to her to 
fight very hard: Annie felt he didn’t have a grasp of her situation. “He asked 
me at one point if I was a prostitute,” she says bitterly.

Although counsel for the local authority acknowledged that Annie posed no 
immediate risk of harm to her baby, the debate continued for more than two 
hours, until Annie could bear no more and asked for permission to leave. At 
quarter past seven that evening, a midwife came into Annie’s hospital room. “I 
asked if it was time,” Annie says. “She said, ‘Yes’ and gently took Huw out of 
my arms and quickly left the room. I just saw his fluffy little head going out 
the door.” Annie’s screams echoed through the corridors. The foster carer who 
came to the hospital to take the baby has told Annie she is still haunted by 
the sound.

The death in 2007 of Peter Connelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/baby-p>, 17-month-old “Baby P”, prompted a 
rapid rise in the number of children taken into care. When it emerged that 
Peter, who died due to multiple injuries caused or allowed by his mother, her 
boyfriend and his brother – was well known to Haringey social services, social 
workers were vilified by politicians and the press. Terror of being seen as 
responsible for “another Baby P” is thought to have contributed to a highly 
risk-averse culture in children’s services. This fear may be why the number of 
babies removed from their mothers at birth has increased so rapidly: according 
toprofessor Karen Broadhurst 
<http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/arts-and-social-sciences/about-us/people/karen-broadhurst>
, it more than doubled between 2008 and 2013, from 802 to 2,018. By the end of 
March 2015, there were69,540 children in local authority care 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015>
.

Another factor is an increased focus on emotional harm. If proved on the 
balance of probabilities, risk of this is an acceptable basis for a UK court to 
sever a parent’s legal bond with their child. By 2013,the number of children on 
child-protection plans 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/469737/SFR41-2015_Text.pdf>
 due to emotional abuse was more than six times as many as for sexual abuse, 
and nearly three times as many as for physical abuse.

Of the children who become involved in care proceedings, about four in 10 end 
up in long-term foster care or are adopted; Broadhurst’s research found that 
just one in 10 babies removed at birth will be reunited with their mother. As 
Annie was to discover, once a baby is taken into care, it can be extremely 
difficult to get them back.

***

Serious concerns about Annie’s children had been raised two years before Huw’s 
birth, in 2011. Annie, at 31, had been in a volatile relationship with a man 
who was controlling and occasionally violent. “It was an abusive cycle,” she 
says. “He would drink, get angry at me, hit me, reject me. I would fall apart, 
he would leave, and then I would let him back, because my self-esteem was so 
bloody low.”

One night in November 2011, unable to cope with the confusion and distress, 
and trying to manage her children alone, Annie was overcome by panic. She 
needed urgently to get out of the house: “I just had to not be there.”

She rang her close friend Jenna and asked her to come over urgently, to watch 
her children. Then, when she could hear Jenna’s noisy car exhaust rounding the 
corner, she ran. Jenna arrived to find the younger children asleep and Peter 
playing on his Xbox, unaware that his mother had left (Rosie was with her 
father at the time). After a frantic search, and concerned about her friend’s 
wellbeing, Jenna rang the police. Annie was arrested and handcuffed on a road 
near her home, and taken to the police station, where she was put in a cell.

A duty solicitor advised Annie to accept a caution for child neglect; 
reluctantly, she did, after being told refusal would lead to a compulsory care 
order. Later that day, she signed a consent form for emergency care. Danny and 
Grace were temporarily fostered with a local family. Peter, then 15, was 
allowed to stay at home. Rosie stayed with her dad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fchildren-taken-into-care-mother-fighting-to-get-baby-back-louise-tickle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3fef0a1499bdaa997295181f1b7debfdd15ed26%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20saw%20his%20fluffy%20little%20head%20going%20out%20the%20door'%3A%20one%20woman's%20fight%20to%20keep%20her%20baby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fchildren-taken-into-care-mother-fighting-to-get-baby-back-louise-tickle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20saw%20his%20fluffy%20little%20head%20going%20out%20the%20door%27%3A%20one%20woman%27s%20fight%20to%20keep%20her%20baby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fchildren-taken-into-care-mother-fighting-to-get-baby-back-louise-tickle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3fef0a1499bdaa997295181f1b7debfdd15ed26%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Annie with Huw: her friends describe her as ‘an amazing mother’, ‘incredibly 
engaged with her kids’. 
Annie has no parental support. She was sexually abused at the age of eight by 
a family member, but when she told her mother, normal life resumed as though 
nothing had happened. Now, she finds, it is better to stay away from her 
family. “They are not good for my mental health.”

She was sexually assaulted in her teens by a stranger, and by 15 she was 
self-harming and staying out all night. She left home and went to her 
grandmother’s. After a period of sleeping rough, she walked into North 
Tyneside’s council offices and asked children’s services for help. They found 
her a foster placement, but when she got pregnant, after a brief affair with a 
married man more than twice her age, the foster carer asked her to leave. By 
16, Annie was living in her own place, studying for GCSEs at college and caring 
for her baby. She was encouraged by her teachers to take A-levels, and found 
work in business banking, which she enjoyed. At 23, she got pregnant again.

Almost as soon as her baby girl, Grace, was born, she was pregnant again. Her 
boyfriend was unreliable, and when the babies were born he wanted nothing to do 
with them. It was a bitter blow to Annie’s hopes of creating a family.

A pattern had been set. When she was living in relative stability as a lone 
parent, or in the throes of a new relationship, Annie coped. Her friends 
describe her as “an amazing mother”, “incredibly engaged with her kids”. But 
when a relationship collapsed, so did her mental equilibrium. At her lowest 
points, Annie asked for help, and got it: North Tyneside social services 
stepped in, finding nurseries and respite childcare when they were closed. The 
children’s case files are now thick ring-binder folders of notes detailing case 
conferences, assessments and support packages.

In September 2007, after a breakdown in her relationship with a man called 
Richie, Annie took an overdose while her children were in bed. She survived, 
but knew she needed urgent help and asked the council to accommodate Peter, 
Grace and Danny on a short-term basis. For four months, until they returned to 
her care, Annie did intensive therapeutic work with her community psychiatric 
team, seeing her kids regularly all the while.

She describes her relationship with Richie as “volatile”: she got pregnant, 
but he threw her out of his house two weeks before she gave birth to their 
daughter Rosie, in October 2008. Her hard work with the psychiatric team meant 
her mental health was more resilient, and newborn Rosie was discharged from 
hospital into Annie’s care. The risk assessment on the older three was 
downgraded, and the case subsequently closed.

It was three years later, at the end of 2011, that Annie made her panicked 
bolt from home, and the children were again accommodated by consent. During a 
contact outing with Danny and Grace in the town centre one day, Danny begged 
her not to return him to his foster carers. He seemed frightened, and both 
brother and sister showed their mother bruising on their arms and legs. They 
said they were being pushed and shoved, and had fallen. Annie called the police 
to make an official complaint and, though the foster carers weren’t charged, 
Annie withdrew her consent for their remaining in care. Both children moved 
back to live with her.

By the following spring, she was struggling again. Her new boyfriend had asked 
her to marry him, but then broke up with her. Visited at home by the pastoral 
mentor from her children’s school, Annie confessed that she wasn’t coping. “And 
she said, ‘Annie, you have to cope,’” she says.

Two days later, while the children were at school and nursery, Annie wrote a 
suicide note and took an overdose. Before she passed out, she rang her 
community psychiatric nurse. She was almost unconscious when the ambulance 
arrived, and was on a drip in hospital for 24 hours. When she woke up, she felt 
devastated it hadn’t worked, before being hit by a wave of “the deepest, most 
painful, awful regret… and just desperation to be back home with the kids, 
doing tea and the school run.”

North Tyneside’s children’s services decided Annie’s volatile mental state and 
breakdowns were causing the children emotional harm, and applied to take them 
all into care. They accepted that during the periods when Annie was well, she 
was able to meet the children’s needs, but argued that “her mental health 
currently precluded her from doing so on a long-term and predictable basis”.

A children’s guardian 
<https://www.gov.uk/if-your-child-is-taken-into-care/going-to-court>, an 
independent professional appointed to represent their best interests, agreed. 
Annie accepted that the children needed stability and didn’t contest the 
application in April 2013, on the understanding that once she had completed a 
course of therapy, and her mental health was stable, she would be applying for 
the children to come home. By this stage, she was pregnant again and fighting 
for the right to be recognised as the new baby’s mother.

One in four mothers of newborns placed in care have multiple children removed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/14/big-jump-in-number-of-newborns-taken-into-care>
Sitting on the floor of her small council flat on a hot day last August, 
Annie, slim and neat in black leggings and a flowered dress, tucks her legs 
under her. In November 2012, when she found she was pregnant, she was told 
social workers were likely to apply to remove the baby at birth. She felt she 
had no option but to seek an abortion. “I went to the women’s health unit and 
told them why I couldn’t bear to carry this child. The doctor went very quiet. 
And they said, ‘Abortion day is Wednesday.’”

The procedure was booked for 12 December; she would be 11 weeks pregnant. 
“They said they would keep the baby and there would be a burial on 2 January. 
And that,” Annie’s face crumples, “would be how my new year would start.”

Annie was allowed to see her children three times a week. At every 90-minute 
session, a supervisor would make notes

Annie and Richie – with whom she still had an intermittent relationship, and 
whom she believed was the baby’s father (a DNA test later showed he wasn’t) – 
talked late into the night. They scrabbled together the money for a 3D scan 
because, Annie says, “I wanted to be able to say goodbye to my baby.” Finally, 
Annie recalls, “Richie said, ‘You can’t do it. You won’t survive this. And 
maybe they won’t take him. Maybe we can fight.’”

But her children’s social workers were, she felt, no longer interested in 
supporting her effort to keep the family together: they talked over her, she 
felt she was patronised; once, she was shouted at. The social worker later 
wrote in evidence given to the court in February 2013: “I have had difficulty 
communicating with Ms Bertram following a meeting [when she] stated I had 
verbally attacked her.” The social worker noted that Annie had missed four 
contact sessions with her children (though it was not noted that she had 
attended three contacts a week for nearly a year).

In her evidence, Annie wrote: “At that meeting the social worker was so 
hostile to me that the independent reviewing officer had to intervene and ask 
[her] to be more moderate. She had made her personal dislike of me perfectly 
plain.” Annie admitted she had cancelled three contacts after sessions with the 
assessing psychiatrist that had left her distraught, and missed one further 
contact because she was unwell.

Annie was allowed to see Grace and Danny three times a week. On Wednesdays 
only, the four siblings could meet. At every 90-minute session, a contact 
supervisor would observe and make notes. It was not a relaxing environment: 
Annie knew that anything she said could be used in evidence about her ability 
to parent. She prepared carefully for these family sessions, scouring charity 
shops for cheap board games and materials for craft activities. “Grace and 
Rosie would naturally gravitate towards each other, and sit at a table in the 
contact centre, making stuff together,” she recalls. “Sometimes I brought a 
chess set, because Danny likes chess, and he’d often be stressed at the start. 
Playing chess together was a way of helping calm him down.”

To reinforce its case that the new baby would not be safe, the council relied 
heavily on psychiatric and psychological reports commissioned for Annie’s older 
children’s care proceedings. Annie maintained that she had been mentally well 
for the best part of a year; social workers said there had been a 
deterioration. Damagingly, in their report to the court, they stated that 
“mother was referred to [her local] community mental health team but has 
refused to engage on the basis that she does not trust any professionals. 
Mother would not work with her midwife and is no longer prepared to work with 
social workers… She does not take responsibility for her difficulties.”

A social worker previously employed by North Tyneside, who is now an academic 
and asked not to be named, is in little doubt that Annie’s wariness of 
children’s services was justified. “If you went undercover in a social work 
office for a week, you’d be horrified,” he says. “One of the reasons I left is 
because of this drive to take children away from their families – it’s seen as 
not doing your job properly if you’re not removing children.” When asked to 
comment, North Tyneside council pointed out that its figures are “not out of 
step with the national picture” and that its social workers are “actively 
encouraged to question our work with families at every stage, to support 
sensitive child-focused planning”. But according to this ex-social worker, the 
view is “When in doubt, remove.”

***

There were 5,330 adoptions in England 
<http://www.adoptionuk.org/press-media/adoption-facts-and-figures> in the year 
ending 31 March 2015 – a substantial rise onthe number adopted in 2011 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/vsob1/adoptions-in-england-and-wales/2011/sb-adoptions-in-england-and-wales--2011.html>
, when the then education secretary Michael Govedemanded that more children 
should be adopted, faster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/feb/22/michael-gove-relaunches-adoption-rules>
. Removing and then adopting a child based on a possible future danger has 
become highly contentious, particularly since the timescale for courts to 
decide on a child’s permanent future has been reduced to an outside limit of 26 
weeks, leaving parents little leeway to prove they have changed enough to 
safely look after their child. The government does not collect figures on the 
number of forced adoptions: former “adoption tsar”Martin Narey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinnarey> says that only half of 
parents fight adoption right to the bitter end; other family law experts 
suggest that many who are recorded as “not opposing” the final order may simply 
have had their will to fight ground down over months of legal wrangling.

In the months before Huw was born, Annie was diagnosed with emotional 
disorders that would require long-term therapy. One report said she should be 
reassessed after 12 months; a court-appointed psychologist recommended two 
years of treatment and commented on Annie’s high levels of insight, which 
“bodes well for any future change”. Nevertheless children’s services said her 
mental instability posed too high a risk of serious emotional harm to her 
unborn baby.

Annie gave birth to Huw on 6 July 2013. Six days later, around 8.30pm, after 
he was taken from her, she returned to her flat grief-stricken and bereft. 
Night after night, unable to sleep after expressing breastmilk for her baby, 
she would look for advice online. After a few weeks, she came acrossa blogpost 
with the heading “What should you do if social services steal your children?” 
<http://suesspiciousminds.com/2012/08/16/what-should-you-do-if-social-services-steal-your-children/>

The author, Andrew Pack, is a local authority lawyer who writes a popular 
family law blog,SuesspiciousMinds <http://suesspiciousminds.com>. “There are a 
lot of people who’ve had bad experiences with social workers – some because 
social workers have not treated them well and they’re voicing genuine 
grievances, and some who’ve had a miserable time because they’ve not been able 
to change,” Pack tells me.

His blogpost explained that for parents to have any chance of getting their 
child back, they would need to demonstrate change. “The question being asked 
is, given that x has happened, are we going to give these parents another try?” 
he says. “The other thing to ask – and nobody will tell you this – is, are the 
professionals involved rooting for you? Do they like you? Are they optimistic 
about you? These are not the only factors, but they are things you can do 
something about.”

Annie read the post. Some time between midnight and dawn, she left her flat 
and walked eastwards, not stopping until she reached a bench overlooking the 
waves crashing in from the North Sea. The beach stretched out before her. She 
was convinced social workers had made up their minds about her, months before 
she gave birth to Huw: this was where her working relationship with the council 
had begun to break down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fchildren-taken-into-care-mother-fighting-to-get-baby-back-louise-tickle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07da3942cf45a80dd156fb53413b9611857fbc7a%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20saw%20his%20fluffy%20little%20head%20going%20out%20the%20door'%3A%20one%20woman's%20fight%20to%20keep%20her%20baby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fchildren-taken-into-care-mother-fighting-to-get-baby-back-louise-tickle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20saw%20his%20fluffy%20little%20head%20going%20out%20the%20door%27%3A%20one%20woman%27s%20fight%20to%20keep%20her%20baby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fchildren-taken-into-care-mother-fighting-to-get-baby-back-louise-tickle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07da3942cf45a80dd156fb53413b9611857fbc7a%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘The parents who don’t succeed, I see them sobbing on the court steps’: Annie 
with Huw. 
It is difficult and sometimes painful to change one’s mind. It involves 
accepting we are fallible, and might have been wrong. In acknowledgment of 
this, social work students are taught to guard against a phenomenon known as 
confirmation bias, explains Brigid Featherstone, professor of social work at 
the University of Huddersfield. “In a social work context, confirmation bias 
involves looking only for evidence that confirms pre-existing views of a 
family, situation or issue,” she says. “Moreover, people have a tendency to 
maintain their intuitive beliefs even when confronted by evidence that 
challenges them.”

Annie describes her relationship with social workers as broadly one of trust 
until the summer of 2012, when they took legal action to put her older children 
into care. One social worker was “absolutely brilliant, a decent woman, who 
really tried to understand my family and supported us all”. The moment 
children’s services applied to a judge for care orders, however, Annie noticed 
an attitude change: new social workers got involved, whom she considered 
judgmental and biased.

“They’d decided what they thought of me,” she says. “And they twisted what I 
told them, and sometimes they lied to make me look as bad to the court as they 
possibly could.” A spokesman for North Tyneside said, “These are very emotional 
issues and involve understandably strong feelings, but it would be wrong to say 
the local authority team take a general position on any individual.”

Annie is convinced it didn’t matter what progress she made; North Tyneside’s 
social workers would never believe she could change. And by the time she read 
Pack’s blogpost, it had started to feel futile to try to convince them. “But 
that post gave me the tools to fight,” she says. Her task from that point on, 
she resolved, was to work as hard as she could to convince the other 
professionals involved in Huw’s case that she had changed.

***

Annie had been adamant she wanted to breastfeed Huw. In the teeth of social 
workers’ opposition, the judge who granted the order that he should be removed 
also allowed her to see him three times a week. Over the months that Huw 
remained in foster care, mother and son bonded well.

Every child in care proceedings has a children’s guardian appointed, and in 
court their view is given considerable weight. Huw’s guardian submitted her 
evidence in November 2013. “She didn’t just file her evidence, she rang and 
told me,” Annie says, smiling. The guardian had decided it would be best for 
Huw to live with his mother, and that he should be returned home with “the 
minimum delay”.

But by the time of the final court hearing, scheduled for five days in January 
2014, the local authority’s plan remained the same: Huw should be placed for 
adoption. The social workers’ assessment was that Annie’s history of periodic 
mental health crises meant she would put Huw at significant risk of emotional 
harm.

Just before the hearing, a judgment was handed down from the high court in 
London that restated in the strongest terms the statutory requirements that 
must be met before the legal link between a parent and child may be severed. In 
his ruling in the landmark case now known asRe B-S 
<http://www.familylawweek.co.uk/site.aspx?i=ed117048>, the president of the 
family division,Sir James Munby <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Munby>, 
declared that adoption orders are “a very extreme thing, a last resort”, and 
only to be made “in exceptional circumstances and… where nothing else will do”.

As a result, North Tyneside’s social workers had to submit a “Re B-S” 
statement to the court, to prove that their adoption plan did in fact meet the 
law. On day three of Huw’s final hearing, after the guardian’s evidence had 
been noted, and Annie had been cross-examined, it became apparent that the 
social workers would have to rethink. “My legs went. I couldn’t stand up,” 
Annie says, remembering the moment the local authority’s counsel conceded that 
adoption was no longer a viable prospect.

But Huw’s case wasn’t over yet. “He had to wait for 10 more weeks to come 
home, because they kept coming back to court, and there was nothing different 
in their plan,” Annie says, angry at the memory. By the time of yet another 
hearing, on 11 March 2014, a full two months after Judge Simon Wood had been 
told adoption was no longer on the cards, the judge politely but definitively 
lost his temper. “It is just unforgivable,” Wood says on the court recording, 
his voice controlled but furious.

The council has since accepted responsibility for the unnecessary delay 
between the hearings, though it maintains there was no intention to be 
obstructive. Wood twice told the court that, should Annie seek an independent 
investigation of the council’s management of Huw’s case, he would be minded to 
grant it. Of the social workers’ refusal to allow contact between Grace and 
Danny and their baby brother – bar a single supervised hour, in a contact 
centre, just after he was born – Judge Wood said to the social worker in court 
that it “beggars belief”.

“I do not see this as a ‘nothing else will do’ case,” the judge said. “Every 
step taken [by the council]… has had to be forced upon it, and indeed the 
initiative has come not from the local authority, but from the mother herself.” 
Wood reminded the council that, in a case like this, it was bound to provide 
the support services required to enable Huw to return home, whether it wanted 
to or not.

***

Huw came home on 27 March 2014, at nearly nine months old. His social worker 
handed him to Annie in the car park below her flat. “The foster carer sent me a 
text to say, ‘Your son is on his way home where he belongs,’” Annie says, 
sobbing. The day before, Huw had been brought to her house for a contact visit 
with all his clothes and toys. Annie and the foster mother had hugged and cried 
when they said goodbye.

Nearly two years on, life for this family is far from simple. Annie has sole 
responsibility for Huw, picks Rosie up from school and has her to stay three 
nights a week. She gets help from Peter, who has just turned 19 and was still 
living at home last summer, awaiting his A-level results. But Grace and Danny, 
now 11 and 12, are still with foster carers, and their mother describes the 
past three years of involvement with North Tyneside children’s services as “a 
complete disaster for my family”.

A spokesperson for North Tyneside council acknowledges that “Annie and her 
family have had a long and complicated relationship with the local authority. 
Sometimes we have been helpful. Sometimes we have had to take very difficult 
decisions. And sometimes we recognise we could have done things differently and 
better. Over the last couple of months we have sought to rebuild our 
relationship and to seek Annie’s help to allow her experience to positively 
influence our practice.” In other words, there were lessons to be learned.

Grace understood that I couldn’t fight for them at the same times as for Huw. 
Grace and Danny have been the sacrifice

Peter, curled up on the sofa, says he believes older siblings are the 
forgotten victims of care proceedings. “That summer [when they took Huw] was 
brutal,” he says. “I was 16 and in the middle of my GCSEs. I felt so alone – 
the strain was terrible. We were living on £50 a week, eating 15p noodles 
heated up in a pan. Pour on some sauce and that was dinner.”

He huddles into himself. “I don’t want to go to court or fight the local 
authority. I don’t want to be part of that world. Obviously, I have quite a big 
problem with authority now. If you go through this kind of thing, you lose 
trust. We’ve been completely torn apart as a family. We will never, all of us, 
live under the same roof.”

Peter looks up through a floppy quiff. “I haven’t seen Grace and Danny in 
weeks,” he says. “It’s getting to the point now that I don’t feel connected to 
them any more.” He pauses. “I’m exhausted. And I can’t see a way out.”

Grace and Danny have been in long-term foster care for nearly four years. 
Though Annie was discharged from mental health services before Huw was removed, 
the council is adamant that this is where they will remain. Annie acknowledges 
that she let her children down badly when she was ill; but she believes they 
have lost trust in her because of the position social workers have put her in. 
While Huw was still in council care, she and Peter were told not to tell Grace 
and Danny that their baby brother was spending long periods of time at the 
family home. “They made me lie to my children, who of course would wonder why 
on earth their baby brother was coming home when they couldn’t,” Annie says. 
“And social services made Peter lie to them, too.” When this point was raised 
in court, Judge Wood made clear his outrage at “the impossible position” in 
which the local authority had placed Annie – and particularly Peter, “who is 
still a child”. Annie was, finally, permitted to explain to Grace and Danny 
that Huw, whom they had seen just once, would live with her, while the council 
had decided they would not. Social workers, Annie believes, have never looked 
positively at the prospect of Grace and Danny coming home – and, in the past 
few months, the children have started to say they don’t want to.

On Huw’s first birthday, Annie held a party at a soft play centre near her 
home. “Everyone who’d helped me through the court case came; Grace and Danny, 
too.” At first, their social worker had refused to let them come, because it 
was a weekend and there was no contact supervisor to monitor them. Then Annie 
threatened to go to court and they backed down. “Grace wouldn’t leave my side,” 
Annie says. “She held me and I could feel her shaking. I said, ‘What’s wrong?’ 
But I knew what was wrong. And she said, ‘I understand now, Mam. I understand 
that you had to fight for him first.’” Annie’s voice cracks. “She understood 
that I couldn’t fight for them to come home at the same time as doing what I 
had to do to get Huw back. So Grace and Danny have been the sacrifice. That, 
and nearly all of Huw’s first year.”

Annie has now started a website for parents who find themselves in her 
situation,Surviving Safeguarding <http://survivingsafeguarding.co.uk>, and 
helps to train social workers. “I can’t begin to think…” She trails off. “If 
I’d lost him. For the parents who don’t succeed, and when I go to court, I see 
them crying in the toilets, sobbing on the steps, because they’ve lost their 
children. Your life is over and no one gives a damn. You just get dropped. 
That’s what has to change.”

• Some names and details have been changed.
 