
Before dawn on Monday, Yusef, 35, a pharmacist who had fled violence in Sudan, 
stuffed some blankets into a donated backpack and bid farewell to the muddy 
puddles surrounding his leaking tent. Once, he had hoped to stow away on a 
lorry to England. “But that dream died here,” he said. “That bridge is closed.”


He didn’t want to stay to see the first demolition teams begin gradually, over 
the course of the week, taking down shacks by hand in theCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> shantytown where between 6,000 and 
8,000 refugees and migrants had been living, many hoping to stow away on 
lorries to the Kent coast.

Life in the Calais camp was “tough and miserable” and it was a relief to be 
now claiming asylum in France, he said. “All I know aboutFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is that they make good perfume and 
that Paris is called the city of love. Now I’m beginning a journey of love.”

Like many, he had no idea where he would end up as he waited outside a hangar 
where the French state was organising people into pens in four queues – adults, 
families, the sick and a vast crowd of unaccompanied minors. Refugees and 
migrants, who mostly knew nothing at all of France, were shown a French map, 
given a choice of two regions, fitted with a wristband and put on a bus to 
reception centres across the country. They were told only what broad region 
they were going to, not the name of the town or the type of place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcalais-camp-is-dismantled-along-with-dreams-of-getting-to-the-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8581d5902c089afc7b7da7142269aae1880414b4%2F0_320_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20will%20close%20my%20eyes%20and%20put%20my%20finger%20on%20the%20map'%3A%20Calais%20refugees%20move%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcalais-camp-is-dismantled-along-with-dreams-of-getting-to-the-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20will%20close%20my%20eyes%20and%20put%20my%20finger%20on%20the%20map%27%3A%20Calais%20refugees%20move%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcalais-camp-is-dismantled-along-with-dreams-of-getting-to-the-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8581d5902c089afc7b7da7142269aae1880414b4%2F0_320_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 People were shown a French map, given a choice of two regions and put on a bus 
to reception centres across the country. Photograph: Thibault Camus/AP 
“I will close my eyes and put my finger on the map,” Yusef said. “I want to 
integrate, start a new life, contribute. I trust France to keep me safe. People 
misunderstand us – we don’t have economic problems, we’re fleeing violence and 
dictatorship.”

Awad, 31, from Sudan, had also given up on England. “I love the UK but the UK 
doesn’t want refugees,” he shrugged.

“I like the sound of Normandy, is it a nice city?” asked one Afghan in the bus 
queue, puzzled about geography but keen to go somewhere in France away from any 
border – he was so disillusioned with the refugee struggle, he wanted to start 
a new life far from any frontier.

If some were optimistic about claiming asylum in France, others were still 
fearful for their future.

Two Afghan men who had spent several months in the Calais camp, had hesitantly 
decided to take the French assistance on offer to go home to Jalalabad, though 
they still feared for their safety. Muhammad, 26, said: “I’ve tried. I’ve taken 
so many risks trying to get on the back of lorries. Better to die in my own 
country than here under a truck.”

The first day of transfers from the camp saw hundreds depart – by midday over 
700 people had been bussed away. “It’s not as if I have a choice,” said a 
23-year-old Eritrean boarding a state coach to central France. Most people 
carried the minimum of a jumper and coat given by charities, the lucky few had 
a cricket bat or a football.

But the large numbers of young teenagers waiting to be processed, crammed into 
the “unaccompanied minors” pen of the hangar, showed that the issue of the some 
1,300 children who had been counted in the camp in recent weeks was far from 
completely resolved, despite some leaving for the UK in recent days. A 
15-year-old Ethiopian boy sat looking down at his feet among a dozen other 
teenagers as French government staff and aid workers documented them. He had 
been sleeping rough in the Calais camp for four months. “I haven’t seen my 
parents for more than a year, they were caught up in violence. I don’t know 
where my mother and father are but they wanted me to get to England,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcalais-camp-is-dismantled-along-with-dreams-of-getting-to-the-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fa12b323a135ba94661d92de9eac67f7ce8fca2%2F0_0_2544_1706%2F2544.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20will%20close%20my%20eyes%20and%20put%20my%20finger%20on%20the%20map'%3A%20Calais%20refugees%20move%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcalais-camp-is-dismantled-along-with-dreams-of-getting-to-the-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20will%20close%20my%20eyes%20and%20put%20my%20finger%20on%20the%20map%27%3A%20Calais%20refugees%20move%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcalais-camp-is-dismantled-along-with-dreams-of-getting-to-the-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fa12b323a135ba94661d92de9eac67f7ce8fca2%2F0_0_2544_1706%2F2544.jpg>
 Long lines of migrants waited calmly as authorities began evacuating the camp. 
Photograph: Emilio Morenatti/AP 
“The UK knows very well that it has to take its responsibility for the 
children – we have expressed this to the UK several times and discussions are 
ongoing,” said Pierre-Henry Brandet of the French interior ministry.

Inside the fetid Calais camp, many people were planning to stay in their 
makeshift tents and shacks for at least another night, particularly those who 
would still rather try to get to the UK than stay in France.

Adults with family in the UK were concerned that they would now never be 
reunited. Tasfu, 48, a carpenter who had fled violence in Eritrea, had a wife 
and two children in London. He said he hadn’t seen his 16-year-old son for nine 
years. He had never met his nine-year-old daughter. When he last saw his wife, 
in Sudan, she was pregnant. “I don’t know what the future holds. I want to 
explain my case but I can’t get heard. The children here are beginning to be 
heard. What about us, people with children, separated from our sons and 
daughters?”

He was weighing up what to do. Trying to stow away to England had proved 
impossible, he said. After jail and violence in Eritrea, he couldn’t face the 
perilous attempts to jump on to trucks bound for Channel crossings. “I don’t 
want jail or danger,” he said. He was considering whether to be processed in 
France and hope to join his family at a later point. “My wife just prays we can 
be together one day,” he said.

Deep in the camp, a makeshift plywood door led into into a series of shacks 
graffitied with the words: “We are Syrian, we wish to live.” Mahmoud, 22, from 
Manbij near Aleppo, was sitting drinking a cup of sweet tea. He had been in the 
camp for several months and had tried five times to stow away on lorries, but 
people smugglers asked for £3,000-£4,000 to open the doors of trucks and he 
found it impossible. His family back home in Syria was surrounded by four 
fronts: Kurdish fighters, Syrian rebel fighters, Islamic State and soldiers of 
the Syrian regime. “It has been difficult and I want to get to England,” he 
said. He had several cousins in London, some worked in hairdressing, one worked 
in a supermarket, another in tiling.

In the dead of night, a group of Syrians he knew in the camp had left with 
their few possessions, intending to sleep rough in the Calais area and continue 
trying to get across to the UK. “I don’t know what I’ll do,” he said, keen to 
keep trying for Britain but exasperated at how hard it was. “Sometimes I feel 
that either I’ll get to Britain someday or I’ll end up having to go back to 
Syria.”
 