
“To run a magazine about LGBT issues, to campaign on these issues in Bangladesh
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>, you have to be a very brave 
person, very bold,” says photographer Gazi Nafis Ahmed. “Xulhaz Mannan was the 
one who made Roopbaan magazine happen. He was a very special man.”


Speaking to the Guardian shortly after Xulhaz Mannan’s murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/editor-bangladesh-first-lgbt-magazine-killed-reports-say-roopbaan>
 byIslamist extremists 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/04/25/asia/bangladesh-u-s-embassy-worker-killed/>, 
Ahmed explained that it was the repression of the LGBT community in his home 
country of Bangladesh that had inspired his own work, a long-term photography 
project entitled Inner Face.

“I studied photography in Denmark and saw there what sexual liberty was like 
in western countries. It was amazing.” After he finished his degree he began to 
photograph the LGBT community in Bangladesh. “There were an amazing amount of 
men who were brave enough and said to me that ‘we want to go for it, we want to 
get our voices out there’. In Bangladesh it is not easy for the LGBTQ community 
people to practice their freedom of expression as in many other countries. But 
I felt that, through my art, these human beings could have the choice to have 
their voices out there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F948c6fef490b6fb5a727f6afdf53949c2992fe13%2F0_156_1333_1665%2F1333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20want%20to%20help%20the%20LGBT%20community%20in%20Bangladesh%20make%20their%20voices%20heard'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20want%20to%20help%20the%20LGBT%20community%20in%20Bangladesh%20make%20their%20voices%20heard%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F948c6fef490b6fb5a727f6afdf53949c2992fe13%2F0_156_1333_1665%2F1333.jpg>
 Shamol was 13 when this photo was taken, and working as a sex worker to 
support his family. “My mother supplies water to five shops, but that is not 
enough to provide for the family. I have to do my best to make a living. I will 
need to arrange my sister’s marriage and send my younger siblings to school. I 
often get hijacked at night. But I have to keep on doing it. I see no other 
options.” Photograph: Gazi Nafis Ahmed 
Ahmed began his project, photographing the members of the underground LGBT 
community, and, where possible, recording their stories, back in 2008. He 
approached the Bandhu Social Welfare Society which address concerns of human 
rights abuse and denial of sexual health rights, and provide a rights-based 
approach to health and social services for the most stigmatized and vulnerable 
populations in Bangladesh. “They helped me to make connections and get in touch 
with people and, over the years that followed,my network expanded.”

“The LGBT scene in Bangladesh is very, very underground. There are essentially 
two different social groups. The upper/middle classes. They refer to themselves 
as gay, they have access to the internet, they’re part of the global network of 
gay communities and have friends all over the world.” This group set up an 
online Yahoo peer-networking group the Boys of Bangladesh (BOB) a few years 
ago, and help and support each other.

“And then there is the different social class who don’t refer to themselves as 
LGBT but as MSM. This is a public health designation which stands for Men Who 
Have Sex With Men. They are low income – cooks, dancers, rickshaw pullers – and 
there is huge stigma towards them. My work was with both groups.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4aaf3004eef72b5d73acc5a5c8d223509a390624%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20want%20to%20help%20the%20LGBT%20community%20in%20Bangladesh%20make%20their%20voices%20heard'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20want%20to%20help%20the%20LGBT%20community%20in%20Bangladesh%20make%20their%20voices%20heard%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4aaf3004eef72b5d73acc5a5c8d223509a390624%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 “Any discussion around sex and sexuality is taboo in my country.” Photograph: 
Gazi Nafis Ahmed 
As he began to exhibit his photographs both in Bangladesh and overseas, the 
reactions varied. Some were supportive, others angry, but it was the reaction 
of the mother of one of his subjects which remained with him: “She spoke at one 
of the exhibitions, saying that her son was the way he was, and that ‘I accept 
him, and I would like to see other parents accept their children who identify 
as LGBT in this way’. It was a very important message, I think.”

At a 2008 exhibition of his work, he met Mannan, who was working at the US 
embassy at that time and would shortly move on to work at USAid. “He reached 
out to me, thanked me for working on this project and offered to put me in 
touch with more people. He was a protocol officer of the US embassy, and then 
went on to USAID. He also founded and edited Roopbaan.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f46bebc40606f6314c1d1111ded7cbc9084a5f4%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20want%20to%20help%20the%20LGBT%20community%20in%20Bangladesh%20make%20their%20voices%20heard'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20want%20to%20help%20the%20LGBT%20community%20in%20Bangladesh%20make%20their%20voices%20heard%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f46bebc40606f6314c1d1111ded7cbc9084a5f4%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
 Alam and Kabir grew up in the same village and fell in love; at the time of 
this photo they had been together for 11 years. “We will go on to prove that 
two men can spend their lives together in complete happiness.” Photograph: Gazi 
Nafis Ahmed 
Mannan “was very kind hearted, always supportive. If I ever asked him he was 
always ready to support my work. He always had a smile on his face, always a 
yes for any favour.”

Over the years that followed, Mannan and Ahmed were regularly in touch. “He 
was a very brave person, out as gay to his friends, his close circle, and at 
his work. In Bangladesh that is absolutely unusual, especially in upper-class 
circles. But Mannan wanted to start a discourse around LGBT issues, a subject 
that is so opposed and so stigmatised in Bangladesh.

“Bangladesh has a patriarchal, conservative society so that makes it 
difficult, even the mindset of people makes it more difficult. Having a 
magazine like Roopbaan and talking about these issues is really brave and bold. 
And it was Xulhaz who made it happen.”

A couple of weeks ago, Mannan invited all his friends to join him on 
Roopbaan’s annual Rainbow Rally, timed for April 14 to coincide with the 
Bangladesh new year. The colorful rally, with the participants dressed 
different colors of rainbow, aims to celebrate diversity and friendship and 
ensure the participation of people with different sexual orientations, 
including hijras, in Pohela Boishakh festivities and promote tolerance among 
all sexes.

The plans were laid as usual, but the participants were anxious. Over the last 
couple of years Bangladesh has seen a growing number of homicidal attacks on 
liberal bloggers and academics; on April 7Nazimuddin Samad, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/secular-activist-who-criticised-islamism-hacked-to-death-in-bangladesh>
 a law student who criticised Islamism on his Facebook page, was murdered. By 
the morning of the Rainbow Rally there had been more and more threats aimed not 
just at the gay marchers but at the traditional Bengali celebrations which 
feature garlands of flowers and colourful animal masks. The organisers decided 
to cancel the event. Policethen arrested 
<https://76crimes.com/2016/04/14/four-arrests-of-lgbt-activists-at-bangladesh-celebration/>
 four of the LGBT activists.

In the next few days, Ahmed says, Mannan moved the Roopbaan Facebook group 
from ‘closed’ to ‘secret’. And then, two days ago, a group of six men managed 
to gain access to his apartment and hacked Mannan and the friend with him to 
death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d430db97a09db2720ced6ada537cf50d4e04572%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20want%20to%20help%20the%20LGBT%20community%20in%20Bangladesh%20make%20their%20voices%20heard'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20want%20to%20help%20the%20LGBT%20community%20in%20Bangladesh%20make%20their%20voices%20heard%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fi-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d430db97a09db2720ced6ada537cf50d4e04572%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 Part of the Inner Face series. Photograph: Gazi Nafis Ahmed 
“It was a terrible shock, for everyone,” says Ahmed. Some observers are not 
optimistic about the future, fearing, like Ibtisam Ahmed inthe Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/murder-of-lgbtq-editor-highlights-danger-facing-all-rational-voices-in-bangladesh-58455>
 this week, that the government’s cowed reaction to the Islamist campaign of 
terror over the past couple of years means Bangladesh is “on a precipice … the 
adversaries of moderation, freedom and rationalism are getting bolder”.

“Whether you support LGBT rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lgbt-rights> or not, there can never be any 
justification for murder,” says Ahmed. “But with so many gruesome 
assassinations of free minds and intellectuals in the country, it seems like 
anyone can be a target. No one feels safe, that is the truth.”

But he has also heard that the next publication of Roopbaan may be delayed but 
will not stop. “That should be the spirit. People should come forward, 
together, and ask for action against this.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 