
Arab book fairs are like a giant travelling circus; no sooner does one end 
than publishers are boxing up books, pulling down posters, and moving their 
wares to the next. There are more than 15 major fairs across the region, with 
dozens of minor ones. This week, a reported 568 publishers are at theKuwait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kuwait> international book fair, where 
readers, publishers, and writers are fighting back – and winning small gains – 
against a growing censoriousness.

UAE launches new law to 'make reading a daily habit'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/02/uae-launches-new-law-to-make-reading-a-daily-habit>
The Kuwaiti fair is an outlier in the Middle East, where book fairs have 
traditionally been a free space. The recent Sharjah international book fair in 
theUnited Arab Emirates <https://www.theguardian.com/world/united-arab-emirates>
 saw an estimated 2.3 million customers. Many books not allowed in Emirati 
shops were sold at the fair.

“With the exception of the Kuwait fair,” longtime Lebanese publisher Hassan 
Yaghi 
<http://publishingperspectives.com/2016/05/lebanon-tunisia-egypt-hassan-yaghi/#.WDQgcTaLSrM>
 said just before the event began last week, “all the other fairs, including 
those inSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, allow a 
wide expanse of freedom for publishers and readers.”

These travelling book souks, which usually last around 10 days, began popping 
up a half-century ago, led by the giant Cairo fair. The decline of Cairo’s fair 
and the rise of ebooks, pirated PDFs, and bookstore chains would seem to make 
fairs obsolete. Yet, while their centre of gravity has shifted, they remain 
vibrant.

Kuwait has a robust appreciation for literature and tough-minded writers – yet 
restrictive censorship and bureaucracy

But the Kuwait fair is a strange case. It’s held in a country with a robust 
appreciation for literature, tough-minded writers, and strong cultural 
infrastructure – yet, a restrictive censorship law and political bureaucracy 
constantly threatens literary life.

Bestselling Kuwaiti author Bothayna al-Essa 
<http://www.banipal.co.uk/contributors/960/bothayna--al-essa/> has been one of 
the most vocal in organising anti-censorship forces, recently giving a speech 
before Kuwait’s parliament and sharing her thoughts onTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/Bothayna_AlEssa>. According to Al-Essa, the problem 
started with a battle over controversial books in 1998, which resulted in 
political turmoil. Since then, books have been used by politicians to score 
political points; in the last 10 years, Al-Essa says, “the Ministry of 
Information has committed a literary massacre,” by banning many Kuwaiti authors 
from sale.

A book being banned doesn't mean demand disappears. 'It's sold under the 
table, exposing the sellers to danger'
Bothayna al-Essa 
Al-Essa’s 2015 novel Wandering Maps 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25635774> was published in Lebanon and 
banned from last year’s Kuwaiti fair. She says the book was banned because of a 
scene depicting child molestation. But a book being banned doesn’t mean demand 
disappears. “It’s sold under the table,” Essa said, “exposing the sellers to 
danger, as though they were selling hash and heroin to secondary-school 
students.”

Other books have been banned on an even flimsier basis: The Taste of the Wolf 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/29747793> (2016) by Abdullah al-Busais was 
banned because it contains words like “pee,”, according to al-Essa, while his 
previous novel,Stray Memories was also banned 
<http://news.kuwaittimes.net/bedoon-book-banned/>. The comic novel Mama Hissa’s 
Mice <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/24981611?from_search=true> (2015), by 
International prize for Arabic fiction-winning authorSaud Alsanousi 
<http://www.thenational.ae/arts-lifestyle/books/in-conversation-with-kuwaiti-novelist-saud-alsanousi>
, was banned for allegedly harming public order.

Al-Essa blamed the strong censorship of the last two decades on the lack of 
effective political opposition in Kuwait. “Until now, liberal and secular 
groups have been unable to organise their ranks and provide a clear and direct 
narrative,” she said.

Censorship <https://www.theguardian.com/world/censorship> in Kuwait creates 
problems not just for Kuwaiti writers and readers, but also for Arab 
booksellers, who’ve already been hit hard by the loss of readers in Iraq and 
Syria, as well as the economic crisis in Egypt.

Sherif-Joseph Rizk, head of the Cairo branch of publisher Dar al-Tanweer 
<https://cairobookstop.wordpress.com/publishing-houses/dar-al-tanweer/>, is 
currently in Kuwait for the fair. “It’s a very important market because of the 
high readership,” Rizk said. “Even though it’s a small population, the 
percentage of readers is high and disposable income is also high.”

Tunisian novel wins ‘Arabic Booker’ in Abu Dhabi despite UAE ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/06/tunisian-novel-wins-arabic-booker-in-abu-dhabi-despite-uae-ban>
Since this year’s Kuwaiti fair opened, publishers have been optimistic. Rizk 
said that he had seen several books that would typically be banned allowed this 
year, because the censors had been changed to “more reasonable” people. He was 
surprised that controversial books, likeShukri al-Mabkhout’s novel The Italian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/06/tunisian-novel-wins-arabic-booker-in-abu-dhabi-despite-uae-ban>
, and the Arabic translations ofGeorge RR Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/george-rr-martin>’s Game of Thrones novels 
were on sale (they do, however, remain banned from stores).

We don't want to submit to this situation, which we hope will change in a 
country where freedom has had a wide berth
Hassan Yaghi 
Publishers take a risk by participating in Kuwait, Yaghi said, because book 
stock can be held by censors. “Nevertheless, we insist on participating, and 
not only because of the economic realities,” he said. “We don’t want to submit 
to this situation, which we hope will change in a country where freedom has 
always had a wide berth.”


It’s unlikely that censorship will entirely disappear. But the organisation 
Sout al-Kuwait <http://www.soutalkuwait.com/> (Voice of Kuwait) is lobbying the 
country’s Ministry of Information in hopes of reform, and change does seem to 
be afoot.








 