
It was a defiant public display of affection like no other. About 200 people 
wielding rainbow flags filled the aisles of a Sainsbury’s store to stage a mass 
“kissathon” in protest after a gay couple were ejected from the supermarket for 
holding hands.

Thomas Rees, 32, and his boyfriend Joshua Bradwell, 25, were reportedly 
reprimanded by security at the store on Hackney Road, eastLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, after a customer deemed their holding 
hands to be “inappropriate”.

In response, dozens of gay men and women arrived at the store, set up speaker 
systems blasting outDiana Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/05/diana-ross-crush-bim-adewunmi>
 andDonna Summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/17/donna-summer-disco-pop> before 
heading inside to kiss each other amid the canned goods and fresh fruit and veg.

Rees and Bradwell thanked their supporters before joining in. “The number that 
turned out was absolutely insane, we were not expecting this at all,” Bradwell 
said.

“We were right to be holding hands because when someone questions your 
behaviour in such a direct manner you can’t help but analyse how you are 
perceived by society,” said Rees.

“When your community come behind and say ‘you were right and you are right’, 
all that does is amplify your feelings. We were right to complain and do what 
we’ve done and fight those people who said we were wrong.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fkissathon-protest-sainsburys-hackney-london-gay-couple-were-ejected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53a85267e6d2ebe0f6c4ce164d77270dac2564bc%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Kissathon%E2%80%99%20protest%20at%20Sainsbury%E2%80%99s%20store%20where%20gay%20couple%20were%20ejected&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fkissathon-protest-sainsburys-hackney-london-gay-couple-were-ejected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Kissathon%E2%80%99%20protest%20at%20Sainsbury%E2%80%99s%20store%20where%20gay%20couple%20were%20ejected&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fkissathon-protest-sainsburys-hackney-london-gay-couple-were-ejected%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53a85267e6d2ebe0f6c4ce164d77270dac2564bc%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Thomas Rees (left) and Joshua Bradwell take part in a mass ‘kissathon’ in the 
aisles of Sainsbury’s. Photograph: Steve Parsons/PA 
At least one member of the public shouted at the group to “get off my street”, 
but the protesters were undeterred.

Rees said: “Both of us have received messages from people around the world who 
don’t even have the courage to hold hands, let alone stand up against something 
like this. You have to do so.”

Asked what he hoped the protest would bring about, he said: “Lots of hand 
holding, hugs, public kisses. Show your love.”

A spokesperson for Sainsbury’s, which laid on biscuits and water for the 
protesters, said: “It’s been a really great event and an important opportunity 
for the community to show their support. We do our best to make sure everyone 
feels welcome in our stores but occasionally we make mistakes. We are working 
hard to make sure lessons are learnt.”
 