
Millennials – people born between 1980 and 1995 – will be familiar with 
studies making claims about them, from observations on their eating habits to 
their anxiety levels. But now their sex lives, or lack thereof, are also being 
put under the microscope. A US study suggests that young people born in this 
bracket areless sexually active than previous generations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/02/less-sex-please-were-millennials-study>
.

This was found to be particularly true for younger millennials born in the 
1990s, sometimes referred to as the Snapchat generation.

Eight young people shared their views on this story, based on their 
experiences:

Helen, 25, Hampshire: my generation is very comfortable talking about sexual 
identity

I don’t think millennials are having less sex. In my group of female friends, 
we talk about sex openly and are very comfortable discussing our sexual 
identity (there is very little or no judgment on this from others).

There should be more information about female sexual pleasure. Websites such as
OMGyes <https://www.omgyes.com/try-it> should be given more attention. We are 
really lacking in proper sex education too, especially information about sexual 
identity and female pleasure.

My biggest fear around sex is getting pregnant. My partner and I practise the 
withdrawal method (I couldn’t cope with the psychological effects of the pill 
or the implant). We both hate using condoms. Having had more than my fair share 
of brief encounters, sex for me is infinitely better in a long-term, loving 
relationship. It’s much better when you can be completely honest about what you 
like and dislike, and let yourself go.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc116f6426811abbbde96e2acaac6799cb7fe04%2F0_78_2362_1418%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Less%20sex%3F%20We%20just%20have%20less%20to%20prove'%3A%20millennials%20on%20sexual%20encounters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Less%20sex%3F%20We%20just%20have%20less%20to%20prove%27%3A%20millennials%20on%20sexual%20encounters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc116f6426811abbbde96e2acaac6799cb7fe04%2F0_78_2362_1418%2F2362.jpg>
Hatty, 25, London: to millennials, the older generation’s obsession with sex 
seems really backward

Millennials are not less interested in sex, we just have less to prove about 
it.

In the UK at least, 1990s “ladette” culture saw young women proving their 
feminist credentials by being more like the boys and having more casual sexual 
encounters than they might actually have wanted to. Millennials, on the other 
hand, have no pressure from family to remain virginal (my mum put me on the 
pill and bought me condoms without batting an eyelid), but also no pressure to 
be sexually liberated either.

There is also less pressure on men to be macho about sex. I have a male friend 
who waited until his early 20s to lose his virginity, because he wanted it to 
be within the context of a loving relationship and he wasn’t afraid to tell 
people that.

To millennials, the older generation’s obsession with sex and their highly 
restrictive gender-normative approach seems backward.

Abby, 24, London: young people lack information about sexual pleasure and 
orgasms for women

Millennials are as interested in sex as any other generation and they want it 
just as much. Whether or not we are doing it as much, I am not sure, but a 
quick search on Tumblr will show you that there’s no shortage of interest.

The difference is perhaps that asexuality is now more acknowledged and 
accepted. People are more comfortable admitting that they have no interest in 
sex.

People are now more comfortable admitting that they have no interest in sex

Before I started having sex, my biggest fear was that I would be a virgin 
forever. Now that I’m in a relationship, I don’t have any huge fears or 
anxieties, apart from worries about getting pregnant. But I’m on the pill and 
I’m careful, so I’d have to be very unlucky for that to happen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc74253edcedb1dcc398205b513e97fb505f73e1e%2F0_394_5250_3150%2F5250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Less%20sex%3F%20We%20just%20have%20less%20to%20prove'%3A%20millennials%20on%20sexual%20encounters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Less%20sex%3F%20We%20just%20have%20less%20to%20prove%27%3A%20millennials%20on%20sexual%20encounters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc74253edcedb1dcc398205b513e97fb505f73e1e%2F0_394_5250_3150%2F5250.jpg>
Young people lack information about sexual pleasure for women. There’s so much 
information on the internet, if you know where to look, but there are lots of 
teenage girls and young women who are too focused on male pleasure. It’s 
important for women to enjoy sex too.

Floarin, 25, London: we now live in an overly sexualised world – maybe that’s 
led to sex fatigue

I don’t think young people are less interested in sex. We may be even more 
interested in it. Attitudes have changed and we can speak about it more openly 
than perhaps our parents did. That said, society is saturated with sexual 
imagery, so much so that we’ve almost become desensitised to it. That could 
have an impact on our sex lives. Almost a form of fatigue, where we think about 
it often, but don’t necessarily engage in it as much.

But that’s very much conjecture. They’re just extrapolations. You only have to 
look at what they allow before the watershed now, in comparison with only 10 
years ago, to see that we live in an overly sexualised world.

Jordan, 26, Essex: nowadays people prefer to stay in, rather than go out and 
interact

There are many reasons why millennials are less into sex, the main one being 
the rise in technology. Social skills are dependent on human interaction, and 
nowadays people do not make effort to go out and meet others, they prefer to 
stay in and interact online instead. This coupled with worries about 
contracting sexually transmitted diseases means a lot of people would rather 
just stay in and watch porn.
Close encounters podcast trailer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/close-encounters/embed.html>
Brian, 33, London: our generation has a very different view around sexual 
identity. We are much more open

I believe interest in sex has increased massively due to the internet and 
social networking sites. People can now interact with anyone they like through 
a variety of dating apps. Our generation also has very different views around 
sexual identity. We have more words to describe sexual identities and 
lifestyles, such as bi, trans, asexual, polygamous etc. We are much more open.

Alice, 21, Newcastle: I feel really insecure about sex, and there’s less 
attention given to this

Perhaps my generation is less interested in it – I certainly am. I feel 
insecure about having sex and there’s less attention given to this. I think 
advice about performance would be helpful. Instead, people think the only thing 
young people worry about is sexually transmitted infections and getting 
pregnant.

Sex <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> has become less important, 
possibly because of our overexposure to it – it’s all over TV screens, in films 
and on the internet. We have become less interested in the intimacy of it as a 
result. As a generation, we also have a lot of other sources of stress that 
impact on our desire to have sex. I do also think technology has made us less 
likely to engage in real human interaction, which includes sex.

Bella, 19, Scotland: we’re much more worried about sex

People are just as interested in sex, but we’re just so much more worried 
about it. I’m still a virgin, I’ll admit that, and it’s not that I haven’t had 
the opportunity or that I don’t want to have sex, it’s that the idea of 
engaging with someone like that scares me. I felt all our sex education was 
very much done in the spirit of scaring us away from pregnancy and STDs. It 
felt almost like we were being taught abstinence.

Dominic, 26, China: online porn really put me off sex 

Many friends, myself included, are choosing not to have relationships and feel 
no social pressure to have casual sex. I’d like to think that this is because 
we’re more interested in other things, but these other things may well be 
Netflix and pointless mobile apps. The last generation were promiscuous, in 
part, to be rebellious in the eyes of their peers. Nowadays, there’s no social 
pressure to have sex. Perhaps now we are having sex as much as we actually want.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc69c59bb7ea5945626e45dd8cf0b096c17566b66%2F0_130_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Less%20sex%3F%20We%20just%20have%20less%20to%20prove'%3A%20millennials%20on%20sexual%20encounters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Less%20sex%3F%20We%20just%20have%20less%20to%20prove%27%3A%20millennials%20on%20sexual%20encounters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc69c59bb7ea5945626e45dd8cf0b096c17566b66%2F0_130_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Online porn really put me off sex as a teenager. I gradually started to find 
it disgusting and addictive until I quit for many years. But now I understand 
that it can be part of a healthy sex life if it is not overconsumed.

I am looking for a relationship instead of brief sexual encounters now. I 
enjoy those special moments when you realise you might like someone, the first 
nervous touch of their hand or a shared smile. I love how messy and complex 
love can be, but in my mind, sex and love are two separate things.

Katie, 26, London: I don’t feel like my sexuality belongs to me, it’s just 
something people use to sell products

The ubiquity of sex has made us a generation obsessed with it, but terrified 
of the reality of it. We’re also a generation without privacy. As a young 
woman, I don’t feel like my sexuality belongs to me, it’s just something people 
use to get clicks or sell products. Just look at the recent Marc Jacobs ad – 
who is this for? It’s for men, so they buy it for their girlfriends.

I’m lucky enough to be in a happy same-sex relationship, but there’s no 
privacy in shared houses and there’s nothing sexy about hearing your flatmate 
snoring/wanking/watching Game of Thrones in the background as you try to have 
an intimate moment. And as there are far fewer real life spaces for gay women 
to meet other gay women now, before I found my partner I felt isolated and like 
queer sex between women was more about men being entertained online, rather 
than a real and meaningful experience between two people.

Jennifer, 23, London: people have become really bad at having flings and 
casual relationships

As a historian who focuses on the history of sex and sexuality, I can tell you 
that the enjoyment and desire for sex is timeless. What I think has happened is 
that people have become really bad at having flings and casual relationships. 
One night stands are pretty limited to nightclubs, and who goes to nightclubs 
any more? Plus no one is interested in mediocre one night stand sex.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36cb090d697e82f9e5758c2df7ced2837b5f431b%2F0_140_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Less%20sex%3F%20We%20just%20have%20less%20to%20prove'%3A%20millennials%20on%20sexual%20encounters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Less%20sex%3F%20We%20just%20have%20less%20to%20prove%27%3A%20millennials%20on%20sexual%20encounters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fmillennials-having-less-sex-readers-less-to-prove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36cb090d697e82f9e5758c2df7ced2837b5f431b%2F0_140_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
But there has become such a fear culture surrounding relationships. Guys are 
scared to see girls more than twice, in case they accidentally end up with a 
girlfriend. Girls are scared to admit to guys that they are just looking for a 
fling or a casual arrangement, in case they look easy and it decreases their 
value as a woman. Deep down, we know it’s all bullshit, but we’re all 
inadvertently feeding this commitment-phobe madness.

 * Some names have been changed  