
“We celebrate all rites except one: we can’t celebrate the love of two people 
with a wedding ceremony,” Rabbi Jacqueline Ninio of the Emanuel synagogue, says.

Ninio says that despite wanting to celebrate same-sex marriages, she is 
limited to calling them them commitment ceremonies or covenants of love.

Based in Sydney’s east, Emanuel was founded as a progressive synagogue, and 
already has celebrations for anniversaries of gay relationships, and rituals 
for coming out and gender affirmation.

Ninio is just one of the faith leaders who have been proselytising the message 
that advocacy for LGBTI rights and religion don’t sit uneasily together, but go 
hand in hand.

Legalising same-sex marriage is needed to inject faith back into what could 
become a secular institution, to transform the secular into the sacred, she 
says.

“I feel my religious freedom is being infringed by not being able to perform a 
[same-sex] marriage.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fmarriage-equality-why-knot-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marriage%20equality%3A%20why%20knot%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fmarriage-equality-why-knot-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marriage%20equality%3A%20why%20knot%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fmarriage-equality-why-knot-video&media=>
Marriage equality: why knot? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/mar/31/marriage-equality-why-knot-video>
Ninio was just one of the representatives of faith communities who gathered in 
Canberra this week for Australia’s first inter-faith forum on marriage equality.

Dr Gavriel Ansara, a researcher and human rights advocate from an Orthodox 
Jewish network that affirms LGBTI people, believes that religious freedom is 
harmed not by same-sex marriage, but by its denial.

Without civil marriage equality, LGBTI people of faith had to choose between a 
holy life and recognition of their relationships, he says.

Ansara says that when he came to Australia and tried to find a place in the 
Orthodox Jewish community, he found some rabbis would only accept same-sex 
attracted people in the manner of others who had erred, such as failing to 
observe the Sabbath.

He rejected what he called the “lesser Jew trope” that same-sex attraction 
diminished his faith or status as a religious person.

Ansara says that because Australia does not recognise civil same-sex marriage, 
the status of his relationship changes between jurisdiction – whereas religious 
and spiritual experience is universal.


This conviction of the universality of love regardless of sexuality is 
represented across denominations.


The Anglican dean of Brisbane, Peter Catt, says marriage equality is needed 
for “human flourishing and good order in society”.

Kylie Minogue says she will not marry in Australia until there is marriage 
equality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/06/kylie-minogue-says-she-will-not-marry-in-australia-until-there-is-marriage-equality>
If good order in the reinvigoration of spirituality in society isn’t argument 
enough for religious leaders, the Baptist reverend Carolyn Francis has another 
argument in favour of same-sex marriage: self-interest.


Although men over 50 who lead the church tend to oppose same-sex marriage, 
younger leaders understand sexual diversity and that exclusion harms spiritual 
wellbeing, Francis says.

“Young evangelicals leaders are not at all keen to be relegated to a cultural 
ghetto defined by bigotry,” she says. It’s a “strategic” argument that comes on 
top of the basic demand of justice.

“To put it very crudely: they don’t want to be irrelevant, and they want bums 
on seats in their churches. To put it a little more elegantly: they want to be 
relevant and welcoming.”

Francis says she had encountered people of faith who were “terrified” of 
same-sex marriage, because they had seen communication from “scurrilous groups 
that shall not be named” that led them to believe churches would be forced to 
conduct same-sex marriages.

The same-sex marriage bills before parliament contain no such requirement, and 
as such do not threaten religious freedom, the religious attendees concluded.

“I won’t let my faith be defined by those obsessed with exclusion … For 
Australia the Good News would be that same-sex couples will not be excluded 
from marriage [when the law is changed],” Francis says.

Shiffa Samad, from Muslims for Progressive Values, says intolerance of LGBTI 
people by a faith community was not the only fear she had growing up. Sneaking 
into gay clubs as a teenager, she found herself ostracised by white queer 
people and had great difficulty “coming out as Muslim to gay people”.

Reading a diary entry, she recalls “different faces told me the same story: 
that I needed to come out to my family, that I need to leave them if they don’t 
accept me”.

“There are correct ways to be gay, and Muslim isn’t it,” she says.

Australia's Anglican hierarchy divided over marriage equality plebiscite
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/anglican-church-splits-on-whether-to-back-marriage-equality-plebiscite>
“It’s better to tell them you’re Hindu or Buddhist, talk about Krishna and 
Kama Sutra – then suddenly you’re mystical and they want to sleep with you.”

Samad says she “couldn’t stand” mosques for the same reason, of not feeling 
accepted. Gay Muslims have bigger problems than marriage equality, she says, 
including the pain of being kicked out of home, being told to pray out the gay, 
living a lie or being told celibacy is the only answer.

She says she found an interpretation of Islam that did not pit her religion 
against her sexuality, and a support network that made her feel safe and secure.

Imam Nur Warsame knows the difficulties of being a gay Muslim. He founded the 
Marhaba (meaning “welcome”) congregation in Melbourne, as a means to improve 
the welfare of LGBTI Muslims. He is Australia’s first gay imam, and one of only 
eight or nine in the world. “But I guarantee you there are many, many more,” he 
quips.

Nur Warsame says the violent rejection of homosexuality in some 
interpretations of Islam did not exist at the time of Muhammad or in the 400 
years after, but was a more recent development, emerging in the last 500 years.

He recounts attempting self-harm and the marginalisation and despair of gay 
Muslim youth, and people living double lives. “Marriage equality will give hope 
to a lot of Muslim youth,” he concludes.

Australians for Equality organised the forum as part of a push to create a 
wide political coalition to legalise same-sex marriage, particularly necessary 
afterthe plebiscite bill was voted down in the Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/marriage-equality-plebiscite-bill-set-to-fail-as-nxt-vows-to-block-it-in-senate>
, leaving a free vote in parliament and cross-party cooperation as the best way 
forward.


The Australians for Equality director, Tiernan Brady, told the forum: “When 
someone says they’re a person of faith and for marriage equality, it causes 
surprise.

“It should be the opposite,” he says, noting that the majority of religious 
people are in favour of same-sex marriage.

Marriage equality plebiscite bill voted down in Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/marriage-equality-plebiscite-bill-set-to-fail-as-nxt-vows-to-block-it-in-senate>
The human rights commissioner, Ed Santow, who gave the keynote address at the 
forum, says LGBTI people of faith have “largely been missing” from the national 
debate.

“It’s vital that those voices and concerns of those people are heard in this 
debate, not least because ... LGBTI people of faith fall into some of the 
highest risk categories of poorer mental health outcomes as a consequence of 
their lived experience.”


Santow says the perception of a division of interests between LGBTI and 
religious people needs to be broken down.

“The experience of civil marriage equality in countries with much larger 
faith-based communities than Australia challenges the idea that a country 
cannot value simultaneously both the faith-based background of its citizens as 
well as an important representation of equality of LGBTI people,” he says.

And in that lies the point of the national faith forum and the same-sex 
marriage campaign: to prepare Australia for a time when marriage equality and 
freedom of religion are both respected, and both identities lie together 
inseparably entwined.





 