
Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, the anti-EU 
British politician and former Ukip leader, will appear with Donald Trump at a 
rally on Wednesday, a week after the US presidential candidate branded himself 
“Mr Brexit” and tapped one of the leading American supporters of Brexit to run 
his campaign.

The Trump campaign confirmed that Farage would appear with Trump at an evening 
rally in Jackson,Mississippi <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi>, 
to tell US voters “the Brexit story” of how he triumphed over the electoral 
odds. Farage will not endorse Trump.

Trump hopes to ride to victory a populist wave of nationalist enthusiasm 
comparable to the movement behindBritain’s June vote to leave the European Union
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/22/brexit-means-brexit-when-is-big-question>
. As leader at the time of Ukip, Farage was a key promoter of the Brexit.

Instead, the British politician, who was invited by Mississippi governor Phil 
Bryant, will draw parallels between what he sees as the inspirational story of 
Brexit and Trump’s campaign. Farage will describe the Republican’s campaign as 
a similar crusade by grassroots activists against “big banks and global 
political insiders” and how those who feel disaffected and disenfranchised can 
become involved in populist, rightwing politics. With Trump lagging in the 
polls, just as Brexit did prior to the vote on the referendum, Farage will also 
hearten supporters by insisting that they can prove pundits and oddsmakers 
wrong as well.

How remain failed: the inside story of a doomed campaign | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/05/how-remain-failed-inside-story-doomed-campaign>
This message resonates with the Trump campaign’s efforts to reach out to blue 
collar voters who have become disillusioned with American politics, while also 
adding a unique flair to Trump’s never staid campaign rallies.

The event will mark the first meeting between Farage and Trump.

Arron Banks, the businessman who backed Leave.EU, the Brexit campaign group 
associated with the UK Independence party (Ukip), tweeted that he would be 
meeting Trump over dinner and was looking forward to Farage’s speech.

The appointment last week of Stephen Bannon, former chairman of the Breitbart 
website, as“CEO” of Trump’s campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/steve-bannon-profile-breitbart-trump-campaign-manager>
 has seen the example of the Brexit vote, which Breitbart enthusiastically 
advocated, rise to the fore in Trump’s campaign narrative.

Speaking to a local radio station before the joint rally, Farage urged 
Americans to “go out and fight” against Hillary Clinton.

“I am going to say to people in this country that the circumstances, the 
similarities, the parallels between the people who voted Brexit and the people 
who could beat Clinton in a few weeks time here in America are uncanny,” Farage 
told Super Talk Mississippi. “If they want things to change they have get up 
out of their chairs and go out and fight for it. It can happen. We’ve just 
proved it.”

“I am being careful,” he added when asked if he supported Trump. “It’s not for 
me as a foreign politician to say who you should vote for ... All I will say is 
that if you vote for Hillary Clinton, then nothing will change. She represents 
the very politics that we’ve just broken through the Brexit vote in the United 
Kingdom.”

Asked if he thought this was the biggest factor in the Brexit referendum, 
Farage said: “It was the key. It was the absolute key. The reason we won the 
referendum ... is that we believe immigration should be controlled.”

Both Farage and Trump are keen to limit immigration and protect voters against 
some of the impact of globalisation.


Farage was condemned during the EU referendum campaign for using 
anti-immigration rhetoric, including aposter showing a queue of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 with the slogan “Breaking Point”; Trump haspromised to impose “extreme vetting”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/15/donald-trump-immigration-test-isis-islamic-state-foreign-policy>
 on potential immigrants.

In a further parallel with Brexit politics, the Trump campaign has argued in 
recent days that it enjoys support not reflected in the polls, fromundercover 
voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/23/donald-trump-campaign-news-polls-kellyanne-conway>
 who are shy about admitting their support for the controversial nominee.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
They will soon be calling me MR. BREXIT!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/766246213079498752> August 18, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/766246213079498752> 
In the immediate aftermath of the referendum, Trump flew to Scotland, where he 
owns a golf resort, and enthusiastically welcomed the decision of the voters to 
leave the EU, saying it was a “great thing” that voters had “taken back their 
country”.

Farage has expressed “massive thanks” to Bannon and Breitbart for their 
favorable coverage of the Leave campaign.


“And can I just say a massive thanks to Breitbart, on both sides of the pond?” 
Faragetold Bannon after the vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/aug/18/trump-says-hell-be-known-as-mr-brexit-despite-poor-poll-showing-politics-live?page=with:block-57b5dbb2e4b0c23bfed8ab45#block-57b5dbb2e4b0c23bfed8ab45>
. “Because you guys have been fair with me, and given me a chance to make my 
arguments. I thank you guys very much indeed for that.”

Farage is taking a more prominent role in the Trump campaign even as he 
stepped away from British politics. Farage stepped down as Ukip leader in the 
wake of the vote, but has hinted that he could re-enter frontline politics if 
the British prime minister, Theresa May, does not rapidly press ahead with her 
promise to ensure “Brexit means Brexit”.

Farage has appeared at Republican events in the past, beginning with a 
well-received speaking gig at the 2015 Conservative Political Action Conference 
(CPAC). Farage also popped up at the Republican national convention in 
Cleveland last month, where hedeclared himself 
<https://www.c-span.org/video/?412958-1/nigel-farage-criticizes-president-obamas-intervention-brexit-campaign>
 himself “a huge fan of Barack Obama”.

“Without him we wouldn’t have won the referendum,” Farage explained. “He was 
very helpful.” The US president had encouraged Britain to remain part of the EU.

Dan Schneider, the executive director of the American Conservative Union, 
raved at the time about Farage’s CPAC appearance to the Guardian, calling him a 
“very smart, very funny man and he can turn a phrase very well”.

Farage is not uniform in his support of Trump, however. Last month he told an 
interviewer 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/nigel-farage-donald-trump-republican-convention-muslims-us-election-2016-a7153206.html>
 that Trump’s anti-Muslim rhetoric makes him “very uncomfortable”.
 