
'Nasty woman': Trump attacks Clinton during final debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/nasty-woman-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>
Little girls are made of sugar and spice and everything nice but sometimes 
they grow up and life corrupts them. They metamorphosize from being sweet 
little girls into Nasty Women.


The most extreme case in point, as Donald Trump helpfully pointed out during 
yesterday’s debate, isHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>. Not only did she get in 
her pretty little head that she wanted to run for president. She decided to 
carry on with the charade and answer real questions about policy during the 
debate. Worse still, she only let Trump interrupt her every few minutes – and I 
mean, everyone knows how much he respects women, he was just trying to help her 
out.

So while Clinton was explaining her views on funding social security, Trump 
decided to go ahead and say what everyone was thinking: Hillary Clinton is 
“such a nasty woman”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-calls-hillary-clinton-a-nasty-woman-during-final-debate-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20calls%20Clinton%20a%20'nasty%20woman'%20during%20final%20debate%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-calls-hillary-clinton-a-nasty-woman-during-final-debate-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20calls%20Clinton%20a%20%27nasty%20woman%27%20during%20final%20debate%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-calls-hillary-clinton-a-nasty-woman-during-final-debate-video&media=>
Trump calls Clinton a ‘nasty woman’ during final debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-calls-hillary-clinton-a-nasty-woman-during-final-debate-video>
While Clinton may be the chief Nasty Woman of the United States, we’ve all 
been there at some point. There are few women out there who haven’t been 
informed at some point by a man they are, in fact, a Nasty Woman.

It often happens at the bar. A guy comes over to you and pays you a 
compliment. It’s a real honor; he’s taken time out from socializing with his 
friends to talk to you! Instead of understanding how much of an honor it is, 
however, you tell him that you’re not really interested. He informs you that 
you’re ugly anyway! He informs you, in so many words, that you’re a Nasty Woman.

Janet Jackson's Nasty gets boost after Trump's 'nasty woman' comment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/20/janet-jackson-nasty-woman-debate-comment>
Maybe you do go home with that guy, though. Maybe you just feel like having 
sex. Some women occasionally do, I’ve heard. That also makes you a Nasty Woman. 
You didn’t wait long enough, you see. You’re a slut. A whore. He’s a stud, a 
player. It’s not double standards. It’s just the way of the world. Deal with it.

Nasty Women aren’t just wandering our bars. They’re everywhere. Walking down 
the street, for example. A guy catcalls you, yells a comment. You ignore him. 
He yells after you, a profanity followed by an uncomplimentary descriptor. Why 
didn’t you just stop and listen to his compliments? Are you really that rude? 
Why do you have to be such a Nasty Woman?

They’re at work too. Nasty Women speak up too much. They’re too ambitious. Too 
aggressive. They’re not team players. Let’s be honest, they’re real bitches. 
They may get to the top, they may climb that greasy ladder, but at what cost? 
Nobody likes them. They probably never have sex. Their children probably hate 
them. They probably have no idea how to bake. They’re Nasty Women.

Then there’s the internet. The internet is full of nasty women. They have 
opinions. They voice these opinions. They’re everywhere, these women. They 
don’t understand that technology is for the guys. They’ve got the vote, they 
can go to work, what do they need to go online for? Save a little space for the 
poor men out there.

It’s easy to become a Nasty Woman. It can happen in an instant. You can go to 
bed a perfectly nice person and wake up a Nasty Woman. But this doesn’t have to 
happen to you. You can remain a Nice Girl if you just try hard enough.

Nice Girls let men do the talking. They let men compliment them in whatever 
language that man might choose. They go to bed with a guy after a certain 
number of dates have elapsed and they have proved that they are a Nice Girl. 
They then marry that man. They stand by their man. Nice Girls do not complain. 
Nice Girls know their place. Nice Girls raise nice children. And Nice Girls 
definitely do not run for president.
 