
The overwhelming odds against shuttering the Guantánamo Bay detention facility 
before Barack Obama leaves office have left his allies viewinghis latest 
closure plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/23/obama-guantanamo-bay-closure-plan-congress>
 as an epitaph for an effort they consider marked by unforced errors.

Ever since he took office, Obama has watched the collapse of political 
consensus on closingGuantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay> – a move endorsed by his 
predecessor, George W Bush, and his 2008 opponent John McCain. Instead, a wall 
of conservative opposition formed which Obama has shown no ability to 
penetrate. Seven years of entreaties, reiterated the president on Tuesday, have 
yielded only emboldened resistance to wait him out.

Guantánamo Bay is only the symptom of a sickness: indefinite detention | 
Trevor Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/23/guantanamo-bay-symptom-sickness-indefinite-detention>
Yet to former and current administration officials and human rights lawyers 
who represent Guantánamo detainees, the conservative resistance is only half 
the story.

From their vantage, Obama and his team stumbled repeatedly – in concept, 
strategy and tactics – ceding critical terrain to those seeking to keep 
Guantánamo open, inside and outside his administration.

Beginning in 2009, these compounded errors have left Obama to make last-ditch 
arguments that keeping a man detained indefinitely without charge inside the 
United States is cheaper than keeping him detained indefinitely without charge 
at Guantánamo.

“The president,” said Wells Dixon of the Center for Constitutional Rights, 
“has no one but himself to blame for the fact that Guantánamo has been open 
longer under his watch than under the prior administration.”

When did the idea of closing Guantánamo begin to go wrong? There is little 
consensus, but May 2009 turns out to have been a critical month.

As one of his first acts in January 2009, the president decreed that 
Guantánamo be closed within a year and set subordinates to work on the details. 
As Obama spoke of “responsibly” closing the facility, civil libertarians began 
to perceive a gap between what they meant by closing Guantánamo and what the 
White House meant.

They wanted the president to announce that he would try the long-held 
detainees in federal courts, then hold those convicted and release those 
acquitted or unable to stand trial because torture tainted the evidence against 
them. They also wanted him to forswear trying those charged in military 
commissions that the supreme court had junked in a 2008 ruling. Every such 
group, from the ACLU to Amnesty International to Human Rights Watch, understood 
the phrase “closing Guantánamo” to mean putting an end to those practices, 
which they contended had undermined longstanding US commitments to the rule of 
law and human rights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdfe996cb17faa15a48554bc7e239550488cd058%2F0_0_5262_3156%2F5262.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='No%20one%20but%20himself%20to%20blame'%3A%20how%20Obama's%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20plans%20fell%20through&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27No%20one%20but%20himself%20to%20blame%27%3A%20how%20Obama%27s%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20plans%20fell%20through&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdfe996cb17faa15a48554bc7e239550488cd058%2F0_0_5262_3156%2F5262.jpg>
 Obama is applauded by retired senior military leaders and Joe Biden after 
signing an executive order closing the prison at Guantánamo Bay. Photograph: J. 
Scott Applewhite/AP 
Instead, Obama gave a speech 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-national-security-5-21-09>
 on 21 May 2009 at the National Archives that treated “closing Guantánamo” with 
strict literalism.

Obama used all of the rhetoric against Guantánamo that the groups had compiled 
during the Bush years. Guantánamo had “set back [America’s] moral authority” 
and was a “rallying cry for our enemies”. Some 240 detainees were in a “legal 
limbo”. The military commissions were less efficient than civilian courts in 
dispensing justice. Guantánamo, all told, was “a mess”.

Yet with the exception of torture, Obama chose to retain every objectionable 
practice at Guantánamo. While he said he preferred to try detainees in civilian 
courts, he defended the military commissions, and downplayed his 2006 Senate 
vote against them, calling them an “appropriate venue for trying detainees for 
violations of the laws of war”.

Most importantly, Obama conceded a role for indefinite detention – this time 
in the United States. He called them “a number of people who cannot be 
prosecuted for past crimes, in some cases because evidence may be tainted, but 
who nonetheless pose a threat to the security of the United States”.

Over the years, administration aides would speak of them as a detail, an 
“irreducible minimum”, those left after men who posed a marginal threat were 
transferred out. Like Obama, they said this was a “responsible” approach to 
closing Guantánamo.

Republicans had smelled Obama’s weakness. He never climbed back from that. But 
then, he never really tried
Cori Crider of Reprieve 
The human rights groups so encouraged by Obama’s pledge to close Guantánamo 
smelled a bait-and-switch. Even if Obama got what he wanted, he wouldn’t be 
closing the facility in any substantive fashion. The indefinite detentions 
without charge, the military commissions, everything, save torture, that made 
Guantanamo internationally infamous would live on, except this time closer to 
home.

Bitter with disappointment, the campaigners and lawyers came to call the 
prison in Thomson, Illinois, where Obama wanted to hold the residual Guantánamo 
population “Gitmo North”. Yet many would continue to mute their criticisms of 
Obama, whom they felt had his heart in the right place and was preferable to 
Republicans like the current Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, whosaw no 
problem 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/03/13/AR2009031302907.html>
 with Guantánamo.

Interviews over the past seven years with numerous administration officials 
who worked on detention issues indicate that they did not seriously consider an 
alternative approach, both because they feared letting dangerous people free 
and because they feared the political consequences of doing so.

They held with that approach even as civil libertarians warned them, publicly 
and in closed-door meetings at the White House and Justice Department, that 
circumscribing their focus from the start would lead them inexorably on to the 
terrain favored by the plan’s opponents. If the US was going to do the same 
things somewhere else, what was the point of clearing out Guantánamo?

As Obama prepared to give his National Archives speech, intended to rally 
support for his Guantánamo approach, legislative opposition began to coalesce – 
not just from Obama’s enemies, but from his friends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4de9d9683b6598358568b56ce98119aef226f453%2F0_190_2896_1737%2F2896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='No%20one%20but%20himself%20to%20blame'%3A%20how%20Obama's%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20plans%20fell%20through&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27No%20one%20but%20himself%20to%20blame%27%3A%20how%20Obama%27s%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20plans%20fell%20through&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4de9d9683b6598358568b56ce98119aef226f453%2F0_190_2896_1737%2F2896.jpg>
 Navy guards escort a detainee through Camp Delta at Guantánamo Bay naval base. 
Photograph: Handout/Reuters 
On 4 May, the chairman of the powerful House appropriations committee, liberal 
Democrat David Obey, stripped $80m devoted to the Guantánamo closure out of a 
wartime funding bill destined to pass. Obey, in a preview of what was in store 
from Capitol Hill for years,savaged 
<http://www.cnn.com/2009/POLITICS/05/04/guantanamo.closure/> Obama’s closure 
plan as pointlessly vague.

“While I don’t mind defending a concrete program,” he told reporters, “I’m not 
much interested in wasting my energy defending a theoretical program.”

The day before the Archives speech, the Democratic-held Senate dealt Obama’s 
plans an even harsher blow. By a blowout bipartisan margin of90-9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/may/20/close-guantanamo-funding-senate-obama>
, the Senate rejected financing the closure. A Senate leadership aide at the 
time, stunned by what she considered White House lassitude, explained why even 
people inclined to help Obama would vote against the measure: Obama had decreed 
Guantánamo be closed without presenting lawmakers with a specific plan they 
could defend to skeptical constituents.

In his Archives speech, Obama hit out at the emerging demagoguery around 
closing Guantánamo, decrying “30-second commercials … designed to frighten the 
population”. But he said much less about another May 2009 decision that 
acquiesced to those fears.

A federal judge in 2008 had ordered 17 ethnically Uighur men held at 
Guantánamo be freed. But since the US could not transfer them back to China 
without the strong likelihood of their being tortured, Obama had found a 
different solution: resettle them in northern Virginia, where the local Uighur 
community welcomed them with open arms.

Instead, by May 2009, the local congressman, Republican Frank Wolf, raised 
furious objections when he learned of the plan. Without evidence, Wolf argued 
they might “directly threaten 
<http://www.newsweek.com/chinese-uighurs-and-obamas-gitmo-problem-80027>” his 
constituents. Obama abandoned the resettlement plan, and found homes forfour of 
the Uighurs in June in Bermuda 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/15/world/americas/15uighur.html>, where they 
were photographed swimming joyfully and eating ice cream.

Cori Crider of the human rights group Reprieve, who has represented numerous 
Guantánamo detainees, considers the Uighur resettlement an early, unforced and 
underappreciated capitulation that sowed the seeds for further failure.

“Just think for a minute if those snapshots had been in America – if from 
spring ’09, everybody’s mental picture of ex-detainees was five dudes in 
T-shirts and hipster beards at a backyard barbecue. Everything later would have 
gone down differently,” Crider said.

“From that point there was blood in the water: congressional Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> had smelled Obama’s weakness, 
and they exploited it every chance they got. He never climbed back from that. 
But then, he never really tried.”

It would not be until December 2013, more than five years after Judge Ricardo 
Urbina ordered their release, that thefinal three Uighur detainees left 
Guantánamo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/31/uighur-men-leave-guantanamo-bay-slovakia>
, for Slovakia.

Still, the administration thought it could reach a broader deal in Congress.

Led by Rahm Emanuel, Obama’s first chief of staff, the White House looked to 
GOP Senate hawk Lindsey Graham. Although Graham was mercurial, he was pragmatic 
and had points of agreement with Obama that neither side liked to emphasize, 
including an opposition to torture that set him out of step with many in his 
own party. Beginning in 2009, as the two sides worked to revitalize the 
military tribunals at the base – ultimately passing the Military Commissions 
Act of 2009 in October – the White House and Graham’s office worked toward what 
they hoped would be a grand bargain on Guantánamo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdb78205bbca609fcd13ed3deaa8fd334ca26ba8%2F0_1492_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='No%20one%20but%20himself%20to%20blame'%3A%20how%20Obama's%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20plans%20fell%20through&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27No%20one%20but%20himself%20to%20blame%27%3A%20how%20Obama%27s%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20plans%20fell%20through&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdb78205bbca609fcd13ed3deaa8fd334ca26ba8%2F0_1492_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 A detainee is seen at Guantánamo’s Camp Six. Photograph: Simon Leigh for the 
Guardian 
As implied by the term, Graham spent the summer of 2009 looking beyond 
Guantánamo. His basic proposition to the White House, reportedin detail 
<http://www.charliesavage.com/?p=469> in Charlie Savage’s 2015 book Power Wars, 
was to deliver the votes in the Senate for shuttering Guantánamo and opening a 
replacement facility. In exchange, Graham wanted a broader wartime detentions 
policy than Obama was willing to embrace. It would allow the US military to 
continue making captures far beyond the declared battlefields of Iraq and 
Afghanistan, sending them to the alternative site. When trial was an option, it 
would occur in the military commissions.

In 2010, Obama’s losses were compounded, from unexpected quarters. Khalid 
Sheikh Mohammed and four others were charged with conspiracy in the 9/11 
attacks, a capital case, intended to show the capacity for federal civilian 
courts to take on the hardest cases. But New York’s mayor, Michael Bloomberg, 
rejected the trial as a potential danger. The White House and Justice 
Department were incensed but impotent and the trial was scrapped.

Ultimately, the Graham-Obama deal died. Graham came out of it gaining more of 
what he wanted than did Obama. By 2012, the military commissions again took up 
the Khalid Sheikh Mohammed prosecution – although four years later, there is 
still no end in sight for pre-trial hearings.

What Graham didn’t get was something Obama had pledged in the Archives speech 
to create: “clear, defensible, and lawful standards” for dealing with future 
wartime detainees, beyond those captured on the active battlefield of 
Afghanistan.

Since Obama did not want to add to the Guantánamo population, he set up ad hoc 
rules for captures, symbolized by the spring 2011 capture of Ahmed Abdulkadir 
Warsame, a Somali supporter of al-Qaida, whom navy forces heldaboard the 
amphibious assault ship USS Boxer for months 
<http://www.wired.com/2011/07/floating-gitmo/> before sending him to a New York 
federal jail.

In Senate testimony that June, Adm William McRaven, who commanded the Seal 
raid that killed Osama bin Laden,testified 
<http://www.wired.com/2011/06/actually-special-ops-night-raids-are-rather-gentle/>
 that the administration lacked a detentions policy, which had forced the Boxer 
brig to be used as a floating Guantánamo surrogate.

Graham and fellow hawks seized on McRaven’s testimony as evidence that the 
effort to close Guantánamo was leading the US into using untenable detention 
alternatives, the same type of lawless improvisation Obama had deplored at 
Guantánamo in the first place.

By then, defense analysts observing the intensity of Obama’s drone strikes in 
Pakistan, Yemen and Libya were drawing another conclusion. A reluctance to 
capture suspected terrorists, and send them into the morass of detentions 
policy, wascontributing to the overall lethality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/07/us-raids-terror-suspects-obama> 
of Obama’s counter-terrorism. Obama was killing terrorist suspects rather than 
capturing them.

Republicans who controlled Congress in 2011 ended their resurgent year with 
another victory. Inside a must-pass bill authorizing the annual half-trillion 
in Pentagon funding, they placed a prohibition on using any funding at all to 
transfer Guantánamo detainees to the US for any purpose.

Obama first threatened to veto the bill and then capitulated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/15/americans-face-guantanamo-detention-obama>
. It established a pattern that would hold for the next five years: to call the 
effort irresponsible, but then – sometimes after giving an actual veto – to 
sign the bill rather than inviting the obvious attacks that he was holding US 
troops hostage to his Guantánamo closure pledge. The measure destroyed the 
Justice Department’s plans to prosecute whatever Guantánamo detainees it could 
in federal courts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fbarack-obama-guantanamo-bay-terrorism-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%3A%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20undermines%20our%20fight%20against%20terrorism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fbarack-obama-guantanamo-bay-terrorism-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%3A%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20undermines%20our%20fight%20against%20terrorism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fbarack-obama-guantanamo-bay-terrorism-video&media=>
Obama: Guantánamo undermines our fight against terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/feb/23/barack-obama-guantanamo-bay-terrorism-video>
. 
But the Justice Department was also working at cross purposes with the 
Guantánamo closure.

Ever since the supreme court ruled in 2004 that Guantánamo detainees had the 
right to challenge their detention in habeas corpus cases, the self-designated 
“Gitmo bar” had racked up victories. Though the cases were drawn out and 
featured lengthy appeals, they were another avenue by which the Guantánamo 
ranks thinned, through the attrition of successful litigation.

Members of the Gitmo bar figured that Eric Holder’s Justice Department – which 
contained lawyers who represented terrorism suspects, smeared in a 2010 attack 
ad as the “al-Qaida Seven 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=124546087>” – would be a 
natural, if informal, ally. Instead, the federal lawyers went hard at the 
habeas cases.

The government’s decision to fight the Ba Odah case is a self-inflicted 
gunshot wound to the head
Attorney Wells Dixon 
By January 2010, the Washington DC federal circuit court presiding over the 
habeas cases had issued 32 rulings in favor of Guantánamo detainees and eight 
against them. The tally currently stands at 39 rulings in favor and 25 against, 
a testament to the intensity of the Justice Department attorneys. Habeas 
hearings all but ground to a stop in October 2011 after the Justice Department 
won a complex case against a Yemeni detainee, Adnan Latif, that in effect gave 
even fragmentary government intelligence reports on detaineesthe presumption of 
truth <http://www.scotusblog.com/2011/11/major-win-for-u-s-on-detainees/>. 

The most recent habeas challenge in the circumscribed system came in August, 
in a case concerning Tariq ba Odah, a Yemeni man approved for release in 2009. 
Hunger strikes had left Ba Odah weighing 76lb and in dire physical health. Yet 
the Justice Department not only challenged his release, it took the exceptional 
step ofdoing so in a secret filing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/15/us-launches-secret-bid-to-stop-release-of-hunger-striking-guantanamo-detainee>
.

“It makes no sense,” said Dixon, Ba Odah’s attorney. “When it comes to closing 
Guantánamo, the government’s decision to fight the Ba Odah case is a 
self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head for the administration.”

Latif himself, who was never charged with any crime, died at Guantánamo on 11 
September 2012 in what authoritiescalled a suicide 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/12/us/politics/detainee-who-died-at-guantanamo-had-release-blocked-by-court.html?_r=2>
.

“When Obama became president, the federal courts were routinely granting 
habeas petitions, because the evidence used to hold most of these guys was 
trash. Judges would just look at it and say, ‘After seven, eight years – this 
is all you got?’ Lots of people went home,” Reprieve’s Crider said.

“The president should have directed the Justice Department to stop taking 
stupid points and petty appeals.”

One reason the Justice Department pursued the habeas cases so hard was its 
client: the Pentagon. Senior US military officers, unconvinced by the push to 
close Guantánamo and wary of the administration’s allergy to a formal detention 
policy, did not want to risk setting a precedent for courts ordering 
battlefield captives free, even as Guantánamo, thousands of miles from any 
active battlefield, presented a different set of circumstances.

After Obama won re-election in 2012 and recommitted himself to a new push to 
close the facility, frustrations at the White House and the State Department 
with the military’s joint staff and the new defense secretary, Chuck Hagel, 
took root.

Administration officials saw the Pentagon slow-walking decisions on releasing 
what some considered uncontroversial detainees, either those cleared for 
transfer by a 2010 internal review or by a quasi-parole board to thin the 
Guantánamo ranks. Evenpainstaking resettlement deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/13/pentagon-blocking-guantanamo-transfer-shaker-aamer>
 became subject to highly bureaucratic Pentagon obstruction. Even as the White 
House pointed to the parole board as a responsible solution to get detainees 
out of Guantánamo, cases trickled to a slow pace, prompting former officials to 
loudly proclaim that the sloth – all of which was generated internally, far 
from the discontent of Congress –jeopardized the goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/26/yemen-unrest-derail-guantanamo-bay-prison-detainees>
 of shuttering Guantánamo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff67b29b9c2373237d594dee0a7208aaccfe565ad%2F0_0_3080_1848%2F3080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='No%20one%20but%20himself%20to%20blame'%3A%20how%20Obama's%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20plans%20fell%20through&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27No%20one%20but%20himself%20to%20blame%27%3A%20how%20Obama%27s%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20plans%20fell%20through&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fobama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff67b29b9c2373237d594dee0a7208aaccfe565ad%2F0_0_3080_1848%2F3080.jpg>
 Detainees pray in a communal area of Camp Six in 2011. Photograph: 
HANDOUT/Reuters 
Divisions within the administration over the intransigence became broader. It 
took Hagel five months toeven appoint an official 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/08/guantanamo-bay-envoy-paul-lewis> 
to spearhead Guantánamo closure efforts. Ultimately, the frustration 
contributed to Obamafiring Hagel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/24/chuck-hagel-step-down-us-defence-secretary>
 in 2014, although officials todaysay intransigence persists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/13/pentagon-blocking-guantanamo-transfer-shaker-aamer>
, even as the pace of transfers has accelerated to the point where Guantánamo 
is down to 91 detainees.

Far less public is a years-long battle over another self-inflicted challenge: 
the hunger strikes.

In 2013, despondent at the prospect of Obama failing to release them, more 
than 100 detainees launched a hunger strike that became an international cause 
célèbre. One wrote in the New York Times of the forced-feeding counter-measure 
taken by guards, who forced him out of his cell, thathe likened to torture 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/15/opinion/hunger-striking-at-guantanamo-bay.html>
.

One response, taken at the initiative of Gen John Kelly, then the new 
commander of all forces in South America as well as Guantánamo, was to order a 
press blackout. Guantánamo and Pentagon officials, who once provided daily 
tallies of hunger strikers, refused to give out any information at all. They 
maintain today that the strike – which at one point they gave the euphemism “
long-term non-religious fasting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/29/obama-guantanamo-bay-force-feeding-hearing-secret>
” – is all but over, and, backed by Obama, have argued that the only 
alternative to the tube feedings is to allow the detainees to die.

Guantánamo Bay: Obama reiterates call to close prison in final plan to Congress
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/23/obama-guantanamo-bay-closure-plan-congress>
In the course of his habeas case, a Syrian detainee, Abu Wa’el Dhiab, in 2013 
prompted the Justice Department to disclose that the military has kept 
extensive videotapes of the forced feeding. Several news organizations, 
including the Guardian, joined in asuccessful lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/03/guantanamo-force-feeding-videos-released>
 to disclose censored portions of the tapes – but the Justice Department 
continues to fight the disclosure through appeals to higher courts.

Several members of the Gitmo bar, now resigned to continued representation of 
Guantánamo clients, consider the decision emblematic of Obama’s broader 
self-inflicted failures. Release of the tapes,they argue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/08/guantanamo-force-feeding-tubes-weapons-judge-video>
, would show a procedure brutal enough to spark international outcry, which 
might aid Obama in shuttering Guantánamo. Instead, the administration fights 
their release, even as its options for closing the detention facilitynow hinge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/23/obama-guantanamo-bay-closure-plan-congress>
 on convincing a Republican Congress in a presidential election year to reverse 
course on an obstruction for which they have paid no political price, in order 
to hand a victory to a hated president.

A typical response from a GOP congressman came from Florida’s Vern Buchanan, 
who greeted Obama’s Tuesday plan by stating: “As our nation fights Isis and 
radical Islamic extremism around the world, the last thing we should do is 
close a facility used to house and interrogate individuals determined to kill 
Americans.”

Several members of the Gitmo bar believe their detainees will die at 
Guantánamo without having ever been charged. The quasi-parole board has turned 
up basic mistakes in identifying detainees, such as Mustafa al-Aziz al-Shamiri, 
whose 13-year detention the board revealed was based in part on the military
believing it had a different person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/01/mistaken-identity-guantanamo-bay-mustafa-al-aziz-al-shamiri>
. The military commissions have tangled into a procedural snarl, and have even 
yielded suspicions that the governmentinserted spies on the defense teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/14/guantanamo-bay-hearing-halted-fbi-spying>
, all of which jeopardizes the commissions’ viability. Some administration 
officials, who would not speak for the record for this story, consider 
Guantánamo’s closure in any form a lost cause.

“President Obama gave my clients the single most dangerous commodity there is 
in Guantánamo Bay: hope. And then he let them down,” said Crider.
 