
Rotherham council hit the national headlines following the scandal over its 
failings to deal with child sexual exploitation (CSE).

Fundamental flaws were identified across the council, but in particular in 
children’s services, which were deemed failing by Ofsted.

Now the council is in its second full year of reforming its services, 
practices and culture following government intervention. But – like all local 
authorities across the country – it is doing so against a backdrop of annually 
reducing budgets with an increasing demand for services and rising costs.

Despite this, the council is taking many positive steps towards improvement 
and is redefining its priorities and ambitions. This has included a wholesale 
change of management at the council, including in children’s services.

Now it has its sights firmly set on becoming an outstanding borough by 2018, 
which means fundamental transformation of the service top to bottom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Frotherham-council-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fwork-for-rotherham-improvement-journey-social-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9f636caef32771a12f8f6bb891ec6ca50877ad0%2F0_0_2898_1739%2F2898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Now%20is%20the%20time%20to%20work%20for%20Rotherham%20and%20be%20part%20of%20our%20improvement%20journey'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Frotherham-council-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fwork-for-rotherham-improvement-journey-social-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Now%20is%20the%20time%20to%20work%20for%20Rotherham%20and%20be%20part%20of%20our%20improvement%20journey%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Frotherham-council-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fwork-for-rotherham-improvement-journey-social-workers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9f636caef32771a12f8f6bb891ec6ca50877ad0%2F0_0_2898_1739%2F2898.jpg>
 The council is taking positive steps towards improvement and is redefining its 
priorities and ambitions. Photograph: Rotherham council 
‘If we want to recruit the best people, we need to give them the right reasons 
to join us’

Ian Thomas, strategic director of children’s services

There can’t be anyone who hasn’t heard about the Rotherham story. 

This was a town blighted by the exploitation of children over a 16-year period 
and on an industrial scale. However, following the appointment of 
commissioners, supported by local elected members, green shoots of recovery 
have definitely started to emerge.

Now is the time to come and work for Rotherham and be part of the improvement 
journey; part of the change. There has never been a more exciting time to come 
and work here. If you can imagine what it would be like to have a blank canvas 
and be able to write your own rules, then this is the place for you. We want 
people who want to redefine how we deal with children’s services, who have 
ambitions about how we make the best within the budgets we have and how we make 
our town stand out for all the right reasons, not the wrong ones.

We are striving to become a “child centred borough”, where all policy 
decisions take into account the potential impact on children. The commitment in 
our corporate plan is to make sure every child is making the best start in life.

One of the ways we are doing this is by turning the CSE issue on its head and 
making this council a beacon for best practice across the country.

Securing convictions six months ago against six individuals – four men and two 
women, who were sentenced to a total of 102 years for CSE – has been key to us 
being able to demonstrate to people that we take this sort of crime seriously; 
that we will work effectively with our partners to secure convictions and help 
make sure justice is served.

But it was clear to me that the only way we will be able to achieve our vision 
of a brighter future for the families of our region, was by committing a 
significant investment of new resources for children’s social care. We needed 
to make social work really matter in order to achieve our five-year 
transformation plan for services.

That is why I took steps to secure resources to enable me to reduce caseloads, 
bring in additional social workers and restructure the whole service from top 
to bottom.


It is not rocket science: if we want to recruit the best people to work as 
social workers here in Rotherham and help us achieve our ambition, then we need 
to give people the right reasons to join us. Smaller, much more manageable 
caseloads, good management structures, fair pay and training and development 
are a sure fire way to making people want to not only come and work for us, but 
also to stay and help us transform our services into some of the best in the 
country.


Our locality teams are placed within the communities they serve, so they 
really get to know the neighbourhood, building close relationships with 
partners, children and families in the area. This deepens trust and 
familiarity, helping us to put vulnerable children and young people at the 
centre of what we do.

We have also put in place accessible leadership and are nurturing a culture 
which encourages people to speak out and voice their observations and 
recommendations.

On top of this we have purchased and plan to implement new systems and tools, 
which will result in major IT improvements. This should mean far less admin and 
paperwork. With greater efficiency and time saving, staff are freed up to focus 
on their caseloads and on making a difference to the families they work with.

We need people to understand the changes we have been through and are still 
going through and to come and work for us at this pivotal time. We will make 
the difference, but the key is will you?

More information about children’s social care jobs in Rotherham is available 
here 
<http://childrenssocialcarejobs.org.uk/?utm_source=GJ&utm_medium=content&utm_campaign=work-for-rotherham-improvement-journey-social-workers>
.

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Rotherham council
 