
When he was a schoolboy, Liu Cixin 
<http://www.sf-encyclopedia.com/entry/liu_cixin>’s favourite book was Journey 
to the Centre of the Earth by Jules Verne. This might seem like a fairly 
standard introduction to science fiction, but Liu read it under exceptional 
circumstances; this was at the height of the Cultural Revolution, in his native 
China, and all western literature was strictly forbidden.

Now 53, Liu (western publishers present him as Cixin Liu to make it easier for 
readers to find his family name on the shelves) is a science-fiction writer of 
some renown, both in China and in the English-speaking world. His novelThe 
Three-Body Problem won a Hugo award in 2015 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sponsored/china-watch/culture/11834788/santi-trilogy-author-liu-cixin-hugo-award.html>
 and is currently being adapted into a movie, due in 2017. His sequel, The Dark 
Forest, was published in English in 2015, and the third book Death’s End, has 
just been translated and released in the UK.

But more than 40 years ago, growing up in a coal-mining city in the Shanxi 
province, a young Liu found the book that would alter the course of his life, 
hidden in an old box that once belonged to his father.

“No science-fiction novels were published, and people did not have any notion 
of scientific imagery,” Liu recalls. “At the time, almost all the translated 
novels from the west were strictly banned, so I had to read it in secret. This 
very book turned me into a sci-fi fan.”

It wasn’t until the late 1970s, when China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> experienced economic reform and the 
strictures on western literature were relaxed, that science fiction was 
translated widely into Chinese. With this came a sudden surge of Chinese 
authors writing in the genre – and Liu wanted to be one of them. But instead of 
studying literature, he got a job as a power-plant engineer in Yangquan. But 
what looks like a career diversion was entirely strategic: the stability of his 
career meant he could write, he says.

“For about 30 years, I stayed in the same department and worked the same job, 
which was rare among people of my age. I chose this path because it allowed me 
to work on my fiction,” he says. “In my youth, when I tried to plan for the 
future, I had wished to be an engineer so I could get work with technology 
while writing sci-fi after hours. I figured that if I got lucky, I could then 
turn into a full-time writer. Now looking back, my life path has matched my 
design almost precisely. I believe not a lot of people have this kind of 
privilege.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fliu-cixin-chinese-sci-fi-universal-the-three-body-problem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e6c102c4dd059fd111217c098e5eb19e3e08c27%2F0_0_3624_2592%2F3624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='People%20hope%20my%20book%20will%20be%20China's%20Star%20Wars'%3A%20Liu%20Cixin%20on%20China's%20exploding%20sci-fi%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fliu-cixin-chinese-sci-fi-universal-the-three-body-problem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27People%20hope%20my%20book%20will%20be%20China%27s%20Star%20Wars%27%3A%20Liu%20Cixin%20on%20China%27s%20exploding%20sci-fi%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fliu-cixin-chinese-sci-fi-universal-the-three-body-problem%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e6c102c4dd059fd111217c098e5eb19e3e08c27%2F0_0_3624_2592%2F3624.jpg>
 A cyclist passes in front of a factory in the Chinese town of Yangquan. 
Photograph: Reinhard Krause/REUTERS 
His first novel, The Devil’s Bricks, came out in 2002, but it wasn’t until 
2006 that he had his breakthrough, The Three-Body Problem. Initially serialised 
in the Chinese magazine ScienceFiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> World, the novel takes its title 
from a physics question in orbital mechanics and contains three intertwining 
plots, set respectively during 1971 in the Cultural Revolution, in the 
mid-2000s and on a distant world in a three-sun system.

Technological and social changes that took centuries in the west have been 
come in two generations in China
Ken Liu 
The success of Liu’s novel is credited with inspiring a new surge in sci-fi 
writing; in 2012 alone, nearly 200 new titles were published in China.

Seven years after its initial publication, The Three-Body Problem was brought 
to a western audience by Tor Books in New York in 2013. It was translated by 
the Boston-based author Ken Liu (no relation). In his translator’s note, Ken 
writes: “The act of translation involves breaking down one piece of work in one 
language and ferrying the pieces across a gulf to reconstitute them into a new 
work in another language. When the gulf separating the two is as wide as the 
Pacific Ocean … the task can be daunting. The Chinese literary tradition shaped 
and was shaped by its readers, giving rise to different emphases and 
preferences in fiction compared to what American readers expect.”

What western readers expect of Chinese science fiction is a curious issue. 
Western eyes have a tendency to view China as a dystopia, or full of ‘eastern’ 
mysticism. But Ken says it’s a mistake to read Chinese SF in this way; if 
there’s one common theme in Chinese SF, it is “imbalance”.

“Contemporary China is a complex society in transition. The kinds of 
technological and social changes that took societies in the west centuries to 
move through have sometimes been experienced by a mere two generations in 
China,” he says. “The anxiety of careening out of balance, of being torn by 
parts moving too fast and too slow, is felt everywhere. While entrepreneurs, 
researchers, and megacorps in Beijing and Shanghai are pushing the boundaries 
of advanced technology … at rates sometimes far ahead of the west, just a few 
hundred miles away, children left behind in rural villages by parents who have 
gone to the great cities in search of low-wage jobs grow up on bare concrete 
floors without toys, without books, without basic nutrition, without even the 
support of crumbling traditional extended families and folk beliefs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fliu-cixin-chinese-sci-fi-universal-the-three-body-problem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1826d0c21f41e36b3cadf018d1c944f7fb8d081%2F0_211_2912_3640%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='People%20hope%20my%20book%20will%20be%20China's%20Star%20Wars'%3A%20Liu%20Cixin%20on%20China's%20exploding%20sci-fi%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fliu-cixin-chinese-sci-fi-universal-the-three-body-problem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27People%20hope%20my%20book%20will%20be%20China%27s%20Star%20Wars%27%3A%20Liu%20Cixin%20on%20China%27s%20exploding%20sci-fi%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fliu-cixin-chinese-sci-fi-universal-the-three-body-problem%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1826d0c21f41e36b3cadf018d1c944f7fb8d081%2F0_211_2912_3640%2F2912.jpg>
 Ken Liu, writer and translator. Photograph: Lisa Tang Liu 
Liu says it’s a mistake to think that Chinese SF doesn’t share common tropes 
with its western equivalents. “We can safely say that all themes once explored 
in the American and European sci-fi genre have found their manifestation in the 
Chinese counterpart – things like space exploration, alien contact, artificial 
intelligence, and life science. Problems of modern development are also 
addressed, like environmental hazards and the negative effects coming from new 
technologies. Yet Chinese sci-fi does have its own unique themes as well, such 
as the attempt to re-deduce and re-display the ancient history of China from a 
sci-fi angle.”

The Three-Body Problem was the first full-length Chinese SF work to be 
translated into English, just two years ago. But a wide and burgeoning school 
of SF writing dates back to the end of the Cultural Revolution, arguably as far 
back as 1978, with the publication of short storyDeath-Ray on the Coral Island 
by Tong Enzheng 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=vyST6mWN7LAC&pg=PA265&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false>
, in China’s prestigious literary magazine People’s Literature.

Liu says that a national obsession with sci-fi began around 1983. “Some of the 
works even sold as many as four million copies. There were even debates on 
whether sci-fi ought to belong to the domain of science or of literature; 
Chinese authors made effort to pull it back to its literary origin, attempting 
to change the way that sci-fi had been treated as a mere tool for disseminating 
scientific knowledge.”

While the harsh reality that saw the young Liu having to read Jules Verne in 
secret is four decades gone in China, there is still the ever-present shadow of 
government censorship. Liu says he and his publisher were concerned about 
potential issues with The Three-Body Problem, which deals with the Cultural 
Revolution itself. “It was a sensitive topic and therefore we were worried 
about related contents causing trouble. However, the book has been out for 10 
years now, and we have never had any censure from the authorities,” he says. 
“Many government officials have read the book.”

So far, Liu has “never encountered pressure or intervention from the 
government during my writing process and the publication of my stories”; its 
attention is reserved for films, he says. And with next year’s movie version, 
Liu’s star is set to rise even further. “This will be the first big-budget 
sci-fi film in China,” he says. “Many people hold high expectations for it, 
hoping that it will become China’s 2001: Space Odyssey or Star Wars. But 
personally I feel that such an expectation for the first attempt of the 
nation’s film industry might be unrealistic. I’d rather watch this process 
unfold with a calm attitude, treating it like a positive start for China’s 
sci-fi films.”

He remains mildly surprised by the success of The Three-Body Problem outside 
China. “All we had hoped for was just to let American readers become aware that 
there is sci-fi in China. Now that it has been embraced by readers in the UK 
and the US, it supports an idea I once had: sci-fi as a literary vessel is the 
most global, the most universal [storytelling], with the capability to be 
understood by all cultures. Sci-fi novels are concerned with problems faced by 
all of humanity. Crises in sci-fi mostly threaten humanity as a whole. This is 
a unique and treasurable trait inherent in the genre – that the human race is 
perceived as a single entity, undivided.”

 * Death’s End, the third book in the Three-Body Problem series, is published 
in the UK by Head of Zeus, priced £18.99.It is available from the Guardian 
bookshop for £15.17, including free UK p&p 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/death-s-end.html>. 
 * Invisible Planets, edited by Ken Liu, is out now from Head of Zeus.  