
The gunman who fired an assault rifle inside the Washington DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-dc> restaurant at the heart of 
false allegations of a VIP child-sex ring has said he now regrets his actions.

“I just wanted to do some good and went about it the wrong way,” Edgar Welch, 
28, told a reporter from theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/07/us/edgar-welch-comet-pizza-fake-news.html>, 
adding: “I regret how I handled the situation.”

Welch was arrested on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/gunman-detained-at-comet-pizza-restaurant-was-self-investigating-fake-news-reports>
 at the Comet Ping Pong pizzeria, which became the subject oflurid conspiracy 
theories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/fake-news-pizzeria-owner-calls-on-conspiracists-to-stop-video>
 after it was mentioned in the personal emails ofJohn Podesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/the-podesta-emails-show-who-runs-america-and-how-they-do-it>
, Hillary Clinton’s campaign chief, published by WikiLeaks.

The controversy, which has been labelled Pizzagate, centres on references in 
the emails to Comet Ping Pong and to various types of food and other objects 
that online researchers haveclaimed are codewords for child sexual abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/pizzagate-lie-what-it-says-about-society-real>
.

Further investigations have thrown up a number of circumstantial links that 
self-appointed online detectives say indicate the existence of a network of 
powerful paedophiles. Accusations have been levelled against a number of senior 
Democrats, including Hillary Clinton and her husband Bill, the former president.

Those involved in the controversy deny all allegations of wrongdoing, and the 
speculation – which has taken place to a large extent on Twitter, YouTube and 
online forums such as Reddit – has widely been dismissed as another example of 
the so-called “fake news” phenomenon.

Pizzagate is a lie. But what it says about our society is real | Ijeoma Oluo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/pizzagate-lie-what-it-says-about-society-real>
Meanwhile, a New York restaurant has become the latest target of conspiracy 
theorists. Roberta’s, a Brooklyn restaurant known for its wood-fired pizza, 
received telephone calls threatening its employees, police confirmed on 
Wednesday. There have been no arrests.

It was after reading online reports of the Pizzagate controversy that Welch, a 
father of two from Salisbury, North Carolina, woke up on Sunday, told his 
family he had some things to do, and got in his car for the 350-mile drive to 
Washington DC, the New York Times reported.

According to the paper’s interview Welch said he had wanted to give Comet Ping 
Pong a “closer look” to “shed some light” on the rumours before returning home.


Welch found no children held captive at the restaurant when he stormed in with 
his AR-15 rifle. However, although he admitted that “the intel on this wasn’t 
100%”, Welch refused to disavow the claims he had read online.

He also said he did not like the term “fake news”, which he saw as a 
pejorative term that attempted to denigrate reports carried by alternative 
media.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffake-news-pizzeria-owner-calls-on-conspiracists-to-stop-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20news%20pizzeria%20owner%20calls%20on%20conspiracists%20to%20stop%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffake-news-pizzeria-owner-calls-on-conspiracists-to-stop-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20news%20pizzeria%20owner%20calls%20on%20conspiracists%20to%20stop%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffake-news-pizzeria-owner-calls-on-conspiracists-to-stop-video&media=>
Fake news pizzeria owner calls on conspiracists to stop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/fake-news-pizzeria-owner-calls-on-conspiracists-to-stop-video>
On Thursday, a judge delayed a preliminary hearing for Welch at the request of 
his public defender, who said she needed more time to investigate the case. One 
of Welch’s friends has told the Washington Post she did not think he intended 
to shoot anyone.

“He most likely really believes the conspiracy theory,” said Kathy Sue 
Holtorf, who lives in California and works as a film producer. “He’s a good guy 
with the best of intentions. He probably saw himself as more on a hero mission 
to save children than anything else.”

 