
A ruined castle wall marches along one edge of the site, like the crumbling 
battlements of a medieval abbey, complete with rusting iron cages where 
prisoners might once have been confined. The captives in question were retired 
zoo animals, a community of mangey lions and leopards, along with bears and 
baboons, brought by the fairground impresarioGeorge Sanger 
<http://www.sangerscircustrail.org.uk/stall-sangers.php> at the turn of the 
last century to spend their final days by the sea here in Margate.

Like a dream: Margate's forgotten theme park – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jun/08/margate-dreamland-amusement-park-tintype-photographs-in-pictures>
They would have enjoyed the prospect of an ornamental garden, with fishponds 
and fountains, and statues modelled on those in the Vatican, where visitors 
could partake in the thrills of an archery range, coconut shies and a 
steam-powered merry-go-round.

More than 100 years later, the animals are one of the few attractions that 
won’t be returning toDreamland <http://www.dreamland.co.uk/>, the Kent coast’s 
kiss-me-quick mecca of “pleasure without measure” and holiday destination for 
generations of London’s eastenders, which is rising from the ashes after years 
of neglect.


“We’ll have high-divers, drag queens and puppet shows, but we’re not planning 
on bringing zoo creatures back,” says the theme park’s new programme manager, 
Rebecca Ellis. “Times have moved on. But we’d love to have a dog show.”


More than a decade after it was closed, then subjected to arson attacks and 
legal battles – which ended with thecouncil issuing a compulsory purchase order 
in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jun/07/margate-dreamland-seaside-regeneration>
, a vociferous local campaign has finally culminated in the triumphant 
reopening of Dreamland on 19 June, against all the odds, following a £30m 
restoration.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433943920344%2F05a991ec-1190-4706-8cb1-b4cfd80204a3-2060x1397.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Pleasure%20without%20measure'%3A%20Margate's%20Dreamland%20rises%20from%20the%20ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Pleasure%20without%20measure%27%3A%20Margate%27s%20Dreamland%20rises%20from%20the%20ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433943920344%2F05a991ec-1190-4706-8cb1-b4cfd80204a3-2060x1397.jpeg>
 All the fun of the fair … the old exterior of Dreamland 
The crowning glory of the park will be the Scenic Railway, a majestic wooden 
rollercoaster built in 1920 and all but destroyed by arson in 2008. It has been 
meticulously reconstructed with new timber from the ground up. Promoted in a 
1930s brochure as “the securely enthroned monarch of amusement-park rides, 
providing its patrons not only with rib-tickling sensations, but also healthy 
gulps of fresh air,” the Grade II-listed structure runs for nearly a mile in a 
double loop. Surely it will be fairly sedate compared to modern rides?


People might think these old rides will be very tame but​​ they go like stink
David Littleboys 
“I can guarantee it will be pretty hairy,” promises Dreamland’s director, 
Eddie Kemsley, who has been poring over film footage from the 40s and 50s to 
try and match the railway’s original breakneck speed. “It will be as rackety as 
the old one, complete with the nerve-inducing ‘clack, clack, clack’ as the 
train goes uphill before the drop.” In a theatrical move, visitors will enter 
the park through the wooden struts of the rollercoaster, which stands like a 
great wall of scaffolding, to be immersed in the sounds of the rickety runaway 
train and its accompanying screams.


Once inside the park – for a hefty ticket price of £17.95 – you’ll be met with 
a living, whirling history of vintage rides through the ages, from the stately 
charms of a “galloper” merry-go-round from the 1890s to a rare set of dodgems 
from the 1970s – all lovingly restored by West Yorkshire firmLittleboys 
<http://www.littleboys.co.uk/>.

“People might think these old rides will be very tame,” says David Littleboys. 
“But they go like stink. And they rely on the riders having a degree of 
commonsense, which modern rides don’t require.” He’s especially proud of the
Zodiak Jets <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zdi-ZcF4z5k>, spinning rockets 
that are operated by passengers pulling a lever to zoom up into the air, and 
which he says “you will very much have to hold on to.”

To the disapproval of some purists, there will also be new rides that update 
classics with a modern twist. There will be a spinning teacup number modelled 
on a Wedgwood tea set but featuring subcultural scenes rather than the usual 
traditional designs; and the Caterpillar coaster, a famous Dreamland staple, 
has been reinvented as theCounter Culture Caterpillar 
<http://www.dreamland.co.uk/rides-and-attractions/rides#caterpillar>, its 
carriages sporting badly airbrushed portraits of celebrities.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433941048443%2F0632f7a7-3284-4908-85aa-868cb4594c45-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Pleasure%20without%20measure'%3A%20Margate's%20Dreamland%20rises%20from%20the%20ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Pleasure%20without%20measure%27%3A%20Margate%27s%20Dreamland%20rises%20from%20the%20ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433941048443%2F0632f7a7-3284-4908-85aa-868cb4594c45-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sprinkling the fairy dust of creative-led gentrification wherever he goes … 
fashion designer turned placemaker Wayne Hemingway. Photograph: Stephen Howse 
Such mischievous twists are the work of Wayne Hemingway 
<http://houseofhemingway.co.uk/hemingway-design/> and his son Jack, who have 
been working on the project for the past four years, since they were called in 
by the Dreamland Trust to bring a creative vision – and a touch of celebrity 
sparkle. (The charitable trust has since been replaced by the commercial 
operator Sands Heritage,to some local criticism 
<http://thanetgreencouncillor.blogspot.co.uk/2015/04/dreamland-still-no-legal-agreement.html>
, following a council tender process that compelled the winning party to have 
sufficient funds to make the project viable.)


“It’s been a dream commission to work on,” says Hemingway on a recent tour of 
the site, skipping between vintage rides and mounds of earth like some 
fairground Willy Wonka, enthusing about the pleasurescape that would apparently 
soon be summoned from the rubble. “I was born at the seaside and I live at the 
seaside. It’s in my blood.”


The cheeky market-stall holder turned fashion designer, turned “placemaker”, 
seems like a good person to bring a seaside amusement park back to life, being 
a guru of the kind of popular vintage kitsch such an endeavour requires. Born 
in Morecambe to a Canadian showman wrestler named Billy Two Rivers, Hemingway 
is certainly keeping the family tradition of camp fairground jollity alive. 
Together with his wife and kids, he operates his own travelling circus of 
sorts, sprinkling the fairy dust of creative-led gentrification wherever he 
roams – be itGateshead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2005/aug/15/architecture.communities> 
or London’s Balfron Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/sep/26/wayne-hemingways-pop-up-plan-sounds-the-death-knell-for-the-legendary-balfron-tower>
.


“It’s about being a bit daft and just having fun with it,” Jack Hemingway 
says, grinning and looking a bit like a Cockney chimney-sweep in flat-cap and 
shirtsleeves as he roams the park with his dad, the two inspecting their work 
and finishing each others’ sentences like a comedy double-act. They’ve 
certainly had a lot of fun, scouring eBay for ephemera and bits of old 
attractions, from tin pedal cars to a haul of fibreglass bins shaped like 
bears, found in a corner of the Blackpool Pleasure Beach and now transformed 
into “Teddy” bears with 1950s quiffs and beehive hairdos.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433940963913%2F1e9a21f1-2f13-4cdb-bbf4-94421475f081-2060x1517.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Pleasure%20without%20measure'%3A%20Margate's%20Dreamland%20rises%20from%20the%20ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Pleasure%20without%20measure%27%3A%20Margate%27s%20Dreamland%20rises%20from%20the%20ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433940963913%2F1e9a21f1-2f13-4cdb-bbf4-94421475f081-2060x1517.jpeg>
 ‘We’re trying to create an old-fashioned, yet oh-so-fashionable brand’ … 
Dreamland circa 1960 
“We’re trying to create an old-fashioned, yet oh-so-fashionable brand,” says 
Wayne, describing a world of rockabilly nostalgia, where candy floss and 
cupcakes will be sold by tattooed staff in brown smocks and denim dungarees. 
“It’s got to feel risky and subversive, edgy, homespun and indie.” M&C Saatchi 
have even been called in to develop a brand bible to “get the tone of voice 
right”, which has resulted in plans for catering staff to wear T-shirts with 
slogans such as: “Do you want sauce on that?”


If it all sounds a bit cliched, the experience will at least be redeemed by 
the presence of the bruised and battered buildings, stripped back to reveal 
their multiple layers of history. Under the direction of architect Ray Hole, 
dingy suspended ceilings have been swept away to expose beautiful structures 
that have been covered up for years.


These urban pioneers have done Shoreditch and Margate​. In 10 years they might 
go and do Blackpool.
Wayne Hemingway 
A bold, tapering concrete frame has been uncovered in the post-second world 
war entrance hall, while the tin panelling of the 1920s barrel-vaulted Garden 
Cafe has been revealed, characterfully pock-marked with torn holes where a more 
recent structure used to poke through. Originally a recycled airship hangar 
from the first world war – which could seat 3,500 people – the grand space will 
be reborn as a roller-disco rink, another tradition that goes back to the 
earliest days of the site. According to a poster from 1893, Professor Chambers, 
“the skateorial king”, would provide “instructions to ladies and gentlemen in 
ease and comfort and without the slightest chance of falling”.


Later phases will see the restoration of the waterfront art deco cinema and 
bingo hall from the 30s, with £2m of central government funding, along with the 
reopening of the Hall by the Sea later in the year, as a venue for gigs, 
cabaret shows and circus acts.


As we leave the site and stroll along the beach, looking back at the 
waterfront parade of bustling arcades and new outlets of Costa Coffee and 
Subway poised to spring into life, Hemingway breaks into another eulogy of 
estate-agent speak. He describes how the east London “axis of cool” is moving 
even further east to the seaside, and how a two-bed flat in the brutalist 
Arlington House is a pinch at £50,000, given the Margate renaissance – the town 
recently made Rough Guide’s list of top places to visit in the world.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433954459425%2F601cd534-9fd5-4be7-9b0b-ae0cec18d147-2060x1099.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Pleasure%20without%20measure'%3A%20Margate's%20Dreamland%20rises%20from%20the%20ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Pleasure%20without%20measure%27%3A%20Margate%27s%20Dreamland%20rises%20from%20the%20ashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fmargate-dreamland-seaside-fairground-reopening%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433954459425%2F601cd534-9fd5-4be7-9b0b-ae0cec18d147-2060x1099.jpeg>
 What dreams are made of ... Dreamland under construction ahead of its opening 
on 19 June Photograph: Dreamland 
This phenomenon has been spurred on by the arrival of David Chipperfield’s 
Turner Contemporary gallery in 2011 and the high-speed train shuttling visitors 
from London, along with comparatively cheap property prices. It has seen Tracey 
Emin’s gritty teenage stomping ground transform into something of an artists’ 
enclave: flat whites and vintage furniture stores charging £500 for mid-century 
Danish chairs now sit alongside the Poundlands and betting shops. Dreamland 
deserves to be the people’s jewel in the crown of this resurgence, providing a 
bawdy bookend to the town, across the bay from Chipperfield’s stark white 
iceberg of art.

“It’s great how we have these urban pioneers,” says Hemingway. “They’ve done 
Shoreditch, now they’re doing Margate. In 10 years they might go and do 
Blackpool.”

 I hope some of them jump off the regeneration wagon and contribute to the 
life of Margate, too, rather than just increase property prices and then move 
on to gentrify grittier pastures.
 