
Between the immediate aftermath of Brexit and the US presidential election, 
one insult began to seem inescapable, mostly lobbed from the right to the left: 
“snowflake.” Independent MEP Janice Atkinson, who was expelled from Ukip over 
allegations of expenses fraud, wrotea piece for the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/janice-atkinson/grief-stricken-post-brexi_b_11068390.html>
 decrying the “wet, teary and quite frankly ludicrous outpouring of grief 
emails” she had received post-referendum as “snowflake nonsense”. The far-right 
news site Breitbart, whose executive chairman Stephen Bannon is now Donald 
Trump’s chief strategist,threw it around with abandon 
<http://www.breitbart.com/video/2016/11/17/conway-millennials-protesting-trump-precious-snowflakes/>
, using it as a scattershot insult against journalists, celebrities and 
millennials who objected to Trump’s inflammatory rhetoric; its UK site used it 
last week to criticise a proposed “class liberation officer” at an Oxford 
college who would provide more support for working-class students.

On an episode of his long-running podcast 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/bret-easton-ellis-podcast/id753552884?mt=2>
 in August, Bret Easton Ellis discussed the criticism ofa lascivious LA Weekly 
story about the pop star Sky Ferreira 
<http://www.laweekly.com/music/sky-ferreiras-sex-appeal-is-what-pop-music-needs-right-now-7027759>
 with a furious riposte to what he calls“little snowflake justice warriors” 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-hollywood/2016/08/03/author-bret-easton-ellis-unloads-social-justice-warriors-political-correctness/>
: “Oh, little snowflakes, when did you all become grandmothers and society 
matrons, clutching your pearls in horror at someone who has an opinion about 
something, a way of expressing themselves that’s not the mirror image of yours, 
you snivelling little weak-ass narcissists?”
 MEP Janice Atkinson: decried post-referendum grief emails as ‘snowflake 
nonsense’. Photograph: Chris Radburn/PA 
In September, Breitbart’s Milo Yiannopoulos used it to dismiss a protester at 
a talk in Houston, declaring that it was his event, not the “silver-haired 
snowflake show”. “Madam, I’m grateful to you for coming, but to be quite honest 
with you, fuck your feelings,” he told her, as the crowd roared “USA! USA! 
USA!” in the background. “Fuck your feelings” is a crude expression of what 
snowflake has come to mean, but it is succinct and not entirely inaccurate.
 ‘Fuck your feelings’: Breitbart’s Milo Yiannopoulos. Photograph: Drew 
Angerer/Getty Images 
The term has undergone a curious journey to become the most combustible insult 
of 2016. It emerged a few years ago on American campuses asa means of 
criticising the hypersensitivity of a younger generation 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Special%20Snowflake%20Syndrome>
, where it was tangled up in the debate over safe spaces and no platforming. A 
much-memed line from Chuck Palahniuk’s Fight Club expresses a very early 
version of the sentiment in 1996: “You are not special. You are not a beautiful 
and unique snowflake. You are the same organic and decaying matter as everyone 
else.”

But recently it has widened its reach, and in doing so, diluted its meaning. 
It has been a favoured phrase of some tabloids, which have used it as a means 
of expressing generic disdain for young people who are behaving differently 
from people older than them. Whenever a new survey appears that claims young 
people are having less sex, or drinking less alcohol, or having less fun, it’s 
there as a handy one-word explanation: they are snowflakes.

Whenever a survey appears claiming young people are having less sex, or 
drinking less alcohol they are snowflakes

Until very recently, to call someone a snowflake would have involved the word 
“generation”, too, as it was typically used to describe, or insult, a person in 
their late teens or early 20s. At the start of November, the Collins English 
Dictionary added “snowflake generation” toits words of the year list 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/news/collins-dictionarys-10-word-of-the-year-from-brexit-and-snowflake-generation-to-jomo-a7395121.html>
, where it sits alongside other vogue-ish new additions such as “Brexit” and 
“hygge”. The Collinsdefinition 
<http://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/snowflake-generation> is 
as follows: “The young adults of the 2010s, viewed as being less resilient and 
more prone to taking offence than previous generations”. Depending on what you 
read, being part of the “snowflake generation” may be as benign as taking 
selfies or talking about feelings too much, or it may infer a sense of 
entitlement, an untamed narcissism, or a form of identity politics that is 
resistant to free speech.

The phrase came to prominence in the UK at the beginning of 2016, after Claire 
Fox,director of the thinktank Institute of Ideas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/nov/19/comment.radio>, used it in her 
book I Find That Offensive to address a generation of young people whom she 
calls “easily offended and thin-skinned”. Fox is clearly a natural provocateur 
and has written about generation snowflake in bulldozing articles for the 
Spectator (How We Train Our Kids to Be Censorious Cry-Babies 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/06/generation-snowflake-how-we-train-our-kids-to-be-censorious-cry-babies/>
) and for the Daily Mail (Why Today’s Young Women Are Just So Feeble 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3632119/Why-today-s-young-women-just-FEEBLE-t-cope-ideas-challenge-right-view-world-says-academic.html>
). As intended, both caused considerable debate – which is precisely what Fox 
claims generation snowflake are losing their ability to do.
 Claire Fox, director of the Institute of Ideas thinktank, used the term 
snowflake in her book I Find That Offensive. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
On the day we speak, she is bristling over an appearance at a school in 
Hertfordshire, where some students had objected to her being invited in the 
first place. “Several of the students said, ‘How dare you invite this terrible 
woman to speak?’ and said to me that I’d come there and upset them. They were 
giving a literal demonstration of my very speech,” she says.

Much of the debate around this generation of “whingers”, as she later calls 
them – slightly naughtily, as she also admits that obviously not every young 
person is a whinger and the phrase “generation snowflake” is more useful “to 
demonstrate the closing down of free speech and the demand for attention” – is 
to do with what has been happening on university campuses in the last decade or 
so. She is appalled by the move towards “no platforming”, in which speakers who 
have views deemed by students to be controversial or offensive, fromGermaine 
Greer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/18/transgender-activists-protest-germaine-greer-lecture-cardiff-university>
 toPeter Tatchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/13/peter-tatchell-snubbed-students-free-speech-veteran-gay-rights-activist>
, have been barred or disinvited from speaking events. Regardless of whether 
their opinions are objectionable or abhorrent, Fox insists we must hear views 
that do not agree with our own in order to learn how to tackle them.
 Protesters at Cardiff University object to Germaine Greer giving a lecture in 
2015. Photograph: Gareth Phillips/Gareth Phillips for the Guardian 
“People have given up trying to persuade other people, and trying to win the 
argument,” she says. “Demands for safe spaces are to ‘stop people coming in 
here, so we’re not to be exposed to this. We demand our lecturers don’t 
introduce these ideas.’ It’s infantilising. It’s the opposite of rebellion. It 
has not got any intellectual weight. I want a generation to come forth with a 
new philosophy of freedom, rather than playing out in practice that their 
teachers and parents raised them as cotton-wool kids.”

Try talking to a person whose age puts them into the “generation snowflake” 
category, however, and it’s apparent that the most offensive thing about the 
whole offence debate is being called easily offended. In June, in reaction to a 
slew of articles decrying wimpy, moany millennials, Angus Harrisonwrote an 
article for Vice 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/were-either-generation-snowflake-or-the-new-young-fogey>
 in which he pointed out that young people were being labelled snowflakes at 
the same time as being called “Generation Sensible” or “new young fogeys”. 
“Young people today are really old and boring and sensible. Except, they are 
also babies, totally unprepared for the adult world. Make sense? No, it 
doesn’t,” he wrote.

“I’m confused!” says Liv Little, 22-year-old editor-in-chief of the magazine 
gal-dem <http://www.gal-dem.com/>, who was recently selected as one of the 
BBC’s 100 most influential and inspirational women of 2016. She finds the idea 
that she and her peers are self-obsessed and unable to cope with the world 
absurd. “I don’t get what they want to happen. Do they want people to be quiet 
and suck it up? Do they want people to have breakdowns and be really unhappy 
and accept a political system that doesn’t represent them?”

Little set up gal-dem as a student in 2015, in response to a lack of diversity 
at her own university. It has since grown to a collective of more than 70 women 
of colour and recentlywon a prestigious award for Online Comment Site of the 
Year <http://www.commentawards.com/winners.php>. She says that what she sees is 
people taking that feeling that the world isn’t working for them and turning it 
into something positive and active. “A lot of offensive stuff is happening. Why 
should people not be offended? People are offended but they’re using that 
feeling of being offended to bring about change. Things are so dire sometimes 
that it’s necessary. If I want to carve out a safe space, why shouldn’t I?”
 Liv Little, editor-in-chief of gal-dem: ‘People are using the feeling of 
being offended to bring about change’ Photograph: Lennon Gregory 
Much of the disagreement is down to how you define these endlessly complex 
sticking points of campus debate. For Fox, a “safe space” is a censorious 
exclusionary zone. For Little, it is a starting point that doesn’t hurt anyone, 
not least the people who are left out. “Creating safe spaces is good for us, 
it’s good for our mental health, it’s good for us in terms of preparing and 
organising, and then when we want to welcome people in to our spaces, we can. 
How often have women or people of colour been excluded from so many spaces in 
the world? And then people are crying because we’re creating spaces for us. It 
doesn’t make sense!”

Often the argument that younger people are weaker and less able to cope feels 
like a dressed-up way of saying “things were better in my day”. We live in a 
time of stark generational division and animosity, in which the year’s huge 
political decisions, the ones that have seemed most cataclysmic – Brexit, Trump 
– have been decided by older voters whose opinions are vastly different from 
those of younger voters. Millennials are living in a time of economic 
uncertainty, without guaranteed access to the affordable housing, free 
education and decent job market enjoyed by the generations before them. “I 
think our generation is really under pressure,” says Little. “I look around at 
my peers, at women around me, and they’re all working themselves into the 
ground. It’s a difficult climate. We’ve sucked it up for a while and now we’re 
trying to take control,” says Little. “In our case, it’s for women of colour. 
And that’s just inherently a good thing.”
 Generational divide: young people protest over access to, and quality of, 
higher education. Photograph: Marc Ward/REX/Shutterstock/Marc 
Ward/Rex/Shutterstock 
I ask her if there’s any sympathetic part of her that can understand why the 
people who are calling her generation snowflakes might feel inclined to do so. 
“Err.” There’s a long pause, in which she really does sound like she’s trying. 
“Um. No. I just see it as an extension of entitlement.”

When the supposedly entitled are calling their detractors entitled for calling 
them entitled, it’s clear that whatever impact “snowflake” may have had as an 
insult is in the process of being neutralised. In a remarkably speedy 
turnaround of its intended usage, the left have started to reclaim it, throwing 
it back at the people who were using it against them in the first place. Trump 
wasrepeatedly labelled a snowflake 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/11/19/special-snowflake-donald-trump-demands-safe-spaces-after-people-boo-mike-pence-6269311/>
 earlier this month during the row over Mike Pence getting booed during a 
performance of Hamilton on Broadway. Trump said the theatre should always be a 
“safe space”, sounding not unlike a university protester himself; the irony was 
not lost on many commentators, who called him “the most special snowflake of 
all”.Search Twitter for “snowflake” 
<https://twitter.com/search?src=typd&q=snowflake> alongside the name of any 
prominent political figure on either side of the spectrum and you’ll find a 
black hole of supporters and detractors barking the word back and forth at each 
other.
 Donald Trump: labelled a snowflake after he objected to the Broadway booing 
of Mike Pence. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
So if the right are calling the left snowflakes for being liberal, and the 
left are calling the right snowflakes for expressing offence, and the old are 
calling the young snowflakes for being too thin-skinned, and the young are 
pointing out that the older generation seem to be the most offended by what 
they’re doing, then the only winner is the phrase itself. It’s particularly 
effective given that there’s really no comeback to it: in calling someone a 
snowflake, you are not just shutting down their opinion, but telling them off 
for being offended that you are doing so. And if you, the snowflake, are 
offended, you are simply proving that you’re a snowflake. It’s a handcuff of an 
insult and nobody has the key.

I called Jim Dale, senior meteorologist at British Weather Services, to see if 
it was ever an effective analogy in the first place. He says he can see why it 
was chosen. “On their own, snowflakes are lightweight. Whichever way the wind 
blows, they will just be taken with it. Collectively, though, it’s a different 
story. A lot of snowflakes together can make for a blizzard, or they can make 
for a very big dump of snow. In which case, people will start to look up.”
 