
The 2016 presidential race on Thursday circled closer to the poisonous pulse 
of racial resentment, as Donald Trump attackedHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> for a video featuring 
white supremacists and Clinton prepared to deliver a speech detailing how, she 
said, the Trump campaign “is taking a hate movement mainstream”.

Trump, trailing badly in the polls, has moved aggressively to capture 
non-white voters. The Republican nominee met African American and Latino 
activists at Trump Tower in New York on Thursday morning, after moderating his 
stance on immigration and including in his stump speech a sales pitch for 
African American voters: “What do you have to lose? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/what-do-you-have-to-lose-donald-trump-appeals-for-black-vote>
”

“We have great relationships and the numbers are going up with the African 
American community rapidly,” Trump said at the meeting, which included retired 
neurosurgeon and former presidential candidate Ben Carson and members of the 
Republican leadership initiative to develop conservative minority leaders.

“I’ve always had great relationships with the African American community, and 
now I’ve made it such a focal point.”

Prior to the meeting, two protesters hung a flag over a second-floor railing 
in the building’s lobby just outside a branch of Starbucks, reading “Trump = 
Always Racist”, according to a pool reporter with the Trump campaign. A 
protester was quickly escorted out, although he shouted to the small gaggle of 
reporters that Trump was “trying to pander to black and Latino leaders” and 
“nothing will change”.

The magnitude of the challenge for Trump as he tries to attract non-white 
support was underscored by a Quinnipiac Universitypoll 
<https://www.qu.edu/news-and-events/quinnipiac-university-poll/national/release-detail?ReleaseID=2375>
 released on Thursday in which Clinton led among non-white likely voters by a 
62-point margin, 77%-15%.A July poll 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/donald-trump-gets-0-support-black-voters-ohio-pennsylvania-nbc-n609026>
 of battleground states found Trump with 0% support among African Americans.

This is not the first week of the campaign in which racial tensions have been 
laid bare. But with election day nearing, the rhetoric has once again 
intensified.

“Hillary Clinton is a bigot!” Trump told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/25/trump-clinton-bigot-mississippi-rally-video>
 a largely white audience in Jackson, Mississippi, on Wednesday night, saying 
that the Democratic nominee valued non-white votes but not non-white voters.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Ftrump-clinton-bigot-mississippi-rally-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Hillary%20Clinton%20a%20'bigot'%20at%20Mississippi%20rally%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Ftrump-clinton-bigot-mississippi-rally-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20calls%20Hillary%20Clinton%20a%20%27bigot%27%20at%20Mississippi%20rally%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Ftrump-clinton-bigot-mississippi-rally-video&media=>
Donald Trump calls Hillary Clinton a ‘bigot’ at Mississippi rally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/25/trump-clinton-bigot-mississippi-rally-video>
 Clinton responded with a sample of a critique she planned to lay out at 
greater length in her speech in Reno, Nevada, on Thursday afternoon, noting 
that Trump had “questioned the citizenship of the first African American 
president”, “courted white supremacists” and had been “sued for housing 
discrimination against communities of color”.


Speaking in Reno this afternoon, Clinton will say: “This is what I want to 
make clear today: a man with a long history of racial discrimination, who 
traffics in dark conspiracy theories drawn from the pages of supermarket 
tabloids and the far reaches of the internet, should never run our government 
or command our military. If he doesn’t respect all Americans, how can he serve 
all Americans?”

Meanwhile, in New Hampshire, Trump accused Clinton of trying to bully his 
supporters.

It was a video released on Thursday by the Clinton campaign that drew the 
sharpest rebuke from Trump, however. The video features white supremacists 
describing their support for Trump, and depicts newly minted Trump campaign 
chief executive Stephen Bannon as an avatar of the so-calledalt-right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/23/alt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump>
, defined in voiceover as “the sort of dressed-up-in-suits version of the 
neo-Nazi and white supremacist movements”.

“If Trump wins, they could be running the country,” the ad warns.
Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) 
There's a reason the most hateful fringe of the right wing is supporting 
Donald Trump.https://t.co/AqB3DM2m0N <https://t.co/AqB3DM2m0N>
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/768823064033308673> August 25, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/768823064033308673> 
The Trump campaign called for the ad to be retracted through a statement from 
Mark Burns, acontroversial 
<http://www.theroot.com/articles/politics/2016/07/the-rnc-is-over-but-can-we-talk-about-pastor-mark-burns/>
 pastor from South Carolina and, next to Carson, one of Trump’s most prominent 
African American supporters.

“Hillary Clinton and her campaign went to a disgusting new low today as they 
released a video tying the Trump campaign with horrific racial images,” Burns 
said.

“This type of rhetoric and repulsive advertising is revolting and completely 
beyond the pale. I call on Hillary Clinton to disavow this video and her 
campaign for this sickening act that has no place in our world.”

A Clinton spokesman responded that the rhetoric in the ad was indeed repulsive.

At Trump Tower, Trump kept up his argument that Democrats had taken non-white 
voters, especially African Americans, for granted.

“They’ve been very disrespectful as far as I’m concerned to the African 
American population of this country,” he said. “And we are making it a very 
important part of our speeches and of our thought process. And it’s having a 
tremendous impact. It’s having a tremendous impact.”
 