
Deep antipathy to Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> exists within the FBI, 
multiple bureau sources have told the Guardian, spurring a rapid series of 
leaks damaging to her campaign just days before the election.


Current and former FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> officials, 
none of whom were willing or cleared to speak on the record, have described a 
chaotic internal climate that resulted from outrage over director James Comey’s 
July decision not to recommend an indictment over Clinton’s maintenance of a 
private email server on which classified information transited.

“The FBI is Trumpland,” said one current agent.

This atmosphere raises major questions about how Comey and the bureau he is 
slated to run for the next seven years can work with Clinton should she win the 
White House.

The Hillary Clinton email controversy explained: what we know so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/hillary-clinton-latest-emails-explained>
The currently serving FBI agent said Clinton is “the antichrist personified to 
a large swath of FBI personnel,” and that “the reason why they’re leaking is 
they’re pro-Trump.”

The agent called the bureau “Trumplandia”, with some colleagues openly 
discussing voting for a GOP nominee who has garneredunprecedented condemnation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/08/republicans-donald-trump-warning-letter-bush-reagan>
 from the party’s national security wing and who has pledgedto jail Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
 if elected.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20is%20no%20case%E2%80%99%20in%20FBI%20email%20investigation%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20is%20no%20case%E2%80%99%20in%20FBI%20email%20investigation%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton: ‘There is no case’ in FBI email investigation – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/hillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video>
At the same time, other sources dispute the depth of support for Trump within 
the bureau, though they uniformly stated that Clinton is viewed highly 
unfavorably.

“There are lots of people who don’t think Trump is qualified, but also believe 
Clinton is corrupt. What you hear a lot is that it’s a bad choice, between an 
incompetent and a corrupt politician,” said a former FBI official.

Sources who disputed the depth of Trump’s internal support agreed that the FBI 
is now in parlous political territory. Justice department officials – another 
current target of FBI dissatisfaction – have said the bureaudisregarded 
longstanding rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/democratic-senators-fbi-director-comey-clinton-emails-letter>
 against perceived or actual electoral interference when Comey wrote to 
Congress to say it was reviewingnewly discovered emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
 relating to Clinton’s personal server.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Ffbi-leaks-hillary-clinton-james-comey-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b2668f9a3a3bf6611ae2dc45f58e1f45c0f8ef0%2F0_126_3794_2276%2F3794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20FBI%20is%20Trumpland'%3A%20anti-Clinton%20atmosphere%20spurred%20leaking%2C%20sources%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Ffbi-leaks-hillary-clinton-james-comey-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20FBI%20is%20Trumpland%27%3A%20anti-Clinton%20atmosphere%20spurred%20leaking%2C%20sources%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Ffbi-leaks-hillary-clinton-james-comey-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b2668f9a3a3bf6611ae2dc45f58e1f45c0f8ef0%2F0_126_3794_2276%2F3794.jpg>
 The FBI director, James Comey, testifies during the Senate committee hearing 
in September. Photograph: Shawn Thew/EPA 
Comey’s vague letter to Congress, promptly leaked 
<http://www.deseretnews.com/article/865666097/Chaffetz-at-center-of-controversy-over-FBI-directors-letter-about-Clinton-emails.html?pg=all>
 by Republican congressman Jason Chaffetz, said the bureau would evaluate 
communications – subsequently identified as coming from a device used by 
disgraced ex-congressman Anthony Weiner, whose estranged wife Huma Abedin is a 
Clinton aide – for connections to the Clinton server. Comey’s allies say he was 
placed in an impossible position after previously testifying to Congress it 
would take an extraordinary development for him to revisit the Clinton issue. 
Throughout the summer and fall, Trump has attacked the FBI as corrupt for not 
effectively ending Clinton’s political career.

A political firestorm erupted, with Comey and the bureau coming under 
withering criticism, including arebuke on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/barack-obama-fbi-hillary-clinton-emails-election-polls>
 from Barack Obama. Even some congressional Republicans, no friends to Clinton, 
have expresseddiscomfort 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/10/31/meet-the-republicans-defending-hillary-clinton-from-fbi-chief-james-comey/>
 with Comey’s last-minute insertion of the bureau into the election.

The relevance of the communications to the Clinton inquiry has yet to be 
established, as Comey issued his letter before obtaining a warrant to evaluate 
them. Clinton surrogates contend that Comey has issued innuendo rather than 
evidence, preventing them from mounting a public defense.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fobama-criticises-fbi-we-dont-operate-on-innuendo-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20criticises%20FBI%3A%20we%20don't%20operate%20on%20innuendo%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fobama-criticises-fbi-we-dont-operate-on-innuendo-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20criticises%20FBI%3A%20we%20don%27t%20operate%20on%20innuendo%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fobama-criticises-fbi-we-dont-operate-on-innuendo-video&media=>
Obama criticises FBI: we don’t operate on innuendo – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/02/obama-criticises-fbi-we-dont-operate-on-innuendo-video>
Some feel Comey needs to address the criticism and provide reassurance that 
the bureau, with its wide-ranging investigative and surveillance powers, will 
comport itself in an apolitical manner. Yet since Friday, Comey has maintained 
his silence, even as both Clinton and Trump have called for the bureau to 
disclose more of what it knows.

Leaks, however, have continued. Fox News reported 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2016/11/02/fbis-clinton-foundation-investigation-now-very-high-priority-sources-say.html>
 on Wednesday that the FBI is intensifying an investigation into the Clinton 
Foundation over allegations – which both the foundation and the Clinton camp 
deny – it traded donations for access to Hillary Clinton when she was secretary 
of state. The Wall Street Journalreported 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/secret-recordings-fueled-fbi-feud-in-clinton-probe-1478135518?mod=trending_now_1>
 that justice department officials considered the allegationsflimsy 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/secret-recordings-fueled-fbi-feud-in-clinton-probe-1478135518?mod=trending_now_1>
.

The leaks have not exclusively cast aspersions on Clinton. Paul Manafort, 
Trump’s former campaign manager, is the subject of what is said to be a 
preliminary FBI inquiry into hisbusiness dealings in Russia 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/fbi-making-inquiry-ex-trump-campaign-manager-s-foreign-ties-n675881>
. Manafort has denied any wrongdoing.

The Daily Beast reported 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/11/03/meet-donald-trump-s-top-fbi-fanboy.html?via=desktop&source=twitter>
 on Thursday on ties between Trump surrogate Rudy Giuliani, the former New York 
mayor, and the FBI’s New York field office, which reportedly pressed the FBI to 
revisit the Clinton server investigation after beginning an inquiry into 
Weiner’s alleged sexual texting with a minor. The website reported that a 
former New York field office chief, highly critical of the non-indictment, runs 
a military charity that has received significant financial donations from Trump.

Comey’s decision to tell the public in July that he was effectively dropping 
the Clinton server issue angered some within the bureau, particularly given the 
background of tensions with the justice department over the Clinton issue. A 
significant complication is the appearance of a conflict of interest regarding 
Loretta Lynch, the attorney general, whomet with Bill Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/01/loretta-lynch-bill-clinton-meeting-hillary-email-server-fbi>
 this summer ahead of Comey’s announcement, which she acknowledged had “cast a 
shadow” over the inquiry.

James Comey: Hillary Clinton email inquiry is FBI chief's latest controversy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/james-comey-fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email>
“Many FBI agents were upset at the director, not because he didn’t [recommend 
to] indict, but they believe he threw the FBI under the bus by taking the heat 
away from DoJ [Department of Justice],” the former bureau official said.

All this has compounded pressure on Comey, with little end in sight. 

Jim Wedick, who retired from the bureau in 2004 after 35 years, said that if 
Clinton is elected, she and Comey would probably find a way to work together 
out of a sense of pragmatism. He recalled both his own occasional clashes with 
federal prosecutors and Bill Clinton’s uneasy relationship with his choice for 
FBI director, Louis Freeh.

“Each one will find a way to pick at the other. It’s not going to be good and 
it’s not going to be pretty. But they’ll both have to work with each other,” he 
said.

Senator Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat on the intelligence committee, said: 
“The continued leadership failures at the FBI are another reminder we can’t let 
intelligence agencies say ‘trust us’ and then give them a blank check to probe 
into Americans’ lives.

“While I’ve argued for years that Congress must create ironclad protections 
for Americans’ security and privacy, we also need vigilant oversight of 
agencies that have the power to deprive citizens of their liberty or change the 
course of an election.”

The FBI would not comment for this story. 
 