
Built over a lake that was drained, overwhelmed by the exhaust of cars and the 
pollution in a valley encircled by mountains that don’t let the wind in,Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> City is a bastion of dust mites. The 
atmosphere isn’t as aggressive as our winter is benevolent (although you suffer 
inside the houses, built according to the superstitious idea that heat is 
unnecessary), but spring asthenia thrives in the dirty air. The arrival of the 
rains, more torrential all the time, provides relief from allergies but not 
from flooding.


In this context cafés are not, as in other parts of the world, places where 
you can escape the snow for a while, but rather spots where you can combat the 
rush and, in some cases, breathe differently. Some modern coffeehouses have a 
system known as “washed air”; the more traditional ones don’t have it and don’t 
need it: they make up for the vapors of the Italian machine with a fan that 
simultaneously refreshes the air. The best atmosphere in Mexico City is in a 
café.

In my adolescence people spoke of “café intellectuals,” not with the respect 
due to a sect that transmits ideas within the cramped space of a table but with 
the contempt reserved for those who turn their backs on reality and take refuge 
in vain speculation.

Nonetheless, the elusory cafés of Mexico City represented singular refuges for 
reinventing the real with words.

The rhythm of a café lends itself to the writing and correcting of verses that 
roll onward as the cigar smoke once did

There have never been many cafés in Mexico City. If you don’t count the spots 
started by Cubans and Spaniards in thecentro, among us the café has never 
occupied the preeminent place it has in other metropolises. What’s more, the 
North American-style chains have bit by bit replaced the little cafés where the 
owner would smoke behind the counter with a dog on a comfortable cushion at his 
side – the unique, unrepeatable places, the grottos of the initiates.

The capital’s best-known café is the Casa de los Azulejos, or House of Tiles, 
built by a revanchist Spaniard looking to get back at the authoritarian father 
who had told him, “You won’t even be able to build a house of tiles” (meaning a 
toy house). The stately building has a mural by José Clemente Orozco in its 
staircase. Upstairs there’s a bar with a little window in the shape of a flower 
which gives onto one of the best views of thecentro histórico, dominated by 
domes and bell towers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthe-history-of-a-city-is-the-history-of-its-cafes-writing-life-in-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27bbbf76a1c1e50073d152516a058075722dbed0%2F0_0_1200_803%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20history%20of%20a%20city%20is%20the%20history%20of%20its%20caf%C3%A9s'%3A%20writing%20life%20in%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthe-history-of-a-city-is-the-history-of-its-cafes-writing-life-in-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20history%20of%20a%20city%20is%20the%20history%20of%20its%20caf%C3%A9s%27%3A%20writing%20life%20in%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthe-history-of-a-city-is-the-history-of-its-cafes-writing-life-in-mexico%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27bbbf76a1c1e50073d152516a058075722dbed0%2F0_0_1200_803%2F1200.jpg>
 Casa de Azulejos in Mexico City. Photograph: Alejandro Linares Garcia 
The invasion of plastic-chair coffee shops lent the few real cafés an air of 
quasi-secrecy. Meeting spots for a sect to which one belongs on merits that 
can’t always be defined.

A café is a place for talking. The mythology of radio announcers, who 
populated my childhood with magic words, was substituted in my enthusiasm by 
that of writers, particularly poets. Going on twenty, I’d make pilgrimages down 
Bucareli towards Café La Habana, where according to Roberto Bolaño the “iron 
poets” could be found.

Mario Santiago Papasquiaro: I met him in 1973 under his original name, José 
Alfredo Zendejas, in a short story workshop. He wrote only poems but liked to 
debate narrative. His critical sense was ferocious, yet he tempered his fire 
with jokes that he himself celebrated with thunderous guffaws. He had read more 
than we had, knew the avant-gardes; had banged the drum, along with Roberto 
Bolaño and other rebels, forinfrarrealismo; and was planning an epic trip to 
Europe.

People treated him with annoyed suspicion. When he’d come to see me at La 
Jornada, the newspaper where I worked, the receptionist, who was used to 
dealing with all kinds of eccentrics, would call me on the phone to ask whether 
I really wanted to let Mario in. I preferred to see him at Café La Habana, 
where he’d order a beer at ten in the morning in order to evoke the 1970s, the 
period Bolaño was to make famous inThe Savage Detectives, where Mario appears 
under the name Ulises Lima.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthe-history-of-a-city-is-the-history-of-its-cafes-writing-life-in-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b563e23350de5d45a723e69181ffab515df1851%2F0_0_1024_681%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20history%20of%20a%20city%20is%20the%20history%20of%20its%20caf%C3%A9s'%3A%20writing%20life%20in%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthe-history-of-a-city-is-the-history-of-its-cafes-writing-life-in-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20history%20of%20a%20city%20is%20the%20history%20of%20its%20caf%C3%A9s%27%3A%20writing%20life%20in%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthe-history-of-a-city-is-the-history-of-its-cafes-writing-life-in-mexico%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b563e23350de5d45a723e69181ffab515df1851%2F0_0_1024_681%2F1024.jpg>
 Café La Habana, in Mexico City. Photograph: Francis McKee 
The rhythm of a café lends itself to the writing and correcting of verses that 
roll onward as the cigar smoke once did. You can’t write a novel in a café.

The urgent demands of journalism and the need for isolation drove me away from 
cafés, where I had begun to feel superfluous. I wasn’t a poet and was wasting 
time. So said my puritanical conscience, trained at the Colegio Alemán.

Sometimes I take shelter from the rain in those places and kill time there 
between one appointment and the next, but they’re no longer targets in my life. 
I admire the people who get together there, although I do it with the 
incongruous feeling of one who’s been missing out on something for thirty 
years. Every city has parallel societies: the gamblers, beggars, drug dealers 
and addicts tend to associate clandestinely in order to fraternize at the 
margins of the norm. For me cafés have become something similar, almost 
prohibited. Is there any reason for this renunciation? It’s possible that it 
all has to do with the way we administer the future. For years I’d meet with 
poets to talk about the future. I didn’t plan to write any poems, but like the 
protagonists ofOn the Road or The Savage Detectives, I aspired to live 
poetically. The café was the place of violent conjecture, the place where we 
could conceive of rare, perhaps unattainable hopes.

The history of a city is the history of its cafés, where life mixes with 
culture. Ramón Gómez de la Serna set up his observation post at the Pombo in 
Madrid, Claudio Magris his at the San Marco in Trieste; Karl Kraus at the 
Central in Vienna; Jean-Paul Sartre at the Deux Magots in Paris; Fernando 
Pessoa at the Martinho da Arcada in Lisbon; Juan Rulfo at the Ágora in Mexico 
City.

'How can they write about anything but pain?' The writing life in Afghanistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature/2016/mar/02/how-can-they-write-about-anything-but-pain-the-writing-life-in-afghanistan>
Is there any better way to get to know a city in a sedentary key? If the 
walking man deciphers the lay of the land by looking, the man of the café 
understands his time by listening. Coffeehouses afforded me a valuable 
exercise: being in the city without being absorbed by it, seeing others at the 
moment when they excuse themselves from their habitual codified conduct. The 
urban custom they turn to most often in that enclosure is a certain type of 
conversation, one that foregoes conclusions and aspires only to continuation.

The infinite needs strategies in order to become intimate. Mexico City is 
inexhaustible in a provisional way, like a cup ofcafé cortado.

About the Author

 * Juan Villoro is the author of El testigo 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1925945.El_testigo>, Dios es redondo 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1708212.Dios_es_redondo> (God is Round 
<http://www.restlessbooks.com/bookstore/god-is-round>), Los culpables 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1973035.Los_culpables> (The Guilty 
<http://www.amazon.com/Guilty-Stories-Juan-Villoro/dp/080760013X/ref=sr_1_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1464199810&sr=1-2>
), and other books. His journalistic and literary work has been recognized with 
such international prizes as the Herralde de Novela, Premio Xavier 
Villaurrutia, Rey de España, Ciudad de Barcelona, Vázquez Montalbán de 
Periodismo Deportivo, and Antonin Artaud. He has been a professor of literature 
at UNAM, Yale, and la Universidad Pompeu Fabra de Barcelona. He is a columnist 
for the newspapers Reforma and El Periódico de Catalunya.

About the Translator

 * Philip K. Zimmerman is a writer and a translator from Spanish and German. 
Born in Madrid, he was raised in Upstate New York. His work has been included 
in the Berlin International Literature Festival and the New York International 
Fringe Festival, and he recently completed a translation of Helene and Wolfgang 
Beltracchi’s autobiography, Selbstporträt (Self-Portrait). He lives in Munich, 
Germany.

This essay is excerpted from Juan Villoro’s El vértigo horizontal: la Ciudad 
de México.
 