
On 21 May this year, Lynne Sandford contacted the Foreign Office and the 
police. She was worried about her 20-year-old son’s safety: Michael was a 
vulnerable adult, alone in America. He had been there for over a year, and his 
behaviour – in Skype calls home – had become increasingly erratic. Michael 
called every other day; after not hearing from him in a week, Lynne reported 
him as a missing person.

On 18 June, she was woken by a phone call at 11.30pm from the Foreign Office. 
She remembers every detail. They had found Michael. “I was like, ‘Brilliant – 
where did you find him?’ And that was the first shock. They said Las Vegas. I 
thought he was in New York. I said, ‘How did you find him?’ And they said he’d 
been arrested for trying to take a police officer’s gun in a casino. I said, 
‘What was he doing in a casino?’ And they said he was at aDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> rally. They said, when 
questioned, he had said he intended to assassinate Donald Trump. And my world 
just stopped.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fbritish-man-tried-to-kill-donald-trump-at-las-vegas-rally-say-police-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20man%20arrested%20at%20Trump%20rally%20in%20Las%20Vegas%20'after%20trying%20to%20seize%20police%20gun'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fbritish-man-tried-to-kill-donald-trump-at-las-vegas-rally-say-police-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20man%20arrested%20at%20Trump%20rally%20in%20Las%20Vegas%20%27after%20trying%20to%20seize%20police%20gun%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fbritish-man-tried-to-kill-donald-trump-at-las-vegas-rally-say-police-video&media=>
Michael Sandford arrested at Trump rally in Las Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jun/21/british-man-tried-to-kill-donald-trump-at-las-vegas-rally-say-police-video>
On 30 June, Michael Sandford was charged with disrupting an official function, 
and two firearm offences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/30/briton-michael-sandford-accused-trying-kill-donald-trump-is-charged-us>
. He told police he had been planning to kill Trump for a year; the previous 
day he had been to a gun range to learn how to shoot. He was living out of his 
car and was in the US illegally, having outstayed his visa. A month on, he 
faces up to 30 years in jail and his mother is still in shock.

***

Michael was two when Lynne realised there was something different about him. 
His speech was delayed and his coordination was poor; he was referred to speech 
and physical therapists. He had a tremor in both hands – ironic, Lynne says, in 
light of the charges. She imitates his shaking hands. “Trying to grab a 
policeman’s gun? He wouldn’t have stood a chance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaf54021e145e968bbb9c1175560e00627ff7d44%2F0_0_2365_3543%2F2365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaf54021e145e968bbb9c1175560e00627ff7d44%2F0_0_2365_3543%2F2365.jpg>
 Lynne Sandford (mother of Michael), centre, with her mother, Christine, left 
and Lynne’s daughter, Jessica. Photograph: Mimi Mollica for the Guardian 
We are in the sitting room of Lynne’s flat in Dorking, Surrey. Her mother, 
Christine, brings tea and biscuits. The room is small and stuffed with the 
paraphernalia of family life. Lynne also has a four-year-old daughter, Jessica, 
whose favourite colour is clearly pink: there’s a pink scooter, a pink doll’s 
house. Michael moved out four years ago, but his toy racing cars are still on 
the mantelpiece. In the family photos, he looks slight and sweet and a little 
otherworldly. Mother and son were always close. When he was five, Michael’s 
father left home; Lynne raised him largely as a single parent, with a huge 
amount of help from Christine. Michael, Mum and Nan: they were a team.

After his wobbly start, Michael made rapid progress at primary school, 
outperforming most of his classmates. He was unusually knowledgable: they used 
to say he was like an old man in a boy’s body. And yet in other ways he was 
very young: he had friends – Alex and Jack were the closest, Lynne says – but 
he didn’t like going to their houses. His gross motor skills (running, jumping, 
playing sport) were poor, but his fine motor skills were exceptional. He was 
great at Lego, for instance, and won a number of competitions. On the 
mantelpiece there is a cutting from the Dorking Advertiser with a picture of a 
young Michael holding a matchbox. “Creative Beaver Scout Michael Sandford is 
celebrating a winning strike after stuffing 210 items into a matchbox,” it 
reads.

He liked to make fellow pupils laugh, but there were other things Lynne 
struggled to explain. He took everything literally, and was punishingly honest. 
“He’d always say, ‘Well, I don’t mean to be rude – I’m just saying it as it 
is.’ He had a lack of empathy.” Lynne remembers a child in his class whose 
father died when he was nine. She had lost her own father at a young age, and 
explained to Michael how the boy might be feeling. “But he shrugged and said, 
‘Well, he’ll get used to it.’”

Michael went on to a comprehensive with more than 1,000 pupils, where he was 
lost. There were detentions for not doing his tie tightly enough, and not 
having his shirt tucked in. It was only later, when Michael was diagnosed with 
hypersensitivity, that Lynne made any sense of it: the shirt and tie had been 
uncomfortable. “A lot of clothing made him itchy. Bedding, too. Sometimes he’d 
stay up all night. I remember one time going to Gatwick Tesco, a 40-minute 
drive away, just to buy him cotton bedding at 3am so he’d go to sleep.”

Michael refused to sign a home-school agreement promising to do his homework 
and wear uniform. “He was the only person in the history of the school who 
refused,” Lynne says. “I thought he was being a little bugger. But he just 
looked at me and said, ‘Well, quite honestly, Mum, I don’t know whether I can 
agree to these things. So I can’t put my name to it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4be290f6079cf806de0620de00ce1ba3a787f62e%2F42_53_1382_974%2F1382.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4be290f6079cf806de0620de00ce1ba3a787f62e%2F42_53_1382_974%2F1382.jpg>
 Michael Sandford with his mother Lynne. Photograph: Mimi Mollica 
He was still showing huge promise academically, particularly at maths. His 
teachers encouraged him to sit a mock GCSE at the age of 12, which he passed 
with an A. “This is the tragedy of it,” Lynne says. “He left school with no 
qualifications, and he has such potential.” Michael was bullied but didn’t like 
to talk about it. He started to truant. One day Lynne took him back to school 
three times. She would see him wandering around town on a winter’s day, his 
hands raw with the cold. She’d bring him home; if he was going to play truant, 
she’d rather he was somewhere safe and warm.

Michael became anorexic and developed paralysing OCD 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Obsessive-compulsive-disorder/Pages/Introduction.aspx>
 after starting secondary school. Every other weekend, his mother or 
grandmother would drive him to Portsmouth to stay with his father, but he 
became claustrophobic and unable to cope with the car, so that stopped. He 
became obsessed with hygiene – either not washing or brushing his teeth for 
weeks, or scrubbing himself until he bled.

At the age of 13, he was diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/about/what-is/asperger.aspx>, a form of autism. The 
specialist said it was the most severe case she had seen in 30 years: his 
behaviour was so ingrained it would be almost impossible to change. The 
diagnosis explained a lot, but it didn’t help Lynne cope. Michael stopped going 
to school. “He said, ‘Why would I want to learn what everybody else is 
learning? Because everybody is going to know it. I want to learn what interests 
me.’ We fought tooth and nail about it. He was offered every opportunity: home 
school, online tuition, private tuition, a special school.” In the end, Lynne 
says, he sat at home watching documentaries. “I said you’re not going to have 
any qualifications, and he just said well, qualifications aren’t everything. 
I’d explain that if you want a job, they are crucial. But he couldn’t see that.”

At 14, Michael became anorexic and was sectioned. He hired a lawyer and 
brought a case that he should be allowed home

I ask Christine if she thinks her daughter was too soft on him. “I’m afraid I 
did, at times.” Michael would stay with his grandmother two nights a week, to 
give Lynne a break. But even she couldn’t get him to eat. “One evening he said, 
‘Sorry, Nan, I can’t eat that. Don’t cook for me any more.’ He was 
bloody-minded.” The two women struggled to cope. “We were trying to learn about 
his condition, but no one was advising us.” Lynne tried the stick approach, 
taking away his teenage privileges; it made no difference.

At 14, Michael won a three-day scholarship to join a police training 
programme. “He had always said he wanted to be in the police force, and that 
was the last normal thing he was able to do. After that things went downhill. 
He did the three days, and I think that used up the last ounce of energy he 
had.” Michael was put on the child protection register – not because he was at 
risk from an adult, but because he was a risk to himself.

He became so weak from not eating that he could barely get out of bed. Later 
that year Lynne reluctantly agreed to have him sectioned at the Maudsley 
psychiatric hospital in London. How much weight had he lost? “He refused to let 
the doctor weigh him,” Lynne says. But she told them he wouldn’t live much 
longer without treatment.

“He was like a skeleton, wasn’t he?” Christine says. “Broke my heart, seeing 
him like that.”

A day after being sectioned, Michael escaped. Police discovered him trying to 
board a train home without a ticket and took him back. Lynne shows me a letter 
he wrote back at the Maudsley: “Dear Mum, I’m not bad or evil or naughty and I 
never intend to be. I try to be polite and non-rude. At the moment I have no 
death wishes or wanting to self-harm. My first escape attempt was meant to be 
peaceful and not to harm people or damage property or break the law. Any 
further attempts will be the same. I do not want or intend to be violent. 
Unless I feel I am in danger I will be peaceful and polite. I love you very 
very much and I am sorry that I upset you. Lots of love, Michael.”

The next day she called to see how he was. “They said, ‘Oh, he’s fine. He’s in 
bed reading legal papers and he’s acquired himself a lawyer!’” Even in his 
darkest moments, she says, he could make her laugh. Sure enough, Michael 
brought a legal case that he should be allowed to return home. He lost, but 
made progress at the Maudsley. While he did not attend the hospital school, 
Michael agreed to one-to-one sessions with a teacher. The report he received on 
leaving said: “Michael is a very polite and articulate young man who is 
confident and pleasant to talk with.” After four months, now 15, he was 
released.

That year, Lynne was surprised to find herself pregnant with Jessica. She says 
Michael was fantastically mature about it. “The pregnancy was the result of a 
brief relationship. I didn’t think I could keep her – I didn’t think it would 
be fair to Michael. Then he said, ‘Mum, you have to have that baby, and I’ll do 
everything I can to help you.’”

But life was not easy. Michael had become abusive. “He was never violent, but 
he would be very verbally aggressive. He’d shout and swear at me, and then he’d 
be so apologetic. He’d just unleash. I spent most of my time in my bedroom. It 
wasn’t sustainable.”

At 16, he found himself a one-bed flat to rent a few minutes away. “It was 
perfect. Clean, modern, a nice outlook over the hills.” How could he afford to 
live independently? “He was on disability living allowance, employment and 
support allowance and housing benefit. He didn’t do anything, go anywhere, so 
he had few other expenses.”

Michael was more content than he had been in a long time. He would visit his 
mother every day, have something to eat and play with his baby sister, whom he 
adored. “But after two or three hours, you could see his anxiety levels rise 
and he’d need to get back.” Lynne shows me a photo album: Michael holding 
Jessica when she was an hour old, reading to her, helping her on the 
trampoline, the two of them having a picnic.

In the early days, he let Lynne and Christine come to the flat. It didn’t 
last; he continued his daily visits home, but barred them from visiting and 
withdrew into himself. Like many people with Asperger’s, Lynne says, he was a 
whiz with computers. She worried that he would befriend the wrong sort of 
people. Another passion was the TV seriesRobot Wars 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robot_Wars_(TV_series)>. Michael once paid 
£1,000 for a robot and his mother drove him, Jessica and the 16 stone robot to 
roadshows across the country so it could do battle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd16f600b2f40fd7e432e178831896b380594c992%2F39_60_1363_997%2F1363.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd16f600b2f40fd7e432e178831896b380594c992%2F39_60_1363_997%2F1363.jpg>
 Michael Sandford with Steel Avenger used for Robot Wars. 
As Lynne talks, I notice a tattoo on her upper arm, with Michael’s name and 
date of birth attached. What is the design? She lifts her sleeve and laughs, 
embarrassed. It’s a playful devil with a pitchfork. “I had it done when he was 
born. It was just tongue in cheek, because all parents say ‘He’s a right little 
…’ She trails off. “In hindsight, perhaps I shouldn’t have.”

When he was 17, Michael decided he would learn to drive. His mother was 
delighted and offered to book him lessons. No need, he said: he had signed up 
for an intensive two-week course.

“We were terrified, weren’t we?” Christine says.

“Horrified,” Lynne says. Michael had a lesson every day for a fortnight, took 
his test and passed. He bought a car on eBay for £500, “which is every parent’s 
worst nightmare. I got the RAC to check it out and they said, ‘Well, it’s not 
bad,’ and he said, ‘OK, I’m off out.’” Thirty seconds later, he had 
over-accelerated into another car and written his off.

On New Year’s Eve 2014, Michael told his mother he had news – and she wasn’t 
going to like it. He was going to New York. “I just collapsed on to the sofa. I 
said, ‘This is insane – what the hell are you on about?’” Lynne asked her GP 
and local mental health services how she could stop him. “They said, ‘He’s 18; 
there’s no way short of having him declared mentally incompetent,’ which 
clearly he was not.” She tried to see it from his point of view. “His old 
school friends were at university or having gap years, and we thought he felt 
left behind. It was his way of being normal – do a bit of sightseeing.”

On 18 January 2015, he left. The next day, she received a call. “All I heard 
was, ‘Are you Michael Sandford’s mother? This is an American hospital emergency 
room,’ and again everything in me just stopped. I started yelling, ‘Oh my God! 
Is he dead? Is he dead?’”

Michael was not hurt, but he had been found by the road in a state of extreme 
distress. He was forcibly given a drugs test, because the police thought he was 
high. In fact, he was having a meltdown, and was sectioned overnight. But the 
hospital discharged him the next day, and he continued his two-week trip in a 
rental car.

By the time Michael returned home, he was a wreck. “He just broke down and 
came out with this…” Lynne shudders to a stop. “I can’t say ‘tale’ or ‘story’; 
I’ll say ‘version of events’.”

“He was terribly, terribly distressed,” Christine says. “He said that, 
unbeknownst to us, between the ages of 16 and 18, he’d had a girlfriend, and 
got her pregnant. He said they’d had a scan and it was a boy. And the day after 
Michael’s 18th birthday, this girl was killed in a car crash. He said that 
after this he’d attempted to commit suicide twice.”

Michael told them he had a new girlfriend, who had recently moved back to 
America; but when he got there, a friend had texted to say she was in prison on 
a drugs charge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe750d86d71f1ee709ff66b2158e3d1824559a397%2F0_0_3056_1911%2F3056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe750d86d71f1ee709ff66b2158e3d1824559a397%2F0_0_3056_1911%2F3056.jpg>
 A card from Michael Sandford to his family (including the cat). Photograph: 
Mimi Mollica for the Guardian 
Lynne didn’t know what to think. She still doesn’t know what to think: she has 
been unable to corroborate the story of the girlfriend and the fatal accident. 
She has no idea if any of it is true, but says Michael had no history of lying 
to her, and no history of psychosis. She pauses, and says there was one 
incident when he was eight and convinced aliens were coming to get him. “He was 
shaking and cowering, and we took him to hospital. It was like he was 
possessed.” But nothing since.

Michael told Lynne and Christine he wanted to be there for his girlfriend, 
Lauren, when she came out of jail. He said he would move in with Christine and 
save to get back to America. But he couldn’t save quickly enough; he asked his 
grandmother to mortgage her house.

“He plagued us for money.” Lynne’s voice is quivering. “He said, ‘I’m going to 
have to either commit suicide or turn to illegal measures.’ We said, ‘We love 
you, but we can’t do this. I’m a single mum on the minimum wage, and Nan can’t 
mortgage her house.’”

Lynne looks at her mother, just about holding her tears back. “If you’re OK 
with me saying this? Quite by chance my mum came into an inheritance. Her 
sister had left a reasonable sum of money, which Mum was going to split four 
ways: her, me, Michael and Jessica.” Christine and Lynne agreed to forfeit 
their shares and pay for a year’s rent for Michael in New York. It was a last 
resort.

They made Michael sign an unofficial document stating that the money was a 
one-off to help him turn his life around; that over the year he would come home 
regularly (he needed to sign on every 90 days for his benefits, for one thing); 
he would live in the flat; he would not break the law; and he would not attempt 
to kill himself. It was agreed that his first visit home would be in five 
weeks’ time, for Jessica’s third birthday.

But Michael never came. He told his mother there was a warrant out for his 
arrest in the UK (he had left a few utilities bills unpaid). Lynne contacted 
the police, who assured her there was not, but Michael said he believed his 
source rather than her. He lost his benefits. Lynne pleaded with him to come 
home for Christmas, but Michael said it wasn’t an option. He told them Lauren’s 
friends were now his friends. She began to worry that he had come under the 
influence of a cult; she also feared that he was simply ill and delusional.

Michael’s Skype calls were becoming less frequent. When he rang, his face was 
always blurry and against the same white background. Lynne asked him to show 
her around the flat, but he refused. Just before Christmas 2015, he rang home 
and said he’d moved into a cheaper flat. It didn’t make sense; the rent had 
already been paid. But he told them he’d got a refund on the outstanding time, 
and preferred the new flat.

On 17 April, he told them he’d been kicked out of the new flat, and needed 
money for a hostel. His father had been sending him £60 a month, and Lynne and 
Christine sent what they could. They begged him to come home. “He said, ‘I 
can’t – I’ve been very ill and run up lots of medical bills.’” A month later, 
Lynne reported him missing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5528ed13b3bcabab5169a7b2b80a155c2314401%2F0_291_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20said%20my%20son%20intended%20to%20assassinate%20Donald%20Trump.%20And%20my%20world%20just%20stopped%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fsaid-son-intended-assassinate-donald-trump-michael-sandford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5528ed13b3bcabab5169a7b2b80a155c2314401%2F0_291_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 A letter Sandford’s mother sent to his old flat in New Jersey. 
The night after Lynne was told of her son’s arrest, a friend rang. “She said, 
‘I think you’d better turn the telly on.’ It was midnight and I saw pictures of 
him being arrested. Headlines going across the screen. I couldn’t believe it. 
My son, headline news for something so awful, and something just so not him. It 
broke my heart because it was the most I’d seen of him in a year. I just wanted 
to wrap my arms round him and never let him go .”

A few weeks ago, a tabloid newspaper offered to take Lynne and her ex-husband, 
Paul Davey, to Las Vegas, where Michael is in custody, in exchange for an 
interview. But Jessica did not have a passport and Lynne did not want to leave 
her, so Paul went alone. The newspaper promised to take Lynne as soon as 
Jessica’s passport came through, but then decided not to. Subsequent reports 
suggested Michael had a thing for guns. Lynne says this is misleading: there 
was a brief period when he was intoairsofting 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Airsoft> (a game similar to paintball, in which 
participants shoot at each other with non-metallic pellets). Yes, at one point 
he had camouflaged his bedroom and hung replica guns on the wall, with help 
from his father; but three months later the room had returned to its 
motor-racing theme.

Paul tells me that the first time he talked to his son, via video link, at the 
detention centre he was unrecognisable. “Michael said, ‘Someone had to stand up 
for America,’ and was going on about how dangerous Trump’s policies were – 
building the wall, banning Muslims. He didn’t seem to know what the 
consequences were, what he had been charged with. He thought it would blow over 
and he’d be home soon. I saw him again a few days later and he was calmer, much 
more like his old self. We were talking about what we used to get up to. He 
never mentioned Trump once.” Paul has not been in touch with him since that 
second conversation.

Had Michael ever talked to Lynne about politics? “Not once,” she says. “Not to 
Mum, not to me, his father, his friends. He never had any interest.”

She and Christine talk about his despair in the weeks leading up to the Trump 
rally. I ask them if they think his attempt to grab the gun might have been a 
bid to die, while still keeping his promise that he would not commit suicide. 
“No,” Lynne says instantly. “I think this was his way of getting help. He was 
always a bit of baby on the physical side of things, so I wouldn’t think he’d 
choose to be shot. I also think he would have sent me a goodbye letter.”

Why Trump? Did Michael ever talk politics? ‘Not once. To Mum, me, his father, 
his friends. He never had any interest’

His grandmother seems less sure. “He did tell the police that he thought he’d 
be dead.” She mentions the most recent messages he had sent her. “One night, 
just before we got in touch with the police, I said, ‘Look after yourself,’ and 
he said, ‘I can’t.’ Then he sent me another message saying, ‘I can’t live like 
this much longer.’”

Did they ever suspect he might do something like this? No, she says. Apart 
from the verbal outbursts, he has never been violent. “I asked his friend 
Alex,” Lynne says, “‘You know him in a different way to me; did he ever give 
you any indication he could do something like he has done?’ And he said no, 
never. His other friend Jack went on Facebook and said, ‘I want to tell the 
world Michael isn’t like that.’”

For the past three weeks, Lynne has received calls every night from the 
detention centre in Las Vegas. All she hears is a crackling and beeping like a 
fax machine. She knows it is Michael. The detention centre has told her there 
is a technical issue with international calls.

“Then on Friday night, something incredible happened.” Her face lights up. 
“Eleven pm, an unknown number rang, and I just heard, ‘Hi, Mum.’ He’d been 
allowed to call from an office as a one-off. I spoke to him for five minutes. I 
asked him how he was and he said, ‘Well, not good, obviously. It’s prison.’” 
Did she ask him what happened? No, she says – she knew time was short. “I said, 
‘Your nan loves you, your dad loves you, I love you.’”

She has been told he is on three medications: for anxiety; to help him sleep; 
and for hallucinations. “He’s hearing voices. He said in that call, ‘I just 
want to come home and get psychiatric help.’ Obviously I can’t condone what he 
attempted to do, but he was not in control of his mind. Yes, a sentence by all 
means, but a sentence over here where his family can visit him and where he can 
get the help he needs.” Lynne has been warned that US courts are not 
sympathetic to mental health problems; it is unlikely to affect his sentencing.

Lynne knows she is running on empty. Since she heard the news, she has been 
unable to sleep and eat properly. Fighting for her son is the only thing 
keeping her going; she has launched aCrowdJustice 
<https://www.crowdjustice.co.uk/case/michaelsandford/> page to help with legal 
fees.

The trial is due to start on 22 August, though Lynne has heard that the case 
is more likely to be settled before that with a plea bargain. “I assume he will 
be asked to admit his guilt, and in return be offered a lesser sentence.” In a 
way, she says, she hopes it does go to trial – so a jury can see how helpless 
he is. But the danger is that they throw the book at him anyway.

Last week the Foreign Office told Lynne that Michael had been put on suicide 
watch. Does she think he is at risk of killing himself? “One hundred per cent. 
If he gets a lengthy sentence and he stays out there, he will commit suicide. 
He won’t see the point.”

On Friday, a day before this article was published, Michael managed to phone 
home successfully for the first time. “He was extremely distressed, and begged 
me to get him home,” Lynne says. “He said, ‘I can’t cope. I can’t last out much 
longer.’”


 * This article was updated on 30 July 2016 to add the final paragraph.  