
On 3 July 1789, in the middle of the night, the Marquis de Sade was dragged 
from his cell in the ironically named Liberty tower of the Bastille. Earlier 
that day he had been caught shouting to the crowd gathered outside the prison 
walls that the inmates’ throats were being cut. He was transferred to an asylum 
outside Paris, and forced to leave many of his most precious possessions 
behind, including a copper cylinder kept hidden in a crevice in the wall. When 
his wife set off for the Bastille to fetch his belongings on 14 July, it was 
already too late: the Revolution had beaten her to it, and she had to turn back 
empty-handed.

Sade wept “tears of blood” over the loss. Inside the cylinder was a scroll, 
12m long and 11cm wide, covered in minute handwriting: the manuscript of an
unfinished novel calledThe 120 Days of Sodom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/03/marquis-de-sade-scroll-120-days-sodom-paris>
, orThe School of Libertinage.

Though Sade never saw his scroll again, its story was far from over. Somehow 
it escaped the storming of the Bastille in the hands of a young man called 
Arnoux de Saint-Maximin, who then sold it to a Provençal aristocrat, the 
Marquis de Villeneuve-Trans. His family held on to it for more than a 100 years 
before eventually selling it to a German collector, who allowed the pioneering 
sexologist Iwan Bloch to publish the novel for the first time in 1904. Sade’s 
descendants, the Nouailles family, bought the scroll back in 1929 and kept it 
until 1982, when they entrusted the publisher, Jean Grouet, with its valuation. 
But he smuggled it over the border to Switzerland, and sold it to a leading 
collector of erotica, Gérard Nordmann. Decades of legal wrangling ensued 
between the Nouailles and the Nordmanns, only resolved in 2014 when a private 
foundation acquired the scroll for €7m and placed it on display in Paris. The 
exhibition was cut short when the director of the foundation was charged with 
fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/06/frances-king-of-manuscripts-held-over-suspected-pyramid-scheme>
. The scroll, which started its life in prison, is thus under lock and key once 
again, waiting for the courts to decide its future.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmarquis-de-sade-120-days-of-sodom-published-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc08de18b708c47bd27811a89ba5b452aa3450329%2F0_63_1163_1453%2F1163.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20most%20impure%20tale%20ever%20written%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20The%20120%20Days%20of%20Sodom%20became%20a%20%E2%80%98classic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmarquis-de-sade-120-days-of-sodom-published-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20most%20impure%20tale%20ever%20written%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20The%20120%20Days%20of%20Sodom%20became%20a%20%E2%80%98classic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmarquis-de-sade-120-days-of-sodom-published-classic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc08de18b708c47bd27811a89ba5b452aa3450329%2F0_63_1163_1453%2F1163.jpg>
 The Marquis De Sade spent 32 years in prison or in mental hospitals. 
Photograph: Channel 4 
The story of the scroll, complete with Provençal noblemen, prison-breaks, and 
shadowy booksellers, reads rather like the life of the man who created it. By 
the time Sade wroteThe 120 Days he had spent eight years in prison, first in 
Vincennes then the Bastille. He had also been shot at, burnt in effigy and 
forced to live on the run – on one occasion escaping to Italy with his 
sister-in-law, and lover, Anne-Prospère. Though the Surrealists would 
eventually cast him as a martyr to freedom, Sade was in prison not for his 
words but for his deeds.He was a notorious libertine  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/quiz/2014/dec/02/marquis-de-sade-200-years-quiz>
even by the standards of his age. His 20s and 30s had been marked by a series 
of public scandals: a sexual assault on a young woman named Rose Keller; an 
orgy in Marseille which led to four prostitutes falling ill after consuming 
chocolate-coated Spanish fly (an aphrodisiac); and, most disturbingly, a winter 
spent in his chateau with his wife and several freshly recruited servants aged 
around 15 – the so-called “little girls affair”. After years of covering up her 
son-in-law’s behaviour, Madame de Montreuil had finally had enough: she had the 
king sign alettre de cachet, a royal warrant that meant Sade could be 
incarcerated indefinitely. He was arrested in February 1777 and remained in 
prison for the next 13 years.

Sade began drafting his novel in earnest on 22 October 1785, working from 
seven to 10 each evening over 37 consecutive days. The novel is not complete, 
however, as only the introduction and the first of its four parts are written 
in full. The remainder are very detailed summaries but no more. Though he had 
ample opportunity over the next four years, Sade never completed his first – 
and most extreme – novelistic enterprise. Perhaps he realised it was 
unpublishable – a conclusion that censors and courts around the world would 
repeatedly endorse over the course of the 20th century. He described his novel 
as “the most impure tale ever written since the world began” and, for all the 
hyperbole, his description still holds true even now.

The 120 Days tells the tale of four libertines – a duke, a bishop, a judge and 
a banker – who lock themselves away in a castle in the Black Forest with an 
entourage that includes two harems of teenage boys and girls specially abducted 
for the occasion. Four ageing brothel madams are appointed as storytellers for 
each of the four months, and their brief is to weave a 150 “passions” or 
perversions into the story of their lives.

There are some books that are not fit for all people and some people who are 
not fit for all books

The libertines, surrounded by their victims, listen and enact the passions 
described, and as the passions become more brutal, so do the libertines: the 
novel builds to a violent climax with the “criminal” and “murderous” passions 
of Parts Three and Four. These are presented as long, numbered lists, 
interspersed with brief accounts of the scenes they inspire. Sade’s tortures 
range from the cartoonish (“He vigorously flattens a foot with a hammer”) to 
the clinical (“Her air supply is turned off and on at whim inside a pneumatic 
machine”); and from the surreal (“They make her swallow a serpent which in turn 
will devour her”) to the mundane (“He dislocates a wrist”). But the vast 
majority are simply too obscene and too violent to be quoted, as one nameless 
victim after another is subjected to increasingly elaborate and frenzied 
torments.

These relentless lists read like a series of nightmarish diary entries, or a 
set of instructions for an apprentice torturer.The 120 Days is not a work that 
seduces its readers: it assaults them. Reading it is, thankfully perhaps, a 
unique experience.

Sade’s once unpublishable novel has now joined the ranks of Penguin’s Classics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/classics> for the first time, and its author 
will take his place alongside the great figures of world literature – many of 
whom would no doubt turn in their graves at the news that their club now 
counted Sade among its members. It is a significant cultural moment for a work 
that was for so long the preserve of a privileged few. Indeed, ever since Sade 
began work on his draft,The 120 Days has been a hidden text – hidden first by 
its author and later by its subsequent owners.

For much of the 20th century, even those who published the novel did their 
best to keep it away from the prying eyes of the authorities. These early 
editions were published – pseudonymously or anonymously in some cases – in very 
small numbers for private and wealthy subscribers, and thus remained 
inaccessible to the general public. It is no coincidence thatJean-Jacques 
Pauvert – the first publisher to put his own name to an edition of Sade’s major 
works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/jun/30/biography.artsandhumanities>, 
and the first to attempt a larger print run – was prosecuted by the French 
government in 1956 for committing an outrage against public morals.

Pauvert argued that Sade’s works were “medico-legal documents” of great 
scientific value, and that his editions were in any case too expensive for 
ordinary members of the public to buy. Most of his sales, he insisted, had been 
to doctors and medical faculties – Sade was, in other words, in safe hands. The 
judge disagreed, but his verdict was overturned on appeal, and a little over a 
decade later, Sade’s works were available in France in mass-market paperbacks. 
Sade is now firmly established as part of the French literary canon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmarquis-de-sade-120-days-of-sodom-published-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0166afafa563a573cd690d146e20cbf88ae8ee8d%2F0_339_2465_1479%2F2465.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20most%20impure%20tale%20ever%20written%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20The%20120%20Days%20of%20Sodom%20became%20a%20%E2%80%98classic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmarquis-de-sade-120-days-of-sodom-published-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20most%20impure%20tale%20ever%20written%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20The%20120%20Days%20of%20Sodom%20became%20a%20%E2%80%98classic%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmarquis-de-sade-120-days-of-sodom-published-classic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0166afafa563a573cd690d146e20cbf88ae8ee8d%2F0_339_2465_1479%2F2465.jpg>
 A scene from Pier Paolo Pasolini’s 1975 film ofSalo, or The 120 Days of Sodom. 
Photograph: Allstar/United Artists 
This concern about the wider circulation of the works was as revealing of 
class anxieties as it was about attitudes towards Sade. To say that his works 
posed a risk to the public was really to say that a public able to read Sade 
was itself a risky prospect. These same anxieties resurfaced a few years later 
across the Channel, just when it looked as if Sade was beginning to gain a 
foothold in British culture.

Though the translations published by the Olympia Press in Paris were banned 
from the UK throughout the 1950s, British publishers such as Peter Owen were 
able to produce (very careful) selections from Sade’s writings without running 
into trouble. In the wake of the Lady Chatterley’s Lover trial in 1960 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/22/dh-lawrence-lady-chatterley-trial>
, a test case for the Obscene Publications Act passed a year before, more 
publishing houses were emboldened to publish Sade. But all this came to a halt 
with the Moors murders trial of 1966, and with the revelation thatIan Brady  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/28/ian-brady-learned-moors-murderer>
had owned a paperback Corgi edition of Sade’sJustine.

Brady’s taste in books was widely reported in the tabloid press, and fired the 
public imagination – a fire stoked by commentators who saw his reading of Sade 
in “fairly recent paperback” and his crimes as a matter of cause and effect.
George Steiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/feb/14/comment.stephenmoss>alluded to 
the “high probability” that Brady’s reading ofJustine was a “significant 
factor” in the case. Pamela Hansford Johnson fretted about the threat posed by 
the rise of “a semi-literate reading public”: “There are some books that are 
not fit for all people and some people who are not fit for all books.”

It did not seem to matter that the copy of Justine that Brady owned had only 
appeared in print after he had committed all but one of his murders. A ban on 
the publication and importation of Sade’s works swiftly followed the trial and 
remained in effect for more than 20 years. When a British publisher, Arrow 
Books, finally tested the ban by reprinting Sade’s major novels in the late 
1980s and early 90s, Ann Winterton MP led calls for the DPP to act, condemning
Juliette as “filth of a particularly ugly and dangerous kind”.

Publishing The 120 Days as a classic changes it still further and makes Sade a 
little more respectable

It is hard to imagine a work of fiction prompting calls for prosecution in 
Britain today. The written word no longer seems to frighten people in the same 
way any more. The fear that novels used to inspire has shifted instead to more 
recent – and visual – forms of fiction and fantasy such as video games, horror 
movies, and internet pornography.

It is telling that the controversial section relating to “extreme pornography” 
in the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2009 deals only with images, and 
makes no mention of the written word. But is this because words now seem safe, 
or because they are just too slippery for the law?

In 2003, MPs debated whether “paedophile pornography” could be textual as well 
as visual. A young George Osborne advised his fellow MPS against delving into 
the “quagmire” of words: “In previous generations, people have been dragged 
into debates about works of literature, such asLolita, or works that do not 
quite qualify as literature, such as those by the Marquis de Sade, and 
parliament should not be drawn down that avenue again.” Even works that are 
“not quite” literature have words in them – reason enough, Osborne suggests, 
for politicians and lawyers to steer clear of them.

Do Sade’s novels now qualify as great literature? That a novel as extreme as 
The 120 Days is part of a “classics” collection tells us just how much our 
sense of literature has changed over the past few decades. And publishingThe 
120 Days as a classic changes it still further: if it makes Sade a little more 
respectable, it also makes literature a little more dangerous than it was 
before.

• Will McMorran is a lecturer at Queen Mary University of London. His 
translation, with Thomas Wynn, ofThe 120 Days of Sodom is published by Penguin 
Classics. (RRP £12.99). To order a copy for £10.65 go tobookshop.theguardian.com
 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/120-days-of-sodom-426432.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 