
The 2016 presidential campaign has put Americans’ gun rights “in the balance”, 
according to the former Texas governorRick Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry>.

NRA lobbyist: 'Bernie's right' about lawsuits against gunmakers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/22/nra-executive-bernie-sanders-right-gun-lawsuits>
“I don’t think this is overblown rhetoric,” Perry said in an interview outside 
theNational Rifle Association’s annual convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/22/nra-executive-bernie-sanders-right-gun-lawsuits>
 in Louisville, Kentucky. “You know, in campaigns you do have some hyperbole. 
This is not hyperbole.”

If Hillary Clinton is elected, Perry said, she will nominate a supreme court 
justice willing to overturn the court’s landmark 5-4 decision inDistrict of 
Columbia v Heller 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/06/07-290.pdf>, from 2008. 
In that case, the court ruled that Americans have an individual right to own 
firearms in the home for self-defense.

On Friday, Maya Harris, an adviser to Clinton, said the candidate believed the 
Heller decision was “wrongly decided 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-05-20/hillary-clinton-believes-pivotal-gun-rights-ruling-was-wrong-adviser-says>
”, as it undermined the ability of cities and states “to craft commonsense laws 
to keep their residents safe”.

Supreme court justice Antonin Scalia, the author of the Heller decision, died 
suddenly in February. Republican leaders immediately pledged to delay the 
nomination of a replacement until after the 2016 election.

In endorsing presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/nra-endorses-donald-trump-convention>
 on Friday, NRA leaders told members: “The second amendment is on the ballot in 
November.” Trumponce again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/08/trump-accuses-clinton-of-wanting-to-abolish-the-second-amendment>
 turned the charge against Clinton.

Perry, who ended his bid for the Republican nomination in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/11/rick-perry-drops-out-republican-presidential-election>
, has been a fierce critic of Trump. But he told CNN on Friday that he would be 
willing to be his vice-president.

“I suspect I’m going to be helping him in myriad ways,” Perry said. 

Asked to comment on Sunday on what he thought about Trump’s endorsement by the 
NRA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nra>, Perry was lukewarm.

“Great, yeah, good, good show,” he said. 

He said he was very concerned about the future of gun rights in America. If 
Clinton and “the anti-gun people” succeed in overturning Heller, he said, “that 
would jeopardize gun rights”.

Any justice nominated by Clinton, Perry added, “she will give a test to, about 
whether or not they’re going to be supporting gun rights”.

Though it was a huge symbolic victory for gun rights advocates, the Heller 
decision did not radically transform gun laws in most of America. Local handgun 
bans were extremely rare, thanks to the political power of the NRA and other 
advocates.

Since Heller, courts have left other gun control laws in place, including 
state bans on “assault weapons”.

Perry said overturning Heller would still have serious implications for gun 
owners.

“We consider that to be the nose under the camel’s tent,” he said. “Those of 
us who have been in this business for a long time understand that you ratchet 
things one way or the other a little bit at a time.

“This is a ratcheting away from [the] second amendment right to carry freely 
wherever we should be able to.”

Asked what he thought Clinton would realistically be able to do to restrict 
gun rights in her first term in the White House, Perry said: “Nothing, because 
she won’t be there.”

 * The NRA refused to issue Guardian US with accreditation for its annual 
convention. Reporter Lois Beckett is in Louisville and covering the event from 
outside.  