
Jonathan Coe relished the culinary surrealism of 70s Dinner Party  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/13/70s-dinner-party-food-instagram-anna-pallai>
and Margaret Drabble luxuriated inThe Long, Long Life of Trees 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/long-long-life-of-trees.html> - love them or 
hate them, the annual books of the year columns provide an irresistible insight 
into the reading year.

Nearly 90 authors offered their favourites over the weekend in a two-part 
selection from theGuardian Review  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/26/best-books-of-2016-part-one>and 
theObserver New Review. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/27/best-books-of-2016-part-two>

Best books of 2016 – part one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/26/best-books-of-2016-part-one> 
Among the most widely loved nonfiction titles of the year were Hisham Matar’s 
The Return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/03/hisham-matar-the-return-review>, 
a memoir of his search for his father, who disappeared after being jailed in 
Libya (an unstintingly truthful masterpiece, according to Alan Hollinghurst), 
and Edmund Gordon’s biography,The Invention of Angela Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/09/invention-of-angela-carter-a-biography-edmund-gordon-review>
, which was described as “luminous” by Philip Hensher.

In fiction, Rachel Cusk’s Transit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/17/transit-by-rachel-cusk-review-outline-follow-up>
 was widely cited, as wasZadie Smith’s Swing Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/13/swing-time-zadie-smith-review>, 
while Kazuo Ishiguro spoke for many when he hymned Sebastian Barry’s 
“magnificent”Days Without End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/28/days-without-end-by-sebastian-barry-review>
 – “a lyrical, sometimes savage, often achingly tender western about two young 
gay Irishmen adrift in the American west before, during and following the civil 
war”.

Best books of 2016 – part two
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/27/best-books-of-2016-part-two> 
Interestingly, among contenders for the Man Booker prize, it was two 
historical yarns, Graeme Macrae Burnet’sHis Bloody Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/12/his-bloody-project-by-graeme-macrae-burnet-review>
 and Ian McGuire’s “gleefully gruesome” (Hilary Mantel)The North Water 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-north-water.html> that appear to have 
captured the imagination, with several contributors confessing that they were 
hoping to catch up with Paul Beatty’s winner,The Sellout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/04/the-sellout-by-paul-beatty-review-galvanizing-satire-post-racial-america>
, over Christmas. The two glowing mentions for another shortlistee,David 
Szalay’s All That Man Is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/09/all-that-is-man-by-david-szalay-review>
 (from David Nicholls and Alan Hollinghurst), would seem to confirm that it is 
a short story collection rather than a novel.

I was personally delighted to see two nominations for Han Kang’s Human Acts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/13/human-acts-han-kang-review-south-korea>
, which was doubly disadvantaged this year in being published back in January 
and overshadowed by Han’s previous novel,The Vegetarian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/24/the-vegetarian-by-han-kang-review-family-fallout>
, which won the Man Booker International in the same month. Handily, Human Acts 
is just out in paperback, though a word of warning: this account of a massacre 
in South Korea is about as far from a cheering fireside read as they come.

I was also pleased to see a mention for Martin MacInnes’s uncompromising debut,
Infinite Ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/05/infinite-ground-martin-macinnes-review>
. In the words of Macrae Burnet, it is “ostensibly a detective story … a 
dazzling novel of ideas, brimming with passages of jaw-dropping brilliance”. At 
this time of year, some best-kept secrets are best not kept.

Please leave your books of the year in the comment section below or post them 
onGuardian Witness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/583c0a2ce4b0cc60d347803d>, with a 
brief explanation of why you liked them. We will run a selection of your 
choices in Guardian Review and online.
 