
The triggers in Brandy Buckmaster’s jail cell are everywhere. The walls 
surrounding her, the sounds of officers walking by, the demeaning comments – it 
all reminds her of the prison guard who she says sexually abused her behind 
bars.

But one of the hardest parts about being incarcerated in Washington County 
jail in Oregon is knowing that the courts are treating her like a criminal 
while the man she accuses of victimizing her lives in the free world.

The only reason the 41-year-old woman is locked up is because she’s a 
“material witness” in the state’s case against the former guard, Brian Balzer, 
and prosecutors are afraid she won’t show up to testify.

Never mind a second chance. Our incarcerated women need a first one | Christia 
Mercer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/17/us-women-prison-population-crime-rates>
As a result, Buckmaster has been confined for more than a month to a 
correctional institution much like the site of her past sexual trauma.

Balzer, meanwhile, is out on bail.

“I feel like I’m being punished for what he did to me,” she said during a 
recent jailhouse interview, tears streaming down her face. “I get traumatized 
every day.”

But when Buckmaster’s lawyers recently tried to have her released, prosecutors 
refused to back down, arguing in court that she was “complicit” in the sexual 
“relationship”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Foregon-prison-abuse-victim-brandy-buckmaster-incarcerated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2635707fa7ba8cc29230fca53435b9b2523e77a%2F0_106_1841_1104%2F1841.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Traumatized%20every%20day'%3A%20prison%20sexual%20abuse%20survivor%20jailed%20again%20%E2%80%93%20as%20a%20witness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Foregon-prison-abuse-victim-brandy-buckmaster-incarcerated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Traumatized%20every%20day%27%3A%20prison%20sexual%20abuse%20survivor%20jailed%20again%20%E2%80%93%20as%20a%20witness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Foregon-prison-abuse-victim-brandy-buckmaster-incarcerated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2635707fa7ba8cc29230fca53435b9b2523e77a%2F0_106_1841_1104%2F1841.jpg>
 Brian Balzer, guard at the Washington County jail in Oregon, faces prosecution 
by the state for sexual misconduct and supplying contraband. Photograph: YouTube



‘He was in a position of power’

Talking publicly for the first time since her case made headlines 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/washingtoncounty/index.ssf/2016/09/accuser_in_prison_sex_case_jai.html>
, Buckmaster told the Guardian she wanted to speak out in the hopes that it 
might help other women who have faced sexual violence and discourage law 
enforcement from jailing victims.

“I feel like [prosecutors] have victimized me as much as he has,” she said.

Speaking through a thick glass wall in a 4ft-by-4ft visitation room and 
dressed in an orange prison uniform, Buckmaster said she barely had enough 
money in her jail account to call her boyfriend or purchase hygiene products 
from the commissary, and the district attorney’s office hasn’t offered help. 
Prosecutors have also publicly named her in court documents, instead of 
protecting her privacy. The Guardian does not usually identify victims of 
sexual assault.

 After growing up in Washington state, Buckmaster moved to Portland, Oregon, 
when she was 13, she said. She has been in and out of prison over the last two 
decades for a range of nonviolent offenses stemming from her struggle with drug 
addiction.

She said she was a survivor of child sex abuse, and explained that it had had 
a lasting impact on her relationships.

In 2012, at Coffee Creek, the only state prison for women in Oregon, 
Buckmaster met Balzer, a 42-year-old guard who she said repeatedly coerced her 
into sex and exploited her until her release in 2014. She spent some of her 
sentence in the prison’s mental health unit, records show.


“He was in a position of power … and took advantage of someone who wasn’t 
mentally stable,” said Buckmaster, adding that her past abuse made her 
vulnerable to his advances. “I didn’t have anybody.”

According to the Washington County district attorney’s office, Balzer “engaged 
in sexual conduct” with Buckmaster and gave her perfume samples, and the abuse 
only came to light after she was released, when she mentioned the 
“relationship” to a staff member at a facility where she was living.

Prosecutors charged Balzer with felonies of custodial sexual misconduct and 
supplying contraband. Buckmaster testified in front of a grand jury last year, 
and Balzer was indicted in November. On theday of his arrest 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/washingtoncounty/index.ssf/2016/09/accuser_in_prison_sex_case_jai.html>
, he posted $2,000 bail and was let go.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJtRWmU_Py_g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJtRWmU_Py_g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJtRWmU_Py_g&media=>
By law, there is no such thing as consensual sex between guards and inmates 
since staff havecomplete control 
<https://www.themarshallproject.org/2015/06/17/preying-on-prisoners#.5y8qOXHox> 
over the lives of prisoners. Any sexual activity is considered criminal.

“The inmates have no power,” said Betsy Rawls, Buckmaster’s lawyer. “If they 
deny [sexual advances], they’re going to have to see them every day.”

Buckmaster said she was desperate for a sense of safety and comfort in prison 
and that it took her time after her release to realize how Balzer had 
manipulated her.

“I’m tired of blaming myself for somebody else’s actions,” she said.

Buckmaster recently struggled with relapse, and when her parole officer and 
other law enforcement officers allegedly had trouble locating her, deputy 
district attorney Dan Hesson requested a so-called “material witness warrant” 
for her. Prosecutors wanted her in custody until trial.

Buckmaster said she had been making progress in her recovery and had always 
planned to participate in the trial. But her promises didn’t matter. Washington 
County circuit judge Charles Bailey approved prosecutors’ request, and on 16 
August, she returned to jail.

A ‘perverse’ use of jail

Criminal justice reform activists have fought back against the detention of 
material witnesses, arguing that it is unjust to imprison people who are not 
accused of crimes. By law, the holds are only supposed to be used in
extraordinary circumstances 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/08/17/are_prosecutors_taking_advantage_of_material_witness_orders_partner/>
 as a last resort, and advocates argue that it is particularly cruel to detain 
witnesses who are victims.

“This is a perverse way of using our criminal justice system and using our 
jails,” said Julia Yoshimoto, program director of the Oregon Justice Resource 
Center’s Women in Prison Project.

Buckmaster and her attorneys have said she would show up for trial and would 
be willing to wear an ankle bracelet and also complete a deposition in advance.

But Hesson, the deputy district attorney, said jailing her was the only 
feasible option.

Citing the fact that Buckmaster contacted Balzer after she was released, 
Hesson claimed in a filing that she was “complicit in perpetuating the illicit 
relationship between she and the defendant”. He further claimed that “Ms 
Buckmaster has led a life of crime” and “wasted considerable public resources” 
when prosecutors were unable to locate her.

Brent Goodfellow, another attorney representing Buckmaster, scoffed at the 
claim: “It’s expensive for Washington County to house her.”

“I don’t want to run,” Buckmaster said. “He’s going to pay for what happened … 
If I have to be accountable for my actions and for my past, he has to be 
accountable for his.”

Balzer’s attorney declined to comment.

Reached by phone, Hesson confirmed that his office had not provided Buckmaster 
with any victim support services while she was in jail. He also repeatedly 
declined to comment on whether prosecutors considered her a “victim”.

“It is a terrible idea that she is in jail,” Hesson said, “but I can’t find a 
better alternative.”

Counting the days

Advocates said they were concerned that the Balzer case could have a chilling 
effect on victims reporting sexual violence in prisons – especially in Oregon, 
which has a documented history of problems.


At Coffee Creek, at least eight employees have been convicted of sexual 
misconduct cases involving inmates since 2004,according to the Oregonian 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/washingtoncounty/index.ssf/2016/09/accuser_in_prison_sex_case_jai.html>
. The paperreported 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/politics/index.ssf/2012/04/abuse_of_women_inmates_at_oreg.html>
 that the state has paid $1.2m to 17 victims who said prison employees abused 
them.

Studies have also shown that, like Buckmaster, many who get caught up in the 
criminal justice system have histories of trauma – nearlysix in 10 women 
<http://www.csosa.gov/newsmedia/factsheets/statistics-on-women-offenders-2014.pdf>
 in state prisons have previously experienced physical or sexual abuse.

“The system often retraumatizes them,” said Emily Austin, director of advocacy 
services for the California Coalition Against Sexual Assault.

These days, Buckmaster said, she struggles to cope when she feels triggered or 
depressed. She said she has dreams of building a treehouse with her boyfriend, 
living somewhere serene and quiet, starting a family, and is counting the days 
until the trial, scheduled for 4 October.

Often, though, she just paces back and forth in her cell.
 