
In the children’s services department of Swindon council, a Microsoft Excel 
spreadsheet is helping to reduce the average social worker caseload and 
identifying where the department needs extra hands on deck.

The simple case management tool allocates a weighting to each child or case 
based on a range of factors, such as the case type (for example, children in 
need, child protection or children looked after), the number of siblings, and 
the amount of travel or court work required. Each factor is given a number of 
points, judged by the social worker and their supervisor, and the numbers are 
totted up: the more complex the case, the more points it is given.

'I've returned older and wiser': the social workers coming back to practice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/17/ive-returned-older-and-wiser-the-social-workers-coming-back-to-practice>
“If it’s done properly, you see fair comparisons across teams and can tell 
where people might need extra help,” says Karen Reeve, the director of the 
department who introduced the tool after using it in four other councils.

“It’s also helpful to tell where caseloads are getting too big. We have what 
we call a ‘bandwidth’ of what seems right for social workers who have 
experience or not, and if we start creeping above that, we can put extra staff 
in,” Reeve added.

Swindon is one of many councils taking steps to reduce social worker 
caseloads. In July, Manchester city councilannounced plans to invest £10m 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/07/04/councils-10m-plan-tackle-unmanageable-caseloads/>
 in order to cut the average number of caseloads from 24 to 18 per social 
worker. The council will hire an extra 86 social workers and 14 team managers 
to make this possible, and it predicts that the higher numbers of permanent 
staff will reduce the proportion of agency workers from 35% to 20% by early 
2018.


Walsall council is also taking action. Alongside introducing a new restorative 
practice 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/11/14/council-proposes-caseload-guarantee-social-workers/>
 approach to the way social workers engage with families, the council is 
recruiting 40 extra workers in order to reduce average caseloads for 
experienced social workers in the safeguarding family support and looked-after 
children teams from 20 to 15, and from 15 to 12 for newly-qualified workers.


You cannot develop trust and rapport with someone in need unless you are given 
the time to do so
Maris Stratulis 
“We want to get social workers doing real social work,” says Carol Boughton, 
head of safeguarding at the council. “With a lower caseload, social workers 
will see children and families more frequently, they’ll be more hands-on. We 
know that’s what social workers want and it will be instrumental in keeping 
them working with us.”


High caseloads are often linked to low staff retention, and Manchester, 
Lambeth and Cardiff councils have all published reports that raise the issue.

Boughton hopes the measures Walsall is starting to put in place will retain 
and attract staff. “We want social workers to have a manageable workload, to 
have a good work-life balance,” she says. “They need to have interesting and 
challenging work, supported by good training packages and group support and 
supervision. We want to create a safe environment where they can do the best 
they can.”


In June this year, Ofsted’s annual social care report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-social-care-annual-report-2016/ofsted-social-care-annual-report-2016-summary-for-children>
 identified unmanageable workloads as a common feature in services rated 
inadequate, and warned councils to take action on high social worker caseloads.


The average social worker caseload varies hugely across departments and local 
authorities, and the idea of a limit or cap is often discussed, but is rarely, 
if ever, put in place. The2009 Social Work Taskforce review 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130401151715/https:/www.education.gov.uk/publications/standard/publicationdetail/Page1/DCSF-01114-2009#downloadableparts>
 rejected the idea, concluding that there was no consensus on the number any 
cap should be set at.


How can high social work caseloads be tackled?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jan/21/how-can-high-social-work-caseloads-be-tackled>
Besides, says Rachael Wardell, chair of the Association of Directors of 
Children’s Services’ workforce committee <http://adcs.org.uk/workforce>, 
reducing social worker caseloads is not as straightforward as simply setting a 
number. “It’s all about the complexity of the case, the skill level of the 
social worker, and how they’re supervised,” she says. “You can’t just say ‘30 
is too much, 10 is lovely and 20 is the absolute limit’.”


Maris Stratulis, England manager for the British Association of Social Workers 
<https://www.basw.co.uk/>, adds: “When we talk about caseloads, we are often 
talking about vulnerable children, families and adults with complex needs and 
fundamental rights, including the right to be safeguarded and protected.

“Sadly the number crunching caseload allocation loses sight of individual 
needs – and the important commodity of time. You cannot develop trust and 
rapport with someone in need unless you are given the time to do so.”


Even those councils working to reduce the average social worker caseload seem 
reluctant to describe their measures as implementing a limit.

“We’re calling it a caseload promise,” says Debbie Carter, assistant director 
for children’s services at Walsall council. “I think ‘limit’ has quite negative 
connotations. It’s reflective of the restorative approach. A promise is 
something important, you keep it.”

While not imposing a limit or cap, having a dedicated and open caseload 
management tool has encouraged social workers in Swindon who are struggling 
with heavy caseloads to discuss them with their managers. And for Reeve, the 
spreadsheet has proved extremely helpful in making the case for more staff.


We social workers are more than just cogs in the system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/oct/19/social-workers-challenge-exclusion-system-work-better>
“We brought in the system at a time when caseloads were going up, and it 
highlighted the need for additional resources,” she says. “Over the last two 
years, we’ve hired five extra assistant team managers and 15 additional social 
workers above the usual limit. We’re now down to the national average for 
vacancies. It’s paid dividends.”


But, says Reeve, the system is not intended to be used as a replacement for 
professional judgment. “The case management tool gives a more subtle and 
refined way to measure the demands on social workers, but the weighting has to 
be flexible and based on the judgment of professionals – it’s not intended to 
be arbitrary criteria that cannot reflect the various needs of the child and 
the social worker.”


Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.

• This article was amended on 13 December 2016 to correct the name of one of 
the interviewees. Carol Boughton, head of safeguarding at Walsall council, was 
misnamed in an earlier version as Carol Barton.
 