
Sara Ryan is a sharp, funny woman with short spiky hair and an acute bullshit 
detector. She used to laugh all the time, as did her son, Connor Sparrowhawk. 
She and her husband, Richard Huggins (Connor’s stepfather, who brought him up 
from the age of three), sit in the kitchen of their home in Oxford, the table 
heaped with biscuits and chocolate, and tell me stories about the son they 
nicknamed Laughing Boy.

Connor was epileptic, autistic and had learning disabilities. He was also very 
funny – sometimes knowingly, sometimes not. The thing about Connor, his parents 
say, is that he had no filter. There was the time they went camping, with 
Connor and his siblings. “One night, the people who were camping next to us 
came around. And the older man had a beautiful, much younger girlfriend. Connor 
spent the whole evening talking about paedophiles. We all tried to smile it 
off, but when we got up in the morning they’d gone.”

He could get things very wrong. Take the time they were staying on a farm and 
he became convinced the farmer was running an international crime syndicate. 
“He decided he was wanted by Interpol. He’d march round, raging about the 
farmer being a wanted criminal.” How did the farmer react? “Oh, they were bezzy 
mates by the end, weren’t they?” Sara says.

He was handsome, with pop-star hair and a natural stylishness. He was close to 
his siblings, who adored him

He had a strong sense of injustice, Richard adds, such faith in the law. “He 
would rant and rave about how we were infringing his human rights. He’d always 
be slapping injunctions on us.” What about? “Oh, you know,” Sara says, trying 
to keep a straight face, “cleaning, washing up.”

Three years ago, aged 18, Connor drowned in a bath at Slade House, a 
residential unit run by SouthernHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, an NHS foundation trust. His 
parents had brought him there a few months before, after he became aggressive 
and violent, and they found themselves unable to cope. “It felt as if we were 
buying a bit of time for everyone, including Connor,” Richard says. “These guys 
were professionals, Connor would get some support. We thought it was a terrible 
thing to have to do, but it was fair. Within a few days we thought the place 
wasn’t very good. But we never, ever thought he wouldn’t come out.”

In October last year, a jury delivered a damning verdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/16/neglect-teenager-connor-sparrowhawk-death-nhs-unit-inquest>
, that serious failings and neglect had contributed to Connor’s death. Two 
months later,an astonishing report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/09/southern-health-nhs-trust-failed-investigate-patient-deaths-inquiry>
 by audit firm Mazars, commissioned by NHS England in 2014 at the request of 
Connor’s family, found that Southern Health had failed to properly investigate 
the deaths of more than 700 people with learning disabilities or mental health 
problems, over a four-year period, from 2011 to 2015.

In a statement to the Commons on 10 December last year, health secretary 
Jeremy Hunt said <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-35061716> that the Mazars 
report had raised serious concerns about Southern Health, which cares for about 
45,000 people in Hampshire, Dorset, Wiltshire, Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire. 
“Our hearts go out to the families of those affected,” he said. “More than 
anything, they want to know that the NHS learns from tragedies such as what 
happened to Connor Sparrowhawk, and that is something we patently fail to do on 
too many occasions… There is an urgent need to improve the investigation of, 
and learning from, the estimated 200 avoidable deaths we have every week across 
the system.”

Connor is still everywhere in the family home. His paintings are on the wall, 
there are photographs of him and his siblings on the mantelpiece, literature 
about the case is stacked in piles. The night Connor died, Sara says, the house 
became more a campaigning centre than a home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d8d11eb606f8bb97d1f74b7ca527e30124dde80%2F17_988_4098_2458%2F4098.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20never%20thought%20he%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20come%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20why%20did%20our%20son%2C%20Connor%20Sparrowhawk%2C%20die%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20never%20thought%20he%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20come%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20why%20did%20our%20son%2C%20Connor%20Sparrowhawk%2C%20die%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d8d11eb606f8bb97d1f74b7ca527e30124dde80%2F17_988_4098_2458%2F4098.jpg>
 Connor’s mother, Sara Ryan. Photograph: Joel Redman for the Guardian 
But 100 days on from the Mazars report, she is beginning to think she was 
naive. “We thought the report would become a national priority for action. And 
nothing has happened.” She is looking at the possibility of bringing a class 
action, with other families, against Southern Health, one of the largest mental 
health and learning disability trusts in England.

***

Connor Sparrowhawk was close to his three brothers and his sister, who adored 
him. He went to a small special school, but didn’t like to consider himself as 
having special needs. He told everybody he was going to run his own business 
and have a beautiful girlfriend. He was handsome, with pop-star hair and a 
natural stylishness.

Both Sara and Richard are academics: she is a sociologist who specialises in 
autism and learning disabilities, he is a political scientist. Connor was a 
kind and loving child, but at 18 he became aggressive and unhappy. “Maybe he 
was beginning to get a sense that his life was very different from his 
brothers’ and his sister’s,” Sara says. “They were leaving home, going to 
university, and nothing like that was happening to him. No job, no prospects, 
no qualifications, nothing. He was just surrounded by professionals talking 
about his future. It was as if his social work team had forgotten that there 
was a boy, or young man, attached to their care budget. There was no one 
asking, ‘What do you want to be?’”

Connor went on a school trip to Devon and had to be picked up early because he 
was out of control. “He was shouting and threatening and doing a bit of 
pushing, but he was ineffectual,” Richard says.

Sara shakes her head, disagreeing. “You can’t really say that,” she says. 
“When he did lash out, he was incredibly strong.”

Things reached a head when Connor punched a teaching assistant in the face. 
“He got suspended. Then he started shoving me,” Sara says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23d7a4a3e1cee3b95ac70428b1a46b112003373%2F44_79_737_921%2F737.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20never%20thought%20he%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20come%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20why%20did%20our%20son%2C%20Connor%20Sparrowhawk%2C%20die%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20never%20thought%20he%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20come%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20why%20did%20our%20son%2C%20Connor%20Sparrowhawk%2C%20die%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23d7a4a3e1cee3b95ac70428b1a46b112003373%2F44_79_737_921%2F737.jpg>
 Connor with his younger brother Tom. Photograph: courtesy of Sara Ryan 
“Sara had always been sacrosanct,” Richard says. For the first time in 
Connor’s life, they did not know how to cope. His younger brother Tom, with 
whom he shared a room, became anxious, and Tom’s friends stopped coming round.

“I was worried that he was going to hurt someone,” Sara says. “He had no 
inhibitions at all. He’d lost it.” This all happened over a period of weeks. 
“We’d been ringing social services in tears, saying, what can we do? They said, 
call the GP if you have trouble over the weekend. They were so unhelpful. We 
were almost under siege, weren’t we?” She looks at Richard. “Walking on 
eggshells.”

It was then that a friend told them about Slade House, a five-minute drive 
away, and well equipped with psychiatrists, occupational therapists, 
psychologists, dietitians and specialist nurses; they were told that Connor 
would still be able to do some school activities there. Sara talks about taking 
him there. Connor did not know where he was going, and it felt like a betrayal. 
But they were desperate.

Within a few days of him being admitted to Slade House’s Statt (short-term 
assessment and treatment team) unit, they had become concerned. Yes, Connor was 
18, technically an adult, but they couldn’t understand why the trust was so 
aggressive about protecting his privacy. “They said, ‘We can’t be told about 
his medical records without his permission, because he’s an adult.’ We were 
like, he can’t even cross the road by himself.”

Richard remembers the first time he went to visit in the evening, and the 
staff told him Connor had just been put to bed. “It was 6pm on a Saturday 
night!” Another time he was left waiting outside for three-quarters of an hour. 
“They just didn’t answer the bell, then said it was broken. But the nurses’ 
station was right next to the door. We could see them.”

Once Sara arrived to find Connor had bitten his tongue. Her immediate thought 
was that he’d had an epileptic fit; but the psychiatrist had simply prescribed 
Bonjela. “I pitched up and said, ‘By the way, Connor’s had a seizure – you’d 
better act on this.’ ”

For some time before Connor was admitted, Sara had been writing a blog about 
him, calledmydaftlife <http://mydaftlife.com/>. There were too many funny 
stories, she says, not to get them down – and Connor loved being written about. 
“One blog was about getting on a bus after one of the terrorist scares,” she 
says. “He stood up and said, ‘Are there any terrorists on board? Please make 
yourself known to the driver!’”

But once he went into Slade House, the blogs became more serious, highlighting 
perceived inadequacies in Connor’s care. Sara gave the staff nicknames; one 
psychiatrist became Dr Crapshite.

After almost four months at the unit, Connor seemed calmer and was looking 
forward to returning home for good (a meeting had been planned to discuss 
this). Richard asked to visit him on the evening of 3 July 2013 (Connor had to 
consent, because he was 18). “He was very excited, gabbling, so I said, ‘Should 
I come round and see you?’ And he was like, ‘Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.’” But when 
Connor handed the phone back to the nurse, she said no, Connor didn’t want him 
to come. He is still exasperated talking about it today. “I said, ‘I can hear 
him saying yes, I’m coming round’ and thankfully I did. Because that was the 
last time I saw him.”

On Connor’s 107th day in care, Sara received a call from a psychiatrist at the 
unit. “She just said, ‘Oh hello, are you at work? It’s Connor, we found him 
unconscious in the bath. He’s on his way to the John Radcliffe hospital, we’ll 
ring you if there’s any change. Can you make your way there?’”

Sara says the psychiatrist was so casual, she didn’t think there was anything 
to worry about; after all, Connor had been taken to hospital a few times after 
epileptic seizures. “I was texting a couple of mates in the cab. I didn’t even 
ring you, did I?” she asks Richard. Then she began to worry and rang the unit 
back. “I said, ‘Was he breathing, was he conscious when he left?’ and they 
said, ‘Oh, they got him breathing.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F867a32c343117e32443943349b2f1ef4611ac9f8%2F69_154_1641_2049%2F1641.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20never%20thought%20he%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20come%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20why%20did%20our%20son%2C%20Connor%20Sparrowhawk%2C%20die%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20never%20thought%20he%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20come%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20why%20did%20our%20son%2C%20Connor%20Sparrowhawk%2C%20die%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F867a32c343117e32443943349b2f1ef4611ac9f8%2F69_154_1641_2049%2F1641.jpg>
 Connor in 2012, aged 17. Photograph: courtesy of Sara Ryan 
Sara brushes away the tears, determined to get her words out. “But he was 
actually dead, wasn’t he? He was on some ventilator. The John Radcliffe was 
brilliant. The consultant who admitted him said, in his view, Connor was dead 
by the time the rescue people got there – but Southern Health didn’t even have 
the guts to say it was urgent.” At the inquest, it emerged that the tone of the 
999 call made from Slade House was so vague, the operator initially said they 
would book Connor in for a four-hour ambulance response.

***

Over time, the family discovered how much had been kept from them, and that 
they had been watched. “It turns out Southern Health were monitoring us. The 
day after Connor died, they circulated a briefing about my blog,” Sara says. 
(She found this out only after requesting documents.) Under the heading 
Potential Media Interest – Background Briefing On Mother’s Blog, it states: 
“Learning Disabilities SU (service user) has been found not breathing in bath 
at STATT service in Oxfordshire. SU later died at John Radcliffe Hospital in 
Oxfordshire. Below is a summary of an online blog which we have been 
monitoring. The blog is written by the mother.”

It goes on to say: “Depending on the reason of death and the events leading up 
to the incident there may be some concerns raised by the Mother on Day 63 (21 
May 2013) which she may revisit.” Sara explains: “That was the entry when I 
wrote, ‘I can’t believe he’s had a seizure and they’ve not noticed.’ Southern 
Health was monitoring the blog, and they didn’t pay any attention to the 
content of what I was writing. Yet as soon as Connor died, they circulated a 
briefing saying, this particular entry might become problematic.”

Bess, the family jack russell, walks up to Sara and starts barking. She has a 
tendency to do this whenever Sara becomes upset.

Two weeks after Connor’s death, Sara discovered that Southern Health had 
recorded his passingin the minutes of a board meeting 
<https://mydaftlife.wordpress.com/2013/11/24/a-story-in-minutes/> published 
online: “A Serious Incident Requiring Investigation (SIRI) occurred in one of 
the Trust Learning Disability in-patient facilities, leading to the unexpected 
death of a service user. The postmortem indicates the user died of natural 
causes and early investigations indicate all appropriate systems and processes 
were in place and being followed leading up to the incident.” At the time, Sara 
did not think she could have been more angry, but she was wrong.

In September 2013, six weeks after Connor died, the Care Quality Commission 
visited Slade House 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/sites/default/files/old_reports/RW11V_Slade_House_INS1-927131809_Scheduled_21-11-2013.pdf>
, and failed it on all 10 counts it inspected: there was no battery in the 
defibrillator, no oxygen in the oxygen tank, no therapeutic interactions, there 
were traces of faeces in the furniture, medicines were out of date – and on it 
went. Three months later, in December 2013, the Statt unit was closed down.In 
May 2014 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/sites/default/files/RW11V_Slade_House_INS1-1278665120_Responsive_-_Follow_Up_21-05-2014.pdf>
, it was reported that the CQC had returned to Slade House and that its 
services had improved; baths, however, were now banned in favour of showers. 
The reason was never revealed to Connor’s family. (The CQC’s current rating for 
Southern Health is “requires improvement”.)

Why did Connor Sparrowhawk die in a specialist NHS unit? | Saba Salman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/19/connor-sparrowhawk-death-nhs-care-unit-slade-house-learning-disabilities>
As soon as Connor died, people advised Sara and Richard to get in touch with 
the charity Inquest, to get hold of Connor’s records from Southern Health, to 
make sure the postmortem had been conducted correctly. “We were given a list of 
about 15 things and told you’ve got to do these this morning or you’ll be 
screwed, and it was true – we would have been.”

With a strong social support group, they were in a relatively good position to 
find out what had happened to their son – but even so it almost did for them. 
“There have been times, God knows, when both of us have thought, what is the 
point of carrying on?” Richard says. “I’ve got high blood pressure and am on 
antidepressants. I’ve lost part of my job.”Deborah Coles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/deborah-coles>, director of Inquest, has 
worked with the family since Connor’s death. “Without their determination,” she 
says, “the truth would have been hidden from public scrutiny. What about all 
the Connors who don’t have families to speak out for them?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1014ee84c036fe75d15f8bc9e8a914fe144ae6fa%2F11_1162_3985_2391%2F3985.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20never%20thought%20he%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20come%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20why%20did%20our%20son%2C%20Connor%20Sparrowhawk%2C%20die%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20never%20thought%20he%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20come%20home%E2%80%99%3A%20why%20did%20our%20son%2C%20Connor%20Sparrowhawk%2C%20die%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fnever-thought-he-wouldnt-come-home-why-son-connor-sparrowhawk-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1014ee84c036fe75d15f8bc9e8a914fe144ae6fa%2F11_1162_3985_2391%2F3985.jpg>
 Connor’s mother and stepfather, Richard Huggins. Photograph: Joel Redman for 
the Guardian 
After two years spent negotiating what form the inquest would take, 
proceedings finally began in Oxford last October. Sara had already discovered, 
to her horror, that Connor had been left alone in the bath. But it was only in 
court that they learned the door had also been locked. Even then, lawyers for 
Southern Health quibbled over whether the door was actually locked, despite a 
nurse testifying she had used her key to open the door.

“That was one of those moments which showed you what an arsehole the British 
legal system is,” Richard says, raising his voice. “Two barristers representing 
members of staff stood up and said, ‘Oh nononono, just because she opened a 
door with a key doesn’t mean it was locked.’” He’s lost for words. “I mean, 
what sort of ludicrousness is that?”

In court, the counsel for Southern Health made capital out of the fact that 
Sara had called a member of staff Dr Crapshite on her blog, suggesting that her 
attitude might have affected the way staff cared for Connor.

In interviews conducted after his death, Sara was referred to by a member of 
staff as “toxic”. “These interviews were submitted as evidence at the inquest,” 
Sara tells me. “Under one section headed ‘My Relationship with Dr Ryan’, a 
student nurse wrote, ‘I was really scared of her, I saw her shout at a 
consultant.’ But when the same nurse gave evidence, she retracted it: ‘No, I 
wasn’t scared of her. She was a mother who cared for her child.’ So I reckon 
they were coaxed into writing this crap.”

On the fourth day of the inquest, the counsel for Southern Health disclosed 
that, seven years before Connor’s death (when the unit was under different 
management), another patient had died in the same bath. This came out only 
after it was raised by a former member of staff. “The police had carried out a 
two-year investigation into Connor’s death and they’d never told them that,” 
Richard says. “Three of the staff who had already given evidence had been 
working there when this happened, and hadn’t mentioned it.”

A document disclosed at the inquest showed an action plan had been written 
following an incident at Slade House in 2004, stating “the baths should be 
removed because they were therapeutic and too deep – hence not fit for 
purpose”. This was two years before the first death, nine years before Connor’s.

“If somebody dies in a bath, you act, don’t you?” Sara says. “If they’d paid 
attention to the first man who died and decided the baths were too high, Connor 
would be alive.” When asked by the Guardian why they had not told Connor’s 
family about this previous death, Southern Health said the man “did not suffer 
from epilepsy and had not drowned… and was therefore not relevant”.

Far from accepting responsibility, a barrister representing a member of staff 
went on the attack, suggesting Sara had been negligent in not explicitly 
stating that her son had to be watched in the bath. “They said, why didn’t we 
tell them? And we said, anybody knows that you don’t leave somebody with 
epilepsy in the bath alone. It would have been like asking a schoolteacher 
taking children on a trip not to let them loose on a motorway. We were always 
in and out when he was having a bath, the door was always open.”

One of Connor's nurses said, 'I want to say sorry, I let you down totally.' 
That was such a relief

Even now the family don’t know how long Connor was left alone. In the 999 
call, the nurse initially suggested five minutes, then said she was unsure. Yet 
even Southern Health’s own recorded observations suggest he had been in there 
since 8.30am and was checked on at 9am, and then again at 9.15am when he was 
found unconscious. “On the recording, the nurse says quite clearly, we don’t 
know how long he’s been in the bath. My view is that he died in the bath, and 
they didn’t notice. And then they found him under the water,” Richard says.

Sara is trying to remember the positives that emerged from the inquest. “There 
were two nice things that happened. One of Connor’s two main nurses asked if 
she could say something to us before she gave evidence. She turned round and 
said, ‘I just want to say sorry, I let you down totally.’ That was such a 
relief.”

The other nice thing, she says, was when a staff nurse talked about Connor the 
boy, rather than Connor the dead service user. “He said Connor had introduced a 
sense of camaraderie between the patients and they had a bit of a banter of an 
evening. They really took the piss out of the staff. They were subversive, and 
they hung out together and watched films.” It meant a lot to her, because until 
then she had never heard staff talk about the Connor his parents knew and loved.

***

It was while they were waiting for Connor’s inquest to take place, in 2014, 
that Richard and Sara started to think about all the other people who might 
have died in similar situations. They met withDavid Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-nicholson>, the then chief executive 
of NHS England. “We said, can you review the deaths that have happened to see 
how Southern Health has responded to them? I don’t think anybody expected the 
findings to be what they are.”

Look beyond the stark headline numbers of 2015’s Mazars report 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/south/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2015/12/mazars-rep.pdf>
 and the detail is just as shocking. Of 10,306 deaths of service users between 
April 2011 and March 2015, 722 were categorised as unexpected; of these only 
30% were investigated. Sixty-four per cent of investigations did not involve 
the family. Most shocking of all, less than 1% of deaths in learning disability 
services were investigated (compared with 60% of unexpected deaths in adult 
mental health services). Southern Health came in for severe criticism: “The 
failure to bring about a sustained improvement in the identification of 
unexpected death and in the quality and timeliness of reports into those deaths 
is a failure of leadership and government.”

In December, Sara called for the chief executive of Southern Health, Katrina 
Percy, to resign.The trust acknowledged the failings 
<http://www.southernhealth.nhs.uk/news/archive/2015/statement-from-southern-health-17-12-2015-independent-review/>
 documented in the Mazars report: “We fully accept that our processes for 
reporting and investigating deaths of people with learning disabilities and 
mental health needs were not always as good as they should have been.” But it 
also defended its record, stating that, “National data on mortality rates 
confirms that the Trust is not an outlier” and its “rate of investigations is 
in line with that of other NHS organisations”. (“As if that makes it all 
right!” Sara says.)

Percy made a public apology: “Connor needed our support. We did not keep him 
safe and his death was preventable.” She added that many changes had been made 
since Connor died. Percy is still in post.

For Sara, the Mazars report crystallised what she had always suspected. “It’s 
a eugenics thing,” she says. “There’s no value attached to their lives.”

Bess the jack russell doesn’t so much bark this time as howl.

Look, Richard says, they never set out to cause a commotion. “If there had 
been a very different approach from day one, if there’d been a culture of 
saying, let’s sit down and see how we can sort this out, none of this would 
have happened. We weren’t confrontational from the beginning.”

“I always was,” Sara corrects him.

“No,” Richard says quietly. “We weren’t confrontational, we just wanted stuff 
done for Connor. We weren’t fighting just to fight.”

Sara says it was an amazing moment, hearing Connor and Mazars and Southern 
Health being debated in the Commons at the end of last year. Now she believes 
many of the professionals involved have regrets for the wrong reasons. “People 
have said to me, if Southern Health had just behaved a bit better, none of this 
would have come out, as if it’s a bit more problematic than it’s worth. I think 
a lot of people in health and social care still think, ‘I don’t want to lose my 
job over a bunch of learning disabled people, thank you very much.’ And yet 
Connor was better than all of us in many ways – his generosity of spirit. No 
guile, no deceit, no lying, no avarice. He didn’t want anything; he just wanted 
to be.”

As well as a class action, Sara is looking at the possibility of bringing a 
corporate manslaughter charge against Southern Health. After Connor’s death, 
she was told that the trust could not be charged with this because the bar for 
gross negligence had not been met. Now, lawyers are taking another look. “We’re 
arguing that it was met, because of the earlier death in the bath.”

In December, Jeremy Hunt promised a study into mortality rates of people with 
learning disabilities across the NHS, and to publish the number of avoidable 
deaths within eachNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> trust, from 
this year. But as yet there has been no confirmation that there will even be an 
investigation into the 700-plus deaths identified by the Mazars report. 
Charlotte Haworth Hird, a lawyer representing Connor’s family, says: “It is no 
good simply saying that investigation procedures will be different in future, 
if indeed they will. There needs to be effective investigation of those deaths 
that have already happened, and those responsible need to be held to account.”

Three years on, Sara and Richard have called for a much wider public inquiry, 
into all those avoidable deaths. It’s hard to know where they get the energy 
from. Sara says she’s a changed person – and not in a way that she likes.

“Rage is quite new to me. I’d have to be pushed into a rage before,” she says. 
“I was hugely optimistic.”

“But you always had a huge sense of justice,” Richard says, “a bit like 
Connor. A sense of fairness.”

She nods. Yes, she says, but this is different. “Rage is my daily business 
now.”

 