
“There is a false narrative that the movement stopped and then started again,” 
says the Reverend Jesse Jackson Sr, when I ask whether he feels in or out of 
step with theBlack Lives Matter movement <http://blacklivesmatter.com/about/>. 
“We never stopped,” the 73-year-old civil rights activist says, chiding me 
subtly for questioning whether there was any sunlight between his decades of 
activism and today’s activists.

Birthed in the wake of Trayvon Martin’s killing in 2012 in Florida and kicked 
into high gear a year ago with the killing of Michael Brown in St Louis, Black 
Lives Matter is a political movement largely led by young protesters unattached 
to organisations such as Jackson’s Rainbow/Push (People United to Save 
Humanity) coalition. It has flourished during the time of the nation’s first 
black president – a historic achievement that Jackson once hoped would be not 
Barack Obama’s, but his own.

Love him or hate him (and many Americans do both), Jackson’s role in the 
history of black American activism is undeniable. He is adamant that the two 
main protest movements of the past few years –Black Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/09/black-lives-matter-movement-taught-black-oppression-borderless-michael-brown>
 andOccupy Wall Street <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/occupy-wall-street> 
– are simply modern continuations of the civil rights movement. Yet, despite 
this, he displays little interest in talking about those who have taken up the 
causes dearest to his heart.

Jackson was mentored by Martin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> and has had a hand in 
many civil rights organisations over the past half-century, including the 
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) and Operation Breadbasket 
during the 1960s, the same decade in which he became an ordained minister. The 
70s saw him lead the Rainbow/Push coalition and host the Black Expo in Chicago, 
when he started brokering deals between civil rights, business and politics 
with a less sceptical relationship to capitalism than King displayed.

Despite never having held elective office, Jackson was the second African 
American to mount a serious effort for the Democratic nomination for the 
presidency in 1984, garnering 1.4m votes, and even more –6.6m 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1988/06/13/us/jackson-share-of-votes-by-whites-triples-in-88.html>
 – in his 1988 bid. In the 90s, he wasspiritual adviser 
<http://content.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,96020,00.html> to President 
Clinton during the Monica Lewinsky crisis, and became a sort of freelance 
informal ambassador dispatched to negotiate the release of US hostages 
overseas, sometimeswithout the White House’s blessing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1999/05/02/world/crisis-in-the-balkans-prisoners-serbs-release-3-captured-us-soldiers.html>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fjesse-jackson-martin-luther-king-obama-and-blacklivesmatter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439578171077%2Ff284d8c5-5dcc-4eea-9ef8-949d4873f573-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We're%20winning'%3A%20Jesse%20Jackson%20on%20Martin%20Luther%20King%2C%20Obama%20and%20%23blacklivesmatter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fjesse-jackson-martin-luther-king-obama-and-blacklivesmatter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%27re%20winning%27%3A%20Jesse%20Jackson%20on%20Martin%20Luther%20King%2C%20Obama%20and%20%23blacklivesmatter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fjesse-jackson-martin-luther-king-obama-and-blacklivesmatter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439578171077%2Ff284d8c5-5dcc-4eea-9ef8-949d4873f573-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jesse Jackson (second left) stands next to Martin Luther King on 3 April 1968, 
on the balcony at the Lorraine Motel where King was assassinated the following 
day. Photograph: Associated Press 
Jackson became known, too, for being such a focal point of black political 
power that when famous white Americans did something racist – such as when
Seinfeld actor Michael Richards was racially abusive to some black audience 
members after being heckled onstage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/nov/21/arts.usa> – they were expected 
to apologise to Jackson to receive absolution. Resentment by black Americans 
who felt Jackson sold forgiveness for hire and didn’t speak for them was 
parodied onSouth Park <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0940288/reviews> in 2007, 
when Token Black angrily declared: “Jesse Jackson is not the emperor of black 
people!”

Despite his history of agitation, Jackson’s more recent work with presidents, 
corporations, foreign governments and establishment media – not to mention the 
many comforts afforded to him while ensconced in his own empire, on display 
when we spoke at his headquarters on Chicago’s South Side – has turned many in 
the Black Lives Matter movement off him. When I was on a panelthis spring 
<http://artandactivism.org/blog/2015/02/16/who-we-be-superpanel-post/> in San 
Francisco with Alicia Garza, a co-founder of#BlackLivesMatter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/19/blacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement>
, shesaid Ferguson marked 
<http://artandactivism.org/blog/2015/04/10/who-we-be-superpanel-follow-up/> 
“the first time in my lifetime”‚ in which the Reverends “Al Sharpton and Jesse 
Jackson were begged to leave” the scene of a civil rights crime.

Some young people in the streets of Ferguson, particularly angry young black 
men <http://www.buzzfeed.com/joelanderson/who-are-fergusons-young-protesters> 
written off by black elders such asBill Cosby 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Gh3_e3mDQ8> and civil rights groups, had no 
use for the likes of Jackson. They saw him as too slow, too accommodating, too 
lacking in anger for the fight. They weren’t interested when he pushed them on
voter registration 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/08/head-missouri-gop-calls-voter-registration-drives-ferguson-disgusting>
, particularly since many young people in Missouri have already beenbarred from 
voting 
<http://www.brennancenter.org/blog/how-restrictive-voting-laws-block-ferguson%E2%80%99s-citizens-having-their-fair-say>
 because of convictions. Black Lives Matter was challenging the structural 
racism of the entire political system, including how it served black 
politicians, andblacklivesmatter.com described Jackson 
<http://blacklivesmatter.com/al-sharpton-does-not-have-my-ear-why-we-need-new-black-leadership-now/>
 as “clearly dethroned from a place of either honour or leadership or 
relevance”.

That caused a backlash against the young movement, Garza recalled 
<http://artandactivism.org/blog/2015/04/10/who-we-be-superpanel-follow-up/>, 
but it also signalled that the movement had “accomplished an interesting feat 
by calling out respectability politics”, the belief that liberation can only be 
achieved for and by people who are respectable enough to deserve it. While 
Jackson engaged in oppositional politics against those in power as a young man, 
he has often been seen as representative of respectability politics as Black 
Lives Matter rose.

Jackson doesn’t say whether he had been “begged” to leave town, or how that 
would have made him feel if he had. He is open with history, but guarded with 
emotion, his deep-set eyes displaying a weary desire to stay engaged in the 
movement. He talks freely about the past and policy, but does not want to talk 
much about the personal and the present. Like many older black civil rights 
figures I have interviewed, he replies to nearly every question about 
contemporary times with an answer starting sometime between the civil war and 
the 1960s. “It’s all one story,” he says.

When we meet, Jackson bounds out of a black car, surrounded by several young 
black men all dressed in black. Jackson, too, wears black shoes and black 
clothes, and, improbably for his age, has mostly black hair.

I’ve long heard people talk about the “cult of Jesse Jackson”, which would be 
an unfair way to dismiss the domain he inhabits, including the dozens of 
children studying at Rainbow/Push the day I visit. But his is a world very 
different from the two biggest centres of black politics right now, 
oppositional and respectable: the Black Lives Matter movement and the Obama 
administration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fjesse-jackson-martin-luther-king-obama-and-blacklivesmatter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439578234779%2Fc2420866-69fc-4302-a64e-79870e3aa55f-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We're%20winning'%3A%20Jesse%20Jackson%20on%20Martin%20Luther%20King%2C%20Obama%20and%20%23blacklivesmatter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fjesse-jackson-martin-luther-king-obama-and-blacklivesmatter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%27re%20winning%27%3A%20Jesse%20Jackson%20on%20Martin%20Luther%20King%2C%20Obama%20and%20%23blacklivesmatter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fjesse-jackson-martin-luther-king-obama-and-blacklivesmatter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439578234779%2Fc2420866-69fc-4302-a64e-79870e3aa55f-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Jackson delivers a speech during his 1984 presidential campaign in Chicago, 
Illinois. Photograph: David Hume Kennerly/Getty Images 
Jackson’s universe differs from Black Lives Matter in its permanence, how he 
is centred within it, and the role it affords women. His headquarters since 
1971 are located in a modest but decent-sized building with interior 
cinder-block walls plastered with fading photos of famous Democrats. He is 
eager to show it off and explain who is who in dozens of ageing images. In the 
lobby, there is a large, garish cardboard cutout of Jackson with King at the 
Lorraine Motel in Memphis, which looks like an ad for a new album in an old 
record store. Jackson tells me the photo was taken on 3 April 1968 – the day 
before King’sassassination 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2007/1/15/rev_jesse_jackson_on_witnessing_the> and 
the ensuing controversy aboutwhat he did 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/jesse/jessescript.html> or did not do 
with King’s blood.

His office is a very lived-in place. By contrast, my interviews with the 
informal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/13/black-lives-matter-ferguson-police-shooting>
, oftentransient 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/10/magazine/our-demand-is-simple-stop-killing-us.html>
 leaders of theBlack Lives Matter movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/13/black-lives-matter-ferguson-police-shooting>
 have not been in offices, but on the streets of Ferguson,Baltimore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/02/in-baltimore-we-need-protest-in-all-its-forms>
 and New York. And the women among them – who co-foundedthe movement 
<http://www.thefeministwire.com/2014/10/blacklivesmatter-2/> and who prominently
lead it 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-ferguson-women-protests-20141122-story..html%C2%A3page=1>
 – are not apt to defer to men. The women around Jackson seem to dote on him as 
the gravity of their universe.

Jackson’s world is also different from Obamaland in how black it is. Jackson’s 
headquarters is just a few minute’s walk from the president’s Hyde Park home. 
But, compared with Obama’s Chicago-based re-election campaign (which, ina 
famous 2012 staff photo 
<http://www.nbcchicago.com/news/local/Obama-Campaigns-Lack-of-Diversity-146685175.html>
, looked almost entirely white) or his White House cabinet (which so lacks 
diversity that congressman Charlie Rangelonce called it 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/10/charlie-rangel-obama_n_2447818.html> 
“embarrassing as hell”), Jackson’s universe is unapologetically black. During 
my visit, the only non-black people I see are the Guardian photographers.

Jackson was born in Greenville, South Carolina, in 1941, a state where he has 
spent a lot of time lately – both to see his elderly mother, and to visit 
Charleston afternine black people were slaughtered at Emmanuel African 
Methodist Episcopal church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/18/charleston-church-shooting-state-senator-victim>
. He seems as agitated by his home state’s drama with the Confederate flag as 
he is by how state officials have refused to expand Medicaid health cover for 
the poor largely with federal money – an issue of importance to one of those 
killed in the church attack,Reverend Senator Clementa Pinckney 
<http://www.greenvilleonline.com/story/opinion/editorials/2015/07/18/editorial-expand-medicaid-south-carolina/30304173/>
, who Jackson knew.

Jackson credits his awakening about civil rights to watching his father 
experience, and stand up to, discrimination after he returned from the second 
world war when “black soldiers had to sit behind Nazi prisoners of war on 
American military bases”. He found early on “that you adjust to the dos and 
don’ts of segregation” and “learn your place”. His family taught him, he says: 
“If you have a sense of dignity within you, your body may be on the back of the 
bus, but your mind is up front.” He first protested about segregationas an 
18-year-old 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/half-century-jesse-jackson-has-helped-lead-fight-progressive-politics/>
, by trying to check out book at a local whites-only library.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fjesse-jackson-martin-luther-king-obama-and-blacklivesmatter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439578343732%2Fcfee6b36-23bd-4ac6-9a4d-416c40a899fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We're%20winning'%3A%20Jesse%20Jackson%20on%20Martin%20Luther%20King%2C%20Obama%20and%20%23blacklivesmatter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fjesse-jackson-martin-luther-king-obama-and-blacklivesmatter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%27re%20winning%27%3A%20Jesse%20Jackson%20on%20Martin%20Luther%20King%2C%20Obama%20and%20%23blacklivesmatter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fjesse-jackson-martin-luther-king-obama-and-blacklivesmatter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439578343732%2Fcfee6b36-23bd-4ac6-9a4d-416c40a899fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jackson at a protest march over the death of Trayvon Martin in Florida in 
2012. Photograph: David Manning/Reuters 
Jackson met King while the latter was en route to accept the 1964 Nobel peace 
prize, and, in 1965,Jackson travelled to Selma 
<http://www.biography.com/people/jesse-jackson-9351181> to join him in the 
historic marches. Over the next few years, Jackson became a close, if ambitious 
and polarising, member of King’s circle, eventually tasked with running 
operations for the SCLC in Chicago and then running its national economic 
development arm, Operation Breadbasket.

Jackson drew ire when he was reported to have returned to Chicago after King’s 
killing and worn a shirt stained (under disputed circumstances)with King’s blood
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1987/11/29/magazine/jesse-jackson-aims-for-the-mainstream.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm>
. When he was shot, King had been planning a Poor People’s Campaign – wildly 
unpopular even among the dwindling supporters he had at the end of his life – 
which was meant to unite poor whites, blacks and Latinos in a shantytown built 
on the Capitol Mall called “Resurrection City 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/eyesontheprize/story/15_poor.html>”.

What was it like to work on something so unpopular?

“It was all unpopular,” Jackson says, criticising America’s short memory on 
King. The Poor People’s’ Campaign – which Jackson credits as the “origins” of 
Occupy Wall Street’s tent city in Zuccotti Park – was unpopular, sure. But so 
were King’s support for the Memphis sanitation worker’s strike, his stance 
against the Vietnam war, and his belief that three evils of society were 
“racism, militarism and capitalism”. Even the March on Washington, no matter 
how much modern America pretends otherwise, was unpopular in its time, Jackson 
insists.

Forty years after King’s assassination, on a November night in Chicago’s Grant 
Park, Jacksonhad tears streaming down his face 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p7Tt6R-t8AY> as Barack Obama addressed the 
world as the first African American president elect. But ask him about the 
black man from his neighbourhood who ascended to the office he ran twice to 
attain, and Jackson gives a politician’s answer that he’s long supported Obama 
and “voted for him 10 times”.

Jackson’s claims about his own role in Obama’s rise are surprisingly modest: 
specifically, that reforms in the Democratic nomination process he fought for 
in his campaigns helped Obama edge ahead of his primary opponent, Hillary 
Clinton. But the summer before he was elected, alive mic caught Jackson saying 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Wf6LnwRZXA> that Obama was “talking down to 
black people”‚ and that he wanted “to cut his nuts off,” a phrase that evoked 
the historical castration of black men during the lynchingera 
<http://www.albany.edu/womensstudies/journal/2004/cooley.html>. He said he had 
been “inappropriate”, when caught, but claimed he was speaking about “angst” of 
tone rather than concern over policy.

“Black men, it’s obvious, we are targeted more by police,” Jackson says, and 
his frustration with candidate Obama was feeling that “unless you’re going to 
deal with how we are targeted, don’t advise us on how we express our pain”. He 
now credits Obama with “a tremendous job” while facing challenges matched only 
by those of Lyndon Johnson and Abraham Lincoln.

It is incredibly hard to get Jackson to say anything personal about his 
present self. After hearing him recall soaking up King’s then contemporary 
books as a young activist, I want to know what he thinks ofTa-Nehisi Coates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/14/between-the-world-and-me-ta-nehisi-coates-review>
. How does he feel that, in the US, this summer’s bestselling author on race 
hails not from the black Christian activist tradition, but froma place of 
secular atheism 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2015/08/why-ta-nehisi-coates-isnt-our-james-baldwin.html>
 that is not especially optimistic? Has he readCoates’s Between the World and Me
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/14/between-the-world-and-me-ta-nehisi-coates-review>
?

“No,” he answers simply, with impassive eyes, little to add, and no sign of 
curiosity.

What about #BlackTwitter: what does he make of one of its most prolific users 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lWIDvMpieVQ>, activist DeRay McKesson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/09/ferguson-civil-rights-movement-deray-mckesson-protest>
?

“Who?” he asks. The brother “in the blue vest <https://twitter.com/deraysvest>
”, I tell him, which triggers Jackson’s memory.

“I’ve met all those kids. They’re great,” he tells me – but again, he says 
nothing more. He registers none of the interest he has while talking about 
King, Johnson or Robert Kennedy.

Neither does he display a willingness to talk about his son, when I try to 
discover how the incarceration of black men in America – a prime target of 
Black Lives Matter – has affected him personally. In 2013, Jesse Jackson Jr, a 
10-term congressman from Illinois whoresigned in 2012 
<http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2012-11-22/news/chi-brother-rep-jackson-to-announce-resignation-20121121_1_sandi-jackson-federal-probe-jesse-jackson>
 during a federal inquiry, was sentenced to30 months in prison 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2013/08/14/former-rep-jesse-jackson-jr-to-be-sentenced/>
 for misappropriating campaign funds for personal use. He was released from 
prison in the spring and from a halfway house this summer.

As a father, did watching his son go to prison affect his thinking about the 
American criminal justice system? He won’t talk about his son, or his feelings 
as a dad. He circles back to slavery, to Jim Crow, to his own experiences of 
being arrested in acts of political civil disobedience. When I press him later 
as we are walking in a hallway, he introduces me to a passing man who spent 30 
years in prison before being found innocent all along.

“This is what they do to us,” he says, before walking into a social hall where 
he is mobbed by kids.

It’s a tack to respectability politics, a reminder of his overall message that 
the present struggle is just a continuation of what has gone before, that “the 
movement never stopped”. Despite the deaths he has protested about (most 
recently, Sandra Bland’s for “driving while black” 
<http://chicago.suntimes.com/opinion/7/71/827702/jesse-jackson-sandra-blands-offense-driving-black>
) and the incarceration of nearly amillion black Americans 
<http://www.naacp.org/pages/criminal-justice-fact-sheet>, Jackson is adamant 
that “we’re winning”, that victories on many fronts over time are making a 
positive difference.

It is a hard message to buy the day after we speak, on the anniversary of 
Michael Brown’s killing, when yet another young black man isshot by Missouri 
police <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-33844201>, and all hell breaks 
loose.

But Jackson’s mantra to “Keep Hope Alive!” is not so different from Obama’s 
“audacity of hope”‚ nor is his optimistic messaging so different from McKesson’s
often tweeted <https://twitter.com/deray/status/615013706272010240> mantra: “We 
will win.”

“Something in our household,” Jackson says about his childhood, with a 
sentiment that could be applied to those arrested on public property outside a 
Missouri courthouse, “always had our mind in the front of the bus, and always 
taught us to never adjust to degradation”‚ no matter how the police reacted.

Even Jackson working with politicians doesn’t seem so different in light of 
news that Black Lives Matter protestershave begun to meet 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/08/black-lives-matter-protesters-attempt-disrupt-hillary-clinton-2016-event-121269.html>
 with Democratic presidential candidates aboutracial justice policy proposals 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/08/10/431343144/bernie-sanders-releases-racial-justice-plan-after-black-lives-matter-protests>
. In fact, afterMcKesson, Johnetta Elzie, and other activists and journalists 
were arrested 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/ferguson-protesters-deray-mckesson-and-johnetta-elzie-arrested_55c8f42ee4b0923c12bdb0a2>
 for assembly and journalism in St Louis on 10 August – it would seem the 
tactics, goals and messages of Black Lives Matter aren’t so disparate from 
those of a young Jackson, who was first arrested for trying todesegregate a 
public library 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/half-century-jesse-jackson-has-helped-lead-fight-progressive-politics/>
 more than a half century ago.

Jesse Jackson is appearing at the 2015 Edinburgh International Book Festival 
on Saturday 22 August. For tickets visitwww.edbookfest.co.uk 
<http://www.edbookfest.co.uk/>
 