
The first time Sharon’s* partner hospitalised her was on her birthday. About a 
year into their relationship, after a gradual escalation of “little things”, he 
punched and kicked her until he broke her arm. “He made me get into the van 
with him and drove me to hospital,” she says. “He sat with me the whole time I 
was there, so I couldn’t say anything.”

Over the next 18 months, Sharon was in and out of A&E with more injuries, 
including a second break to her arm – but she couldn’t bring herself to admit 
what had happened. “I didn’t say anything, I wouldn’t even speak,” she says.

But hospital staff were concerned and Sharon was referred to Punita Bassi, an 
independent domestic violence adviser (IDVA) based at the Bristol Royal 
infirmary (BRI). “The hospital picked up on it,” Sharon says. “I think the 
physio realised I hadn’t tripped over the dog or fallen up the stairs like I 
said I had.”

This referral changed everything for Sharon: “I had three sessions with Punita 
where I just cried, but then I put my trust in her. She’s an amazing lady, 
absolutely amazing. I don’t think I’d be here today without her. If [the 
service] hadn’t all been there in the hospital, I wouldn’t have had the courage 
to find support anywhere else.”

The BRI is one of around 25 hospitals in the UK to have a team of IDVAs. Now 
SafeLives <http://www.safelives.org.uk/>, a charity dedicated to ending 
domestic violence, is calling for every hospital in the country to invest in 
on-site IDVAs to support more abuse survivors like Sharon.

Nurses in A&E don’t have the time, specialist skills or knowledge to deal with 
a domestic violence case

More than half of domestic violence victims identified in hospital access A&E 
in the year before getting help, according to SafeLives’A Cry for Health 
<http://www.safelives.org.uk/node/935> report. The charity believes health 
professionals are ideally placed to identify victims and intervene earlier.

“Domestic abuse is extremely difficult to talk about but a lot of research 
suggests health settings are a good place, in terms of not carrying stigma and 
feeling safe,” says chief executive Diana Barran. “We also know that clinical 
staff are unlikely to ask about domestic abuse if they aren’t confident there’s 
a someone they can refer to. This is simple; let’s have two or three specialist 
practitioners in every hospital.”

How does that work in practice? At the Royal Stoke University hospital, nurse 
Mandie Burston and her colleagues work alongside a team of three on-site IDVAs 
from local charity Arch.

“Having IDVAs in A&E makes it a one-stop shop and helps us keep people safe,” 
she says. “The victim is most likely to be honest when they’ve just had that 
critical incident, so immediacy is vital. If the disclosure comes when there’s 
an IDVA in the hospital, who has the time to meet them there and then, the 
victim knows we have taken them seriously.”

Burston adds: “Nurses in A&E can deal with the health emergency but they don’t 
have the time, specialist skills or knowledge to deal with a domestic violence 
case. What they can do is recognise abuse and refer the victim to the IDVA.”

IDVAs act as a bridge between healthcare, community domestic violence support 
and the criminal justice system,­ helping victims put safety plans in place and 
access any additional services they might need, in a way that’s tailored to 
them.

Related: I long for the day I don't have to check patients for signs of 
domestic abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2015/nov/09/gp-check-patients-signs-domestic-abuse>

In Sharon’s case, Bassi supported her to prosecute her ex-partner and clinical 
staff from the hospital gave evidence. “I wouldn’t have gone through with the 
prosecution without Punita, but I took him [to court] to let him know I’m not 
scared any more,” says Sharon.

For clinical staff, Burston says, welcoming IDVAs into the team is no 
different from any other partnership. “A&E has such a mix of injuries and 
illnesses, we have to refer patients on to many other specialities all the 
time. The relationship between the IDVA and the patient is pivotal; they work 
magic. When we get it right, we save a life.”

For Bassi it’s important for an IDVA service to be embedded within A&E. “If 
you look at the ‘toxic triangle’ of mental health problems – drugs and alcohol 
misuse, and domestic violence – here we’re working alongside psychiatry 
liaison, and drug and alcohol nurses, so a victim can access all three 
specialisms under one roof if needed.”

These additional vulnerabilities are especially common in victims who are 
hospitalised, according to A Cry forHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>. In the report, almost 60% of 
domestic abuse victims identified in hospital had mental health concerns, just 
fewer than half had post-traumatic stress disorder, and one in six had been to 
A&E due to an overdose in the previous six months.

Related: Using a multi-agency approach to support victims of domestic violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2012/jun/07/domestic-violence-help-barnet>

Raising awareness is also a key part of the work IDVAs do with their clinical 
colleagues.

“Training has a massive implication on referral rates,” Bassi explains. “Part 
of the education includes understanding what is meant by‘high risk’ behaviours 
<http://www.safelives.org.uk/sites/default/files/resources/Dash%20risk%20checklist%20quick%20start%20guidance%20FINAL.pdf>
 (pdf) – strangulation, sexual violence, threats to kill, and recent separation 
from the perpetrator. If a patient is deemed high risk, our medics can ask if 
there is provision to keep them in hospital overnight, rather than sending them 
home to an unsafe environment,” she says.

It costs around £100,000 per hospital per yearto bring in on-site IDVAs. “Not 
big bucks, in the scale of NHS budgets,” as Barran points out, nor when you 
consider that domestic abuse costs theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> £1.73bn annually.

For Bassi it’s a no-brainer: “You invest to save long-term. Our service shows 
that if we engage well with patients they leave abusive relationships, stop 
being injured, stop coming back into A&E, and ultimately victims and their 
children remain safe.”

* Not her real name

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 