Middletown timeline 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/middletown-timeline/embed.html>
We’ve been asking readers to help guide and shape Gary Younge’s reporting from 
Muncie, Indiana, where, for the past month, he’s been taking the political 
pulse of middle America during this volatile election. Here, residents tell us 
about the issues that matter most to them when it comes to voting, and their 
experience of living in Muncie. As with Middletowns everywhere, the city faces 
difficulties, but it seems these are matched by a strong and active community 
willing to take them on.

Lauren Bishop-Weidner, who taught English at Ball State University for 15 
years, told us: “Your first impression of Muncie is probably going to be 
inaccurate. Most people come in on the east or west side on McGalliard Avenue 
and you just see box store after box store. But if you go through the 
neighbourhoods you see diversity and spirit, especially downtown. You need to 
go all the way through Muncie before you decide what you think.”
Jason Donati family photo 2016 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/muncie-community-image-three/embed.html>
 Jason Donati family photo 2016 
Jason Donati, 36, has four children, grew up in Muncie and returned eight 
years ago. He lives in downtown Muncie and is an environmental educator for the 
Muncie Sanitary District. He is also the co-founder of Race Muncie, which 
stands for Reconciliation Achieved Through Community Engagement.

There are jobs in Muncie. I know people in economic development and there are 
a lot of jobs which don’t have enough qualified people. It’s easy to say we 
haven’t got jobs, that we’ve been screwed over by Nafta [the North American 
Free Trade Agreement]. We have all felt the effects of losing the automotive 
industry, that’s true, but what working-class white people have to deal with 
here is the issue of addiction. I’ve been to a lot of funerals of my friends. 
The drugs are so much stronger, people in their mid-30s with small children are 
now dying through recreational use. It’s doubling and tripling and heroin is 
catching up with meth. There’s a lack of resources in the community for mental 
health, counselling and healing. The only thing I’m seeing elected officials do 
is bust the cases, it needs to be addressed as a disease.

I lost my middle brother to drugs in 2005. It’s something you deal with your 
entire life. That’s my motivation, I think about my brother and the impact it’s 
had on my life, and it’s a rare privilege to live another day. I learned 
through my two years withAmeriCorps 
<http://www.nationalservice.gov/programs/americorps> that you have to get out 
and serve … I’m running for the Muncie community school board and if I get 
elected I can help address some of these issues.

{{atom}}
Pheobe 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/muncie-community-image/embed.html>
Chris Allen, 32, is the community development block grant coordinator for 
Hamilton County, Indiana, helping communities fund activities such as 
affordable housing, public service programmes and infrastructure projects. He 
was born and raised in Anderson, about 20 minutes south-west of Muncie, went to 
Ball State University and has mostly lived in Muncie ever since.

In Muncie, Anderson and the surrounding communities, up until the 1980s, you 
could go to high school and graduating was optional. You could drop out, get a 
job at GM, or BorgWarner, or Delco Remy, working on the line. My dad worked 
there, three-quarters of my elementary class parents worked there. You got 
married, had the family and the income, health benefits, retirement benefits – 
you could achieve the American dream. You had the ranch house, ran two cars 
and, more importantly, could afford to take your family on vacation, going to 
the lakes or down to Florida. Now, that’s a luxury. These kinds of dreams have 
been lost, and I think that’s a major driving force of this election.

Fifty years ago Muncie was a boom town, what are we going to do to get that 
back? If that’s not realistic, then how are we going to replace it, how do we 
get economic gains?

 There’s no doubt in my mind that there are towns like this across the world 
but for a lot of people, Muncie is the place. You can’t give up on it, there’s 
so much work and effort that’s striving to make this place better.
Danielle 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/muncie-community-image-six/embed.html>
Danielle, 21, grew up in the south-east of Muncie. She graduated from Muncie 
Central High in 2013 and went to university, but returned to the town after two 
years because of family illness. She supports herself with two jobs.

The future of Muncie is very bleak, a lot of older people have seen a city 
just out of its prime, now they see their city is dead. Regeneration is 
happening downtown, not everyone involved is from the north side but a lot of 
them are. Typically, that’s where the doctors, lawyers and educators live. On 
the south side, where those who did the [factory] work live, they don’t see 
revitalisation happening for the kind of skills they [have].

I do believe healthcare has got worse. I see people all the time who can’t 
afford treatment. If they choose treatment, they can’t eat or fall into debt 
and lose their homes. I think education in Muncie is slipping too, they have 
consolidated two high schools and it has become a mess. It’s hard to talk 
about, everyone here is very closeted about their opinions, particularly about 
anything political.

But Muncie does have a lot of good: people band together over the slightest 
thing, there’s strong community when it matters. I do feel proud, we’ve 
lightened up a lot. Kids going to different states and coming back are 
influencing us, we’re changing ourselves. I feel part of the regeneration, 
everyone is helping just a little bit.
Jeannine Lee Lake 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/muncie-community-image-two/embed.html>
 Jeannine Lee Lake with her husband Aaron celebrating their wedding anniversary 
in 2016 
{{callout link}}

Jeannine Lee Lake, 47, is a stay-at-home mother, former owner of Grandma 
Betty’s Ice Cream Shop 
<https://www.facebook.com/Grandma-Bettys-Ice-Cream-Shop-160256834008564/> and 
editor of the Good News, a bimonthly free publication that focuses on minority 
and religious issues in Delaware County. She lives in Muncie with her husband, 
who works at Ball State University, and has four sons.

Muncie’s a great town to raise your children in and you feel safe here. It’s 
diverse, there are still opportunities for people who aren’t educated … I am an 
optimistic person, I’m a Christian … my belief is if you care about your family 
there are resources and opportunities here for you.

I’m really embarrassed that these are our candidates. I think [Hillary 
Clinton] is the lesser of two evils and would be better thanDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. I do believe whoever is next 
in office should address the rage that is out there among a certain group of 
white people. They’re very, very, very angry. Some of the stuff I’ve seen on 
Facebook – people rip at you. I don’t get why white people feel they’re 
targets. One woman told me on Facebook: ‘My husband is under siege.’ It’s a 
perceived danger, maybe something about them losing power, socially, 
economically. However, white males live longer, and they’re more educated than 
we are. Where’s the siege?

Trump is their voice. I don’t mind the voices coming to the table, but why do 
we have to put other people down to be heard? I think Hillary is the better 
candidate, Trump will fan the flames of hate and discord. I would like our 
nation to be better.
Dawn Bernd-Steffes and her husband Tom Steffes in their greenhouse. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/muncie-community-image-four/embed.html>
 Dawn Bernd-Steffes and her husband Tom Steffes in their greenhouse. 
Dawn Bernd-Steffes, 46, used to teach at Burris Laboratory school in Muncie 
(she’s now at Union HS) and lives with her husband Tom and their four sons on a 
small farm 11 miles outside the city.

Muncie is a mixed bag, we’ve seen a lot of changes. There’s been a decline in 
terms of involvement with the community. When Ball Canning was a huge factory 
here in Muncie, they had a large foundation and gave back to the community, the 
new companies aren’t going to to do any of that. New industries don’t have 
foundations, if they don’t like it here they just move on.

They’re doing a lot of work downtown, that’s excellent. We’ve been going to the
farmers’ market <http://www.minnetrista.net/events/farmers-market/> for the 
past few years. The atmosphere for the community is super healthy, a lot of 
people just come to hang out, see friends, buy a cup of coffee, it’s very 
positive. Another thing we’ve been able to support isthe community gardens 
<https://industryactionplan.wordpress.com/goals-and-initiatives/social-community/community-garden-program/>
. I donate vegetable plants for these gardens. They’re used to feed the 
community. It’s great to be able to drive around and see my plants growing 
there.

In terms of our rural community, it’s tough going for little farmers. We’re 
seeing bigger and bigger farming operations and there’s nothing left in these 
small towns. In Mooreland, there used to be a little restaurant, post office, 
bank, garage and now there’s just a post office open in the mornings, 
everything else has gone. People are living in the homes but if they own five 
acres, they work in town, they’re not working in land. Investment bankers out 
of Chicago bought land at the last auction. The only way small farmers can 
manage is by selling direct to consumers in farmers’ markets. I don’t think 
Trump is the answer but I understand the frustrations.
Cornelius 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/muncie-community-image-seven/embed.html>
Cornelius Dollison, 74, was born and raised in Muncie and is a retired 
engineer who worked for the Delco Remy Div of General Motors. He’s been married 
to Mary, a retired teacher, for 54 years. Both are active in the community. 
Cornelius serves on many boards, including theWhitely community council 
<https://whitelycc.org/>. 

Muncie is a giving, caring community, it has a reputation for doing more for 
people than a lot of large places , people love to help each other and that’s 
not typical.

The perception of Whitely, where I live, is that it’s an area folks avoid. 
We’re trying to dispel that attitude [through our neighbourhood association]. 
We try to make people proud of our community. Everyone helps each other, 
elderly and the youth. We deal with a lot of systemic racism. Indiana is a Klan 
stronghold, some of these problems still exist. We’ve changed the way we look 
at our neighbourhood,we have a strategic plan <https://whitelycc.org/goals/>. 
The goals and values we want to pursue are what we focus on. We help other 
neighbourhoods to find solutions.

Look at our elections. We look like we’re going back to 1930s. It’s really 
crazy that we think we can bring our country together with people who are so 
divisive. We have systemic hatred people just want to ignore, but this election 
has brought that out. We have to address those problems … Muncie is getting 
better, but we as a country have a long way to go.

Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism is expensive – but 
supporting us isn’t. If you value and enjoy this approach to covering politics, 
please help to fund our journalism bybecoming a Guardian Supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_gymiddletowncom_footer>
.


This article was amended on the 7 November to correct the school that a 
contributor works at.

{{newsletter signup}}
 