
Dr David Hogg

After completing GP training, Dr David Hogg undertook a GP rural fellowship on 
the Isle of Arran, becoming a GP partner in the island’s medical practice.

“Arran itself is about the same size as greater Glasgow. It takes about two 
hours to drive round it and we’ve got 5000 people here but it goes up to 25,000 
in the summer so we cope with big changes of population.

“Combining the challenge of an incredibly diverse rural GP practice with the 
lifestyle appeal of living on a beautiful island is, for me, an unbeatable 
combination. 90% of what we do is general practice like anywhere else but the 
extra 10% totally stretches out these extremes.

“You get the occasional deer peering in the window mid-consultation”

“At Arran Medical Group, we’ve got three base surgeries, two branch surgeries 
and the community hospital,” said Hogg. “We have eight GPs and a team of 40 in 
total including practice nurses and admin teams. A typical week for me can 
involve being in Lamlash, a fairly busy, large village practice and then can 
take me up to Lochranza, with a population of 200 people. We open that place 
ourselves and you get the occasional deer peering in the window 
mid-consultation – it’s a unique place to work.

“On-call work includes A&E, response for NHS24, dealing with up to 17 
inpatients including a high dependency unit, police calls and any pre-hospital 
requests as well.

“Working as part of the team in Arran is very rewarding. We are already 
integrating health with social care because we work so closely together anyway. 
We also work closely with our secondary care colleagues on the mainland. We’re 
looking into innovative ideas and being a rural GP is great for that – 
innovation in smaller groups is often easier. As a GP partnership we have lots 
of control over how we deliver services.”

Dr Lynsey Yeoman 

Dr Lynsey Yeoman is a GP at Hunter Street Homeless Services in Glasgow. She is 
also the health inequality GP fellow for the west of Scotland.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DukMXdl_fS84&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DukMXdl_fS84>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DukMXdl_fS84&media=>
 ‘General practice is a great speciality. You often don’t know what’s going to 
be coming through your door on a daily basis which is fascinating.’ 




“General practice is a great speciality. You often don’t know what’s going to 
be coming through your door on a daily basis which is fascinating. You’ll also 
be able to build up relationships with your patients and that might be through 
a short illness, a prolonged illness or maybe over their entire lifetime. That 
continuity of care is really important - that’s what I really enjoy about the 
job.


I’d definitely recommend working in Scotland. If you like city life we’ve got 
lots of culture here

“My practice is one of the ‘deep end’ practices in Scotland. That means it 
serves some of Scotland’s most deprived population. I feel I can really make a 
difference here.

“Working here, it’s been a privilege to see how they’ve adapted the service to 
help the homeless population rather than expecting them to fit into mainstream 
systems. To make it very accessible we have drop-in clinics every afternoon 
during the week. We also go out to some of the hostels throughout Glasgow in 
the mornings, so if some patients are staying there temporarily we can see them 
as well.

“I really enjoyed my training in Scotland. It was very well supported. I was 
made to feel part of the team whether I was in hospital or in GP practice.

“I’d definitely recommend working in Scotland. It’s a great place, and 
Scotland has probably some of the friendliest people in the world. We’ve also 
got big cities like Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Dundee. If you like city 
life we’ve got lots of culture here with lovely restaurants, lots of things to 
do but as well as that within an hour’s drive you’ve got gorgeous countryside. “

Dr Rizwan Khalid

Dr Rizwan Khalid returned from A&E to General Practice in Largs, a town of 
13,000 on Scotland’s west coast.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX4v2dGAjiv4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX4v2dGAjiv4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX4v2dGAjiv4&media=>
 ‘In A&E I missed the lack of continuity with patients and the complexity of 
managing long-term problems, so I decided that general practice would suit me 
better.’ 
“Although I studied in Scotland, I did my initial doctors training in West 
Yorkshire, as this is where I’m originally from. Once I completed my GP 
training I entered the performers’ list in Yorkshire.

“When I became a doctor I initially wanted to specialise in accident and 
emergency medicine. I got to quite a high level within A&E but I missed the 
continuity with patients and the complexity of managing long-term problems, so 
I decided that general practice would suit me better.

I enjoyed the patient contact. I enjoyed managing complex problems. I enjoyed 
managing patients long-term.

“I was living in England but wanted to move back to Scotland. We found that 
Scotland offered a lot for our children, including a good education and a good 
atmosphere to bring up a family in. I’d also spoken to GP colleagues who had 
told me about their workload and what they did and that their quality of life 
was a lot better working in Scotland compared to England.

“I applied to NHS Ayrshire and Arran health board. The interview was very 
simple: it was just a general talk about what I wanted to gain and where I 
wanted to work and what the process involved. It was very easy and quick from 
there.

“Straight away I enjoyed the patient contact. I enjoyed managing complex 
problems. I enjoyed managing patients long-term. I realised this was the career 
for me for the rest of my life. I would encourage anyone interested in both GP 
training and a General Practice career in Scotland to get onto theScottish 
Medical Training website 
<http://www.scotmt.scot.nhs.uk/recruitment/specialty-recruitment.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=roadblock&utm_campaign=round1>
 and apply.”




You can watch a selection of videos from junior doctors in Scotland who 
represent a mix of GPs and specialists working in urban and rural locations. 
More atscotmt.scot.nhs.uk 
<http://www.scotmt.scot.nhs.uk/recruitment/specialty-recruitment.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=roadblock&utm_campaign=round1>

Foundation (FY2) doctors can apply 9 November – 1 December for Round 1 core 
and run-through specialty training in Scotland. Applications are for intake 
starting August 2017. NHS Education for Scotland offers training programs in 
over 50 GMC-recognised specialties, including GP Training. For more information 
on training in Scotland and to apply,see the NES website 
<http://www.scotmt.scot.nhs.uk/recruitment/specialty-recruitment.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=roadblock&utm_campaign=round1>
.

Content on this page is produced and paid for by NHS Education for Scotland
 