
Whether you’re a gypsy jazz troupe cramming onto a train from Brighton or a 
troubadour bussing it from the continent hoping for fame, fortune, watery lager 
and your guitar to emerge unscathed from the hold, there’s no better way to 
survive theEdinburgh festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburghfestival> than as a busker.

At 15, I began attempting to entertain pedestrians in the city and have since 
gigged in Asia and busked around other European cities. Drawing from my 
experience of playing and wandering in Edinburgh, I’ve compiled advice on where 
to perform, wander, blow off steam and eat well on a busker’s budget.

Choose your pitch
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F191f7a1bd6124c258dd0264b1ee050e554f8e934%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20busker%E2%80%99s%20eye%20view%20of%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20busker%E2%80%99s%20eye%20view%20of%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F191f7a1bd6124c258dd0264b1ee050e554f8e934%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Perfect pitch … Rose Street. Photograph: Alamy 
It can be daunting trying to find the ideal busking spot in an unfamiliar 
city. If you don’t find a place to anchor quickly, the festival fringe will 
have you waking penniless on the cobbles with promotional stickers all over 
your face and a saltire for a blanket. Forward planning is advisable.

Rose Street
Edinburgh’s perfect pub-crawl location and home to buskers all year round, 
Rose Street provides a pedestrianised haven from the bustle of Princes Street. 
Pick a spot across from customers sitting under the bunting outside historic 
pubs, many of which offer paid gigs. Respect the local buskers and homeless, 
making space for others by playing quietly. Rose Street’s clientele loves to 
sing along, so channeling bass-playing legend Jaco Pastorius with your 
four-string and a loop pedal is a waste of energy. Play short sets and embrace 
a pub-crawl strategy, sampling the atmosphere at each of the street’s 
establishment. TheSocial Bite <http://social-bite.co.uk/> serves wholesome 
lunches with a rewards system that feeds those on the streets, andWolfits 
<http://www.wolfits.co.uk/> lives up to the name. Other culinary highlights 
includeMeze Meze <http://www.mezemezeedinburgh.com/>, Mussel Inn Seafood 
<http://www.mussel-inn.com/> and The Black Rose 
<http://www.blackrosetavern.com/>. Princes Street is a noisier and busier 
alternative, but equally busker-friendly if you can navigate the bagpipers. 
Views of the castle can be an added bonus, especially when blockades of 
tourists with selfie sticks inadvertently boost your crowd.

Old Town

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdab151b63c2be2dc528760c9733ae895d78c6a0a%2F0_0_1080_804%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20busker%E2%80%99s%20eye%20view%20of%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20busker%E2%80%99s%20eye%20view%20of%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdab151b63c2be2dc528760c9733ae895d78c6a0a%2F0_0_1080_804%2F1080.jpg>
 Union of Genius 
The Old Town is postcard Edinburgh and the hub of the fringe. The Royal Mile 
is the main thoroughfare to the castle and during August is a jungle of flyers 
for shows, with street performer everywhere. Busking is regulated here, with a 
licence fee, but the large crowds are worth it. This is festival ground zero 
and for seasoned, outlandish or outstanding buskers only: plagiarising the 
Gallagher brothers will not cut it here. If a licence fee scares you, or Oasis 
really is your thing, try the steps above the National Gallery and on Cockburn 
Street at the cork end of a bottlenecked audience. Arty, “out there” acts 
should go to George Square or the Meadows, Edinburgh’s University district and 
its answer to Hyde Park.Union of Genius <http://www.unionofgenius.com/> does 
incredible soup at great value, sometimes teaming up with theReal Junk Food 
Project <https://www.facebook.com/trjfpEdinburgh/>, so you can eat cheaply and 
deprive the wheelie bins of a feast.

Local culture and open-mic venues: where to see live music between your own 
sets
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77ff848972a87a6bed9be4abf94b52dfa9f6ded4%2F0_47_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20busker%E2%80%99s%20eye%20view%20of%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20busker%E2%80%99s%20eye%20view%20of%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77ff848972a87a6bed9be4abf94b52dfa9f6ded4%2F0_47_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
 Bannermans pub. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Pressure Valve
Hosting live events four days a week, the musical showcase that is Pressure 
Valve offers some of Edinburgh’s best talent in a diverse range of intimate 
venues, such asBannerman’s <http://www.bannermanslive.co.uk/> rock bar and the 
rusticBlind Poet <http://blindpoet.co.uk/bar/>. Its daytime events are open to 
all ages and attract a friendly crowd with an unpredictable mix of aspiring and 
established musicians. Pressure Valve’s events are an integral part of 
Edinburgh’s music scene – and a great place to meet collaborators.

Whistlebinkies
Outside of the festival period, Whistlebinkies 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhistleBinkiesEdinburgh/> is one of the only places 
to find live music after the pubs shut at 1am. With relaxed, traditional decor 
and a diverse clientele, ‘Binkies provides the perfect setting to enjoy lively 
music. Monday nights arguably feature the city’s most popular open-mic night, 
although new venue,Stramash <http://stramashedinburgh.com/>, is hot on its 
heels every Tuesday.Clerk’s <http://clerksbar.com/> on a Thursday is another 
stalwart. Getting down early is a must: the slots are as elusive as a wild 
haggis. Be sure to indulge in a post-Binkies Pizza Paradise (no website, 0131 
557 4905), open until 5am next door – the only better (or more arduous) way to 
conclude your night is to climb Arthur’s Seat and watch the sun rise.

Brass Monkey Cinema 
Tucked away on Drummond Street, just off “the Bridges” (South bridge, not the 
Forth), lies student favourite the Brass Monkey (no website, 0131 556 1961). It 
has one of the cosiest rooms in Edinburgh, conveniently installed with a home 
cinema. Movies are shown at 3pm every day among a midden of cushions, 
mattresses and posters. Revitalise with a coffee atBlack Medicine Coffee Co 
<http://www.blackmed.co.uk/> or Brew Lab <http://www.brewlabcoffee.co.uk/>. 
Alternatively, reflect upon the film’s directorial genius in the quad of the 
beautiful Edinburgh Law School or join a rousing folky jam at theCaptain’s Bar 
<http://captainsedinburgh.webs.com/>.

Party like a local
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ed4d6c4fa6e07bb7feb8fc5bd0d86d63f0e8d37%2F307_0_3725_2236%2F3725.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20busker%E2%80%99s%20eye%20view%20of%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20busker%E2%80%99s%20eye%20view%20of%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20survive%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbuskers-eye-view-of-edinburgh-festival-and-how-to-survive-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ed4d6c4fa6e07bb7feb8fc5bd0d86d63f0e8d37%2F307_0_3725_2236%2F3725.jpg>
 Sneaky Pete’s 
A full day of busking can easily merge into a night of drinking. During the 
fringe, clubs licences are extended until 5am, making festival time the peak 
season for Edinburgh’s nightlife. The festival also brings a wealth of new 
venues, such as theUdderbelly 
<http://www.underbelly.co.uk/what-we-do/our-festivals/underbelly-at-the-edinburgh-fringe>
, George Square Gardens andSpiegeltent 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/venues/the-famous-spiegeltent> – however, 
marquees and plastic cups can only satisfy for so long.

A sure-fire way to divide Edinburgh’s locals with a passion for partying into 
two camps is to ask: “George Street or Cowgate?” If you hit it big busking and 
your idea of a night well spent is ordering Grey Goose by the litre to a Top 40 
soundtrack, then George Street clubs such asOpal Lounge 
<http://www.opallounge.co.uk/>, Lola Lo <http://www.lolaloedinburgh.com/> and 
Lulu <http://www.luluedinburgh.co.uk/> can provide an ambience of decadence to 
varying degrees of success. If, however, this makes you feel cold inside, I 
suggest making your way to the Cowgate.

Home to famous fringe venues, Cowgate also boasts renowned clubs such as 
Cabaret Voltaire <http://www.thecabaretvoltaire.com/> and Sneaky Pete’s 
<http://sneakypetes.co.uk/>. These venues host a mix of internationally 
renowned DJs and a regular selection of rising and established local talent. 
Once you’re flowing with jovial crowds under atmospheric arches and dodging up 
closes (“alleyway” to non-Scots) to avoid wayward rickshaws on your way to sing 
rock karaoke atOpium <http://opiumedinburgh.co.uk/>, I’m sure you’ll see why it 
is the east’s favourite place to let loose.

One last song?

The natural reverb of Cowgate’s archways could make Ozzy sound angelic. 
Nocturnal busking in the Cowgate can be lucrative and a lot of fun, just don’t 
compromise the vibraphone guy: he’s an institution. Club-goers appreciate 
exotic or danceable acts but if you’ve got brass, Ring of Fire goes down a 
treat. There is always an after-party to be found, or alternatively you can 
blag your way into Cab Vol’s backroom as the DJ’s live percussionist – you 
might wake up in the Hilton’s honeymoon suite with a Turner prize-winner and 
upcoming BBC comic, but chances are it’ll be the 7th hole of the Meadows pitch 
and putt, with fewer strings on your guitar than Seasick Steve.
 