
If British food in general was the laughing stock of Europe 30 years ago, I 
dread to think how the north-west of England in particular was viewed. We had 
our Eccles cakes and Chorley cakes, and our Bury black pudding, but it's not 
very sexy.

We've always done other stuff brilliantly in the north-west: art, music, 
fashion, design, clubbing, brawling … But we never quite got that combination 
of cool and quality right where food is concerned. But things have changed 
around here over the past couple of years, and we have a load of places to be 
proud of.

OK, you could argue that some of it is a northern interpretation of a London 
thang. The Venetian small plates atCicchetti  
<http://www.sancarlocicchetti.co.uk/news/>on the ground floor of House of 
Fraser in Manchester may have been inspired by Polpo.Almost Famous 
<http://almostfamousburgers.com/> – whose Manchester gaff was sadly destroyed 
by fire 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/live-fire-famous-manchesters-northern-4731535>
, but which now has a new site on Liverpool's Parr Street – may owe something 
to MeatLiquor. But the important thing is how well a concept is executed, and 
it is precisely this that is changing in the north-west.

There is little more cringeworthy than a trend badly replicated (remember the 
crimes committed against good taste in the name of "fusion") but we are now 
seeing much more substance over style, and high-concept dining offered with 
real skill. What's even more exciting is that, once a few places of real 
quality get going, it is catching: everyone works hard to keep up, and 
standards rise all over.

All the more reason to be happy that Manchester is now home to a Simon Rogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/observer-food-monthly-awards/simon-rogan> 
restaurant, theFrench <http://www.the-french.co.uk/> at the Midland Hotel 
(three courses £29). His flagship Cartmel restaurantL'Enclume 
<http://www.lenclume.co.uk/sr/restaurant.html> has been doing beautiful and 
innovative things with food for over a decade, and it is a delight to have a 
chef of his class in our city. So many people said a Michelin-starred 
restaurant couldn't survive in Manchester. I am almost certain that Mr Rogan is 
about to prove them wrong.
 Simon Rogan's The French at the Midland Hotel 
Umezushi <http://umezushi.co.uk/> (sushi from £3, hot dishes £12) is a 
fabulous sushi joint under the railway arches near Victoria station. It is in 
such an unlikely location that on several occasions I have struggled to 
convince taxi drivers to take me there. The restaurant is tiny, with maybe 20 
seats, so booking is advisable. I've been three times this year out of the, 
ooh, five or six times I've actually gone out. The sushi and sashimi are the 
freshest and best I've had in forever, the specials are always interesting 
(burdock root, crispy pig's ear, sole pirate ship!) and the Japanese wine is 
excellent, as is the sake. Plus, it is the work of two plucky young things who 
sought to provide excellent food and drink while operating on a shoestring, and 
I applaud that.

Food shopping round these parts has been on the up for some time – we now have 
a few Waitroses, and aBooths <http://www.booths.co.uk/stores/> at MediaCity. 
But the local markets are the best bet for interesting local produce. As well 
as permanent markets, there are regular farmers' markets. Find them at
localfoods.org.uk/local-food-directory 
<http://www.localfoods.org.uk/all-local-foods-map-uk>.

I may be biased as it is my home town, but I think Bury Market 
<http://www.burymarket.com> is the best for food. A sign outside states that it 
is "World Famous", which used to make us weep with laughter as schoolchildren. 
I mean, the hubris! It stank! That was the 1980s though; it really is very good 
nowadays. Check out the website intro. Turn it up loud.

We use Brian Iddon's fruit and veg stall a fair bit, as much of the produce is 
grown on their farm up near the Fylde estuary, and the rest comes from their 
neighbours. The fish and game stands just behind Brian's stall are also very 
good, and of course there are the black pudding stalls, cheesemongers and 
butchers.

Katsouris deli <http://www.burymarket.com/stalls/katsouris/index.html> (23-25 
Market Square), just around the corner from the main outdoor market, is a Bury 
institution and I know many that swear by its hot pork roll. Mr Katsouris 
himself is delightfully grumpy. If you are lucky, he might even tut at you for 
joining the wrong queue (it's a confusing system, OK, Mr Katsouris? That's why 
so many of us go in the wrong queue. It is not solely to piss you off. At 
least, it wasn't the first couple of times …)
 Fraiche in Birkenhead: 'Quite how Marc Wilkinson produces such exciting and 
exquisite food with no assistance, blows my mind' 
If my wallet, my restaurant and my children would allow, I'd make the hour's 
trip toFraiche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/mar/23/fraiche-oxton-wirral-restaurant-review>
 (0151 652 2914,restaurantfraiche.com <http://www.restaurantfraiche.com/>, 
three courses £35) in Birkenhead every week. Quite how Marc Wilkinson produces 
such exciting and exquisite food with no assistance, blows my mind. I have had 
meals there that easily match and may even out-do many two-Michelin-star 
establishments: every course is so well thought out, and then so well executed 
that ... that … it makes me feel a bit angry inside. But mainly I love eating 
there and think Marc is an incredible talent. Due to its size (tiny restaurants 
seem to be a bit of a thing round here) and its popularity, it isn't always 
easy to get a table at Fraiche, so book weeks or months in advance.

The Parker's Arms at Newton-in-Bowland (01200 446236, parkersarms.co.uk 
<http://www.parkersarms.co.uk/>) is well worth a trip. It takes just over an 
hour from Manchester, and the drive up through Lancashire is beautiful, if 
often a bit drizzly. The landscape gets more dramatic north of Clitheroe and 
there sometimes comes a point, as you are exactly in the middle of nowhere, 
when you lose mobile signal and the sat nav stops working. But that's kind of 
exciting.

Perservere, and you will find the perfect country pub. Owner Stosie Madi is a 
fabulous cook, and a fabulous woman. She produces such great food because she 
is a real enthusiast, concentrating on finding exceptional produce and treating 
it real nice. Whatever the time of year, you'll be offered the best produce 
from right on their doorstep (the lucky buggers have excellent farms and 
producers all around), cooked with love and care. The fires are nearly always 
lit, and the welcome is equally warm. You can't really ask more from a country 
pub. Oh, and the wine list is top-notch, too.

Finally, Ramsbottom. I grew up near here and though once upon a time its pubs 
were mainly for fighting, that has now changed. TheShoulder of Mutton 
<http://www.theshoulderofmutton.net/> (mains from £11.96), the Hearth of the Ram
 <http://www.hearthoftheram.com/> (01706 828681, hearthoftheram.com, mains from 
£12.95) and theEagle and Child <http://eagle-and-child.com/> (01706 55718, 
eagle-and-child.com, mains from £9.95) are all doing great stuff with local 
produce. There is also a decent chippy and an excellent south Indian restaurant,
 Sanminis.

And then there's Ramsons <http://www.ramsons-restaurant.com> (mains from 
£11.50) a place close to my heart as I spent two years prior to opening Aumbry 
working there. I really like its downstairs Hideaway restaurant. You get the 
same incredible Italian wine list as in the main restaurant, but the food is 
more rustic Italian: beautiful cured meats, cheeses and fresh pasta, as well as 
slow-roast meats and stews. It is a tiny, dimly lit, cellar-like room, perfect 
for those cold nights we have coming our way soon.
 Mary-Ellen McTague at Aumbry 
• Mary-Ellen McTague is chef and co-owner of Aumbry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/28/restaurant-review-aumbry-prestwich>
 (0161-798 5841,aumbryrestaurant.co.uk <http://www.aumbryrestaurant.co.uk>) in 
Prestwich
 