
“I see you’ve got a bit of water on your coat,” said the man at the petrol 
station. “Is it raining out there?” “No, it’s pretty nice,” I replied, checking 
my sleeve. “Oh, right. A pony bit me earlier. It looks like it left some 
drool.” I worry that I could be getting a reputation at this petrol station 
where, only the previous week, after a woodland walk, I’d emptied around a 
dozen pieces of kindling from my pocket on to the counter in order to locate a 
pound coin to pay for a packet of crisps. Then again, perhaps not: the petrol 
station is on the edge of Dartmoor, a place where you have to put some serious 
work before you get a reputation. “Did it hurt?” asked the man.


 As it happened, the bite was virtually painless: more the kind of small, 
ineffectual nip you might get from a spoilt child. The pony responsible was 
queuing up for some ice cream at the time in the car park nearHaytor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haytor>, and perhaps thought I’d jumped in ahead 
of him. I’d always wondered who was crazy enough to buy ice cream from the ice 
cream vans in the car parks on Dartmoor in February, and now I had the answer: 
it was ponies. Especially one of the ponies who like to hang around Haytor, 
who, according to Charlotte Faulkner, founder of theDartmoor Hill Pony 
Association <http://www.friendsofthedartmoorhillpony.co.uk>, are some of the 
most “arsey and tame” ponies on the moor.

 The reason the ponies near Haytor are arsey and tame is because Haytor is one 
of the most tourist-heavy areas of Dartmoor and tourists are constantly feeding 
the ponies snacks, despite signs asking them not to. By feeding the ponies, 
tourists increase the risk of them getting hit by a car, and make them harder 
to round up during the area’s annual pony drift. “I went and told a car full of 
them off the other day,” Tony, a farmer from near Buckfastleigh, told me. “They 
were parked in the middle of the road with the window down, feeding some ponies 
a tube of Pringles.”

The purpose of a pony drift on Dartmoor is to round them up so their health 
can be checked, the foals among them can be weaned, and those who’ve strayed 
can be returned to their correct area. Some of them are also subsequently sold, 
in order to keep the numbers of ponies on each common in accordance with the 
rules set by Natural England. What a lot of people don’t know is that every 
pony on Dartmoor belongs to a specific farmer (Tony and his wife, for example, 
own more than dozen).

The Haytor drift, which Charlotte invited me to join in with, is one of the 
simpler drifts, in the sense that it takes place over a relatively small area 
of ground, but it’s difficult due to the spoilt, recalcitrant nature of the 
ponies here and the amount of half-term sunny day traffic. There’s also the 
added hitch that the field where it used to conclude is now privately owned. In 
other words, the ponies no longer have an ingrained sense of where to go when 
they’re rounded up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fa-close-encounter-with-the-arsey-ponies-of-dartmoor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424777283936%2F8add88db-52a1-4cc3-98bb-53913dbbbae7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20close%20encounter%20with%20the%20'arsey'%20ponies%20of%20Dartmoor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fa-close-encounter-with-the-arsey-ponies-of-dartmoor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20close%20encounter%20with%20the%20%27arsey%27%20ponies%20of%20Dartmoor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fa-close-encounter-with-the-arsey-ponies-of-dartmoor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424777283936%2F8add88db-52a1-4cc3-98bb-53913dbbbae7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Up close and personal with the Dartmoor ponies. Photograph: Tom Cox 
 Giving us our instructions today was a middle-aged farmer people referred to 
as “Mr Retallick”: a man with small glasses and a slight demeanour of the 
leader of a heist in a grainy, low-lit 1970s film. Charlotte told me he has his 
own words for some of the areas here, and his advice to us was full of rich 
topographical language: “Seven Lords”, “Yarner Bank”, “Leighon Valley”.

The people doing the hardest work rode a mixture of horses and quad bikes. The 
likes of myself, meanwhile, served as peripheral foot soldiers: my main job 
being to stand halfway up Saddle Tor, about a quarter mile south west of the 
start point, and wave my arms and shout at the ponies if they hurtled past. An 
hour and a half into the drift four of them did, in spectacular fashion. This 
was essentially the nearest I’d ever got to being in the Black Hills of South 
Dakota in 1864. “I’m getting quite emotional watching it,” said Kerry, a 
passing walker. She gestured at the traffic and tourists below. “Isn’t it a 
disaster waiting to happen?”


 I’d witnessed another small pony-themed near-disaster a three weeks 
previously a few miles west of here, on Yartor Down. Whilst walking, I’d 
noticed a pony roll over on his back, about forty yards from the path I was on. 
“Hello!” I said to it, in the fake posh voice I always use when addressing 
horses, ponies or medium-sized attractive dogs. I assumed he was just rolling 
for fun, but he was very still and, as I got closer, his legs stayed in the air 
and he didn’t seem at all affected by my presence. He kicked his legs again but 
stayed in the same position, breathing heavily, and I began to properly worry 
about him. Fortunately, I was in one of the few spots on Dartmoor where my 
phone gets reception and managed to get in touch with Karla McKechnie,
Dartmoor’s Livestock Protection <http://www.dlps.org.uk/> officer, and send her 
a photo. Karla thought the position of the pony’s legs suggested that he might 
be ill or in trouble.

 I gave Karla the OS map reference and she sent a local farmer out to check on 
the pony. An hour later I received a call explaining that the pony had actually 
been trapped between two rocks, but the farmer had now freed him, and he was 
trotting happily around again, chewing on bracken. I was relieved, but 
surprised: Surely Dartmoor ponies were hardy and experienced enough to avoid 
getting trapped between rocks? Perhaps the pony in question was just a bit 
inept, and did this a lot? The other, more hillwise ponies around him certainly 
seemed a bit casual about his troubles. Their attitude seemed a bit: “Oh, 
there’s Greg again, with his drama and pratfalls. I’m not going to rise to it. 
I’m just going to carry on eating and ignore him.”

 After assisting in rescuing Greg I immediately began to get more interested 
in Dartmoor’s 1,000 or so ponies: the crucial role they play in creating 
biodiversity on the moor, the way their hooves are specifically evolved to 
break down the gorse, the way their bracken-chewing has boosted the population 
of rare butterflies and other fauna. Every time I talked to anyone I knew who 
lived on the moor, Charlotte’s name, and the brilliant work she is doing to 
preserve Dartmoor’s ponies, seemed to come up. After less than an hour in her 
company I’d got a clear sense of her immense energy, hurtling from tor to tor 
over tussocky ground, hearing her alternately shouting instructions into her 
walkie talkie and explaining her plans to find a sustainable future for one of 
the the moor’s most financially-troubled elements.

 It was, however, proving to be a difficult drift. By early afternoon, the 
stretch of craggy, marshy ground between Haytor and Saddle Tor resembled a 
giant quad bike graveyard. One particularly forlorn specimen lay abandoned 
tyre-deep. As Charlotte drove me back to my car, the four mischievous ponies 
who’d galloped so close to me earlier made a break for it, directly to our 
right, and Charlotte tried to head them off. “These,” she somehow managed to 
eloquently explain to me at the same time, “are what I call ‘immaculate 
conception’ foals. We’ve paid £5,000 to clear this area of stallions yet they 
still appear.” “So you’ve actually seen the stallions?” I asked. “Oh yes,” she 
said, “I’ve seen them in a line, queuing up for a bonk.” She also told me of 
the roots of her love of riding: “It all started before I was born, when my mum 
was a little girl and my grandparents found her in the field, riding the family 
cow.”

 Here was as clear an example of the two sides of the moor, side by side, that 
I’d seen: the one some tourists view as a really wild reality theme park and 
the one occupied by hardworking, weather-bitten people, fighting to preserve a 
way of life. Only 30 out of 80 ponies had made it to the pen, but the day was 
bright and invigorating and nobody appeared glum or jaded.

Before I got in the car, Charlotte pointed up towards the hill beyond the 
disused quarries behind Haytor. “Oh, gosh, she’s still up there,” she said. 
“She’s going to be tired tonight.” I followed the direction of Charlotte’s hand 
and saw a lone figure on a horse, belting at great speed across the ridge, in 
pursuit of four ponies. It was one of her daughters, Ginny. The far-off 
silhouette of horse and tenacious rider, and their escaping targets, against 
these wild magical hills, could have been an image from a forgotten film. 
Seeing it here in Britain, in three dimensions, in 2015, whilst standing next 
to a brightly coloured van selling 99 Flakes, felt like a surreal, thoughtful 
gift.

For more info on the Dartmoor Hill Pony Association, please visit 
http://www.dartmoorhillpony.com <http://www.dartmoorhillpony.com>. Tom Cox’s 
latest book,The Good, the Bad and the Furry is published by Little Brown 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/genres/nature-environment/good-the-bad-and-the-furry.html>
. Follow him on Twitter @cox_tom <http://www.twitter.com/@cox_tom>.

 