
There was no way known, between the broadest fields of God’s green earth and 
the seventh circle of hell, that India was ever going to host a World Cup match 
against Pakistan in Dharamsala.

 At first we simply accepted the impossible as plausible. So many people, like 
Perseus multiplied into the thousands, planned their epic journeys around 
tracking down this Pegasus.

 Wow, we said. The biggest game at the smallest venue. This meeting of the 
substantial and the picturesque. Such a moment in such a different setting, 
high in the Himalayas rather than an urban cauldron. It was visionary.

 Then we acted surprised to be informed that horses don’t have wings.

New Zealand’s Mitchell McClenaghan stars in World T20 win over Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/new-zealand-australia-world-twenty20>
 On arrival in Dharamsala, the picture cleared immediately. The drive up from 
Chandigarh took all night. On unpaved sections the bus lurched and thumped with 
the grace of a foraging pachyderm. The sealed sections were too bent to be 
described as racy.

 We arrived in mid-tier Dharamsala at dawn. The place is laid out in levels. 
Down the hill are slightly flatter residential areas. In the other direction, 
referred to simply as “upside”, is the McLeodganj part, where everyone is 
learning to be a yoga instructor and the Dalai Lama hangs out to bestow his 
wisdom on how to match orange with any outfit.

 Getting up there on the first evening to find a beer, the narrow track 
twisted and folded back on itself like the plot of Inception. It had been 
raining for days, and half of the road uphill seemed to have been washed into 
the road downhill.

 Our tiny hatchback taxi scrambled up the slopes and scree and switchbacks 
with the tenacity of a mountain goat, headlights picking out disquieting 
glimpses of eroded banks or overhanging trees.

 The Australian team was staying somewhere on this level. After the 17-point 
turns their bus made to inch down the slope on its first descent, they insisted 
on coming down in cars. Then the ICC insisted the bus was compulsory for 
security reasons. It wouldn’t have had much prospect of a quick getaway. 
Slightly more chance of that in a goat-taxi.

On our way back down, the driver asked if we wanted to take a shortcut. Where 
the principal road switched back and forth tracking the slope, he whipped his 
wrists like VVS Laxman and dropped us into an alley more like a laundry chute, 
a straight drop where we flew past bins and buildings and stacked goods, 
scattering glint-eyed dogs on our way.

The ground is excellent: spacious, well equipped, and you can’t doubt the 
effect of a good view

 We bombed out of this lane having surely shed 100 metres in altitude, then 
straight across the main road and into the driveway of my hotel.

 Imagine 25,000 people ascending to this place, packing it past capacity. Four 
times that number registered to buy the tickets on sale. Extras would doubtless 
show up to chance their hand. Imagine the buses, the convoys, making the climb.

 Tiny roads twist intestinally around the stadium, a couple of kilometres 
further down the hill, with no obvious way there or back. You pick your way 
through the labyrinth of puddles and duckboards and fences and walls and 
quagmires. Then you hit the gates.

 “Sorry sir, you can’t come inside without a pass.”

 “I know, I’m supposed to pick it up from this ground.”

 “OK, so you need to ask an ICC official.”

 “Where are the ICC officials?”

 “Inside the ground.”

“Right, so can I speak to one of them?”

“Sorry sir, you can’t come inside without a pass.”

 I kicked back in the rain and Himalayan cold for two hours, while someone 
asked someone to ask someone to pass a message to someone to call someone to 
get someone to send someone down to go back and get someone else to tell 
another guy to send someone with the precious lanyard.

 I was a solitary human on a pre-game day, with all the relevant documents, an 
easily located body of work, and a fairly verifiable head. Now imagine a 
stadium’s worth of people arriving for the highest-security game of the year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fa-cricket-writers-journey-to-the-remote-world-twenty20-venue-of-dharamsala%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba67629c0285514b2a41581b35c610004f8fb223%2F0_0_3404_2160%2F3404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20cricket%20writer's%20journey%20to%20the%20remote%20World%20Twenty20%20venue%20of%20Dharamsala%20%7C%20Geoff%20Lemon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fa-cricket-writers-journey-to-the-remote-world-twenty20-venue-of-dharamsala%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20cricket%20writer%27s%20journey%20to%20the%20remote%20World%20Twenty20%20venue%20of%20Dharamsala%20%7C%20Geoff%20Lemon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fa-cricket-writers-journey-to-the-remote-world-twenty20-venue-of-dharamsala%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba67629c0285514b2a41581b35c610004f8fb223%2F0_0_3404_2160%2F3404.jpg>
 Fans sat on a wall to see over the fence and catch a glimpse of the match 
between Australia and New Zealand at HPCA Stadium in Dharamsala. Photograph: 
Ryan Pierse/Getty Images 
 The ground is excellent: spacious, well equipped, and you can’t doubt the 
effect of a good view. There is strong lobbying for Dharamshala’s maiden Test 
when Australia tour in 2017. I’d like to be there, and not just so that I have 
five days to get inside.

 But surely, no one ever believed an India-Pakistan game would go ahead. Every 
time there is so much back and forth, demand and counter-demand, not just from 
the cricket boards, but from politicians, lobby groups, terrorist 
organisations, the works.

 On the eve of the tournament, Pakistan news outlet Dawn was reporting that 
the nation’s squad “is due to leave for India by Wednesday but the government 
has said that it can’t go until a security delegation goes to India on Monday 
and gives clearance”.

 Dharamsala would have been an easy concession to make; something to make 
agitators of various stripes think they had influenced change. Indian 
colleagues saidthe match in Kolkata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/india-pakistan-world-twenty-20-match-report>
 was the best organised they had ever seen: traffic wardens, streamlined 
security, and a huge crowd in before the scheduled start. Almost as if it were 
planned well in advance.

 That theory aside, there are also the complicating factors of Indian internal 
politics,as laid out by Siddarth Monga 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/icc-world-twenty20-2016/content/story/980843.html> 
in what might have been sabotage by the state’s chief minister against the head 
of its cricket association.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fa-cricket-writers-journey-to-the-remote-world-twenty20-venue-of-dharamsala%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe753776698e13892a8e9982de72c5dce4d6c907f%2F245_121_1686_3048%2F1686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20cricket%20writer's%20journey%20to%20the%20remote%20World%20Twenty20%20venue%20of%20Dharamsala%20%7C%20Geoff%20Lemon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fa-cricket-writers-journey-to-the-remote-world-twenty20-venue-of-dharamsala%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20cricket%20writer%27s%20journey%20to%20the%20remote%20World%20Twenty20%20venue%20of%20Dharamsala%20%7C%20Geoff%20Lemon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fa-cricket-writers-journey-to-the-remote-world-twenty20-venue-of-dharamsala%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe753776698e13892a8e9982de72c5dce4d6c907f%2F245_121_1686_3048%2F1686.jpg>
 Ashton Agar cut a forlorn figure during Australia’s match in Dharamsala. 
Photograph: Ryan Pierse/Getty Images, 
 Who knows. If the BCCI really didn’t have a plan in Dharamsala, neither did 
the Australian cricket team. Its coaches and selectors have never nailed T20. 
Or the choices they’ve made have never come off.

 Like Ashton Agar, who played most of the last Big Bash as a batsman for 
Perth, bowled only an over here and there, and has almost never bowled in the 
Powerplay in his career.

 Then he walked out for Australia, listed to bat at No9, and was handed the 
ball for the third over of the match. He duly sent down two full tosses, went 
for 18 from the over, and was dragged for the rest of the game.

 Or Adam Zampa, a leg-spinner batting at last man in, who bowled one over for 
three runs. He was preferred to John Hastings, a seamer with a superpower of 
chipping batsmen out on slow pitches, who has the capacity to smash 20 from an 
over and win a game.

 Either the wrong bowlers were picked, or the captain lacks the faith to use 
them.

 Then there were batsmen getting out over and again trying to hit sixes on a 
wicket that did not support the endeavour. Ten Australians hit four fours 
between them, two of those inside edges from attempted slogs.

 So the game passed from view, and with it a fair chunk of Australia’s 
prospects of progression. India and Pakistan were spared the claggy wicket, 
only to get a turner in Kolkata. If Ravindra Jadeja is turning it a foot, you 
know things are drastic.

 In Dharamsala that morning, a handful of media folk milled around in a car 
park as a thunderstorm grumbled in a bleak sky. By the time we were driving 
down the mountain it opened up in artillery-grade hail, chunks of ice beating 
down on the car.

 Within seconds the road was a ski run, small cars pulling to the side to 
avoid disaster while our more substantial vehicle ploughed down the slope.

 We were close enough to the forefront to make it through. Behind us came 
reports of the airport closing, flights being delayed, cars crashing, roads 
being blocked, players and journalists trapped, torrents of water turning 
everything to deconstructed papier mâché.

 Now, those 25,000 people you imagined before. Imagine them that morning, 
trying to ascend the mountain. Imagine the flights that wouldn’t have arrived. 
The people trying to get to the ground. The dirt porridge surrounding it, the 
bogged cars, the blockages.

 Imagine two teams with intense security teams agreeing to find their way 
through the mess. Imagine any chance that they would have bothered. Imagine 
them being lifted out by chopper straight to the nearest airport.

 There is no way Dharamsala was ever going to host that match. If they somehow 
had, given the events of the day, it would have been a perfect disaster. Even 
Pegasus could be grounded by a big enough hailstorm.
 