
Finnieston was once just a port of call for dockworkers in search of less 
salubrious entertainment, but it is now home to the sparkling newSSE Hydro arena
 <http://www.thessehydro.com/default.aspx>, a key venue constructed for this 
summer's Commonwealth Games. Following decades of post-industrial decline, 
Finnieston is on the up, with low rents attracting an influx of younger blood, 
and a stretch of Argyle Street now called "The Strip" coming alive with pop-up 
bars and eclectic restaurants, plus myriad artistic outlets and events. The 
word you keep hearing here is "community". Finnieston has a real sense of one.

Kick off where it all began for Finnieston – down on the banks of the city's 
artery, the River Clyde, at theRiverside Museum 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/museums/riverside/Pages/default.aspx>, home to 
the Museum of Transport. VotedMuseum of the Year 2013 by the European Museum 
Forum 
<http://www.europeanmuseumforum.info/component/content/article/3-emya-award/76-emya-2013-awards-and-emf-annual-assembly.html>
, the Riverside is worth visiting for the drama ofZaha Hadid's spiky, 
steel-clad architectural creation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2011/jun/01/architecture-zaha-hadid>
 alone. Delve inside to wander down a full-size recreation of a Glasgow street, 
ride an old subway car and clamber on steam trains. There's also a 
cafe/restaurant that peers out over the Clyde. Few visitors check out theTall 
Ship <http://www.thetallship.com/>, which is moored alongside. You should, as 
it really brings the city's halcyon shipbuilding days to life.

Follow the banks of Glasgow's "other river", the lesser-known Kelvin, from its 
mouth by the Riverside Museum north to Argyle Street, whose western fringes 
form Finnieston's emerging "Strip". The retroKelvingrove Café 
<http://www.kelvingrovecafe.com/> is part diner/part cocktail den and also 
functions as an unofficial Finnieston social club, where you can glean the 
lowdown on the latest events and pop-up venues. Grab a coveted booth by the 
window. Its vermouth-heavy, stirred-not-shaken cocktails are worth coming back 
for.

The Gannet <http://www.thegannetgla.com/> restaurant is both brilliantly 
Glasgow and brilliantly Finnieston. It's fashioned from a practically derelict 
building, and you can gaze out through floor-to-ceiling windows in the bar or 
head into the exposed stone and wood of the dining room. Fresh and local is the 
mantra, with west-coast razor clams and Scottish Borders lamb the stars.

For something simpler, nip across the road to another newcomer, Old Salty's 
<http://www.oldsaltys.co.uk/> . This self-styled "traditional chippy" serves 
all things battered with chips (it's called a "supper" in these parts) with a 
dash of retro charm. For a lighter option, try the king scallops topped with 
onion and curry sauce.
 The Gannet. Photograph: Robin McKelvie 
The recent temporary relocation of some university operations to Finnieston 
has given the local cultural scene a boost. The Hidden Lane 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheHiddenLane> is home to a collage of galleries and 
studios, includingChouchou Couture <http://www.chouchoucouture.com/>, whose 
Italian designer, Silvia Pellegrino, gives the Glasgow hoodie a revamp with 
elegance and a touch of tartan. It's advisable to call ahead to book a fitting.

Pop downstairs afterwards to the just-right-side-of-twee Hidden Lane Tearoom 
<http://thehiddenlanetearoom.blogspot.co.uk/>, with its elegant vintage 
crockery and mocha laced with flakes of Belgian chocolate.The Shop of Interest 
<http://www.theshopofinterest.co.uk/> across the road, a kooky fashion art 
boutique and gallery, is one of the select places that stock Pellegrino's 
hoodies.

Gents in need of a cool Finnieston trim and a cocktail should head for Soul 
Barber Room <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Soul-Barber-Room/359530614127203>, 
where you get a complimentary rum and mango cocktail and a generous slice of 
Glaswegian patter along with your mop crop. Look out for its soul music events, 
too.
 Crabshakk. Photograph: Robin McKelvie 
In Finnieston, banal metallic-tasting lagers and dodgy, blended whiskies are 
eschewed in favour of cocktails in vintage glasses, with every new hotspot 
offering an eclectic range.The Finnieston <http://www.thefinniestonbar.com/> is 
the brainchild of man-about-town Graham Suttle, who evokes the spirit of the 
area. His gin cocktail bar stocks more than 60 gins, and the restaurant 
specialises in Scottish seafood; try the seafarer's cocktail, made with 
seaweed-infused fino sherry and best enjoyed with a couple of freshly shucked, 
local West Kilbride oysters on the side.

Finnieston makes the most of its country's natural larder. Relative old-timer 
Crabshakk <http://www.crabshakk.com/> is always busy, and no wonder with 
boat-fresh seafood. The best value is itsfruits de mer platter. It may cost 
£70, but it is more than enough for two, heaving with clams, mussels, lobster, 
oysters and, of course, crab. If you are in a group, book the 12-seat private 
dining room and share a whole halibut (there is no room charge). Carnivores 
should wander over to theButchershop Bar & Grill 
<http://www.butchershopglasgow.com/> on Sauchiehall Street, where you will be 
shown all the steak cuts before ordering. New this year is the epic Tomahawk, 
basically a quartet of ribeye steaks on the bone that can weigh anything up to 
2kg.
 Old Salty's. Photograph: Robin McKelvie 
Opened in December 2013, One of a Kind (1116 Argyle Street, no website) is the 
more permanent manifestation of a legendary pop-up bar by a Glasgow-London 
collaboration. It feels urban and edgy, with minimal red lighting and a 
stripped-down bar list offering one variety of every spirit – only Hendrick's 
gin, only Luksusowa vodka and so on.

Local's tip

Ervin Trykowski, Captain of Liquids, The Finnieston The Electric Frog 
<http://www.theelectricfrog.co.uk/> is the hottest club event in Finnieston. 
It's at the super-coolSWG3 Studio Warehouse (swg3.tv) <http://www.swg3.tv/>, an 
arts facility and studio space for more than 120 artists, photographers, 
musicians and dancers. Look out for the Electric Frog Festival in August, too, 
down at the Riverside Museum – there will be three outdoor stages, comedy on 
the Tall Ship and plenty of street food.

Where to stay

Bar the international chains near concert and conference venues, Finnieston is 
short on hotels.The Alamo Guest House <http://www.alamoguesthouse.com/> 
(doubles from £52) is a more characterful 12-room bolthole, combining old-world 
decor with mod cons. For a touch of decadence, Room 12 has a standalone bath 
and a Louis XV bed (from £85 a night). There is also a two-bedroom holiday flat 
that sleeps six.
 