
The 2016 presidential race may be a whole new ballgame in terms of 
fundraising, but most of the players’ names are awfully familiar – even if 
their faces are a bit more lined.

Five Republican candidates to vie for Koch brothers backing at donor retreat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/01/republican-candidates-koch-brothers-backing-donor-retreat>
Very few of the top donors to the super PACs backing one of the many GOP White 
House hopefuls or handful of Democratic candidates are new to giving 
substantial political gifts, according to a review of Federal Election 
Commission data by the Center for Responsive Politics, and many have been 
active for decades.

The relative absence of new faces in the very small pool of really big donors 
magnifies the impact of ultra-wealthy individuals who have been participating 
in the process for years – theRobert McNairs 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?cycle=2014&disp=D&type=V>, 
Jeffrey Katzenbergs 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?cycle=2014&disp=D&type=V> 
andRichard Uihleins 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?cycle=2014&disp=D&type=V> 
of the fundraising world.

But they are anteing up more than ever before as their favored candidates’ 
campaigns become ever more intertwined with theSuper Pacs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/super-pacs>, announcing combined 
fundraising totals and splitting up activities, like voter outreach, that once 
were firmly functions of the campaign committees – not the supposedly 
independent outside groups.

While there are no complete ingenues among the rosters of top donors to the 
Super Pacs, which filed their disclosure reports for the first half of the year 
this week, there are a few who previously haven’t given sums anything like 
those they are notching this year. They include the Texas-based Wilks family, 
four members of which gave $15m to groups backing Sen.Ted Cruz 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/> (R-Texas); brothers Farris and Dan are 
religious conservatives who got rich in the fracking business. Another: Laura 
Perlmutter, who gave $2m to a Super Pac supporting Sen.Marco Rubio 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/> (R-Fla).

The pure numbers are staggering: in the 2012 election cycle, all the 
presidential Super Pacs together had raised about $26m by 30 June of the year 
before the vote. This time, the total comes to more than $258m at the same 
point in time.

That’s about double the more than $130m the presidential campaigns raised in 
the first six months of this year, setting up a new paradigm for campaign 
finance at the federal level.Jeb Bush <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/> and 
Hillary Clinton <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/>, with combined totals of 
$114m and $71m respectively, have settled themselves atop the all-time list of 
presidential campaign-related fundraising in the first six months of the year 
before the election.

Several of the Republican efforts have been utterly dominated by outside 
groups raising unlimited amounts from individuals, corporations and other 
organizations. Seven Republican candidates reported larger fundraising totals 
for their supposedly unconnected Super Pacs than they disclosed for their 
campaigns, with the pro-Bush Right to Rise group pulling in nearly 10 times as 
much as the campaign itself.

A caveat, though: absent this super PAC fundraising, the candidates themselves 
are lagging far behind the pace set in 2007, the last campaign with no 
incumbent seeking re-election. Six of the seven largest fundraising totals at 
this point in all prior cycles came in 2007 when Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama,
Mitt Romney <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres12/index.php>, Rudy Giuliani, John 
McCain 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/politicians/summary.php?cid=N00006424&cycle=2014> 
andJohn Edwards <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres08/summary.php?cid=N00002283> 
all raised more than $23m by 30 June. Only four of this year’s competitors 
(Bush, Clinton, Cruz and Rubio) have reached that level for their campaigns and 
Super Pacs combined.

One important impact of Super Pac activity in the 2012 presidential race could 
be looming again in the earliest stages of the 2016 contest. These groups, 
which allow candidates to benefit from the seemingly limitless financial 
support of a small number of ardent and affluent supporters, can keep campaigns 
going long after they ordinarily would have died a natural death.

In 2012 the campaigns of former Rep. Newt Gingrich 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres12/candidate.php?cycle=2012&id=N00008333> (Ga), 
former Sen.Rick Santorum <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/> (Penn) and other 
Republicans were prolonged by funding in the tens of millions from a handful of 
supporters. Friday’s filings show that contributions from five or fewer donors 
make up the majority of the Super Pac funding for nine of the GOP candidates: 
Rubio,Rand Paul <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/>, Cruz, Rick Perry 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/>, Carly Fiorina 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/>, Bobby Jindal 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/>, Scott Walker 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/>, Mike Huckabee 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/> and Santorum. In many cases, the money 
given by five or fewer individuals or institutions is more than the total given 
by all individuals directly to the presidential campaign committees of these 
contenders.

Some donors have hedged their bets, giving large amounts to groups backing 
multiple candidates. Hedge fund managerRobert Mercer 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?cycle=2014&disp=D&type=V>, 
for instance, was among the top three donors to Super Pacs backing both Jindal 
and Cruz, though he gave far more to the pro-Cruz effort. Houston Texans owner
Robert McNair 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?cycle=2014&disp=D&type=V> 
was more equitable, giving $500,000 each to Super Pacs backing no fewer than 
four Republican candidates: Security is Strength (Graham), Unintimidated 
(Walker), Keep the Promise (Cruz) and Right to Rise USA (Bush).

Only a few of the 17 declared Republican candidates, five Democrats, and the 
Green Party entry lacks at least one supporting Super Pac, including Sen.Bernie 
Sanders <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00000528> (D-Vt.), 
former Rhode Island Gov.Lincoln Chafee 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00009954> and Green Party 
candidateJill Stein 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00033776>. On the other 
hand,Paul <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00030836> has at 
least two major Super Pacs in his corner, andCruz 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00033085> has four, each 
of which seems to have been “purchased” by one or two mega-donors and has a 
name that is some version of “Keep the Promise”.

What’s a wealthy donor to do? The two primary outside groups supporting 
Hillary Clinton’s campaign have addressed the potential for confusion by 
organizing a joint fundraising committee to distribute funds among themselves – 
one-stop shopping that keeps prospective contributors from having to choose and 
the groups from having to compete for checks. Priorities USA Action will get 
the bulk of the funds, with a smaller share going to Correct the Record, the 
group that fights attacks on the former secretary of state.

Here’s a rundown of the main presidential Super Pacs, by the numbers:

Right to Rise USA

All eyes on Trump as Republican debate nears, but Fox will be the real winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/01/fox-news-donald-trump-republican-debate>
Backing Jeb Bush <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00037006>

Amount Raised: $102.5m 

Amount Spent: $5.4m

Top Donors: Miguel Fernandez ($3m),Rooney Holdings 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000022228> ($2m), William 
Oberndorf ($1.5m)

The mother of all presidential super PACs – so far – Right to Rise USA had 24 
donors giving more than $1m (even Bush at one point asked donors not to give 
more than that) and was sitting on almost all of its cash as of 30 June: it had 
spent just $5.4m of its $102.5m. Critics maintain Bush crossed a legal line 
when he jetted to dozens of fundraisers for the group before officially 
declaring his candidacy; in any case, he built up quite a war chest, and 
appears to have focused far less on raising money for his campaign.

Top donor Miguel Fernandez, who has known Bush since before he became 
Florida’s governor in 1998, is chairman of Coral Gables-basedMBF Healthcare 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000035695>, a private equity 
firm, and has been a founder and/or CEO of many healthcare-focused companies. 
No stranger to the presidential Super Pac world, he gave $500,000 to Restore 
Our Future in 2011, the Super Pac that backed eventual GOP nominee Mitt Romney.
William Oberndorf is a California billionaire investor with a passion for 
school privatization. He’s also a longtime Republican donor who has given to 
the occasional Democrat, including (surprise!)Barack Obama 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres08/summary.php?cycle=2008&cid=N00009638> in 
2008 – but has laid out hundreds of thousands for Karl Rove’sAmerican Crossroads
 <http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/lookup2.php?strID=C00487363&cycle=2014> and 
Joe Ricketts’ (see Scott Walker section)Ending Spending Action Fund 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/lookup2.php?strID=C00489856&cycle=2014>. 
Fernandez and Oberndorf, with their spouses, have given $1.3m and $1.6m, 
respectively, over the course of their donor careers at the federal level.

Rooney Holdings <http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000022228> is 
a building and construction management firm. Its CEO, L Francis Rooney III, is 
now the majority owner of Manhattan Construction, a mammoth firm that built the 
new stadium for the Dallas Cowboys and the US Capitol Visitors Center and is 
now working on the George W Bush presidential library. Rooney was a donor to 
Jeb Bush’s brother, former president George W Bush, and was appointed by him to 
be ambassador to the Vatican. He was atop donor 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/overview/topindivs.php?view=hi&type=src> of hard 
money (which does not include Super Pacs) in the 2014 cycle. Rooney Holdings 
alsogave $1m 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/contrib.php?cmte=C00490045&cycle=2012>
 to Restore Our Future in the last presidential election.

Keep the Promise I, Keep the Promise II, Keep the Promise III, Keep the 
Promise Pac

Backing Ted Cruz <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00033085>

Amount raised: $37.8m

Amount spent: $638,000

Top donors: Robert Mercer ($11m), Toby Neugebauer ($10m), Wilks family ($15m 
combined)

Cruz hit the jackpot in the first half of 2015 – the top two donors to all 
presidential candidate-backing super Pacs chose to give to a constellation of 
groups that support him. At $11m and $10m respectively, Robert Mercer and Toby 
Neugebauer made the biggest individual contributions to Super Pacs between 
January and July, period. Another coup: $15m from four members of the Wilks 
family from Cisco, Texas.

Robert Mercer is the CEO of hedge fund Renaissance Technologies 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000022219>; the firm has been 
under investigation by the IRS for many years. He’s aprolific Republican donor 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/11/us/politics/hedge-fund-magnaterobert-mercer-emerges-as-a-generous-backer-of-ted-cruz.html>
, having given, even before the Cruz Super Pac contributions, $16.6m with his 
wife to federal politics.Toby Neugebauer is in some ways the antithesis of 
Mercer, practically a newcomer to big-time political donations. He’s a founder 
and director of engineering firmQuantum Energy Partners 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000036906>. He’s also a big 
game hunter <http://neugebauersnews.blogspot.com/>. Until now, he and his wife 
had made less than $200,000 in gifts to federal politicians and committees.

For their part, the Wilks family struck its gold – or at least shale gas – in 
central Texas in 2002 and rode the fracking boom to a spot on Texas Monthly’s41 
Wealthiest Texans 
<http://www.texasmonthly.com/lists/nos-40-and-41-dan-wilks-and-farris-wilks>, 
with net worth estimated at $1.5bn for each brother, Dan and Farris. They’re 
strong social conservatives (Farris is even a pastor). They’ve given money 
before, but never at this magnitude – together, theygave $37,500 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/indivs/search.php?name=&cycle=All&sort=R&state=&zip=&employ=wilks+brothers+llc&cand=&submit=Submit>
 to the National Republican Senatorial Committee in 2012. Until now, the 
brothers and their spouses had given just $263,000 at the federal level since 
they made their first contribution in 2006. They’ve just entered a whole new 
league.

Priorities USA Action, Correct the Record, Ready Pac

Hillary Clinton papers reveal a third of top backers linked to financial 
industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/31/hillary-clinton-third-top-backers-financial-industry>
Backing Hillary Clinton 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00000019>

Amount raised: $20.3m

Amount spent: $1.5m

Top donors: Nine, each of whom gave $1,000,000

None of the top donors to the Super Pacs behind Clinton are new to the world 
of high-rolling donors; they’re also mostly longtime Clinton backers.Haim Saban,
chair of theUnivision 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/lookup2.php?strID=C00435735&cycle=2014> 
network and CEO ofSaban Capital Group 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?cycle=2014&type=P&id=D000037316>, 
a private media and communications investment firm in Los Angeles, and his wife 
Cheryl,a philanthropist focused on women’s issues, each of whom gave $1m to 
Priorities, have long given to Hillary Clinton, and he backed her husband in 
his 1996 re-election bid. They’ve also, with their foundation, given between 
$10m and $25m to the Clinton foundation, putting them among the top donors to 
the charity; their federal political giving comes to more than $14m, not 
including the just-reported Priorities funds. Hedge fund managerDonald Sussman, 
who’s married to Democratic Rep.Chellie Pingree 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/politicians/summary.php?cid=N00013817&cycle=2014> 
of Maine, supported Bill Clinton in both of his presidential races and Hillary 
Clinton in her 2008 White House bid; he gave millions to the Democratic Party 
in the pre-2002 soft money days, and since the 2010Citizens United 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000024850> decision has sent 
millions more toHouse Majority Pac 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000064423>, the Super Pac that 
helps elect House Dems. Hedge fund guruGeorge Soros, who chairs the Open 
Society Foundations <http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000036394>
, needs no introduction to conservatives, whose name they invoke to represent 
liberal devilry; he too has given to both Clintons over the years and was a 
significant soft money donor prior to 2002. He has forked over much more to 
Democratic Super Pacs in recent years. Total giving to federal candidates and 
committees? Almost $40m.

Herbert Sandler, who previously operated Golden West Financial 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/clientsum.php?id=D000021715&year=2004>, a 
California-based savings and loan company, has been giving to Democrats at 
least since 1989 (which is as far back as CRP records go). Hollywood moguls
Jeffrey Katzenberg and Steven Spielberg, each of whom also gave $1m, are also 
longtime Democratic donors of long – and huge – standing.Fair Share Action 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/recips.php?cycle=2012&cmte=C00526673>
 is a liberal Super Pac that has spent about $5.7m in the last two election 
cycles, the largest part of which was dedicated to helping re-elect Obama. And, 
like other labor unions, theUA Political Education Committee 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/lookup2.php?strID=C00129627>, a unit of the 
Plumbers and Pipefitters union 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000000120>, has a history of 
being active in Democratic politics.

Unintimidated PAC

Scott Walker is the worst, and he has a chance of winning the GOP nomination | 
Jason Nichols
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/27/seriously-scott-walker-is-the-absolute-worst>
Backing Scott Walker 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00036995>

Amount raised: $20m

Amount spent: $976,000

Top donors: Diane Hendricks ($5m), Marlene and Joe Ricketts ($5m), Richard and 
Elizabeth Uihlein ($2.5m)

Diane Hendricks, Wisconsin’s richest woman and one of the richest in the 
nation, has been Walker’s biggest donor at the state level. She owns Hendricks 
Holding Co, which has a broad portfolio, and the roofing companyABC Supply 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000031260>. She’s a devoted 
Republican donor, having given hundreds of thousands of dollars to GOP party 
committees over the years, and gave $1m in 2014 toFreedom Partners Action Fund 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/lookup2.php?strID=C00564765&cycle=2014>, a 
Super Pac tied to billionaire industrialists Charles and David Koch. Walker 
also appears to have won theRicketts primary; while Ameritrade 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000022274> founder Joe 
Ricketts and his wife Marlene also gave to groups supporting other candidates, 
the $5m to Unintimidated PAC is the largest sum by far. Ricketts is the founder 
of Ending Spending andEnding Spending Action Fund 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/lookup2.php?strID=C00489856&cycle=2014>, two 
outside groups backed by a group of billionaire investors likePaul Singer 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?cycle=2014&disp=D&type=V>.

Richard and Elizabeth Uihlein own a shipping supplies company, Uline (think 
bubble wrap and plastic peanuts), and like Hendricks are Wisconsinites. But 
they moved their company to Illinois when that state offered them significant 
tax incentives. Their giving total through the years, not including the $2.5m 
collected by Unintimidated Pac: $10.3 million.

Conservative Solutions PAC

Backing Marco Rubio 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00030612>

Amount Raised: $16.1m

Amount Spent: $108,000

Top Donors: Norman Braman ($5m), Lawrence J. Ellison ($3m), Besilu Stables, LLC
($2.5m), Laura Perlmutter ($2m)

Norman Braman is the owner of Braman Management 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000032092>, which has 23 
franchised luxurycar dealership locations 
<http://www.bramanmotorcars.com/dealership/normanbraman.htm> in Florida and 
Colorado; he got involved in the business in 1972 when he purchased a Cadillac 
dealership. Before that, he was CEO of Philadelphia Pharmaceuticals and 
Cosmetics. He is also an art collector, and has an estimatednet worth of $1.89b 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/norman-braman/>. Braman has long been an 
enthusiastic Rubio supporter, though not a hugely active federal donor, with a 
lifetime total of $865,000. Rubio also has the support of tech executive
Lawrence Ellison, the founder of Oracle 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000000422>, a giant 
information technology company. He likes to buy property, includinga Hawaiian 
island 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/28/magazine/larry-ellison-island-hawaii.htm>. 
Forbes puts hisnet worth <http://www.forbes.com/profile/larry-ellison/> at 
$50.1bn. Federal contributions come to $3.9m.

Besilu Stables is a Florida-based thoroughbred breeding company owned by 
Benjamin Leon, owner of Leon Medical Centers. While Leon, a longtime donor, has 
given mainly to Republican causes, he has also given tens of thousands of 
dollars to Democratic party committees. At $2m,Laura Perlmutter’s donation to 
the Rubio-backing Super Pac makes her a notable newcomer to political giving. 
The wife of Marvel Entertainment’s chairman, Perlmutter, along with her 
husband, gave $50m to theNYU Langone Medical School’s 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000054886> Cancer Center. The 
school also hosts the Laura Perlmutter Center for Woman’s Imaging. But the 
federal-level political giving of Perlmutter and her husband came to just 
$6,000 until now.

Opportunity and Freedom PAC I, Opportunity and Freedom PAC II

Backing Rick Perry 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00033486>

Amount Raised: $12.8m

Amount Spent: $916,000

Top Donors: Kelcy Warren ($6 million), Darwin Deason ($5 million)

As political donors, Kelcy Warren and Darwin Deason seem to move almost in 
tandem. Warren, the CEO ofEnergy Transfer Partners 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/lookup2.php?strID=C00438754&cycle=2014>, gave 
the Perry-backing constellation $6m. His Texas-based company’s lines of 
business include natural gas, natural gas liquids, refined products and crude 
oil pipelines. He and his spouse have given more than $650,000 at the federal 
level since 2008. His biggest contribution previously? A $250,000 donation to
Make Us Great Again 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/recips.php?cmte=C00499731&cycle=2012>
 in 2012 – the super PAC supportingPerry 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres12/candidate.php?cycle=2012&id=N00033486>’s 
first bid for the White House. His most recent donation is about 24 times that.

Deason is a Texas-based billionaire who started off working primarily in the 
energy/oil industry, became CEO of MTech at a young age and then started
Affiliated Computer Services 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000023776>, which he sold to 
Xerox <http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000000607> for $6.4bn. 
He’s been a Republican donor since at least as far back as the 1990 cycle but 
didn’t start writing larger checks until after 2000. But the $5m he turned over 
to the pro-Perry Super Pac is 20 times larger than his previous personal best 
of $250,000, which, like Warren, he gave to Make Us Great Again in the 2012 
presidential cycle; it’s also nearly 10 times the nearly $600,000 that he and 
his wife Amy have given to federal candidates and committees over the years.

Pursuing America’s Greatness

Huckabee defends claim that Iran deal will 'march Israelis to oven door'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/26/huckabee-iran-nuclear-deal-obama-marching-israelis-to-door-of-the-oven>
Backing Mike Huckabee 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00007539>

Amount Raised: $3.6m

Amount Spent: $147,000

Top Donor: Ronald Cameron ($3m)

The pro-Huckabee super PAC’s sugar daddy – who is responsible for 83% of the 
group’s fundraising – is in the chicken business.Ronald Cameron is the CEO of 
agribusiness firm Mountaire Corporation, apoultry company 
<http://www.mountaire.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=trees.pageDetails&p=128-17-221> 
and the largest corporate donor to the Koch-backed Super Pac network,Freedom 
Partners Action Fund 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/lookup2.php?strID=C00564765&cycle=2014>, in 
the 2014 cycle. Cameron himself made a $500,000 donation to help start Freedom 
Partners. He and his wife have given $1.8m to federal political committees 
since 1990, including nearly $1.2m in the 2014 midterm cycle.

America’s Liberty

Backing Rand Paul 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00030836>

Amount Raised: $3.1 million

Amount Spent: $412,000

Top Donor: George Macricostas ($1.1m)

George Macricostas is CEO of RagingWire Data Centers, which offers network 
services, IT infrastructure design and the like. He has also held roles at 
Photronics, Inc and serves on the board of the Jane Goodall Institute. He has 
barely given to federal candidates or committees, though he did back Paul’s 
father, Ron.

Carly For America

Backing: Carly Fiorina 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00031348>

Amount Raised: $2.9m

Amount Spent: $1.3m

Top Donor: A Jerrold Perenchio ($1.6m)

Carly for America’s largest donor, former Univision chairman A Jerrold 
Perenchio, gave $1.6m; Forbes estimates his worth 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/a-jerrold-perenchio/> at around $2.7b. Perenchio 
and his wife have given a substantial $20.1m to candidates, parties and other 
committees, not including the latest gift to Carly. The pro-Fiorina group also 
received a curious $500,000 donation from Keep the Promise I, the Super Pac 
Robert Mercer is using to support Ted Cruz.

Security is Strength

Backing Lindsey Graham 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00009975>

Amount raised: $2.7m

Amount spent: $151,000

Top donors: Robert McNair, Robert Perelman and Access Industries ($500,000 
each)

It took 1,226 donors to Graham’s campaign committee to raise the $2mm he 
brought in from individual contributors. It took just five donors to the Super 
Pac supporting him to bring in the same amount. Overall, Graham’s campaign, at 
$3.6m, was more successful at raising money than the Super Pac, but the group 
pulled in half a million dollars each fromMcNair (who also gave to three other 
candidates’ Super Pacs),Perelman (whose holding company MacAndrews & Forbes has 
investments in everything from cosmetics to military equipment) andAccess 
Industries, which is led by Leonard Blavatnik. Blavatnik and his wife have 
invested far more of their political giving over the years in Democrats than
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>. Access’s 
wide-ranging holdings include Warner Music Group.

Generation Forward

Super Pac backing Democrat Martin O'Malley could have 150 staffers in Iowa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/17/super-pac-backing-democrat-martin-omalley-could-have-150-staffers-in-iowa>
Backing Martin O’Malley <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/>

Amount raised: $289,000

Amount spent: $83,000

Top donors: Retail Services and Systems ($120,000)

In keeping with other Democratic candidates, but unlike most of the 
Republicans, O’Malley’s Super Pac raised far less than hiscampaign 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00037007>, which brought 
in about $2m during the second quarter. Generation Forward’s biggest donor, at 
$120,000, was Retail Services and Systems (RSS), which is based in O’Malley’s 
home state and is the parent company of alcoholic beverage retailerTotal Wine & 
More <https://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000063743>. Robert and 
David Trone 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/indivs/search.php?&name=trone&employ=&cand=&state=MD&cycle=All&soft=&zip=&sort=N&page=1>
, the co-owners of RSS, have never been prolific donors, but their 
contributions over the years show that David has been firmly in the Democratic 
camp while Robert was more bipartisan. David Trone held a fundraiser last year 
for Maryland’s Democratic candidate for governor, Anthony Brown, that featured 
former president Bill Clinton and reportedly brought in about $1.2m. But after 
Brown lost to the Republican candidate, Larry Hogan, Total Wine and its 
affiliates were forking contributions over to help Hogan. Other contributors to 
the Super Pac include John Deane ($66,512), CEO of theAdvisory Board Co 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000043964>, a consulting firm 
whose clients are mostly in healthcare and higher education; venture capitalist 
Ryan Smith ($30,000), owner of Variance Ventures; and trial lawyer John Coale 
($30,000).

America Leads, Leadership Matters for America

Backing: Chris Christie 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00037008>

Amount Raised: $14.3m

Amount Spent: $3m

Top Donors: Steven Cohen ($1m) (was SAC Capital Advisers, now Point72 Asset 
Management <https://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000022233>), 
Alexandra Cohen($1m), Winecup-Gamble 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/clientsum.php?id=D000058652&year=2010> Inc 
($1m)

Paul Fireman, Reebok’s former chief executive, controls Winecup-Gamble Inc. 
For decades, Fireman gave moneyprimarily to Democrats 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/indivs/search.php?&name=paul%20fireman&employ=&cand=&state=&cycle=All&soft=&zip=&sort=R&page=1>
, but took to favoring Republicans in 2012. In 2010, Fireman put the 
Winecup-Gamble Ranch in Nevadaon the market 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748703632304575451902506417376> for 
$50m.Steven and Alexandra Cohen, a husband and wife pair, live in Connecticut, 
where Steven is a hedge fund manager with an estimated net worth of $11.4bn. 
Cohen had to shut down his firm, SAC Capital Advisers, after it pleaded guilty 
to engaging in insider trading, according toForbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/steve-cohen/>.

Believe Again

Backing Bobby Jindal 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00026786>

Amount raised: $3.7m

Amount spent: $1.1m

Top donors: Gary Chouest ($2 million), Robert Mercer ($500,000),Tracy Krohn 
($500,000)

Chouest, the CEO of Edison Chouest Offshore, has been a prolific donor and a 
particular boon for Louisiana Republicansfor decades 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/indivs/search.php?&name=chouest,%20gary&employ=&cand=&state=&cycle=All&soft=&zip=&sort=R&page=5>
. Ditto forTracy Krohn 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/indivs/search.php?name=tracy+krohn&cycle=All&sort=R&state=&zip=&employ=&cand=&submit=Submit>
, another offshore oil company executive. Jindal appears to have received a 
consolation prize fromMercer, a major donor to Ted Cruz and the largest overall.

New Day for America

Backing John Kasich <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/>

Amount raised: $11.1 m

Amount spent: $824,000

Top donors: Wendt Family Trust ($1m), Schottenstein Management Co ($1m), 
Thomas Rastin ($1m), Abigail Wexner ($1m)

The Kasich-backing 527 organization turned Super Pac looked for home-field 
advantage with its fundraising. Schottenstein Management, a Columbus-based real 
estate company whose CEO has given to both Republicans and Democrats;Wexner, 
the wife of the CEO of L Brands; andRastin, an executive of the Ariel 
Corporation, an industrial manufacturing company based in Mount Vernon, Ohio, 
allhail from in-state 
<http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2015/07/30/john-kasich-new-day-for-america-cash.html>
. The California-based Wendt Family Trust was a donor to the pro-Romney Restore 
Our Future.

Ben Carson <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00036973> and 
George Pataki <http://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate.php?id=N00028981> 
each have super PACs backing them, but no donors to those groups gave more than 
$75,000.

 * Center for Responsive Politics <https://www.opensecrets.org/> senior 
researcher Doug Weber and reporting intern Alex Lazar contributed to this post.
 