
Belfast is metamorphosing from a city stuck in the past into an exciting 
tourist destination. Hotel infrastructure has grown to meet demand in recent 
years, now the restaurant scene is also on the up.

Niall McKenna's James Street South <http://jamesstreetsouth.co.uk/Home> ( is 
one of the restaurants flying the flag for higher-end dining. Expect a heavy 
focus on Irish produce such as Mourne lamb and Rademon Estate wood pigeon.Deanes
 <http://www.michaeldeane.co.uk/deanes/>, under head chef Simon Toye provides 
classics like lobster thermidor as well as shining a spotlight on local produce 
such as Lissara duck that comes with cherries and an elegant confit duck 
croquette.

Then there's the new kid on the block, Ox <http://oxbelfast.com/> whose 
opening in March this year was met with the kind of food arousal that would make
Alvin Leung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/nov/28/alvin-leung-hong-kongs-maverick-chef>
 blush. The pairing of owners Stephen Toman in the kitchen and Breton Alain 
Kerloc'h out front brings a superb balance of fine dining on the plate, with a 
fist-pumpingly rocking atmosphere. The menu changes seasonally and gives an 
equally starring role to vegetables and proteins. Milk curd with grilled fennel 
and red pepper caramel, and saddle of rabbit with pork cheek, apricot and olive 
are both stunning dishes.

Northern Ireland has also made massive leaps when it comes to small artisan 
producers.Abernethy butter <http://abernethybuttercompany.com/>, used by Heston 
Blumenthal at the Fat Duck and by Marcus Wareing at the Berkeley, stands beside
Broighter Gold <http://www.broightergold.co.uk/> rapeseed oil as two products 
that the country can be proud of. Both are available in Belfast's most exciting 
deli,Arcadia Delicatessen <http://www.arcadiadeli.co.uk/>.

Any trip to Belfast would be incomplete without trying a "fry", the city's 
breakfast of choice. Check outThat Wee Café (189 Falls Road, thatweecafe.co.uk, 
fry from £3.95), in the Gaeltacht Quarter of west Belfast.
 Arcadia Delicatessen 
The number of independent coffee operators in the city may be low, but Ground 
Espresso Bar <http://www.groundcoffee.net/> in Waterstones and Black Bear Café 
<http://www.black-bear-cafe.co.uk/> are two that stand by the old argument that 
quality is more important than quantity – a concept essential to making good 
coffee, but which so many coffee shops fail to grasp.

Belfast mid-level restaurants manage to combine excitement and value. Mourne 
Seafood <http://mourneseafood.com/> (mains from £8.25) is head and shoulders 
above any other seafood restaurant in the city. For great Italian food there's
Il Pirata <https://www.facebook.com/ilPirataBelfast> (mains from £8.50), which 
has brought small plates and a touch ofPolpo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2012/jun/19/polpo-russell-norman-inspiration-venice-video>
 to Belfast.

Nearly every restaurant in the city has a burger on its menu, but you'll find 
the best atAlley Cat <http://alleycatbelfast.com/> on Church Lane. OK, so it 
wouldn't beat London's MeatLiquor in a fight, but it'd certainly knock seven 
shades out of Shake Shack and Five Guys with both hands tied behind its back.

• John Ferris blogs at the Irish food and drink site Forked <http://forked.ie/>
 