
The Butty Bus in Leverburgh 
<https://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Restaurant_Review-g2187963-d4070197-Reviews-The_Butty_Bus-Leverburgh_Isle_of_Harris_Lewis_and_Harris_Outer_Hebrides_The_Hebr.html>
, on the isle of Harris, serves a welcome egg and chips. There’s only space 
inside the bus for half a dozen customers and in summer the conversation 
swiftly turns toSt Kilda <http://www.kilda.org.uk/>, the remote group of 
islands 50 miles to the west. This harbour town is one of the main points from 
which to catch a boat for a day trip to St Kilda, but Hebridean weather being 
unpredictable and often stormy, boats can be cancelled, and visitors end up 
kicking their heels in Leverburgh.

Still, that’s not such a hardship with the exquisite 15th-century St Clement’s 
church and its carvings a few miles down the coast at Rodel. Or you can head 
north along the west coast’s stunning beaches and sip a cappuccino in theTemple 
Café <https://www.facebook.com/TheTempleCafe/> as you watch eagles soar 
overhead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fhebrides-st-kilda-isle-of-lewis-cliffs-birds-madeleine-bunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb38bcb970277624190fcf1e6fa0a47b2d5ae4d04%2F0_718_7264_4361%2F7264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Hebridean%20cliffhanger%3A%20in%20search%20of%20St%20Kilda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fhebrides-st-kilda-isle-of-lewis-cliffs-birds-madeleine-bunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Hebridean%20cliffhanger%3A%20in%20search%20of%20St%20Kilda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fhebrides-st-kilda-isle-of-lewis-cliffs-birds-madeleine-bunting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb38bcb970277624190fcf1e6fa0a47b2d5ae4d04%2F0_718_7264_4361%2F7264.jpg>
 An unforgiving place: the island of Boreray has the largest gannet colony in 
the world. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
I’d booked two trips, to be safe: one was cancelled but the other went ahead 
in choppy water and driving rain, a total of five hours, there and back, of 
exhilarating Atlantic. Most of my fellow passengers turned a ghastly shade of 
grey.

None of the extensive photography and filming of St Kilda can quite capture 
the drama of its topography. The group of islands and stacks includes some of 
the highest cliffs in the British Isles and is home to one of the biggest 
seabird colonies. Circling round the stacks, I craned my neck to look up at the 
sheer slabs of rock which towered over our boat with the screech of guillemots 
and gannets, the smell of ammonia and salt, and the roar of the surf. It’s 
astonishing to imagine that the St Kildans harvested these cliffs for the birds 
and eggs on which they survived.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fhebrides-st-kilda-isle-of-lewis-cliffs-birds-madeleine-bunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3eba59346c6ea747e7411688148e2c74ffbd6e4%2F0_261_5400_3239%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Hebridean%20cliffhanger%3A%20in%20search%20of%20St%20Kilda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fhebrides-st-kilda-isle-of-lewis-cliffs-birds-madeleine-bunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Hebridean%20cliffhanger%3A%20in%20search%20of%20St%20Kilda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fhebrides-st-kilda-isle-of-lewis-cliffs-birds-madeleine-bunting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3eba59346c6ea747e7411688148e2c74ffbd6e4%2F0_261_5400_3239%2F5400.jpg>
 A mile of sand: Uig Beach on the Isle of Lewis. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The last inhabitants left in 1930, evacuated at their request, bringing to an 
end a remarkable story of human resilience. It’s the appreciation of this as 
much as the dramatic landscape which makes visiting St Kilda, aUnesco World 
Heritage Site <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/387>, so memorable. I wandered 
through the poignant ruined cottages on the main island of Hiort, visited the 
old schoolroom and then headed for the main peak of Conachair, and along the 
cliffs. It was tough walking, but stunning even in a thick drizzle.

Back on Lewis, I came across one of the most inspiring and beautiful 
coastlines of all the islands I have visited in the Outer Hebrides. An hour or 
so by car from Stornoway I reachedUig 
<https://www.visitscotland.com/info/towns-villages/uig-lewis-p238651>, a sweep 
of golden sand with the mountains of Harris in the distance. If you continue 
along the single track road to Mangursta and Mealasta, you will stumble across 
a series of smaller bays. The machair [low-lying grassy plain] here is perfect 
for wild camping and we breakfasted on the cliffs in brilliant sunshine, 
watching gannets dive dramatically into the sea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fhebrides-st-kilda-isle-of-lewis-cliffs-birds-madeleine-bunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81ab3a5482cfbeadb68f50a67fbc36132ec05dfc%2F0_285_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Hebridean%20cliffhanger%3A%20in%20search%20of%20St%20Kilda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fhebrides-st-kilda-isle-of-lewis-cliffs-birds-madeleine-bunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Hebridean%20cliffhanger%3A%20in%20search%20of%20St%20Kilda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fhebrides-st-kilda-isle-of-lewis-cliffs-birds-madeleine-bunting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81ab3a5482cfbeadb68f50a67fbc36132ec05dfc%2F0_285_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
 Bird brained: a group of puffins resting on a lichen-covered rock on St Kilda. 
For generations the local St Kildans harvested bird eggs as part of their diet. 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Jagged stacks rear spectacularly out of the Atlantic along the battered 
coastline. This dramatic spot on Lewis has been chosen as a site for the 
ambitious proposal to build aSt Kilda Centre <http://www.ionadhiort.org/>, 
dedicated to its history, wildlife and geology. It’s an unlikely location – 
building on St Kilda isn’t possible as bad weather would restrict access – so 
this would offer the best chance of seeing the islands, 44 miles to the west.

On my way home, I stopped by Uig Lodge <http://www.uiglodge.co.uk/>, with its 
stunning view of the bay, for the essential souvenir to bring home: the most 
delicate smoked salmon, guaranteed to bring back memories of the bracing salty 
breeze and sound of Atlantic surf as it hits the palate.

Essentials

Trips to St Kilda are available from Harris on kildacruises.co.uk 
<http://www.kildacruises.co.uk/> and from Lewis on Seatrek (seatrek.co.uk 
<http://www.seatrek.co.uk/>)

Love of Country: A Hebridean Journey by Madeleine Bunting is published by 
Granta on 6 October at £18.99. Order a copy for £15.57 at
bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/love-of-country.html>
 