
Manchester. Home to loud-mouthed musicians, even louder football fans and 
rainy skies, certainly. But a top destination for literary types? It’s not 
exactly Hay-on-Wye. But this week’sManchester Literature Festival 
<http://www.manchesterliteraturefestival.co.uk/> (opening on Monday and running 
until 19 October) will surprise even the most bookish of visitors.

Manchester has a rich literacy legacy from Karl Marx writing about working 
life here in the mid-19th century, to Salford’s punk poet John Cooper Clarke 
and current poet laureate Carol Ann Duffy, who has lived in the city for almost 
20 years.

To dip into all things book-related, I joined a literary walk with Manchester 
Guided Tours (manchesterguidedtours.com 
<http://www.manchesterguidedtours.com/our-guides>, £7 for two hours), following 
in the footsteps of the writers who have documented the evolution of this 
modern industrial city.

“Manchester always had an edgy, radical feel as a city,” says Kate Dibble, our 
guide. “Great authors through the ages have always tried to capture it.”
 The revamped Manchester Central Library in St Peter’s Square reopened this 
year. Photograph: Alamy 
Starting by Oxford Road railway station – where the bookstore at Cornerhouse 
arts centre <http://www.cornerhouse.org/books>remains one of the best in the 
city for art and cinema literature – we strolled along Whitworth Street West, 
passingThe Ritz, the venue where Cooper Clarke famously met Salome Maloney 
(“Standing by the cig’ machine, who did I see? In lurex and terylene, she 
hypnotised me”).

Manchester always had an edgy, radical feel as a city. Great authors through 
the ages have always tried to capture it.

The nearby International Anthony Burgess Foundation 
<http://www.anthonyburgess.org/>, dedicated to the Manchester-born author, 
houses an eccentric collection of possessions, including the original 
manuscript of A Clockwork Orange, with doodles by the author, and letters to 
Stanley Kubrick, who directed the infamous film of the book. On 16 October in 
the upstairs performance space, author Blake Morrison will deliver the annual 
Burgess Lecture, a highlight of the literature literature festival.

Heading towards St Peter’s Square, Manchester Central Library 
<http://manchester.gov.uk/centrallibrary> reopened in March this year after a 
£50m refurbishment. It has since welcomed some 300,000 visitors to its hi-tech 
media lounge, contemporary exhibition space and interactive children’s library, 
while original architectural flourishes have been restored to their 1930s glory.

The library is hosting several events from the Rising Stars strand of the 
festival, while Library Live events this autumn include a week-long residency 
by Manchester band Everything Everything (10-15 November).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fmanchester-literature-festival-walking-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412334877095%2Fa622349c-a553-41c2-8a41-0f6770823797-885x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20literary%20tour%20of%20Manchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fmanchester-literature-festival-walking-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20literary%20tour%20of%20Manchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fmanchester-literature-festival-walking-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412334877095%2Fa622349c-a553-41c2-8a41-0f6770823797-885x1020.jpeg>
 Manchester-born author Anthony Burgess with his books. Photograph: Marvin 
Lichtner/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images 
By contrast, a visit to the neoclassical Portico Library and Gallery  
<http://www.theportico.org.uk/>on Charlotte Street is like stepping back in 
time. The 19th-century collection of dusty tomes, including travel literature, 
biographies and first-edition fiction, offers an insight into the mindset of 
Manchester in the industrial age. The genteel reading room is for members only, 
but the cafe and gallery are open to all, as is a programme of literary events.

A walk through side streets to Deansgate brings us to the John Rylands Library 
<http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/rylands/>, named after the 19th-century 
cotton magnate. The addition of a modern wing to the existing neo-Gothic 
structure has created a new exhibition space and a study centre to complement 
the hushed reverence of the historic reading room. There are tours of the 
building and its collection on the third Thursday of each month (free but book 
ahead on 0161-306 0555).

Chetham’s Library <http://www.chethams.org.uk/>, which was founded in 1653 and 
claims to be the oldest public library in the English-speaking world, traces 
Manchester’s literary legacy back to Tudor times. The rambling space of 
cloisters and courtyards has been a haven for studious types ever since. Marx 
and Engels worked here, and their desk in an alcove of the wood-panelled 
reading room is now a place of pilgrimage. A new visitor centre will open early 
next year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fmanchester-literature-festival-walking-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412334670871%2Fee855d40-22ad-41ec-9260-aaa438c2238d-2060x1317.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20literary%20tour%20of%20Manchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fmanchester-literature-festival-walking-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20literary%20tour%20of%20Manchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fmanchester-literature-festival-walking-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412334670871%2Fee855d40-22ad-41ec-9260-aaa438c2238d-2060x1317.jpeg>
 Elizabeth Gaskell’s House Photograph: PR 
We finished our tour in the city’s Ardwick district, where Elizabeth Gaskell’s 
House <http://www.elizabethgaskellhouse.co.uk/>, the family home of the author 
of Cranford, reopens on 5 October after a three-year restoration. The Grade 
II-listed Regency villa will look as if the family had just popped out and left 
the table set for dinner. The house is hosting two events as part of the 
festival: the Manchester Salon on 8 October, exploring Gaskell’s 1855 novel 
North and South; and a walking tour of Gaskell’s Manchester, ending at the 
house, on 15 October.

Gaskell documented Manchester’s industrial revolution from her desk after the 
family moved to the house in 1850. Her views contrasted starkly with the ideals 
of the Victorian era: “Few female voices were as courageous as hers,” says 
Janet Allan of the Gaskell Society. “Her greatest skill was to use storytelling 
to address the social issues of the era.”

A walking tour of Manchester shows that while the city may have evolved, its 
penchant for speaking out remains a source of literary inspiration.

Beyond words: where to eat, drink and sleep
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fmanchester-literature-festival-walking-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412333796094%2F123a25f3-7591-4fd9-b871-1127795da883-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20literary%20tour%20of%20Manchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fmanchester-literature-festival-walking-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20literary%20tour%20of%20Manchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fmanchester-literature-festival-walking-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412333796094%2F123a25f3-7591-4fd9-b871-1127795da883-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Chef Simon Rogan runs restaurant The French at The Midland Hotel. Photograph: 
Chris Bull/Alamy 
Stay
The Midland Hotel 
<http://www.qhotels.co.uk/our-locations/the-midland-manchester/>, the city’s 
stately grande dame, has contemporary rooms and Simon Rogan of L’Enclume fame 
running restaurant The French. A series of afternoon teas with authors during 
the festival includea reading by writer in residence Olivia Laing  
<http://www.manchesterliteraturefestival.co.uk/events/afternoon-tea-with-olivia-laing-34568>
on 9 October (tickets £18).

Drink
The Briton’s Protection <http://britons-protection.com/>, opposite the 
Bridgewater Hall, is one of Manchester’s favourite old Victorian pubs and a 
regular haunt of Elbow frontman Guy Garvey. It hosts a storytelling session, 
Word of Mouth, on the first Friday of each month. Drink up the atmosphere over 
a pint of real ale or a wee dram from the collection of 300 whiskies.

Eat
Sam’s Chop House <http://samschophouse.com/>, near the Royal Exchange Theatre, 
whereMaxine Peake is starring in Hamlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2014/sep/15/maxine-peake-hamlet-theatre-in-pictures>
 until 18 October, is where industrialists would cut deals over lunch. Anthony 
Burgess wrote of its “cotton brokers gorging red meat,” and there’s a statue of 
the artist LS Lowry on the bar. Today, the 19th-century eatery serves modern 
British food.• More information from visitmanchester.com 
<http://www.visitmanchester.com/>
 