
Since Donald Trump became president-elect, he’s made some attempts to soften 
his blowhard, tough-guy image. The former reality star decided against trying to
imprison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-investigation-jail-dropped>
 Hillary Clinton. He’s said his wall might be afence 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/14/us/politics/donald-trump-twitter-white-house.html>
 and that he mightkeep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-appears-to-soften-stance-on-range-of-pledges>
 parts of Obamacare. Trump even told perpetrators of hate crimes to “stop it 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/10/us/post-election-hate-crimes-and-fears-trnd/>” 
post-election, after consistentlyencouraging violence 
<http://mashable.com/2016/03/12/trump-rally-incite-violence/> at his rallies 
just months earlier.


Of course, Trump has a tendency to contradict himself ad infinitum, so no 
matter what he says, it’s hard to gauge his actual positions on anything. The 
best representation of his true values, rather, are the people – primarily men 
– he chooses to surround him.

Tell us: how are you preparing for the Trump presidency?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/tell-us-how-preparing-trump-presidency>
Trump’s inner circle and cabinet appointees prove the president-elect loves 
bullies who prize total power over inclusion. His cabinet is shaping up to be 
full of people who believe Making America Great Again is code for white, 
wealthy men maintaining privilege and control over people of color, women and 
anybody else who can’t afford a penthouse.

Eighty-five 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/11/18/donald-trumps-binder-full-of-white-men/?utm_term=.8cead2dc33b6>
 percent of Trump’s picks for cabinet are men, and yes, most of them are rich 
and white to boot. Sure, there are women nominees, and it’s still early days. 
But there’s no doubt who Trump favors, and if we’re known by the company we 
keep, his taste in white, megalomaniac men is incredibly disturbing.

His chief strategist, Steve Bannon 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/08/stephen-bannon-donald-trump-alt-right-breitbart-news>
, is the former chairman of Breitbart News, a site that regularly spouts white 
supremacist, anti-immigrant and antisemitic ideology. Trump’s pick for national 
security adviser, Lt Gen Michael Flynn, is a power-hungryanti-Islamist 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/18/us/politics/michael-flynn-national-security-adviser-donald-trump.html>
 who said on Twitter that “fear of Muslims is rational”, and who hasretweeted 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/michael-flynn-twitter-226091> 
antisemitic statements. Then there’s Senator Jeff Sessions, Trump’s choice for 
attorney general, a racist 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2016/11/donald_trump_is_bringing_america_government_by_the_worst_men.html>
 who allegedly said the Ku Klux Klan was “OK until I found out they smoked pot.”


Though Trump campaigned as the working class’s savior, he bragged about 
nominating people to cabinet who have “made a fortune” and is set toassemble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/donald-trump-cabinet-positions-wealthy-key-interests>
 the richest administration in modern US history. Andrew Puzder, a fast-food 
mogul and Trump’s pick for labor secretary, is amillionaire 
<https://mic.com/articles/161681/andrew-puzder-net-worth-here-s-what-we-know-about-the-millionaire-ceo-of-cke-restaurants>
 whoopposes 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/08/us/politics/andrew-puzder-labor-secretary-trump.html>
 minimum wage hikes. Trump’sfinance chairman 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/the-worst-of-wall-street-meet-donald-trumps-finance-chairman/>
 pick, Steven Mnuchin, a man with a net worth of about$40m 
<http://www.foxbusiness.com/politics/2016/11/29/trumps-man-steve-mnuchin-wall-street-hollywood-and-now-treasury.html>
, and commerce secretarynominee  
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/11/30/503253374/trump-taps-billionaire-investor-wilbur-ross-for-commerce-secretary>
Wilbur Ross, a billionaire, both worked atGoldman Sachs 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/the-report/articles/2016-11-30/steven-mnuchin-wilbur-ross-and-donald-trumps-gilded-cabinet>
. Trump’s choice for secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, is a flush oil tycoon 
who is buddies with Vladimir Putin. The president-elect favors men whose 
careers have been devoted to making sure the 1% stay filthy rich through 
control of America’s finances.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump's%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&media=>
Who is Donald Trump’s secretary of state nominee Rex Tillerson? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/13/who-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
The way Trump’s chosen men treat women is no better than their xenophobic 
tendencies or lust for cash. The president-elect himself has been accused by12 
women 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/10/28/12-accusers-and-counting-former-miss-finland-says-donald-trump-sexually-assaulted-her/>
of sexual assault, and some of his affiliates are alleged abusers. Puzder’s 
wife filed a protective order after she alleged that he attacked her (she
recently 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/trump-administration-domestic-abuse_us_584b141de4b0bd9c3dfcd283?633rogtxm0di8jjor>
 walked back the claims after decades). Bannon’s wifeclaims 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/trump-administration-domestic-abuse_us_584b141de4b0bd9c3dfcd283?633rogtxm0di8jjor>
 he grabbed her by the wrist and neck, but a domestic violence protective order 
was dismissed when she failed to show up in court. Trump’s brand of masculinity 
is extremely toxic.

Pussy-grabbing comments aside, the president-elect recently expressed 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2016/12/12/donald_trump_is_sad_that_he_won_person_of_the_year_instead_of_man_of_the.html>
 remorse that he was named “Person of the Year” rather than “Man of the Year” 
by Time magazine.


Of course he did. Trump favors a world where white men have total power, and 
he cozies up to like-minded people. He said Obama, a man whoopenly praises 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/michelle-obama-speech-barack-obamas-praise-for-first-lady-is-most-shared-message-on-on-twitter-a7157101.html>
 his wife’s intelligence and speaks out againstmisogyny  
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/obama-sexism-voting_us_58191a3fe4b07c97c1c53435>
andracism <http://www.essence.com/news/barack-obama-racism-presidency>, was a 
weak leader 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/14/opinion/donald-trumps-putin-crush.html?_r=0> 
compared with Russia’s president. Putin, in case it needs repeating, is a 
dictator who has jailed hisopponents 
<http://mashable.com/2016/10/10/what-nations-throw-opponents-in-jail/#MDTblq1e9iq4>
. But like Trump, the Russian president is a ruthless, egomaniacal bully who 
uses any means necessary to maintain control.

Trump is terrifying on his own. But Trump surrounded by a posse of powerful 
men who reinforce and exacerbate his horrifying beliefs about minority groups 
is a political forest fire. The president-elect has picked cabinet nominees and 
political affiliates who will not challenge the narrative that rich white men 
should remain in power. No matter what superficial attempts Trump makes to 
change his image over the next four years, his inner circle and cabinet 
nominees will remain concrete evidence that he’shad a terrifying plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/donald-trump-plays-dumb-dangerous-act>
 all along.
 