
It’s 6.38am on Sunday morning and a crowd is gathered at the water’s edge. 
“Seek sunrise in all that we are,” incants a gentle voice. “Seek dawn in all 
that we do. Wake up. Wake up.”

What sounds like a yoga lesson on the beaches of Ibiza or Goa is far from it. 
Today we are at Tilbury international cruise terminal, 25km east along the 
Thames estuary from London Bridge. The same Tilbury where Elizabeth I addressed 
her fleet before they faced the Spanish Armada, and where theEmpire Windrush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/23/immigration-windrush-west-indians-jamaica-britain>
 passenger liner delivered 642 West Indian immigrants to a new life in Britain 
in 1948.

The town that Bata built: a modernist marvel on the marshes of Essex
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/essex-architecture-weekend-east-tilbury-bata-shoe-factory>
This morning there is no queen, no Windrush, just the flat, autumnal waters of 
the Thames, a big grey duvet of September sky, and two voices – one spoken, one 
sung – occasionally interrupted by birds overhead or a passing tug.

Caroline Bergvall <http://www.carolinebergvall.com/>’s sunrise performance 
Raga Dawn (6.38am was the exact hour the sun rose, albeit behind cloud cover, 
in Tilbury that day) is part of Estuary, a 16-day festival celebrating the 
distinct character of the Essex “edgelands” between Tilbury and Southend. “I 
thought, ‘What about an early morning call to wake you up?’” said Bergvall when 
she got the joint commission from Estuary and La Batie, a festival held on the 
edge of Lake Geneva, Switzerland. “That idea of dawn really stayed with me.”

And dawn chorus this certainly is. Not only is Bergvall duetting her poetry 
with classical singerPeyee Chen <http://peyeechen.com/>, to a score by Gavin 
Bryars <https://www.theguardian.com/music/gavin-bryars>, the pair are 
accompanied by the recorded voices of the Punjabi-speaking community of 
Southend and a group of Romansh speakers from Switzerland. Translating some of 
Bergvall’s key lines into their own languages – “We are passengers” is one of 
the central refrains – results in a hypnotic hour of spoken word and stereo 
sound and, for the audience at least, a headspace somewhere between waking and 
sleeping.
Estuary Festival '16 (@estuaryfestival) 
"Am I aware that I am asleep when I'm awake" @Cbergvall 
<https://twitter.com/Cbergvall> spins web of morning musing around wrapt 
audience#ragadawn <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ragadawn?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/4zacZ5UuDi <https://t.co/4zacZ5UuDi>
 <https://twitter.com/estuaryfestival/status/777385547803295744> September 18, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/estuaryfestival/status/777385547803295744> 
Blame the polyphony of Raga Dawn on Bergvall’s “bilingual brain” – her 
description, incidentally, though “multilingual” might be more accurate. Born 
in Germany to French and Norwegian parents, she moved to London in 1989, drawn 
by art and love (namely, her then girlfriend), and became energised by the 
queer arts scene of the Vauxhall underground.


Bergvall calls herself a writer and artist, not a poet, even if her 
performances and publications most closely resemble that form. Fittingly, Raga 
Dawn is part of two festivals withinEstuary festival 
<http://www.estuaryfestival.com/>: the literary programme, Shorelines, and 
Points of Departure, which is filling the faded beauty of Tilbury’s Grade II 
listed terminal building with art. While about 50 cruise liners still dock at 
Tilbury each year, it feels more like a stage set than a working terminal. 
Opposite the old shuttered-up ticket office playsJohn Akomfrah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/07/john-akomfrah-vertical-sea-arnolfini-bristol-lisson-gallery-london-migration>
’s video Mnemosyne, an epic video cycle about the experiences of postwar 
immigrants to Britain. High in the vaulted roof hangsAdam Chodzko 
<http://www.adamchodzko.com/>’s Ghost, a specially crafted kayak, in which the 
artist transported volunteers across the Thames and back. And on the wall in 
the arrivals lounge hangs one ofJeremy Deller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jeremy-deller>’s Five Memorials: a 
banner paying tribute to the Windrush itself. This last piece is a permanent 
fixture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fraga-dawn-caroline-bergvall-estuary-festival-essex-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19dbed3d1cbfb137bcc4cfc6591d7c1db0e80dd5%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20polyphonic%20dawn%20chorus%20in%20the%20Essex%20edgelands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fraga-dawn-caroline-bergvall-estuary-festival-essex-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20polyphonic%20dawn%20chorus%20in%20the%20Essex%20edgelands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fraga-dawn-caroline-bergvall-estuary-festival-essex-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19dbed3d1cbfb137bcc4cfc6591d7c1db0e80dd5%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Caroline Bergvall: ‘Pop music, rap, even slam poetry all disturb the 
language.’ Photograph: Thomas Martin 
Festival director Colette Bailey didn’t want to make any explicit political 
message in this, Estuary’s inaugural programme. She didn’t need to. The theme 
of new arrivals and borders emerges strongly throughout. For Bergvall, who 
often focuses on language politics, these themes have only taken on greater 
relevance since the Brexit vote. She is scared by what she has seen: “An 
outpouring of xenophobic language and isolationist pride, things that I haven’t 
witnessed in England for quite a long time. Not in a weird generalised way, but 
real insults thrown around in the local cafe or dry cleaners. The mentality 
that’s coming out of it is very scary and disappointing.”

Bergvall’s thoughts on these issues are set out in a thought-provoking 2010 
essay, Middling English, in which she attempts to break down the development of 
modern English into four elements: midden, middle, middling and meddle. As she 
puts it, the “midden” is the soils of the English language, originated in 
multiple cultures. The “middle” is the historical Middle English period where 
the language settled into the one we recognise today. “Middling” is any attempt 
to standardise English, too often in prejudicial ways. This is something we see 
playing out in current political and social debate. Should new immigrants learn 
English as standard? And if so, what English do we mean? As Bergvall says, 
every new generation brings their own words to the mix: “Pop music and rap and 
even slam poetry all disturb the language.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fraga-dawn-caroline-bergvall-estuary-festival-essex-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cf30484e0949f6e16d4822c8c4894b9cf1af2b%2F0_0_2953_2005%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20polyphonic%20dawn%20chorus%20in%20the%20Essex%20edgelands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fraga-dawn-caroline-bergvall-estuary-festival-essex-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20polyphonic%20dawn%20chorus%20in%20the%20Essex%20edgelands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fraga-dawn-caroline-bergvall-estuary-festival-essex-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cf30484e0949f6e16d4822c8c4894b9cf1af2b%2F0_0_2953_2005%2F2953.jpg>
 Raga Dawn by Caroline Bergvall being performed at Estuary festival, with 
singer Peyee Chen. Photograph: Benedict Johnson 
So what about the “meddle”? “The meddle is the artist or writer who messes 
things up and shows up the language’s complexity and richness,” says Bergvall. 
“The meddle is wanting to tackle issues, to bring other areas of awareness to 
the work you make.” Audiences can meddle, too, she adds. “We’re simply jumping 
in and activating it.”

Which is why Tilbury is just the beginning for Raga Dawn. Next year, Bergvall 
and her team of academics and artistic collaborators plan to follow the old 
troubadour route from Morocco up through Europe, interviewing 12 
minority-language groups and incorporating their words into the performance 
until the work is a huge patchwork, like any contemporary language. “We can 
think about other historical issues and geographical differences to do with 
sunrise greeting, especially in summer, from the very short dawn in southern 
Spain to the longer ones in Scandinavia and even in the Isle of Skye. I’m 
talking to arts organisations there who are saying, ‘Can you come in August 
please? If you come in July, it will be 3am and you won’t get anyone along!’”

She’s not done badly in Tilbury, where more than 100 people have made today’s 
early start. By 7.38, after an hour of physical and social awakening, we 
shuffle back bleary-eyed into the terminal to eat a breakfast of chapatis and 
bombay potatoes cooked by the Sikh community in nearby Grays. This too is part 
of the work, says Bergvall. “It’s not about learning so much as belonging.”

• Estuary festival <http://www.estuaryfestival.com/> continues until 2 October 
at venues across Essex.
 