
In the science of human psychology, there is one universal truth: behavior is 
a function of the person and the situation. What we humans do is always a 
result of the interaction between our internal tendencies and the demands of 
the external environment.

But Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> seems to 
defy the psychological laws.

Over the past week, Trump repeatedly lashed out at the Khan family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/01/donald-trump-khan-muslim-soldier-video>
, who spoke of losing their son in the Iraq war at the Democratic national 
convention in Philadelphia. Next,he hinted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/02/donald-trump-paul-ryan-john-mccain-re-election-endorsements>
 that he might not endorse the re-election of fellow Republicans Paul Ryan and 
John McCain, even though they have endorsed him. Finally, faced with acrying 
baby 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/08/02/politics/donald-trump-ashburn-virginia-crying-baby/>
 at his rally on Tuesday, he first attempted to reassure the distressed mother, 
only to change his mind just a moment later. “Actually I was only kidding,” he 
said. “You can get the baby out of here.” In each of these instances, Donald 
Trump seems to act on pure impulse. He ignores what the situation is telling 
him to do and obeys only his instincts.

Once upon a time, his supporters adored this kind of impetuous display, for it 
showcased Trump’s authenticity, they claimed, and his willingness to “tell it 
like it is”. Now they are starting to balk. As Republican operatives have urged 
him to pivot towards a more congenial stance for the general election, Trump 
seems to be doubling down on the raw personality tendencies that won over the 
populist Republican base in the first place. Why can’t he change? Why can’t he 
resist taking the bait? The answer, I believe, lies in the very nature of 
Trump’s personality, which functions as a psychological trap from which he 
cannot escape.

Trump’s personality functions as a psychological trap from which he cannot 
escape

I recently wrote 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2016/06/the-mind-of-donald-trump/480771/>
 an extended psychological commentary on the life of Donald Trump. Rather than 
a clinical/psychiatric assessment, the profile drew upon scientific research in 
personality and social psychology. I scrupulously avoided diagnostic categories 
and attributions about mental health and fitness, for two reasons: (1) I am not 
a clinician, and (2) for me, medical labels affixed from afar provide little by 
way of insight into the structure and the meaning of a person’s life. My aim 
instead was to make psychological sense of Donald Trump’s life and personality, 
drawing upon some of the best ideas and research findings to be found in 
psychological science today.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F841052c0e20e1b4b0e8f029edfcf0fd901fca9c9%2F0_192_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20psychological%20trap%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20Donald%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20life%20and%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20psychological%20trap%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20Donald%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20life%20and%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F841052c0e20e1b4b0e8f029edfcf0fd901fca9c9%2F0_192_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 Once upon a time, his supporters adored this kind of impetuous display, for it 
showcased Trump’s authenticity. Now they are starting to balk Photograph: 
Callahan/Ace/Rex/Shutterstock 
A central thesis in my argument was that two prominent dispositional traits 
define Donald Trump’s temperament: sky-highextraversion (suggesting emotional 
exuberance and social dominance) and rock-bottomagreeableness (suggesting a 
decidedlack of empathy, caring, kindness and altruism). Especially rare among 
people seeking public office, this combustible combination produces a social 
actor who is explosive, threatening and unpredictable.

Nonetheless, research tells us, as does common sense, that most socially 
dominant and disagreeable people are still capable of regulating their behavior 
in response to situational demands, at least to some extent. They can hold back 
their enthusiasm when the situation calls for more gravitas, and they can at 
least pretend to be gentle and kind, even when they don’t feel it. It has 
become increasingly apparent, however, that Donald Trump defies the empirical 
norm: he simply cannot regulate his temperament dispositions, no matter what 
the situation calls for.

I think there are three reasons behind Trump’s problem in self-regulation. 
Each corresponds to a distinctive feature of his personality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24ea99dd0a1ae1f62e7a816b5d40fa559f3564da%2F0_125_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20psychological%20trap%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20Donald%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20life%20and%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20psychological%20trap%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20Donald%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20life%20and%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24ea99dd0a1ae1f62e7a816b5d40fa559f3564da%2F0_125_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 He simply cannot regulate his temperament dispositions, no matter what the 
situation calls for. Photograph: Mark Wallheiser/Getty Images 
First, Trump’s temperament profile – high extraversion and low agreeableness – 
derives much of its power from an underlying impulsivity laced with anger. Both 
George W Bush and Bill Clinton were highly extraverted presidents who expressed 
their social dominance in a generally gregarious and friendly way. By contrast, 
Trump’s style is more aggressive and spontaneous, filled with biting humor and 
a sense that you just don’t know what he might do next.

His charisma evokes feelings of danger and excitement. The angry impulsivity, 
moreover, blocks any expression of care, affection or empathy. He is typically 
unable or unwilling to squelch the impulse, step back and survey the situation, 
and focus on another person long enough to appreciate the other’s humanity. For 
better (in the primaries) and for worse (right now), he seems to live in the 
angry moment.

For better (in the primaries) and for worse (right now), he seems to live in 
the angry moment

Second, Trump’s impulsive temperament style dovetails with his central life 
goal – the narcissistic aim of promoting Donald Trump. Ever since he attended 
New York Military Academy for high school, Donald Trump has doggedly pursued a 
motivational agenda of expanding, extolling, displaying and adoring the self. 
To be fair, it takes no small degree of narcissism to run for United States 
president. But again, Trump seems extreme compared to other candidates, as 
witnessed in his near-constant self-references, his over-the-top braggadocio 
and his desire to plaster his name on skyscrapers, casinos, a so-called 
“university” and steaks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff83d17e6a84c6dbc32f4e03c450752ccc5fb9dd8%2F0_0_4383_2631%2F4383.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20psychological%20trap%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20Donald%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20life%20and%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20psychological%20trap%3A%20making%20sense%20of%20Donald%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20life%20and%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-psychology-personality-republicans-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff83d17e6a84c6dbc32f4e03c450752ccc5fb9dd8%2F0_0_4383_2631%2F4383.jpg>
 Donald Trump is trapped by an angry, impulsive temperament that precludes his 
stepping away from the moment to survey what the situation demands of him. 
Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
In keeping with the narcissism, Trump finds it especially difficult to ignore 
his impulses and consider the exigencies of situations when he perceives a 
threat to the self. He couldn’t just turn the other cheek, or check his 
impulsive anger, when Khizr Khan held up his pocket constitution and mocked 
Trump as somebody who has probably never read America’s most sacred document 
and who has never sacrificed for his country.

Finally, there is Donald Trump’s philosophy of life, spelled out first in The 
Art of the Deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/19/trump-co-writer-says-candidate-could-end-civilisation-the-art-of-the-deal-tony-schwartz>
. It is a matter of principle for Donald Trump that when you are attacked, you 
hit back harder. If you want to win the game of life, you must be a 
counter-puncher. And it does not matter who hits you, even if it is a patriotic 
American couple who still mourn the loss of their son, or a baby who has the 
temerity to cry during your speech.

It is a matter of principle for Donald Trump that when you are attacked, you 
hit back harder

Donald Trump is trapped by an angry, impulsive temperament that precludes his 
stepping away from the moment to survey what the situation demands of him. The 
trap tightens when the moment brings forth an insult to the self, no matter how 
trifling. And even when Donald Trumpis able to emancipate himself from the 
moment and consider a situation from a more reasoned perspective, his 
philosophy of life manages only to reinforce his traits and his goals, 
imploring him to fight back ferociously, no matter how sympathetic or how tiny 
the opponent may be.

It is highly unlikely that Trump will ever transform himself into a 
conventional candidate, somebody who censors himself in light of situational 
demands and moves deftly to the mainstream. The combination of angry 
impulsivity, narcissistic goals, and a life credo of the warrior, affirming the 
power of the counter punch, has gotten him pretty far in life. This 
psychological trifecta is largely responsible, I would argue, for delivering 
many of his biggest victories, includingthe GOP nomination for United States 
president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jul/21/republican-national-convention-day-four-trump>
. Up until this point, the pattern has helped to make Donald Trump a winner. 
But now it threatens to deliver a momentous defeat.


• This article was amended on 8 August 2016 to correct the location of the 
Democratic convention
 