
 * See <> 
 * Stay <> 
 * Eat <> 
 * Drink <> 
 * Buy <> 
 * Unwind <> 
 LOADING 


Click on the slideshow's tiles to jump straight to that part of the guide or 
use these navigation links if you're reading this on a mobile: 
See <> | Stay <> | Eat <> | Drink <> | Buy <> | Unwind <>



See

Based in a townhouse cellar in up-and-coming High Bridge, the Stand is the 
hottest place in Newcastle for live comedy just a year after opening. The 
intimate stage setting is no stranger to big names, but the roster of 
well-known locals is equally popular – look out for regular acts the 
Suggestibles, Steffen Peddie and Tony Jameson.
 The Stand, comedy club, Newcastle 
There are two more reasons why the Stand has established itself so quickly: 
first, the ground-level bar and bistro has become a praised venue in its own 
right (there aren't many comedy clubs that serve smoked duck salad) and, 
second, the club operates a strict ban on stag parties and hen nights. While 
there'll always be the odd heckler in the room, you'll always be part of an 
audience that enjoys and supports live comedy. A gentle word of warning, 
though: it's a small venue, so anyone can be and usually is part of the act at 
the Stand. Don't think that you'll be safe by avoiding the tables closest to 
the stage.
• The Stand, 31 High Bridge, 0844 693 3336, thestand.co.uk 
<http://www.thestand.co.uk>

Back to the top <>



Stay

When it's time to take a break from the bustle of the city centre, escape 
north beyond the Town Moor to Jesmond Dene House for a secluded evening lost in 
the woods. The 40 rooms have contemporary furniture and fittings, and are all 
shapes and sizes, with tucked-away attic spaces, private balconies and garden 
views, giving you the feel of a country manor just minutes from the city. The 
award-winning restaurant uses ingredients that are mostly sourced from 
Northumberland – often from the garden of the hotel. Both the tasting menu 
(£65) and Sunday lunch (£29 for three courses) are real indulgences.
 Jesmond Dene Hotel, cocktail bar 
Clear the head with a walk along the Ouseburn river and through the tranquil 
wooded valley of Jesmond Dene. Idle away a morning in affluent Jesmond's cafes 
and shops, then stop off for afternoon tea at the Fisherman's Lodge (
fishermanslodge.co.uk <http://www.fishermanslodge.co.uk>, £15pp). A taste of 
Newcastle's lively nightlife is close at hand: Osborne Road is lined with bars 
and partygoers.
• Jesmond Dene House, Jesmond Dene Road, 0191-212 3000, jesmonddenehouse.co.uk 
<http://www.jesmonddenehouse.co.uk>, doubles from £130

Back to the top <>



Eat

Pie and peas may be a dish more suited to the football terraces of St James' 
Park but the Red House has turned it into an art form. One of the city's oldest 
pubs and historically the haunt of dockworkers and the Quayside's ladies of the 
night, it has thankfully been dragged away from its more recent niche as a 
venue for stag parties. A change of ownership means there's pie to be had here, 
not just one but half a dozen: the spiced mutton and apricot will warm you 
through on the briskest of winter evenings. Next, pick your accompanying mash, 
then your peas – mushy or minted petit pois – and finally which of the three 
liquors you'd like splashed over. Place your order, take a seat in the bay 
window overlooking the Tyne Bridge and wash it down with a pint of cask ale. 
It's £10 for two pies on Wednesdays. Such simple pleasures have never felt so 
extravagant but if it's extravagance you're craving, ask about the Man v Pie 
challenge: a man-sized platter of pies that's free if you finish every crumb in 
less than 10 minutes.
 The Redhouse, Newcastle 
Quayside has always spoilt diners for choice. Try the Broad Chare (
thebroadchare.co.uk <http://www.thebroadchare.co.uk>) and its unapologetically 
hearty British fare, the southern Thai dishes served in the snug Old Siam (
theoldsiam.co.uk/ <http://theoldsiam.co.uk/newcastle.html>), or the 
unpretentious Indian menu at Simla (simla-restaurant.co.uk 
<http://www.simla-restaurant.co.uk>).
• The Red House, 32 Sandhill, Quayside, 0191-261 1037, theredhousencl.co.uk 
<http://www.theredhousencl.co.uk>

Back to the top <>



Drink

Cheryl Cole was spotted partying hard in Livello before its official opening 
last autumn and you'll often see a parade of sports cars lined up upside. Don't 
be fooled, though; the hardcore drinkers migrated from Quayside a decade ago, 
so the crowd you'll find here is a little more refined. Livello is a bright 
spot on the city's cocktail scene with a comprehensive menu offering classics 
and spirited new recipes from £5. Order a Gummi Berri Juice and you'll be 
treated to a chemistry experiment: a sweet green concoction is served in a 
conical flask of dry ice, smoke belching over the lip as you take a sip.
 Popolo, Newcastle 
If cocktails are your poison, Popolo (popolo.co.uk <http://www.popolo.co.uk>) 
in Pilgrim Street has been shaking and stirring for more than a decade. Drop by 
on a Thursday night for its prohibition menu, settle into a stool under the 
buzz of the sodium bulbs and order a bourbon-soaked Wild Berry Jam. Alvino's (
alvinosbar.co.uk <http://www.alvinosbar.co.uk>) next door serves a decent 
mojito and has one of Newcastle's rare rooftop terraces.
• Livello, Lower Dean Street, 0191-233 1010, barlivello.co.uk 
<http://www.barlivello.co.uk>

Back to the top <>



Buy

Built in the early 19th century and once the largest indoor market in Europe, 
the Grainger Market hasn't strayed too far from its roots as a crowded 
Victorian shopping experience. More surprising is that such a prime site hasn't 
been razed to the ground in the name of progress. Look beyond the endless 
blocks of butchers and fresh veg stalls, and you'll find an eccentric spread of 
boutique businesses, treasure troves of vinyl and jungles of house plants. 
Pumphrey's (pumphreys-coffee.co.uk <http://www.pumphreys-coffee.co.uk>) has 
been trading coffee since the 18th century, and is a key player in Newcastle's 
growing independent coffee scene. Stretching out beneath the glazed roof of the 
market's western hall, its double-sided stall not only serves the perfect drop 
of coffee but sells dozens of beans, blends and speciality teas.
 Grainger Indoor Market, Grainger Town. Photograph: Alamy 
Pick up a bargain at the Marks & Spencer Penny Bazaar, the last of its kind to 
be operated by the high-street giant, with big reductions on selected lines 
from kitchenware through to womenswear. For shopping with attitude, there's 
swagger and fashion to be had at Liam Gallagher's boutique, Pretty Green (
prettygreen.com <http://www.prettygreen.com/>), opposite the market's east 
entrance.
• Grainger Market, graingermarket.org.uk <http://www.graingermarket.org.uk>

Back to the top <>



Unwind

A key attraction of Newcastle's compact centre is the ease with which you can 
slip away from urban life. You're just 10 minutes' drive from the 
Northumberland countryside and the eastern tail of Hadrian's Wall, while 20 
minutes on the city's metro transports you to the coast.

Tynemouth is a popular day out for tourists and locals alike. Stroll down to 
the pier and along to the lighthouse that guards the mouth of the Tyne. The 
ruins of the Benedictine priory standing high above on the headland provide a 
ghostly but picturesque backdrop. The beaches at Tynemouth have attracted 
visitors since the 18th century. Nowadays, the broad sweep of fine dunes and 
sea swells at Longsands lure top surfers from across the country. Join the pack 
and take your first surf lesson with Tynemouth Surf Co (tynemouthsurf.co.uk 
<http://www.tynemouthsurf.co.uk>) or learn to stand-up paddle-board with 
Boardskillz (boardskillz.co.uk <http://www.boardskillz.co.uk>).
 A board surfer, Tynemouth. Photograph: Owen Humpreys/PA 
For families wanting to explore the oceans without donning a wetsuit, the Blue 
Reef Aquarium (bluereefaquarium.co.uk/tynemouth.htm 
<http://www.bluereefaquarium.co.uk/tynemouth.htm>) is a modest but colourful 
collection of creatures from both land and sea. Alongside sharks and seahorses, 
expect to see poison frogs and pygmy marmosets in the aquarium's new rainforest 
exhibition.
• Tynemouth, 15 minutes from Newcastle town centre by metro on the Yellow line

• Paul Smith is the Newcastle author of Twitchhiker, and Tales from the Edge 
of America <http://twitchhiker.com/>, available from 25th February

Back to the top <>
 