
 * See <> 
 * Stay <> 
 * Eat <> 
 * Drink <> 
 * Buy <> 
 * Unwind <> 
 LOADING 


Click on the slideshow's tiles to jump straight to that part of the guide or 
use these navigation links if you're reading this on a mobile: 
See <> | Stay <> | Eat <> | Drink <> | Buy <> | Unwind <>



See

Birmingham has a cavalier attitude to its buildings, even the brutalist 1973 
Central Library by architectJohn Madin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/jan/19/john-madin> – a huge 
inverted ziggurat, envisioned to gleam white across town but never quite 
finished – is scheduled for demolition very soon. So, while a walk past that 
(next door are the more traditional Council House and Town Hall) and its
horrific metal replacement <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Library_of_Birmingham>
on nearby Broad Street, is worthwhile, take a trip out of the city centre to 
find the real history.
 Photograph: Alamy 
Three miles away to the north is Aston Hall 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aston_Hall>, a Jacobean mansion that survived 
Roundhead onslaught in the civil war and has held out against puritan city 
planners ever since. It's buffered by some well manicured gardens and lawns, 
but is now bordered by the A38(M) Aston Expressway and dwarfed by Villa Park, 
home to one of the city's two underperforming football teams. Once home to the 
royalist Holte family, it was badly damaged by Parliamentary troops in 1643. 
Visitors can see the cannonball that made holes in the staircase, and also the 
holes that haven't been repaired since.Bracebridge Hall 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bracebridge_Hall> by Washington Irving is a 
collection of short stories based on life at Aston Hall, describing a wedding 
during its last days as a home.
• Aston Hall, 0121 675 4722, bmag.org.uk/aston-hall 
<http://www.bmag.org.uk/aston-hall>, closed until 30 March, entry £4, under-16s 
free, free entry on first Sunday of each month

Back to the top <>



Stay

The iconic Rotunda <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotunda_%28Birmingham%29> in 
the city centre ("more cylindrical than the gherkin" claims a T-shirt) has now 
been converted from offices into stylish flats. Although some are privately 
owned, it's possible to book into the penthouse and other serviced 
accommodation in what calls itself a "boutique apartment hotel". Rooms are 
decorated in pop-art style to match the building's 1960s modernism, with 
deafening colours and large prints on what walls there are.
 The Rotunda apartments in Birmingham 
But no pictures or design are a match for the view from the floor-to-ceiling 
windows all around the balcony on the top floor. On a clear day you can almost 
see forever. The building is Grade II-listed, but stood almost empty and 
rundown during the demolition and rebuilding of the nearby Bullring at the turn 
of the century. It almost feels historic in the context of its gleaming 
surroundings. Refurbished and renovated by Urban Splash, it towers over the 
main shopping streets of the city and is a fantastically central place to stay.
• 150 New Street, 0121-285 1290, stayingcool.com/birmingham 
<http://www.stayingcool.com/birmingham>, doubles from about £95 a night, 
weekend deals available

Back to the top <>



Eat

Across from New Street railway station, through the Bullring shopping centre 
and indoor markets, past chain outlets such as Café Rouge and Jamie's Italian, 
you'll find Café Soya. Formerly run out of a small kiosk in Chinatown, Soya is 
now a favourite place for birthdays and other occasions when only a table for 
10 or more will do. It's fantastic for authentic south-east Asian food: steamed 
pancakes, noodle soups and very hot curries. The food has been known to appear 
in a seemingly random order, and it takes an age to do things like pay – but 
don't be afraid to ask the staff to hurry up, or they may just assume that, 
like many others, you're happy to linger all evening.
 The Warehouse Cafe, Birmingham 
In nearby Digbeth is another hidden eatery, this one exclusively vegetarian 
and vegan (although Cafe Soya is also good for these). The Warehouse Cafe is 
above a health food shop and the headquarters of the local Friends of the Earth 
chapter. It's healthy and organic as possible, with a wide selection of soft 
drinks so refreshing you could forget it's not licensed.

• Cafe Soya (Unit 2, Upper Dean Street, 0121 622 3888, cafesoya.co.uk 
<http://www.cafesoya.co.uk>) and The Warehouse Cafe (54-57 Allison Street, 0121 
633 0261,thewarehousecafe.com <http://www.thewarehousecafe.com/>)

Back to the top <>



Drink

It doesn't offer great views, for in the great tradition of Birmingham city 
centre pubs the Post Office Vaults is literally as well as figuratively 
underground. It's small and cosy, but has perhaps the widest selection of 
specialist beers and micro-brewed ales in the city. According to the ebullient 
host, who will gladly play a game to show you the rules, it also has the only 
bar billiards table in the West Midlands. Tucked under New Street, where it 
meets the civic expanse of Victoria Square, the bar is a witty respite from the 
rush above. During the run up to Christmas, when Birmingham is turned into the 
largest German market "outside Germany" and people are squashed and assaulted 
by the smell of sausages, the landlord entices people in with the promise of 
"stress busting kits" (sheets of bubble wrap) as well as the usual imported and 
local brews. Salopian Brewery's Oracle, from just up the road in Shropshire, is 
a permanent fixture, and local ale experts have recommended Sierra Nevada, 
Nøgne and Flying Dog as well as the "lethal"Yellow Snow IPA 
<http://rogue.com/beers/yellow-snow-ipa.php>, while they were still upright.
 Photograph: Edward Shaw 
Fans of ale can also check out the newly opened BrewDog bar (81 John Bright 
Street,brewdog.com/bars/birmingham <http://www.brewdog.com/bars/birmingham>) 
which stocks a contoversial beer bottled within a stuffed squirrel, or, for a 
less self-consciously trendy experience, the high-ceilinged and bright Old 
Joint Stock (4 Temple Row West,oldjointstocktheatre.co.uk 
<http://www.oldjointstocktheatre.co.uk/>), a bank converted into a pub and 
theatre.
• Post Office Vaults, 84 New Street, postofficevaults.co.uk 
<http://postofficevaults.co.uk/> 

Back to the top <>



Buy

Birmingham's main trades were always rather industrial, but in the Jewellery 
Quarter <http://www.jewelleryquarter.net/>, just west of the city centre, 
talented and bespoke craftsmen's workshops sit alongside "vintage" jewellery 
bought and sold by weight. For something uniquely Birmingham, however, you 
might, again, venture a little further out of the centre. King's Heath has long 
been overshadowed by its neighbour, Tolkien's famous bohemian suburb of 
Moseley, but a combination of property prices and licensing law changes have 
pushed artists and accompanying wastrels about half a mile up the road, and 
"the Heath" is now brimming with bars, bands and indie boutiques.
 The People Shop, BIrmingham 
The People Shop is the best of the area's outlets, offering chatty service 
with locally made art and craft of the sort every Brummie hipster snaps up then 
snaps with Instagram. Designer in residence Mr Christian (mr-christian.com 
<http://www.mr-christian.com/>) produces bespoke tailored dresses, consulting 
and sketching on the shop floor as well as blogging the results. He is fast 
gaining a reputation across Europe, so snap up an original while you can still 
afford it.

If you're not in the market for a dress, try a drink and some live music 
(several nights a week) round the corner in the Hare and Hounds (106 High 
Street,hareandhoundskingsheath.co.uk <http://hareandhoundskingsheath.co.uk/>). 
Here you may be seated at almost random heights around the tables due to the 
retro and vintage furniture, but even if you don't fancy a pint you will get to 
sample some real local heritage. Like a significant (though sadly dwindling) 
number of Birmingham pubs, the "hairy mound" is still decorated with Victoria 
tile work and masterful stained glass.
• The People Shop, 50 Poplar Road, 0121-444 3444, thepeopleshop.co.uk 
<http://www.thepeopleshop.co.uk/we-are-here/>

Back to the top <>



Unwind

For such a concrete city, Birmingham is surprisingly green in places. Its 
municipal parks are spread over the conurbation like patches of calm, but most 
offer not much more than grass, the odd flower bed and overweight amateur 
sportsmen on a Sunday morning. Cannon Hill Park in Edgbaston is different. It 
has a boating lake, wild areas by the River Rea, a miniature golf course and 
even Brum's oldest pub. That the pub is long closed is a disappointment, but 
there's plenty more to do.
 Photograph: Alamy 
Set against the river is the Midlands Arts centre (macarts.co.uk 
<http://www.macarts.co.uk/>), known as the mac, with cinema, cafe and bar too. 
The gallery is well embedded in a thriving Birmingham art scene, where 
photography, performance, sound and multi-modal artists all do interesting 
work, often concerning local culture.

In spring or summer, nothing beats the Nature Centre 
<http://www.birmingham.gov.uk/naturecentre> on the edge of the park (entrance 
on Pershore Road). Built to educate the city-bound schoolchild in animals and 
flora they'd not be likely to encounter, in recent years it has expanded its 
animal conservation work and now houses more exotic breeds like meerkats, 
lemurs and famously – thanks to oneescapee 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-367493/Panda-caught-red-handed-Birmingham.html>
 – red pandas. It's perfect for those with young children, or slightly hungover 
loved-up couples.
• Cannon Hill Park: entrance off Edgbaston Road, 
birmingham.gov.uk/cannonhillpark <http://www.birmingham.gov.uk/cannonhillpark>

Back to the top <>

Jon Bounds is the founder of birminghamitsnotshit.co.uk 
<http://www.birminghamitsnotshit.co.uk>
 