
 * See <> 
 * Stay <> 
 * Eat <> 
 * Drink <> 
 * Buy <> 
 * Unwind <> 
 LOADING 


Click on the slideshow's tiles to jump straight to that part of the guide or 
use these navigation links if you're reading this on a mobile: 
See <> | Stay <> | Eat <> | Drink <> | Buy <> | Unwind <>



See

In his book 20th Century Architecture, former Guardian architecture 
correspondent Jonathan Glancey singled out Liverpool's Metropolitan Cathedral 
of Christ the King as one of the century's standout buildings. His view is 
probably shared with about 50% of the city: the strident, geometric "wigwam" of 
poured concrete and jaunty stained glass is as divisive now as it was when it 
held its first mass in the late 1960s.
 Photograph: Mike Kirk/Loop Images 
But all is not what it seems at the top of the town, because this avant-garde 
house of god sits atop one of the city's lost architectural gems. Lutyens' 
Crypt is no ordinary ecclesiastical cellar; to the converted this is 
Liverpool's third cathedral, a secret spiritual bunker inciting shock and awe. 
Accessed by a white spiral staircase from one of the chapels, the crypt is a 
ghostly footprint of a gargantuan construction slated to rise above it: a 
Lutyens-designed cathedral on a St Peter's scale that faltered when funds slunk 
away after the second world war.

The deep purple brick and enormous granite pediments and coping stones were 
chosen to take the weight of the cathedral above, but now support nothing but a 
windy piazza. In glass display cabinets, newspaper cuttings and yellowing 
blueprints tell the story behind the stones, while scale models and artists' 
impressions of the intended cathedral depict a staggering domed behemoth, 
rising over the city. Elsewhere, recessed chapels with Indiana Jones-style 
rolling marble portcullises house the tombs of three former archbishops, and a 
treasury gleams with more bejewelled caskets and fancy headpieces than Abbey 
Clancy's dressing table.
• liverpoolmetrocathedral.org.uk <http://liverpoolmetrocathedral.org.uk/>, £3pp

Back to the top <>



Stay

In the past five years Liverpool's bed count has skyrocketed, and there are 
stylish city hotels aplenty for the boutique-minded. But the best city breaks 
aren't always compatible with an early rise for a hotel breakfast, especially 
if you've enjoyed Liverpool's nightlife. With a footsore weekend of exploring 
ahead, opt for the freedom (and space) of a self-catering apartment over a 
hotel. Close to theLiverpool One <http://www.liverpool-one.com> shopping centre 
and theRopeWalks <http://www.ropewalksliverpool.com/> for nightlife, but far 
enough away to ensure a sound night's sleep, Posh Pads at the Casartelli has 
generously proportioned suites.
 Posh Pads at the Casartelli 
The Casartellli building is a replica of an 18th-century Liverpool landmark – 
a bow-fronted building that once housed a business manufacturing scientific 
instruments and later became a wine warehouse before falling into disrepair. 
Inside it's all huge plasma TVs and fully stocked kitchens to help you continue 
the party at your place.
• Posh Pads at the Casartelli, Hanover Street, 0151-708 6666, posh-pads.co.uk 
<http://posh-pads.co.uk/>. One-bedroom apartment from £65, two-bedroom from £120

Back to the top <>



Eat

Mexican street-food joint Lucha Libre (96 Wood St, 0151-329 0200, 
lucha-libre.co.uk <http://lucha-libre.co.uk/>) is a firm favourite of students, 
late-night shoppers and pre-clubbing groups, who gather around plates (£6-£10) 
of spicy slow-cooked pork marinated in orange juice, Mexican fishcakes with a 
spike of red chilli, and generously stuffed burritos – all great fuel for a 
night on the tiles. Downstairs, Maya is an enticing cocktail bar if you find 
yourself too full to hit the streets for a while.
 Panoramic 34 
For something more memorable, it's hard to beat Panoramic 34, one of the UK's 
highest restaurants. Yes, that means you can expect to add £20 or so to the 
bill, but the food just about stands up to the side order of stunning city 
views. Looking like a Pam-Am first-class sky bar circa 1975, the intimate teak 
and chrome space, with its wrap around windows and snug cocktail bar. works 
hard to offer seasonal menus using the best north-western produce. You might 
find Irish Sea scallops with celeriac purée, a pink slice of Cumbrian lamb, or 
fillet of Welsh black beef. Lunchtime menu £21 for two courses.
• West Tower, Brook St, 0151-236 5534, panoramic34.com 
<http://www.panoramic34.com/>

Back to the top <>



Drink

Taking its cue from the hush-hush speakeasies of New York, 81ltd is a cocktail 
bar you'll have to hunt down via a website that reveals nothing but a telephone 
number. Text the digits, wait for the entry code (and directions) and you'll be 
heading to one of Liverpool's most theatrical drinking holes. Actually, the bar 
sits above a riotous "steins and brines" (beer and hotdogs) bar – but don't say 
we told you that. Beyond the security keypads and CCTV cameras, you'll find a 
little slice of midtown Manhattan, with cosy booths, a gleaming back bar and 
judiciously mixed cocktails (its excellent old-fashioneds would put a smile on 
Don Draper's face).
 81ltd 
Music wise, you'll find Men Without Hats mashing it up with DJ Shadow, Kool 
and the Gang with Kraftwerk. Too many Liverpool bars suffer from the 
style-over-substance curse of black resin chandeliers and Philippe Starck Ghost 
chairs, but 81ltd is crisp without being showy and as such attracts a sociable 
crowd who come to enjoy top- drawer cocktails and funky tunes until the early 
hours.
• 07803 361052, 81ltd.com <http://81ltd.com/>

Back to the top <>



Buy

The Liverpool One <http://www.liverpool-one.com/website/> development 
single-handedly catapulted the city back into the top five retail destinations 
when it opened in 2008. Still, for all its audacious open-air-mall styling, its 
breezy park overlooking the river and its procession of chain stores, it's not 
exactly overflowing with Liverpool-centric retail opportunities (save for the 
obligatory Liverpool and Everton football shops). For a souvenir of this 
artistic and industrious city head to Made Here, in the strugglingMetquarter 
<http://www.metquarter.com> mall. Here, curator Kate Stewart has assembled an 
emporium of made-in-Liverpool gifts, art, textiles and trinkets. From the funky 
(flatpack make-your-own models of Liverpool's cathedrals) to the frivolous 
(earrings made from Liverpool's legendary Meccano brand) Made Here celebrates 
the best of the city's current crop of talented makers and designers.
 Made Here 
Across the city, just behind John Lewis, Cow&Co (15 Cleveland Square, 
cowandco.co.uk/liverpool <http://www.cowandco.co.uk/liverpool/>) brings the 
best of international design to the city. It's mainly a mail order business, 
but its small shop offers unusual homewares from Sweden, delicious preserves 
from Portugal, and a smattering of regionally made goodies too. As an antidote 
to the anycity experience of Liverpool One, it's a breath of fresh continental 
air.
• Made Here, Metquarter, Whitechapel, made-here.co.uk 
<http://www.made-here.co.uk/>

Back to the top <>



Unwind

Liverpool's Anglican cathedral is Britain's biggest church, rising from a 
sandstone bluff overlooking the Mersey. Just north of it is the Liverpool 
Oratory: take the road that burrows its way downhill from here through dim 
tunnels and over faded tombstones, to St James Gardens – Liverpool's Père 
Lachaise.
 Photograph: Alamy 
The park is a deconsecrated cemetery which predates the cathedral, and is 
scattered with wobbly Victorian memorials and darkly inviting crypts. There's a 
secret spring too, bubbling up alongside the imposing Huskisson Memorial. 
Formerly a quarry, the site sits hunkered below the handsome terraces of 
Georgian Liverpool, but feels blissfully removed from the machinations of the 
city above. Take a book, grab a coffee from the cathedral refectory (it does 
great lunches, too) and get deep, deep down for a while.
• St James Gardens, Upper Parliament Street, liverpool.gov.uk 
<http://www.liverpool.gov.uk/leisure-parks-and-events/parks-and-greenspaces/st-james-gardens/>

Back to the top <>
 