
In Piccadilly Plaza, Manchester 
<http://manchesterhistory.net/manchester/tours/tour10/area10page24.html>, a 
bunch of brutalists are hanging on to Eddy Rhead’s every word. Concrete to the 
left of us, concrete to the right, Eddy is in modernist heaven. He introduces 
us to the concrete wall built by the Japanese architect Tadao Ando to separate 
the bustle of buses from the serenity of the gardens. Though it is pushing it a 
little to say Ando built the wall – he never actually came to Manchester, but 
he did give his name and blessing to it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fstange-kind-beauty-manchester-brutalist-modernism-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423488906483%2F3a27796c-5d79-4410-868f-4998b33b5020-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20strange%20kind%20of%20beauty%3A%20Manchester%E2%80%99s%20brutalist%20buildings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fstange-kind-beauty-manchester-brutalist-modernism-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20strange%20kind%20of%20beauty%3A%20Manchester%E2%80%99s%20brutalist%20buildings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fstange-kind-beauty-manchester-brutalist-modernism-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423488906483%2F3a27796c-5d79-4410-868f-4998b33b5020-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The tour group contemplate Tadao Ando’s concrete wall in Manchester’s 
Piccadilly Gardens. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for The 
Guardian/Christopher Thomond 
When I was growing up in Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>
, I came to this part of town to do soup runs for the homeless. Back then, 
before the Modernists made merry, the gardens were old-fashioned flowery 
affairs. But even then there was not much serenity to be had. This was where 
the smack heads and the sex workers, the dipsos and the dossers, hung out. 
There was something moving about the community – and it was a real community. 
If one of the homeless had moved on or had an accident, we could rely on the 
prostitutes to keep us informed.

Today, it’s rather soulless in its concrete and steel garb. “It’s just 
starchitecture,” says Dale Lately dismissively. Starchitecture? “Yeah, a 
building designed by a star architect who comes in from the outside. This isn’t 
really true brutalism.”

Eddy, the co-founder of the Manchester Modernist Society 
<http://www.manchestermodernistsociety.org/>, tells the crowd of 30 trendies, 
councillors, hippies, architects and anarchists gathered for his walk, that 
this is brutalism light – a Disneyfication of concrete culture. But we’re only 
at the start. He is going to take us to the centre of the city’s concrete 
jungle, and that, he says, is where we’ll recover our soul.

By the way, he says, brutalism doesn’t come from the word “brutal” as we think 
we know it, however appropriate it sounds. This brutalism is fromBéton brut, 
which is French for raw concrete. We turn to the back of Piccadilly Gardens. 
Nothing unfamiliar or new here. Just the nondescript hotels that lead into 
Chinatown.

But as Eddy talks, it morphs into a concrete wonderland. He’s right – the 
Piccadilly Plaza does have a touch of Thunderbirds about it. He points out a 
beautifully curved car-park ramp. Eddy is known for his half-arsed 
topographical anecdotes, and it’s time for another one.

“In the early 1970s, the architect Louis Kahn 
<https://designmuseum.org/designers/louis-kahn>, who was a god to me, came to 
Manchester to give a lecture at the university. He was in his late 80s and he 
was picked up by a lecturer, who took him to the hotel. He was driving up the 
circular ramp and the car conked out with Louis Kahn in the passenger seat on 
the ramp. He put the handbrake on, it was late at night, he was panicking, 
didn’t know what to do. Suddenly headlights came up in his rearview mirror. He 
looked out, there was a transit van behind, out jump five or six Afro’d men. It 
wasthe Commodores <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodores>! They’d been doing 
a gig in town. They jumped out and pushed Louis Kahn up the ramp to the plaza. 
So the Commodores saved the day. It’s a beautiful story. On that note, we’ll 
move on.”

Close to the plaza is the City Tower hotel. At first glance, all you notice is 
its height. Close inspection reveals beautiful concrete artworks on the gables. 
“The story goes, this is to reflect the circuit boards because as you know 
Manchester invented the computer, no matter what anybody in America says. So 
that is a proud nod towards Baby, the first computer.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fstange-kind-beauty-manchester-brutalist-modernism-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423489073887%2F98236f2d-c0e7-4e1a-8012-6142576934f0-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20strange%20kind%20of%20beauty%3A%20Manchester%E2%80%99s%20brutalist%20buildings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fstange-kind-beauty-manchester-brutalist-modernism-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20strange%20kind%20of%20beauty%3A%20Manchester%E2%80%99s%20brutalist%20buildings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fstange-kind-beauty-manchester-brutalist-modernism-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423489073887%2F98236f2d-c0e7-4e1a-8012-6142576934f0-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The original UMIST campus, now integrated into the University of Manchester. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for The Guardian./Christopher Thomond 
Here is the concrete complex at Umist, Manchester’s science and technology 
university, built in the 1960s and once the gleaming symbol of Harold Wilson’s 
white-hot technological revolution.

Eddy explains that this was inspired by the great Brazilian architect Oscar 
Niemeyer, whose buildings were designed to reflect the light and shadows of 
Brasilia. Even Eddy doesn’t know why so many were built in Manchester. There is 
something heartbreakingly ugly about these buildings. But there is also 
something strangely beautiful – the simplicity, the vision, the ambition (for a 
better world), the hope (for a sunny world).


Parallel to Canal Street, plonk in the middle of a regular road, is the most 
surreal example of Mancunian brutalism: a concrete building with red concrete 
windows and 1911 stamped into its roof. Nobody seems to knows why it was built, 
what it was used for and why it’s still there. It’s every bit as ghostly as 
Rachel Whiteread’s House – only this is for real. Eddy is bewitched by it, and 
so am I.

“It’s BEAUTIFUL,” I scream.

“Beauty is in the eye of the beholder,” says Joan Davies, slightly 
disapprovingly. As a councillor, she’s more used to showing off Manchester’s 
traditional hotspots – the town hall, the Royal Exchange, St Peter’s Square.

Every so often, one of the party passes on a tip to me. A man called David 
taps me on the arm. “Do you know there’s a website calledFuck Yeah Brutalism 
<http://fuckyeahbrutalism.tumblr.com/>,” he whispers. Is that a fan site? “Of 
course,” he say. What made him a brutalist? “Insipid modern buildings,” he 
says. “I like the unloved.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fstange-kind-beauty-manchester-brutalist-modernism-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423488703418%2Fd905be39-8f62-4b66-9407-5afb5736a6dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20strange%20kind%20of%20beauty%3A%20Manchester%E2%80%99s%20brutalist%20buildings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fstange-kind-beauty-manchester-brutalist-modernism-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20strange%20kind%20of%20beauty%3A%20Manchester%E2%80%99s%20brutalist%20buildings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fstange-kind-beauty-manchester-brutalist-modernism-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423488703418%2Fd905be39-8f62-4b66-9407-5afb5736a6dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Simon admires the Mancunian Way flyover, winner of a concrete society award. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for The Guardian/Christopher Thomond 
So we head off to the crowning glory of concrete Manchester – the Mancunian 
Way, a two-mile mini-motorway. Eddy points out the monument to the Mancunian 
Way, made in two complementary concretes. It reads: “1968. The Concrete Society 
Award was awarded to the Mancunian Way.”

Actually, it feels as if the Mancunian Way is held together by graffiti. 
“Future anarchy”; “Take LSD”; “Acid makes everything better”; “There’s no time 
to sit on the fence, fight.” Pure grime, pure gorgeousness. Welcome to 
Manchester.

• This article was amended on 9 February 2015. An earlier version misspelled 
the name of the architect Louis Kahn.
 