
A couple of years ago, I moved away from Copenhagen. I say that because I want 
to tell you something about what it’s like to be a writer inDenmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark>. Most Danish authors live in 
Copenhagen. It is there that you find the literary scene – called simply “the 
scene” if you actually manage to become part of it. I lived in Copenhagen for 
seven years. On the one hand, I wanted to become part of the scene but 
couldn’t. On the other, I didn’t want to. No, I did not want to be part of the 
scene.

* * *

Just about the time that I seriously began to consider moving from Copenhagen, 
the first wolf was sighted in Jutland 
<https://www.rewildingeurope.com/news/the-first-wolf-family-in-denmark-since-centuries/>
. Big commotion! Wolves had been wiped out a couple of centuries previous, and 
suddenly: “a wolf in Jutland!” Interest groups sprouted up that felt the wolf 
should be shot. A wolf-free Denmark, they said. Out trickled tales that seemed 
to have come from the Brothers Grimm. Letters fired off to editors screamed, 
“The wolf is coming, the wolf is coming!” People said they were afraid that the 
wolf would approach their houses, would snatch their children. “But Jutland is 
a big place,” said others, who knew that the most dangerous wolf is the one 
that lurks in our minds. “Let’s welcome the wolf back.” The debate was heated.

In a small population where just about everyone is related, artistic milieus 
are decidedly claustrophobic

A bit of geography is called for. Denmark consists partly of a large peninsula 
attached to northern Germany. The peninsula is called Jutland. In certain 
places, Jutland is abundant in natural life. And thinly populated. Toward the 
west there are vast tree plantations, moors, and fields–and then of course the 
North Sea. It was in western Jutland that the wolf was spotted. The rest of 
Denmark consists of islands, large and small. First there’s Funen, the island 
where Hans Christian Andersen grew up, until he was 16 and left for Copenhagen. 
For the scene was centered in Copenhagen during the 19th century too, and 
Copenhagen lay as far east as one could go–on the island of Zealand.

There are about 5.6 million Danes in the country, and Copenhagen is our 
capital. Some 1.2 million people live there. We are a minuscule people with a 
peripheral language, and in Copenhagen, our nation’s writers gather in 
coteries. If you’re in one of these coteries, you’re a writer among others who 
write and think somewhat the way you do. My experience abroad tells me that 
intellectual movements and artistic milieus are tricky beasts, regardless of 
where you stumble upon them. But in a small population where just about 
everyone is related, artistic milieus are decidedly claustrophobic.

I wanted to be part of the scene, and yet I didn’t, after all. I couldn’t 
anyway, and for seven years I sat in Copenhagen, stuck fast like a burr on the 
back of a cat. And then came the news of a wolf in Jutland.

* * *

There’s bread in crime fiction, but we can’t all write crime fiction

I was born in Jutland, so you could say I moved back home. I chose to settle 
so far west that it’s hardly Denmark anymore. On the central western coast, by 
the North Sea. Every day I walk down to the sea and position myself with my 
back to the land. If I could swim that far–though no one could–I’d be able to 
go ashore on a beach in Aberdeen. I feel closer to the great world here than I 
did in Copenhagen. There are no other writers here. There are ceramists, 
photographers, painters, and musicians–but no writers. Sometimes I drive sixty 
miles north and drink coffee with an old poet who lives up there. I invite 
authors from Copenhagen to spend the weekend. Then they stand with the wind in 
their hair and draw the sea into their lungs, before making the long journey 
east again. There will be more and more time between their visits, I know.

Denmark has produced great writers, yet there are countries that have produced 
more, and countries that have shown more love for the ones they’ve produced. 
Until a generation ago, most Danes were connected to agriculture, through 
either farming or processing. Then agriculture was effectivized, and the 
industrial jobs moved to countries where wages were lower. Since then, the 
population has been in flight from the countryside to the cities, especially 
Copenhagen. It’s a move that the writers here have always undertaken–they want 
to go to the city to encounter the writers they aspire to become. And there’s 
something to that, I think. If a writer isn’t familiar with the literature of 
her own country as it unfolds in her own time, she misses out on dialogue, on 
contact with the path. She must dare to measure herself against the best! 
That’s why I moved to Copenhagen. But when I saw what I had to do, I didn’t 
want to. And I couldn’t either.

* * *

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fa-wolf-in-jutland-dorthe-nors-on-the-writing-life-in-denmark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F964e51ba6e1210b89eeb9abdd9d75e88275c65a8%2F0_0_5280_5280%2F5280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20wolf%20in%20Jutland%3A%20Dorthe%20Nors%20on%20the%20writing%20life%20in%20Denmark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fa-wolf-in-jutland-dorthe-nors-on-the-writing-life-in-denmark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20wolf%20in%20Jutland%3A%20Dorthe%20Nors%20on%20the%20writing%20life%20in%20Denmark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fa-wolf-in-jutland-dorthe-nors-on-the-writing-life-in-denmark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F964e51ba6e1210b89eeb9abdd9d75e88275c65a8%2F0_0_5280_5280%2F5280.jpg>
 A seaside house in southern Denmark.
 Photograph: Guenter Rossenbach/Zefa/Corbis 
I bought a small house in a village by the ocean. There are two reading groups 
in the village. The local women meet once a month to read books together. It’s 
a recent development in Danish reading culture and one that I put great stock 
in, aside from the fact that it lacks men. Among writers, you find men and 
women in equal numbers–but not among readers. I wish that Danish men would read 
more, and that Danish men would read women, but unfortunately that’s not the 
way it is. But you take what you can get, and in the reading groups, women 
gather to talk about books and drink coffee. I hadn’t lived in the village very 
long before I was asked if I wouldn’t come and talk about my work. It was an 
obvious thing for me to do, they thought.

I said yes but it made my stomach hurt. I feared what they would think of me.

It was the Danes’ farming blood. It made me nervous. It runs through our 
veins, for good and ill. A farmer’s life depends on stability and order; a 
farmer is rooted. He doesn’t care for changes and surprises. He doesn’t like 
anything that comes from outside and makes a disturbance; disturbances can mean 
disaster. Whatever can’t be controlled, whatever has a wild or ambiguous nature 
is considered dangerous. The farmer fears any creature that has an inscrutable 
essence. Such creatures can spoil a harvest, or they’ll seat themselves at your 
table and eat you out of house and home. Run off with the sheep. Set fire to 
the barn–and what does a poet actuallylive off of? Can it pay the bills?

If I had a dollar for every time I’ve been asked if I could make a living by 
writing, I’d be rich.

'Can you pay your bills?' It means, in all its presumption, 'Are you a burden 
on society? A parasite? A threat to us?'

But I’m not rich. As in other countries, it’s nearly impossible to get rich 
from writing fiction and poetry in Denmark. There’s bread in crime fiction, but 
we can’t all write crime fiction, and so I turned up for the village reading 
group event with my slender literary productions under my arm, nervous and 
hesitant. I’m usually not afraid to speak before large gatherings. I’ve 
appeared on TV, on the radio, and at international literary festivals without 
my hands trembling. I’m at home on stage and feel comfortable with the public 
side of my writing. But as I sat there at the head of a table covered with 
coffee and pastry, I flushed with shame.

“Can you pay your bills?” That was the question I was waiting for, and I 
dreaded it in advance. It means, of course, in all its presumption, “Are you a 
burden on society? A parasite? A threat to us?”

Denmark is usually good about supporting its artists. In the Ministry of 
Culture, funds are earmarked for author work grants and translations. When a 
Danish author gets something published abroad, the government provides travel 
money so that we can go off and be ambassadors for our country. Our culture 
policy is social democratic. It strives for fairness, it promotes equality. It 
also recognizes that our language is small and threatened, and knows that 
writers help to preserve our curious tongue. The Danish state wants to provide 
writers with tolerable conditions. The Danish statewants culture and art. So 
Denmark provides support from the top down.

I wish that Danish men would read more, and that Danish men would read women

But by the coffee table in the reading group, I found myself in a place where 
art would be supported from the bottom up. And in Denmark, that’s another 
matter entirely. Unlike Icelanders or the French, for instance, the average 
Dane does not have a tradition of examining literature, much less discussing it 
at all hours of the day. It’s considered a tad affected to be an artist. And 
the fact that my work has no concrete utility makes it hard to explain to most 
people the benefits of what I do. “Does it pay the bills?” It’s the farmer in 
them asking, and there I was, seated by a table full of farmers’ wives. I 
needn’t have worried, though, for the women were pleasant. They’d baked rolls 
and layer cakes. There was coffee and tea. And to be honest, they weren’t 
particularly interested in my work. They were more interested in why I had 
decided to move to their area. There was someone who asked if I made a living 
from writing. That was expected, and I answered as I’m accustomed to doing: 
“Just about.” And then came the question that I hadn’t expected. And which I 
still have a hard time shaking off. A woman down on the far end of the long 
table gave me a worried look. She wondered: did I have a restless nature?

A restless nature?

Just like the wolf. A wanderer.

* * *

I’m not the first author to discover that anyone with a free and different 
nature is considered a threat to the existing culture. The Dano-Norwegian 
author Aksel Sandemose wrote about it more than 80 years ago, setting down the 
regulating mechanisms that operate on Scandinavians from below, in what he 
called the Law of Jante. According to Sandemose, the 10 commandments that 
regulate our social behavior are:

 * You mustn’t think you’re special. 
 * You mustn’t think you’re as good as we are. 
 * You mustn’t think you’re smarter than us. 
 * You mustn’t imagine you’re any better than us. 
 * You mustn’t think you know more than we do. 
 * You mustn’t think you’re more important than us. 
 * You mustn’t think you’re good at anything. 
 * You mustn’t laugh at us. 
 * You mustn’t think anyone cares about you. 
 * You mustn’t think you can teach us anything. 
In Scandinavia, anyone with a free and different nature is considered a threat 
to the existing culture

The Law of Jante is legendary in our part of the world. It describes a way of 
thinking that no Scandinavian can avoid responding to. The law is embedded in 
us, and passed down through generations. It’s actually quite odd that we in 
Denmark have this leveling attitude–for on the other hand, Denmark has a strong 
belief in itself, its values, and its way of being in the world. And there we 
stand like farmers, grounded in an unshakeable belief in ourselves and our 
right to be where we are and not budge an inch. At the same time, you should 
remember that Denmark is surrounded by water, and that down through the ages, 
it has therefore had free access to the world and thus an interest in other 
places too. Danes possess a strong wanderlust, and we contain these 
contradictions: the fixed and existing vs. the wild and seeking.

I have settled by the water. I need the great sky, the horizon. I love my 
little country; my language is my roothold. Danish is a linguistic playground 
for me, and I am grateful for the support the Danish state has given me and my 
fellow writers. But I am grateful too that I know English. It enables me to 
work outside Denmark–in the US, England, Sweden, Germany. I have found a 
greater world to write in, and after coming home to Jutland, it suddenly struck 
me one day that the artists who have meant the most to me have lived in places 
other than the places where the other artists all lived. They’ve lived out in 
the woods, on the prairie, by the sea, in the boondocks. Yes–the authors who 
have taught me to write, and who still reveal worlds to me, are the ones who’ve 
resided far from their culture’s self-conceived center.

The lone wolves.

* * *

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Around the summer solstice, we celebrated Midsummer’s Eve in my little village 
in the west. We gathered by the water, lit a bonfire, and sang songs about the 
light night. A forester from the local tree plantation gave the Midsummer 
speech and tried to calm the populace. They shouldn’t be afraid of the wolf. No 
case of a wolf causing a human death had been registered anywhere in the world 
since 1974. In short, there was something almost harmless about wolves, said 
the forester, who was clad in green trousers that blended into the natural 
surroundings. Just behind me stood two older men. Both of farming stock, of 
course. “Since 1974?” the one said. “Yep,” the other said. He paused before 
adding, “If it’s been that long, it’s statistically likely it’s going to happen 
again soon.” They agreed on that, the two men. That the wolf would no doubt 
strike again at any time.

I stood two feet in front of them. And they didn’t have a clue.

Translated from the Danish by Misha Hoekstra

 * Dorthe Nors is the author of five novels, including Karate Chop & Minna 
Needs Rehearsal Space 
<http://pushkinpress.com/book/karate-chop-minna-needs-rehearsal-space/>, and is 
the recipient of the Danish Arts Agency’s Three Year Grant for her “unusual and 
extraordinary talent.” Her stories have appeared in AGNI, Boston Review, 
Ecotone, Fence, A Public Space and the New Yorker. In 2016, a pair of Nors’s 
novellas,So Much for That Winter 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/So-Much-That-Winter-Novellas/dp/1555977421/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1450348434&sr=8-1&keywords=So+Much+for+That+Winter%3A+Novellas>
, will be released in the US by A Public Space Books in partnership with 
Graywolf Press.

 * Misha Hoekstra taught creative writing and literature for several years at 
Deep Springs College before moving to Denmark. He’s won several awards for his 
literary work, including the Sjöberg Translation Prize forYou Disappear 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/You_Disappear.html?id=KyTnnQEACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
 by Christian Jungersen. He now lives in Aarhus, where he writes and performs 
songs under the name Minka Hoist – includingone about the Jutlandic wolf 
<https://minkahoist.bandcamp.com/track/waiting-live-st-bogdag>.  