
I can’t be outdoors enough. Snow or shine, hot or cold, I’m outside. I grew up 
in an active, outdoorsy family who went on day hikes whenever possible and even 
car-camped occasionally. As I came of age, I started venturing deeper into a 
diversity of environments and for longer periods of time. By the time I had 
graduated college, I had thru-hiked the Appalachian trail. By my mid-20s, I had 
hiked on hundreds of trails across five continents. For me, nothing beats 
backpacking into an otherwise inaccessible campsite, having your own, 
uninterrupted space and being self-sufficient.

That said, one of my favorite places to camp is the roof of my Brooklyn 
apartment building.

I am not the first to recommend urban camping, and yet the initial response 
out of most people’s mouths when I tell them I love it is: “Here? In the city?” 
It’s a fair question given the very term “urban camping” presents a facade of 
contradiction. In practice, however, camping in a city is in many ways not so 
different from camping on an unpopulated mountain.

Like every environment, urban landscapes provide their own unique set of 
challenges, including noise, privacy and security from people (instead of bears 
or lions or snakes). One of the reasons I love urban camping is because of the 
specific elements that might not be present during traditional, “wilderness” 
camping. I’ve camped in urban or otherwise populated settings as diverse as a 
heavily trafficked college campus quad to building balconies to, most recently, 
my own apartment building roof.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Furban-rooftop-camping-in-the-city-summer-outings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd45fa1ae3377793b228b2eb5d6aad00761103ead%2F0_198_3670_4371%2F3670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Above%20the%20streets%2C%20beneath%20the%20stars%3A%20why%20you%20should%20try%20urban%20rooftop%20camping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Furban-rooftop-camping-in-the-city-summer-outings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Above%20the%20streets%2C%20beneath%20the%20stars%3A%20why%20you%20should%20try%20urban%20rooftop%20camping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Furban-rooftop-camping-in-the-city-summer-outings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd45fa1ae3377793b228b2eb5d6aad00761103ead%2F0_198_3670_4371%2F3670.jpg>
 Tent illuminated on urban rooftop, NYC. Photograph: Jayme Thornton/Getty Images
Urban camping is in many ways a more democratic form of experiencing 
environments than “wilderness” camping. While Leave No Trace principles help 
reduce human impact on environments, adhering to them can often be 
prohibitively expensive to the point where, in modern times, access to outdoor 
recreation is often rendered off-limits to certain socioeconomic classes. Urban 
camping, on the other hand, is accessible by public transportation or foot. 
Likewise, it generally makes much greater use of items one may already have 
lying around one’s home, so one can better avoid having to rent or buy 
expensive gear.

Furthermore, urban camping may be a good place to start for first-time campers 
as it’s remarkably forgiving; for instance, I love not having to pack in gear 
and food because I’m only sleeping pretty close to – or on top of – my home. I 
can even sometimes order delivery to my campsite, and if I forget something, I 
can simply run around the corner and pick it up.

That said, I will be the first to acknowledge the privilege I have in that I 
possess the liberty of choice: I experience little structural violence and have 
never experienced homelessness. I choose to sleep outside in cities; others are 
nowhere near as fortunate. Additionally, as an educated white guy, authorities 
are, all other factors being equal, less likely to harass me; likewise, as a 
cis man of decent stature, I am probably viewed by most people as a unfavorable 
target for anything from sexual violence to robbery.

Given the previous sentence, you’re probably thinking right now about all the 
ways you could get knifed. That means, however, you are generally aware of that 
tiny risk any time you leave your home. That is exactly why urban camping can 
additionally be a great jumping off point for people who may feel out of their 
shells sleeping in, say, the woods or a desert: not everyone knows what to do 
if a venomous snake bites, but most people who live in a city know what to do 
if, God forbid, someone pulls a knife on you and asks for your wallet.

Like many things in life, safety is in part a question of perspective. Is 
camping in “wilderness” safer than camping in a city? I would argue it’s apples 
and oranges: one is not safer than the other, but rather each produces its own 
unique challenges, and, if you already exist in an environment in some 
capacity, you probably already have a decent idea of the risks posed by that 
environment, as well as how to avoid them and ameliorate them if they do occur.

Urban camping can be more than simply a new experience: it can yield a 
metamorphosis. Even if it’s for a brief time, camping allows me to be part of a 
place, rather than an itinerant. Through camping, I experience an environment 
with an unparalleled intimacy; I hear sounds and observe the immediate world in 
ways I might otherwise never encounter if I had simply been passing through.

For example, I’m always amazed at the heterogeneity of flora and fauna I 
encounter camping in cities, which are popularly but erroneously considered 
biological dead zones. Even if it’s for a brief time, camping fixes you to a 
place, and, through observing the habits of people and animals and machines and 
plants and architecture, I am afforded a first-hand view of the cogs that 
contribute to a functioning landscape. When I camp, I experience whole, 
alternate realities of a landscape. To this end, I’ve come to realize that 
urban landscapes are not removed from “nature;” rather, urban landscapes pose a 
direct challenge to the dominant paradigm of nature-as-wilderness.

Camping, for me, is not so much having the perfect ultralight tent or hiking 
the greatest length of miles. Because camping is often an individualistic 
experience, there are few right or wrong ways to camp. Camping is such a 
powerful and transformative tool in my life because its manifestation is 
malleable. Each camping venture is what I want it to be: a movie night with 
friends, a romantic getaway with my husband, an opportunity to uniquely 
experience an environment, a family board game night, or a solitary time for 
reflection and recreation. I will never stop camping in the remote reaches of 
our planet, but I love urban camping. Urban camping is fulfilling without 
having to leave my proverbial backyard because I am positioning myself in a 
markedly different way in my environment. This change in space that allows me a 
change in perspective that forever surprises, delights and teaches.

How to … try urban camping

You wouldn’t walk into the Kalahari desert without planning ahead, so don’t do 
it in New York City either.

Think ahead about what you want to get out of the experience and work backward 
from there; make a list of what items your experience will require, and then 
use that as a checklist to ensure you have all you gear before heading to your 
campsite.

 * Due largely to illegitimate fears of purportedly dangerous (or 
unpredictably violent or mentally disturbed or unhygienic) homeless people, in 
many western cities it’s illegal to overnight in public areas. Check your local 
laws and ordinances for overnight use of public spaces.

 *  Always secure advance permission from the owner before camping on private 
property.

 *  Many outfitters will rent you the gear you need, including tents, sleeping 
bags, and sleeping mats. That said, couch cushions, bed sheets, yoga mats, and 
blankets can all work too – get creative. Are headlamps amazingly useful and 
awesome? Unquestionably. But if you’re camping on your own roof, a dollar store 
flashlight is fine.

 * Support your local outfitter, not just because small businesses reinvest in 
their communities, but because they are often the most knowledgeable on what 
gear works best in your region and have incomparable knowledge of the best 
trails, campsites, conditions, and so on.

 * The secret to choosing the right gear and location for any kind of camping 
is to plan ahead: check the weather, and, if possible, visit or at least find 
out as much about your campsite in advance as you can. For instance, if you are 
planning a roof camp, perhaps the next time it rains, check out to see where 
(if at all) the rain pools. Note that as a bad place for a tent.
 