
When abstract expressionism first crossed the Atlantic in 1959, in The New 
American Painting, an exhibition that stopped in cities including Berlin, Paris 
and London (where it hung at the Tate Gallery), it blew the socks off European 
artists. Painters of the Ecole de Paris, the centre of the avant garde, were 
still using easels, skirting around the edges of thecondition humaine with a 
modest form of existentialism, or otherwise just copying Picasso. The new 
American painting, by contrast, meant vast canvases byJackson Pollock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jackson-pollock>, Mark Rothko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/rothko>, Barnett Newman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2013/may/16/barnett-newman-sublime-bargain-price>
,Willem de Kooning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/nov/21/willem-dekooning-mylifeinart-art>
,Clyfford Still 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/nov/14/clyfford-still-american-abstract-art>
 and others, with a gripping energy and directness, and an emotional impact 
that, in Rothko’s case, reduced some viewers to tears (“they are having the 
same religious experience I had when I painted them,” Rothko explained). 
Travelling alongside the group show was a retrospective of (more) paintings by 
Pollock, the greatest of them all, who had died in a car crash three years 
previously. The deal was sealed – Paris was over. As the exhibition toured its 
European art capitals, painters must have slunk home from the exhibition in 
shock and despair, electrified by what they had seen and wondering how on earth 
it could be rivalled.

The Abstract Expressionism exhibition opening at the Royal Academy this month 
will be the first survey in Europe of the movement since 1959. Not so 
surprising, perhaps: such large and expensive (at least to insure) paintings 
are very difficult to gather together. There is also the amorphous nature of 
the movement, with no real stylistic relationship between the main figures – 
the link more a matter of physical size and scale of ambition. And then there 
was the new art of the 60s – pop art, happenings and the rest – which seemed to 
make the act of painting itself if not obsolete, then at least old-fashioned. 
And in a sense it was. For all the surprise it caused over the Atlantic, 
abstract expressionism was not the start of something, but rather a beautiful 
ending, the epic finale of a long tradition of Romantic nature painting, gone 
up in the fireworks of Newman’s zips, Pollock’s drips and the smoky miasma of 
Rothko’s colour fields.

Why Jackson Pollock gave up painting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/19/why-jackson-pollock-painting>
For David Anfam, who has curated the show alongside the RA’s in-house curator 
Edith Devaney, “ab ex” (as he terms it), was not so much a movement (there were 
no manifestos, no subscription fees) as a phenomenon. It’s one that cannot now 
be confined to a few lone macho heroes with brushes. For a start, it was not 
just about painting. The sculptor David Smith saw himself in constant dialogue 
with painters. His wiry constellationStar Cage of 1950 transforms Pollock’s 
skeins and arcs of paint into a planetary diagram. Later structures made of 
bold steel elements painted black are like answers to Franz Kline’s paintings, 
constructions of heavy black marks, like girders silhouetted in a heat haze. 
His final stainless steel sculptures, such asCubi XXVII (1965), standing in the 
RA courtyard, have shimmering roughly polished surfaces that might be a 
reflection of a neighbouring Pollock. Louise Nevelson’s sculptures transform 
the dark, serious surfaces of Rothko and Adolph Gottlieb into monochrome 
assemblages of discarded objects, stacked as if to create a shrine.

Nevelson is one of a number of women who played an important, if generally 
unacknowledged role in abstract expressionism. Georgia O’Keeffe, although not 
part of the RA show (but much in evidence at Tate Modern), pioneered a form of 
abstraction built on highly symbolic visions of the body and landscape. She is 
a clear forerunner of the symbolic landscapes of Still. Much less known, the 
paintings of the Ukrainian-born artist Janet Sobel were in part the inspiration 
for Pollock’s leap into total abstraction, after her work was shown at Peggy 
Guggenheim’sArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> of This Century 
Gallery in 1944. The dense abstract interlace of her paintingIllusion of 
Solidity, painted the next year, (on show at the RA) looks like Celtic 
knot-work ornament gone wild. Sobel was barely acknowledged by Clement 
Greenberg, the critic who promoted the abstract expressionist artists, and she 
died in obscurity in 1968. The impact of Pollock’s work was felt most keenly in 
that of his wife, Lee Krasner, who a few years after his death produced a 
series of paintings that wrestle with his memory and legacy, including the 
remarkable monochrome compositionThe Eye Is the First Circle, 1960. In the 
following years Helen Frankenthaler and Joan Mitchell produced the most 
powerful responses to classic abstract expressionism. Mitchell’sSalut Tom, 
painted in 1979, is the most recent painting in the exhibition, and shows just 
how much the abstract expressionist spirit had both endured and transformed. As 
Anfam observes, Krasner and Mitchell got better with age partly for the simple 
reason that they met with less resistance from their male colleagues and 
critics, notably Greenberg.

The RA show will also give a fresh view of the origins of the movement. A 
handful of paintings from the 1930s by Krasner, Pollock, Rothko and others, 
indicate how they came from a very American type of dark modernism born in the 
depression era. Krasner’s 1931 self-portrait presents a sullen, tough image, 
with more than a touch of Giorgione about it, already proving what an 
accomplished painter she was, and makes her eclipse by her husband all the more 
regrettable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fabstract-expressionism-not-just-macho-heroes-with-brushes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7628c20ef0b24d3edf8d0ab089ab32a6f0ea381%2F0_0_5175_6931%2F5175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abstract%20expressionism%20%E2%80%93%20not%20just%20macho%20heroes%20with%20brushes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fabstract-expressionism-not-just-macho-heroes-with-brushes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abstract%20expressionism%20%E2%80%93%20not%20just%20macho%20heroes%20with%20brushes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fabstract-expressionism-not-just-macho-heroes-with-brushes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7628c20ef0b24d3edf8d0ab089ab32a6f0ea381%2F0_0_5175_6931%2F5175.jpg>
 Clyfford Still, PH-950 (1950). Photograph: Clyfford Still/Courtesy the 
Clyfford Still Museum, Denver, CO 
Pollock’s principal role remains, however, unassailable. His 1943 painting 
Mural, commissioned for Peggy Guggenheim’s townhouse on East 61st Street in 
Manhattan, is generally accepted as the first great step towards the new 
painterly vision. It is the largest picture he ever did, and was based, so the 
story goes, on a vision of a stampede, first of a herd of Mustang, but soon 
joined by cows, horses, antelopes and buffaloes. “Everything is charging across 
that goddam surface”, Pollock is recorded saying. It is like a sudden release 
of energy – a moment of fission, perhaps – that affected everything being made 
around it. You can see its influence in de Kooning’s frenetically violent Woman 
paintings, and in the broad calligraphic marks that underlie Arshile Gorky’s 
paintings. It encapsulates a spirit of the west transmitted to the studios of 
New York painters.

Pollock’s Mural was inspired by a stam­pede – as he once said: ‘Everything is 
charging across that goddam surface’

As such it heralds the great confrontation between Pollock and Still. Both 
drew on their early experiences of the American west, Pollock growing up in 
Cody, Wyoming, Still working in his early years on the family farm in Alberta, 
Canada. Where Pollock needs no introduction, Still’s name might not ring many 
bells. He was a great painter who produced a significant body of work over six 
decades, until his death in 1980, but his often vitriolic personality and 
self-imposed outsider status – he mostly refused to sign with a gallery – meant 
that he has always been seen as a secondary figure. Virtually all of his 
paintings are kept in the Clyfford Still Museum in Denver, Colorado, and the 
loan of such a major group as will appear at the RA is rare. It is undeserved 
neglect. His paintings are strangely powerful, mysterious amalgams of landscape 
and unique craggy forms that might be bursts of lightning or flakes of old 
paint, blistered by the prairie heat. His epic canvases – like grand canyons – 
go beyond even Pollock’s forest thickets in their evocation of an awesome 
grandness of nature. “Still makes the rest of us look academic,” Pollock once 
said, with only a small dose of hyperbole.

Grand canyons, forest thickets: for all the claims of abstraction and 
expression, Pollock and Still show us that what we are really dealing with is a 
form of nature painting. Perhaps that is why when looking at Pollock’s flicks 
of pigment I can’t help thinking of the white flecks that animate the surfaces 
of Constable’s landscapes. But this is an exception: the associations are 
otherwise entirely American.

Pollock’s impression of vast herds thundering over the western plains 
electrifiesMural, separating it from a European tradition of landscape 
painting. Still’s monumental paintings remind one of eternal rock faces or of 
Niagara-sized waterfalls. Natural parallels are most obvious in the work of the 
Armenian-born Gorky, whose early titles show directly the inspiration of nature 
–Water of the Flowery Mill, from 1945. To see Rothko’s paintings as landscapes 
and sunsets, or glowing nocturnal seascapes is reductive, but inevitable – for 
that is what they most remind us of.

Where Mural gives an impression of superabundant vegetation, and of hope, a 
decade later the mood begins to darken. Franz Klein’sRequiem of 1958, a great 
dark churning mass, captures this changing mood, just as Rothko’s darkening 
palette seems to reflect the dissolution of an initial moment of optimism. A 
new, darker, view of nature itself was emerging at this time. Between Milton 
Resnick’s entirely grey paintingOctave of 1961, and Ad Reinhardt’s entirely 
black paintingAbstract Painting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/painting> No 23 of 1963, Rachel 
Carson’sSilent Spring was published, the book that launched a new environmental 
movement, revealing the dire threat to nature caused by human civilisation. 
Nevelson’s frieze-like stacks of discarded objects, painted black, are 
melancholy reflections of the growing sense of the perils of consumerism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fabstract-expressionism-not-just-macho-heroes-with-brushes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7545e6dd6f24c177839fe09d1eba5c0143a1748%2F0_0_1513_1673%2F1513.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abstract%20expressionism%20%E2%80%93%20not%20just%20macho%20heroes%20with%20brushes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fabstract-expressionism-not-just-macho-heroes-with-brushes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abstract%20expressionism%20%E2%80%93%20not%20just%20macho%20heroes%20with%20brushes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fabstract-expressionism-not-just-macho-heroes-with-brushes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7545e6dd6f24c177839fe09d1eba5c0143a1748%2F0_0_1513_1673%2F1513.jpg>
 Self-Portrait by Lee Krasner (1931). Photograph: Private Collection 
The alternative was escape. De Kooning moved to a more lyrical form of 
painting, (such asVilla Borghese, 1961), that lacks the urgent, anxious 
connection to the world of his earlier Women paintings (no bad thing, depending 
on your view of these violent images, often described as misogynist). The most 
fascinating response was that of Philip Guston, who seemed to come out of the 
other side of abstraction into an alternative world of figuration, ironic, 
often amusing, but at heart deadly serious about human failure, and how hollow 
the pose of artistic heroism had become. HisLow Tide, from 1976, hanging in the 
RA, shows heel-like shapes resting on a red ground, like body parts of abstract 
expressionist painters, revealed as deep waters become shallow.

The fact that there has been no exhibition of abstract expressionism in Europe 
since the groundbreaking touring show of 1959 might suggest that it was, as a 
movement, a historical failure. Was the sheer ambition of it, the 
life-and-death heroism and claims of transcendence all just a bit too much? Do 
the paintings still have the power to move as they did in 1959? Their legacy is 
undeniable: it is impossible to imagine the scale and ambition of contemporary 
art – from the vigorous expression of Georg Baselitz (who saw the 1959 show) to 
Jeff Koons and Damien Hirst – without the epic precedent of abstract 
expressionist painting. And although the next generation of American artists, 
notably Robert Rauschenberg, reacted against the “nature painters” with work 
that saw the spectacle of the mediated world itself as a form of second nature, 
they knew that the stage on which they stood had been created by the abstract 
expressionist painters. At a time when painting is vying for attention with 
other art forms – it is virtually absent from the recently-opened new wing of 
Tate Modern, for example – the RA exhibition will show how much these 
celebrated beasts can still hold their own.

• Abstract Expressionism is at the Royal Academy of Arts, London W1, from 24 
September.royalacademy.org.uk. <https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/>
 