
On 12 July 1967, Florida newspaper the St Petersburg Times had an eye-catching 
front-page headline: “Dame Margot, Nureyev seized in hippie raid.” Police had 
busted a party in Haight-Ashbury, San Francisco, and unexpectedly ensnared two 
world-famous gatecrashers:Margot Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev 
<http://www.nureyev.org/rudolf-nureyev-biography-margot-fonteyn/>, who had been 
in the city all of four hours. “Marijuana cigarettes were found at the scene,” 
noted the paper, although the two ballet dancers had to be released as there 
was no evidence that they had been smoking them. A high-spirited Nureyev had, 
however, performed ajeté  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glossary_of_ballet#Grand_jet.C3.A9>into the back 
of a police van.

Pokémon Go is just the start – Silicon Valley is taking over our reality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/25/pokemon-go-silicon-valley-reality>
Fonteyn and Nureyev were two of an estimated 100,000 people who descended on 
San Francisco to locate the action during the drugged-up summer of love. It 
turned out thateverything was happening. There were anti-Vietnam protests on 
the campus at Berkeley; Oakland’s African-American revolutionary movement, the
Black Panthers <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Panther_Party>, marched on 
the state capitol while openly armed; and bands such as theGrateful Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/grateful-dead>, Jefferson Airplane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/29/jefferson-airplane-founder-paul-kantner-dies-aged-74>
 andBig Brother and the Holding Company 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Brother_and_the_Holding_Company>, fronted by 
Janis Joplin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/janis-joplin>, performed on 
stage at venues such as the Avalon and theFillmore 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Fillmore>, their acid-sodden psychedelia 
expressing the preoccupations of counterculture from surrealism to sex.

Add performance artists and community activists such as the Diggers – who, 
freaked out by the weekenders, announced the death of the hippie in October 
1967 and staged a mock funeral – to the retina-searing, tripped-out aesthetics 
of the time on record sleeves, gig posters and in fashion, and you had an 
unprecedented mass experiment. The subject was the rejection of conventional 
society with its racism, warfare and repression; and the construction of 
alternative realities. All this was duly transmitted by an astounded mass media 
to living rooms around the world, while records such asthe Beatles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles>’ 1967 album Sgt Pepper’s Lonely 
Hearts Club Band 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sgt._Pepper%27s_Lonely_Hearts_Club_Band> formed 
a clarion call for the counterculture on both sides of the Atlantic. Two weeks 
after its release on 1 June, it was played over the speakers atMonterey Pop 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monterey_Pop_Festival>, arguably the first music 
festival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7771edd67cb4d1e25b62a93ecc20a829156d6d42%2F0_227_9362_5617%2F9362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7771edd67cb4d1e25b62a93ecc20a829156d6d42%2F0_227_9362_5617%2F9362.jpg>
 The Beatles illustrated lyrics – Revolution 1968 by Alan Aldridge Photograph: 
Victoria & Albert Museum 
Then there were those hippies who were heading for the countryside to live 
communally with a copy ofthe Whole Earth Catalog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/05/stewart-brand-whole-earth-catalog>
, which contained a wealth of information from the best kerosene lamps to which 
book on goat husbandry to buy. Over at Stanford University, meanwhile, 
scientists were working on developments in personal computing that would lay 
the foundations forSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> and create the future – 
our present.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e2992047920b9273a9b21db693d26646047da9%2F255_197_3120_4814%2F3120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e2992047920b9273a9b21db693d26646047da9%2F255_197_3120_4814%2F3120.jpg>
 ‘White Rabbit’, Joe McHugh, 1960s. Photograph: Victoria and Albert Museum, 
London/East Totem West USA 
It’s a story on a kaleidoscopic scale, and this autumn the Victoria & Albert 
Museum <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/v-and-a> in London will 
attempt to tell it through an exhibition. EntitledYou Say You Want a 
Revolution? Records and Rebels 1966-1970 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-records-and-rebels-1966-70>
, the show intends to delineate how the world transformed in those few seismic 
years, taking inswinging London <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swinging_London>
, thestudent riots in Paris 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/May_1968_events_in_France>, and the moon landings
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moon_landing> – the latter of which were, says 
co-curator Geoffrey Marsh, “the boldest of human gestures”.

Marsh and fellow co-curator Victoria Broackes created the V&A’s blockbuster 
David Bowie exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/david-bowie-is-exhibition-review>
 in 2013. Like that show, this one promises to use music, objects and images 
not only to reanimate pop and social history but also to evoke something of the 
magic and mania of that tumultuous period. It’s also a salutary reminder of the 
peace, love and understanding that underpinned the hippie ideals – qualities 
that seem in short supply in 2016.

To create the exhibition, the V&A has gathered objects ranging from Airplane 
singer Grace Slick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/jan/18/features11.g25>’s kaftan 
to the first computer mouse, and spoken to a host of surviving members of the 
counterculture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F277e843e8571651bdd64a732377c7215dd27ad00%2F0_0_2840_4112%2F2840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F277e843e8571651bdd64a732377c7215dd27ad00%2F0_0_2840_4112%2F2840.jpg>
 Civil rights activist Stokely Carmichael (1941-1998). Photograph: Bentley 
Archive/Popperfoto/Getty Images 
Over the course of a few days in San Francisco, guided by Broackes, I also 
meet some of these paradigm-shifting former hippies, and visit the sites of the 
greatest upheaval.

We go to the steps of the University of California at Berkeley’s Sproul Hall, 
whereMario Savio <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mario_Savio>, spokesman for the 
free speech movement, made his astoundingly passionate speech inspiring his 
fellow students to stage a sit-in and stop “the operation of the machine”. The 
free speech protests marked a direct link from the civil rights movement, in 
which Savio had participated, to the anti-war protests that would convulse 
Berkeley at the end of the 60s; just as the Beatniks of the previous decade, 
such asAllen Ginsberg <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allen_Ginsberg> and Neal 
Cassady <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neal_Cassady>, had profoundly influenced 
the hippies.

We meet Rick Moss, curator at the African American Museum in Oakland 
<http://www.oaklandlibrary.org/locations/african-american-museum-library-oakland>
, who was 12 when the Black Panthers started galvanising his San Francisco 
community. “It was very empowering because at no point in your upbringing were 
you ever given examples of where black people were standing up for themselves,” 
he says. “So when you see guys swaggering to the state capitol and they’re 
having their weapons, it’s like The Lone Ranger. We were like: ‘This is great! 
This is what you do, you stand up to injustice.’”

Then there are the artists who defined the aesthetics of psychedelia. One, Joe 
McHugh, created a Jefferson Airplane-inspired poster calledWhite Rabbit 
<https://uk.pinterest.com/pin/538883911641195435/>, which depicted a rabbit 
standing on a chessboard, the words “keep your head” dematerialising in the 
background. The other, Stanley Miller, known as Mouse, made theskull and roses 
artwork for the Grateful Dead 
<http://www.rrauction.com/Stanley-Mouse-Grateful-Dead-Painting.html>, although 
he much preferred hanging out with Janis Joplin. “She was wild,” he remembers, 
with a glint in his eye. “The first time she came to my studio she chased me 
around – I was kind of scared of her.”

People drew pictures of the psych experience with lot of colours and mandalas, 
but to me, on acid everything got clear
Stanley 'Mouse' Miller 
Music had drawn him from Detroit to California: “It was the Byrds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/16/how-we-made-eight-miles-high-the-byrds>
 andthe Mama and the Papas 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mamas_%26_the_Papas> – that ringing sound, 
like a siren calling me,” he says, still dreamy at the memory. Like most of the 
cultural productions of the time, his posters were drug-induced, but he never 
employed the bulbous lettering and eye-searing hues popular at the time. “A lot 
of people, how they drew pictures of the psych experience was a lot of colours 
and mandalas, but to me, [on acid] everything got super-clear.”

Miller later moved to London, where he spent a year working for Nova magazine 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nova_(UK_magazine)> and hanging out at the 
Beatles’ Apple headquarters <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple_Corps> on 
Savile Row (now a branch of Abercrombie and Fitch). He saw theirfinal concert 
take place on the building’s roof 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Beatles%27_rooftop_concert>, without 
realising that he was witnessing history. He also stopped taking acid that 
year. “It fell out of fashion. It was replaced in the 70s by a lot of cocaine 
and I didn’t want to do that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a27205ac934e9e372d8438e64703efed2db3957%2F210_0_2120_1536%2F2120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a27205ac934e9e372d8438e64703efed2db3957%2F210_0_2120_1536%2F2120.jpg>
 Dylan by Milton Glaser, 1967; a concert poster for the Avalon Ballroom, 
designed by Stanley ‘Mouse’ Miller and Alton Kelley. Composite: Milton 
Glaser/DACS /Victoria and Albert Museum 
The following day, we meet Stewart Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stewart-brand> with his friend and 
collaboratorLloyd Kahn <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lloyd_Kahn> at his cafe 
and library within the Long Now Foundation <http://theinterval.org/>, which is 
dedicated to his dream of building a clock that will run for 10,000 years. With 
the aid of some genetic engineers, Brand is also trying to bring back 12 
extinct species, and says that he is making real progress on the woolly 
mammoth: “We use the Asian elephant as a scaffold to assemble the geonome.”

Brand had an intense but limited period of drug experimentation; at 80, Kahn 
still uses marijuana, although he vapes rather than smokes it. The first time 
Kahn took acid, he says, “I saw a flower breathing and it wasn’t a 
hallucination. Flowers do breathe, but you don’t really see it.”

The show delineates how the world transformed in those seismic years of the 
1960s

As a biology student at Stanford, Brand first took mescaline when in the army, 
then became a participant in one of the famous government-sponsored scientific 
studies of the effects of LSD at Menlo Park, which helped to ignite the 60s 
drug culture. “The hippie phenomenon was to go and discover how the world 
works, so all the kids went out with backpacks doing the same thing. And we 
learned a lot.”

Soon he was travelling to Native American reservations where he engaged in 
all-nightpeyote <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peyote> rituals, joining author 
Ken Kesey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/06/lsd-ken-kesey-pranksters-film> and
the Merry Pranksters <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merry_Pranksters> to stage 
the acid tests – parties fuelled by LSD that featured light shows, film 
projections and bands such asthe Warlocks (who would later rename themselves 
the Grateful Dead <http://ultimateclassicrock.com/warlocks-grateful-dead/>). 
“Weird shit would be tried,” notes Brand. The slogan was: “Can you pass the 
acid test?” – meaning, he says, “Can you make it through the night without 
being killed or killing anybody?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5806a58d3e9f41efae004cb15bd0bfddf165692%2F378_505_3197_4579%2F3197.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5806a58d3e9f41efae004cb15bd0bfddf165692%2F378_505_3197_4579%2F3197.jpg>
 Skulls and Roses poster by Stanley ‘Mouse’ Miller and Alton Kelley. 
Photograph: Alton Kelly; Stanley Mouse/Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
Now 77, Brand sees the inquiring and hedonistic spirit of those parties 
continue atNevada festival Burning Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/burning-man-festival>, now heavily 
populated by Silicon Valley workers, “with the enormous difference that we had 
no money and these guys have money galore. They’ll spend all year building an 
art car that will stop your heart, just to see it chugging along. Then that 
feeds back into an anything-goes creativity within the tech companies.”

Brand exemplifies the intersection of the hippie movement and the 
technological experimentation that built Silicon Valley – the subject of the 
final room in the V&A’s exhibition. While “full of acid” in 1966, the lifelong 
conservationist (hence the mammoths) pondered how to get more people caring 
about the Earth. The architectBuckminster Fuller 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buckminster_Fuller> – whose geodesic dome 
<https://bfi.org/about-fuller/big-ideas/geodesic-domes> was displayed in the 
USA pavilion at the1967 World Expo in Montreal 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montreal_Biosph%C3%A8re> – had made the point 
“that people think it’s a flat Earth, which makes them think its resources are 
infinite, and if they just understood it is a sphere, and therefore finite, 
they would treat everything differently.”

Brand got badges printed that asked: “Why haven’t we seen a photograph of the 
whole Earth yet?” and the following year an image taken by satellite was 
released by Nasa. It gave the cover image and title to Brand’s next project, 
the Whole Earth Catalog, published in the autumn of 1968, biannually until 
1972, then sporadically afterwards.

Like many of the originators of San Francisco’s counterculture, Brand had 
become fed up with the enormous influx of rubberneckers into Haight-Ashbury 
and, in 1968, headed out to New Mexico and Colorado to participate in the 
movement to live on communes in America’s vast countryside. Before long, he 
realised that the communards would need tools, books and ideas, which he 
decided to collate into a mail-order catalogue. “Whim is the best source,” he 
says. “The catalogue enables the ability to have a whim and then act upon it, 
and that’s pretty much my life.”

Brand hands me his copy of the first Whole Earth Catalog, dog-eared and with 
the dimensions of an oversized magazine (a copy will be in the show).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b41f1bf8e5198d3876ca59d66beda9fe50479eb%2F0_234_3710_2226%2F3710.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b41f1bf8e5198d3876ca59d66beda9fe50479eb%2F0_234_3710_2226%2F3710.jpg>
 Psychedelic rock concert at the Fillmore Auditorium in San Francisco, 1967. 
Photograph: Getty Images/Michael Ochs Archives 
Purely on a media level, the Whole Earth Catalog has been hugely influential; 
whenthe New York Times relaunched its Sunday magazine 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/22/magazine/behind-the-relaunch-of-the-new-york-times-magazine-by-jake-silverstein.html?_r=0>
 in February last year, it also had a globe on the cover. The pages inside the 
catalogue are wonderfully designed, stuffed with information, but never messy 
or confusing. It wasn’t this, however, that made the catalogue truly 
groundbreaking. First of all, it was crowdsourced – 40 years before the term 
became commonplace. Brand appealed for readers to send in suggestions for items 
that those in communes would find useful (“the customers know best,” he said), 
paid $10 per item used, and printed the most helpful, making up about a quarter 
of the overall content. This underlined the fact that the catalogue wasn’t a 
book so much as a network, where likeminded people could find and share the 
information they needed to enter and improve alternative worlds. Symbolising 
this – alongside boots and teepees – the first issue featured Hewlett-Packard’s 
desktop computer, the9100A Calculator 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hewlett-Packard_9100A>, then retailing at $4,900.

Brand straddled the worlds of the communes and computers, having become 
interested in the latter while studying at Stanford, where he filmed the first 
public demonstration of a computer mouse in 1968. “I was just endlessly 
impatient for all these things to come into the world, because I’d already seen 
it – the mouse and online typing, being able to mutually massage something on 
screen with another person, which even now is kind of difficult … [it was] 
apparatus to augment the human intellect.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3d88c11a01e7a4e988b8e9f79d97a292a262528%2F0_0_3937_3087%2F3937.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3d88c11a01e7a4e988b8e9f79d97a292a262528%2F0_0_3937_3087%2F3937.jpg>
 Swingeing London 67 (a) 1968 69, Richard Hamilton. 
This reconceptualising of the world as an information network made the 
catalogue hugely inspiring to a significant handful of local computer 
scientists. To the most forward-thinking and idealistic, the possibilities of 
technology hinted at a new world in which information could be shared among 
likeminded people, leaping over barriers of geography, race or class.

One of them was Steve Jobs <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/stevejobs>, 
who was brought up in Palo Alto and who, in 2005, told a group of graduating 
students at Stanfordin a famous speech 
<http://news.stanford.edu/2005/06/14/jobs-061505/>: “The Whole Earth Catalog … 
was one of the bibles of my generation … it was a sort of like Google in 
paperback form, 35 years before Google came along. It was idealistic, and 
overflowing with neat tools and great notions.”

Jobs concluded his address with: “Stay hungry, stay foolish” – Brand’s motto 
from a mid-70s issue, intended as the final one, which Jobs claimed as his 
ethos and which has now become ubiquitous as aT-shirt slogan 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Stay+hungry,+stay+foolish+t+shirt&safe=off&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjutJD1rs3OAhWBWxoKHRiSAeEQ_AUICSgC&biw=2222&bih=1170>
 andmeme 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?safe=off&biw=2222&bih=1170&tbm=isch&sa=1&q=Stay+hungry%2C+stay+foolish+meme&oq=Stay+hungry%2C+stay+foolish+meme&gs_l=img.3...12704.12859.0.12974.2.2.0.0.0.0.54.80.2.2.0.cprnk%2Ctoken%3Doa...0...1.1j2.64.img..0.1.54...0.c2jp1Q61ywE>
. So what did the phrase mean to Jobs? “By the time he was espousing it, he was 
quite wealthy and powerful and I think aware of the innovator’s dilemma where 
you can put yourself out of business by not continuing to undermine your own 
work,” says Brand. “And ‘stay hungry, stay foolish’ was possibly a formula for 
him to keep coming up with the next thing. Even when the last thing was 
successful, he thought he was going to be destroyed by it.”

Many of the originators of San Francisco’s counter- culture headed out to live 
on communes

The documentary Alex Gibney made about Steve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/15/steve-jobs-man-in-the-machine-first-look-review-apple-founders-sour-side>
 posited that, while Jobs was heavily influenced by the counterculture, he had 
ultimately used it to create machines humanity now can’t live without, rather 
than to enlighten society or himself. Brand, who got to know Jobs after the 
Stanford speech, disagrees.

“I think Steve was pretty enlightened by the end. Like everyone, once he got 
married, everybody said the cruelty went out of him and the kids humanised him 
enormously, so the ferocity became less sincere. But in terms of what he did 
and how he did it, I wouldn’t fault him. That he could do it that well – and to 
help inspire theJeff Bezos <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jeff-bezos>
es [CEO of Amazon] and theElon Musk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/elon-musk>s [CEO of Tesla] and 
characters who, to this day, continue to solve innovative dreams in this harsh 
reality, making stuff that fucking well works – is maybe a part of what he got 
from the Whole Earth Catalog.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F367307c237ed3619bd63ae944e56e667b7803e74%2F57_0_2453_1536%2F2453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20hippy%20explosion%20shaped%20the%20modern%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fsan-francisco-exhibition-victoria-albert-revolution-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F367307c237ed3619bd63ae944e56e667b7803e74%2F57_0_2453_1536%2F2453.jpg>
 The Acid Test poster by Wes Wilson; War Is Not Healthy by Lorraine Schneider, 
1966. Composite: Victoria and Albert Museum – courtesy of Steward Brand/Another 
Mother for Peace 
Our final stop is at the Computer History Museum in Mountain View 
<http://www.computerhistory.org/>, the heart of Silicon Valley, where a 
century’s worth of mind-expanding technological progress is laid out. Our 
guide, curator Chris Garcia, is sceptical about whether Jobs can be regarded as 
a countercultural figure. “He wanted to change the world but he wanted to make 
himself a whole lot of money at the same time,” he says. “You know the phrase: 
‘When the going gets weird, the weird turn pro’? He was definitely a pro from 
early on.”

Andy Warhol’s Self-Portrait With Platinum Bouffant Wig
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/19/anatomy-of-an-artwork-warhol-self-portrait-1981>
Instead, Garcia points to another figure as one of the counterculture’s true 
heroes, his relativeJerry Garcia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerry_Garcia>, 
leader of the Grateful Dead, still America’s biggest cult band when they staged 
theirfarewell concerts last year 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/grateful-dead-end-50-year-career-with-moving-magnificent-final-show-20150706>
 (Jerry died in 1995). He points to the fact that the Grateful Dead were so 
community-minded that they even had an enclave at their concerts where audience 
members could stand and tape the shows. “They were experimental, avant garde 
and they literally allowed people to record their concerts,” says Garcia. 
“That’s ridiculous, at a time when you were making money selling records, to 
let people make their own. So they were giving and they were experimenting and 
they were assisting, becauseanyone who could get a hold of Jerry would probably 
end up jamming back at their place for five or six days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/15/the-night-i-got-high-with-jerry-garcia>
.”

Communal, giving and peaceable, it’s an ethos that still resonates, 
particularly in an ever more atomised, bad-tempered world. While the tens of 
thousands that headed out to the communes eventually came home, the sharing and 
free love proving more fraught than they had imagined, the ideals still have a 
powerful allure, as strange yet somehow comforting as the chorus ofLucy in the 
Sky with Diamonds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucy_in_the_Sky_with_Diamonds>
. Although San Francisco is now one of the most expensive places on Earth, it’s 
still the home of dreams and big ideas, a reminder that other worlds are 
possible.

•You Say You Want a Revolution? Records and Rebels 1966–70 opens at the V&A in 
London on 10 September
 