
Facebook, Twitter and Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> have previously provided 
users’ data to a software company that aids police surveillance programs and 
targets protesters of color, according to government records obtained by the 
American Civil Liberties Union.

The ACLU revealed 
<https://www.aclunc.org/blog/facebook-instagram-and-twitter-provided-data-access-surveillance-product-marketed-target>
 on Tuesday that the technology corporations gave “special access” to 
Geofeedia, a controversial social media monitoring company that partners with 
law enforcement and hasmarketed 
<https://www.aclunc.org/docs/20160921-pra_content_ferguson_r.pdf.pdf> its 
services as a tool to track Black Lives Matter activists.

In response to the findings, all three companies have announced measures to 
cut off Geofeedia’s access to certain data streams, even though critics say the 
corporations need to adopt broader policies that prevent this kind of 
surveillance and data sharing.

The ACLU’s past records requests 
<https://medium.com/@ACLU_NorCal/police-use-of-social-media-surveillance-software-is-escalating-and-activists-are-in-the-digital-d29d8f89c48#.w6vmk8u82>
 in California have determined that at least 13 police agencies have used or 
acquired Geofeedia, a Chicago-based startup that has worked with law 
enforcement across the US. Emails between the company and police revealed that 
Geofeedia had developer-level access to Twitter, Facebook and Instagram, which 
means it could review streams of user content in ways that regular members of 
the public cannot, according to the ACLU.

“The fact that third parties are making big money off of the sale and trading 
of our data with law enforcement is a huge problem and one that any social 
media user in this country or beyond should be disgusted and surprised by,” 
said Malkia Cyril, executive director of the Center for Media Justice, which has
urged 
<https://www.aclunc.org/sites/default/files/20161010_ACLU_CMJ_Color_of_Change_Joint_letter_Twitter.pdf>
 companies toend 
<https://www.aclunc.org/sites/default/files/20161010_ACLU_CMJ_Color_of_Change_Joint_letter_Facebook_Instagram.pdf>
 their relationships with Geofeedia. “It clearly has a chilling effect on 
democratic protests.”

The next step is making clear, transparent, accountable policies about their 
relationship with the police
Malkia Cyril, executive director of the Center for Media Justice 
Instagram had provided Geofeedia access to Instagram’s API, or application 
programming interface, which is a feed of data from users’ public posts that 
includes their location, ACLU said. The photo-sharing service terminated access 
to the API last month, ACLU said.

The ACLU said Facebook allowed Geofeedia to use its “Topic Feed API”, a tool 
geared toward media companies and brands that enabled Geofeedia to obtain a 
“ranked feed of public posts” centered around specific hashtags, events or 
places.Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> also ended 
this access last month.

Twitter provided Geofeedia with “searchable access” to its database of public 
tweets. In oneemail 
<http://www.aclunc.org/docs/20161011_geofeedia_twitter_instagram_riverside_pd.pdf>
 obtained by the ACLU, a Geofeedia representative told police it had a feature 
that “covered Ferguson/Mike Brown nationally with great success”, a reference 
to the Black Lives Matter protests against police brutality in Missouri.

Shortly after the release of the report on Tuesday, Twitter said 
<https://twitter.com/policy/status/785861128589025281> it was “immediately 
suspending” Geofeedia’s commercial access to its data.
Policy (@policy) 
Based on information in the @ACLU <https://twitter.com/ACLU>’s report, we are 
immediately suspending@Geofeedia <https://twitter.com/geofeedia>’s commercial 
access to Twitter data.
 <https://twitter.com/policy/status/785861128589025281> October 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/policy/status/785861128589025281> 
The revelations have further exposed hypocrisy in Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/black-lives-matter-marc-benioff-facebook-twitter-uber>
 where tech leaders have expressed praise for Black Lives Matter, yet appear to 
be helping a social media monitoring company that targets protests and aids 
police.


“The companies have made strong public statements about supporting political 
and social movements, including Black Lives Matter,” said Nicole Ozer, 
technology and civil liberties policy director for the ACLU of California. “Now 
they need to make sure their systems are living up to their commitments.”

Cyril said the case highlighted the need for tech companies to actively 
protect users against the kind of surveillance that has disproportionately 
targeted communities of color.

“Cutting ties with Geofeedia is an excellent first step, but … the next step 
is making clear, transparent, accountable policies – policies that the public 
understands about what your relationship is to the police and how and when they 
will use this user data.”

Ozer added: “The ACLU shouldn’t have to do a public records act request to 
tell Facebook andTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> what 
their developers are doing.”

The ACLU previously found that Geofeedia’s marketing materials 
<https://medium.com/@ACLU_NorCal/police-use-of-social-media-surveillance-software-is-escalating-and-activists-are-in-the-digital-d29d8f89c48#.w6vmk8u82>
 have referred to unions and activists as “overt threats 
<http://www.aclunc.org/docs/20160921-pra_geofeedia_overt_threats.pdf>” and that 
the company told police its product can help track the “Ferguson situation 
<http://www.aclunc.org/docs/20160921-pra_geofeedia_ferguson_situation_r.pdf.pdf>
”. One California police department allegedly used the software to monitorSouth 
Asian, Muslim and Sikh protesters 
<http://www.eastbayexpress.com/oakland/oakland-cops-quietly-acquired-social-media-surveillance-tool/Content?oid=4747526>
, the ACLUsaid 
<https://medium.com/@ACLU_NorCal/police-use-of-social-media-surveillance-software-is-escalating-and-activists-are-in-the-digital-d29d8f89c48#.w6vmk8u82>
.

A spokesperson for Facebook, which owns Instagram, told the Guardian in a 
statement that Geofeedia “only had access to data that people chose to make 
public”, adding, “If a developer uses our APIs in a way that has not been 
authorized, we will take swift action to stop them and we will end our 
relationship altogether if necessary.”


A Twitter spokesperson noted that the company prohibits the sale of user data 
for surveillance and has a “developer policy 
<https://dev.twitter.com/overview/terms/agreement-and-policy>” that bans the 
use of its data to “to investigate, track or surveil Twitter users”.

Geofeedia CEO Phil Harris did not address the specific allegations in a 
statement on Tuesday, but said the company “is committed to the principles of 
personal privacy” and has “clear policies and guidelines to prevent the 
inappropriate use of our software”.

“That said, we understand, given the ever-changing nature of digital 
technology, that we must continue to work to build on these critical 
protections of civil rights,” he added.

 