
Thanks to timing and a lot of activism by our forefathers, the vast majority 
of Americans today have never known real suffering. They constitute what Martin 
Luther King, Jrcalled 
<https://www.africa.upenn.edu/Articles_Gen/Letter_Birmingham.html>, “the white 
moderate, who is more devoted to ‘order’ than to justice; who prefers a 
negative peace which is the absence of tension to a positive peace which is the 
presence of justice; who constantly says: ‘I agree with you in the goal you 
seek, but I cannot agree with your methods of direct action.’”

To this cohort, otherwise known as mainstream America, on-the-ground activism 
is unhelpful and even un-American – largely because it’s inconvenient. Sure, 
they’ll give you a “like” on Facebook, but your march better not block traffic 
on their way to work.

We’ve lost perspective in this country. Activism is not supposed to be 
convenient. Civil disobedience implies that some laws will be peacefully 
broken. At the Boston Tea Party, the Sons of Liberty destroyed an entire 
shipment of tea sent by the East India Company. You think people weren’t 
inconvenienced?

The latest American activist moment is set to happen Saturday at the “Justice 
or Else” <https://www.justiceorelse.com/> gathering in Washington DC to 
commemorate the 20th anniversary of the Million Man March. Last month, users on 
thecity’s Reddit page 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/washingtondc/comments/3jwm9j/anyone_think_this_new_million_man_march_on_1010/>
 had already dismissed the event as nothing more than a potential traffic 
nuisance. We like to believe that we’re far more media savvy than our 
forefathers, and we’re proud of it – so we’ll discount an entire civil rights 
movement if we don’t agree with its marketing tactics.

Take the Black Lives Matter movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement>, a group that 
is fighting for our civil rights in the area of criminal justice.

The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights has stated 
<http://www.civilrights.org/publications/justice-on-trial/> that, in America’s 
criminal justice system, racial inequality is growing, not receding, even 
though we’ve made great progress toward ensuring equal treatment under the law 
for all citizens in the areas of voting, education, employment, equal housing 
and public accommodations. The fallout from the lack of progress on criminal 
justice threatens to undo 50 years of civil rights work.

Still, when a group of so-called progressives gathered in Seattle (supposedly 
one of America’s most liberal cities) at a rally for presidential candidate 
Bernie Sanders in August, no one in the audience seemed to care much about that 
well-established civil rights issue when a couple of activists from the Seattle 
Black Lives Matter group took over the stage.

I, too, was tempted to dismiss the Seattle BLM protestors – though not the 
movement. Then I decided to do a simple internet search to find out what they 
were on about. Within seconds, I found the answer: a press release posted on the
Seattle Black Lives Matter Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/BLMSeattle/posts/716844418437393> the same day as the 
protest stated that the group got on stage to highlight the fact that the 
Seattle Police Department has been underfederal consent decree 
<http://static1.squarespace.com/static/5425b9f0e4b0d66352331e0e/t/5436d96ee4b087e24b9d38a1/1412880750546/spd_findletter_12-16-11.pdf>
 for the last three years due to a pattern of excessive force and 
discriminatory police practices that the US Department of Justice found to be 
in violation of the Constitution.

Why Bernie Sanders' run-in with Black Lives Matter activists made me squirm | 
Heather Barmore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/11/bernie-sanders-black-lives-matter-squirm>
Since 2011, Seattle Mayor Ed Murray has refused to push any reform measures 
for police accountability 
<http://www.thestranger.com/news/feature/2015/06/17/22396835/whats-behind-mayor-ed-murrays-inaction-on-police-reform>
 even after his self-appointed Community Police Commission made numerous 
suggestions. (Seattle’s alt-weekly The Stranger said in June of this year that, 
“If reforming the police department were a big class project, then Murray would 
be so late turning in his homework he’d be failing.”)

In the unedited video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7VbHUI1R3IA&feature=youtu.be&t=2m50s> of the 
Seattle Black Lives Matter incident—unlike inthe much shorter clips 
<http://www.kirotv.com/news/news/social-security-medicare-rally-featuring-sen-berni/nnGDm/>
 thatwent viral 
<http://video.foxnews.com/v/4411695972001/black-lives-matter-activists-hijack-bernie-sanders-rally/?#sp=show-clips>
 at the time—BLM activists list these issues from their press release and are
roundly booed 
<http://www.king5.com/videos/news/2015/08/08/sanders-rally-2/31359953/> by the 
crowd of so-called Seattle progressives.

Online it was no better. Sanders 
<https://twitter.com/Nori_NYC/status/630248570252300288> supporters 
<https://twitter.com/bobbybobby420/status/630245502701834240> disavowed Black 
Lives Matter 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/SandersForPresident/comments/3gadni/seattle_afternoon_rally_blacklivesmatter/>
, claiming they would be against killing black people in the street, but these 
young women behaved sorudely 
<http://www.thestranger.com/blogs/slog/2015/08/11/22680645/in-her-own-words-the-political-beliefs-of-the-protester-who-interrupted-bernie-sanders/comments/8>
 that BLM could justforget counting on their support now. 
<http://www.thestranger.com/blogs/slog/2015/08/11/22680645/in-her-own-words-the-political-beliefs-of-the-protester-who-interrupted-bernie-sanders/comments/5>

Eight weeks later when a group of activists marching against police violence 
in Austin – another so-called bastion of white liberalism – decided to walk 
onto the interstate to get some attention, an act I admittedly wouldn’t advise 
for the sake of your health,Austinites on Reddit 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/Austin/comments/3ll189/any_of_you_guys_blocking_off_i35/?sort=top>
 were up in arms over the traffic disruption. The top comment:

Fuck these people and any other protesters that think it’s okay to block major 
avenues of traffic. I’m all for their right to protest, but them blocking 
highways is just unacceptable.

That being delayed in traffic is more outrageous to the average American than 
the habitual violation of our civil rights is disheartening – but apparently, 
it’s nothing new. When Martin Luther King, Jr led a series of boycotts and 
sit-ins to fight discrimination in 1963 in Birmingham, Alabama, a whole crew of 
clergymen got together topublish a letter 
<http://teachingamericanhistory.org/library/document/letter-to-martin-luther-king/>
 in the paper urging their congregations not to support him. While they agreed 
with the idea of equality in principle, they didn’t like Dr. King’s tendency to 
break the law during his organized actions.

Dr. King’s response to these men of the cloth is the now famous Letter from a 
Birmingham Jail 
<https://www.africa.upenn.edu/Articles_Gen/Letter_Birmingham.html> in which he 
states that people have “a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws,” in 
order to “create a situation so crisis packed that it will inevitably open the 
door to negotiation.”

This country was built on rebellion, incivility and revolution, and we used to 
call the people who practiced those traits heroes and patriots. If similar 
behavior ruffles your feathers today, take a closer look at yourself. You might 
just be on the wrong side of history.
 