
Breaking bad news is an essential skill taught to us at medical school, one 
that I had to employ when explaining to my friends and family that after seven 
tough years at university, I’m leaving the profession.

If I take a step back and look at where it all began, I see a 17-year-old with 
a supportive, medically-oriented family who were absolutely certain of their 
child becoming a doctor. My entire childhood was a subliminal path towards 
making this choice, from having Scrubs or House on TV daily, to admiring the 
respect with which everyone addressed my father at his clinics.

Despite having a clear inclination towards technology, and general geekiness, 
I chose to continue my medical degree for lack, or perhaps fear, of pursuing 
other options. It was, however, not long into my training before I started 
dabbling with non-medical opportunities while masking them as “CV-beefers” for 
my medical career. This included spending two weeks traveling across Sweden and 
the Netherlands with a group of like-minded and skilled individuals, helping to 
improvetheir healthcare systems 
<http://ki.se/en/research/a-train-of-innovation-stops-at-ki> using technology.

NHS plans could bring benefits but we're barred from telling the public
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/aug/26/nhs-plans-bring-benefits-barred-telling-public-sustainability-transformation-plans>
The pressure that comes from understanding the importance of the job you’re 
preparing for, life or death in the case of medicine, results in students 
wanting to study and perfect each topic to a point where other interests are 
boiled off. Eventually, I started reprioritising my interests over this urge 
for academic perfection.

Along the way, my drive to become a doctor has diminished by increasing 
disillusionment of working for the NHS. This is not to say the NHS isn’t a 
fantastic organisation and one we should be immensely proud of. My main gripe 
as someone with a strong entrepreneurial gene is that it isn’t an institution 
that embraces innovation. For me, the deal-breaker is that the NHS doesn’t 
treat its employees as individuals and isn’t open to new ideas. I feel I could 
have a bigger impact on healthcare working outside theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> rather than for it – this is why I 
aim to pursue a career as a doctorpreneur, not a doctor.

Coming to this decision has led me back towards my passion for exploring 
technology and despite the demands placed on me by my full-time university 
course, I have launched a tech company calledSynap <https://synap.ac/>, which 
is already having a big impact on the way thousands of students study for exams.

But while entrepreneurship is the right path for me and, I believe, many other 
medical students with a passion for innovation – it’s not right for everyone.

My family have come to terms with my decision to leave the profession because 
they know I am driven enough to succeed. Have they questioned the time and 
money spent on a degree I won’t be pursuing as a career? Of course, but they 
also believe that my time spent at Leeds University is an investment for the 
future. The medical skills and training I’ve learned and developed are 
transferable to so many areas of my life and I know they will make me a better 
businessman.

There’s a lot I love about medicine and the NHS, but being a doctorpreneur 
will provide me with an opportunity to help more people from the outside.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 