
When the Lady Dorothy set off from Glenridding pier on Thursday morning, 
gliding across Ullswater beneath a panorama of snow-topped fells, it marked 
another small triumph for an industry striving to recover from December’s 
floods. One of the best-known attractions in Lakeland, Ullswater Steamers’ 
fleet of vintage pleasure boats had been out of action since 5 December, when
the burst Glenridding Beck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/22/further-flooding-cumbria-storm-desmond>
 engulfed its pier house and car park with boulder-strewn flood water. 
Thursday’s resumption of services was a sign that business in Glenridding – the 
tourist hub that made national headlines by beingflooded twice in five days 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NHJQGC14uAw> – was getting back to normal.
Map of the Lake District showing areas affected by the December floods 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/travel_lake_district/giv-27167HWHnPpfUaRG8/>
 Map of the Lake District showing areas affected by the December floods 
Why a Lake District winter break is the perfect escape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/14/lake-district-winter-break-walking-pubs-spas>
The steamer called in at Pooley Bridge on Ullswater’s north-western shore, 
which had its own reasons to celebrate this week. It wasannounced that a 
temporary bridge would be erected 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-cumbria-35295874> before Easter to 
replace the 300-year-old road bridge washed away by the unprecedented force of 
the swollen river Eamont. The collapse of the bridge almost marooned the 
village centre, cutting off its usually thriving tea rooms, pubs and gift shops 
from mainstream Lakes’ traffic. More worryingly for the county’s wider tourism 
sector,shocking images of the bridge’s crumbled remains 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-cumbria-35295874> are still dominating 
news reports about the damage inflicted on Cumbria by Storm Desmond.

“The misconception that we have all been devastated is starting to hurt us,” 
says Gary Wilson, general manager of theInn on the Lake 
<http://www.lakedistricthotels.net/innonthelake/index.php> hotel at 
Glenridding. “I’ve never known a quieter January. Yet the main road through 
Glenridding is open, as are most of the footpaths and almost all of our 
businesses. Even the village shop, which had three feet of water through it, 
has reopened.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3988adac93cbeecbcc4efa3cbad4031a0267a823%2F0_83_1250_750%2F1250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3988adac93cbeecbcc4efa3cbad4031a0267a823%2F0_83_1250_750%2F1250.jpg>
 Inn on the Lake, Glenridding. 
The other Lake District: a guide to the quiet and beautiful western Lakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/02/sp-lake-district-guide-western-lakes>
Wilson’s observations are echoed by the tourist board, which estimates a drop 
in visitors that is disproportionate to actual flood damage. “Of about 10,000 
visitor-dependent businesses in the county, about 100 were badly affected by 
flooding,” says Ian Stephens, managing director ofCumbria Tourism 
<https://www.cumbriatourism.org/>. “Of these, we think that approximately 30 to 
50 businesses will not be operating at Easter. But we’re hearing from our 
members that they are down 25%-50% on visitor numbers. If that continues into 
the spring it could amount to lost revenue of £40m a month.”

With funding from the Cumbria Local Enterprise Partnership 
<http://www.cumbrialep.co.uk/>, Cumbria Tourism has embarked on a short-term 
print and digital marketing campaign to reassure potential visitors that the 
county is back in business and doing what it does best. Meanwhile locals have 
taken matters into their own hands by organising theGrand Day Out  
<http://www.granddayoutcumbria.org.uk/>on 16 January, a county-wide fundraising 
day of walks, music and sports events aimed at raising money forMountain Rescue 
Services <http://www.mountain.rescue.org.uk/> and the Cumbria Community 
Foundation <http://www.cumbriafoundation.org/>. 

In market towns such as Keswick, Cockermouth, Kendal and 
Appleby-in-Westmorland, you can still potter round independent shops and duck 
into a cosy pub or tea room. Meanwhile, businesses that were directly affected 
are working flat out to restore their facilities. Gillian Hodgson and her 
husband, Douglas, co-owners of theKeswick Launch 
<http://www.keswick-launch.co.uk/> passenger boats on Derwentwater, are 
repairing six damaged jetties and their ticket office on the Keswick foreshore.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36fdb3d1d1bfc7aa78c20eecb599fcd0935a5fbb%2F0_0_5184_3113%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36fdb3d1d1bfc7aa78c20eecb599fcd0935a5fbb%2F0_0_5184_3113%2F5184.jpg>
 Appleby-in-Westmorland after the river Eden bursts its banks during Storm 
Desmond. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
“It looked like a like a tsunami had gone through it, but we are aiming to be 
up and running by February half-term,” Gillian says. Sally Fielding, owner of 
holiday lettings agencySally’s Cottages 
<http://www.sallyscottages.co.uk/?gclid=CJ3nxOKZrMoCFcGv2wodTdIDag>, says that 
only 20 of her 338 properties were flooded. All are expected to be back in 
business by Easter, and advance reservations look healthy. “Nobody’s moved the 
mountains,” says Fielding. “This week I’ve been posting beautiful pictures of 
snowy fells on social media; bookings are starting to pick up.”

Top 10 photography locations in the Lake District
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/19/top-10-photography-locations-in-the-lake-district>
Determined optimism can’t rebuild bridges, however. And with 15 roads and 26 
road bridges still closed, some parts of Cumbria face infrastructure 
challenges. Businesses cut off by theclosure of Eamont bridge 
<http://www.cumbriacrack.com/2015/12/21/council-leader-concerned-for-eamont-bridge-and-neighbouring-communities/>
 near Penrith, for example, are still in limbo. “It’s been like a ghost town,” 
says potter Mary Chappelhow of the artists’ studios at Brougham Hall, where her 
fellow tenants include a photography studio, art gallery, mosaic maker, 
microbrewery and cafe. “We’re still open seven days a week, but the road 
diversions put people off.”

Close by, at Lowther Castle and Gardens <http://www.lowthercastle.org/>, 
ticket sales are down by 50%. “There’s a worry that holidaymakers are 
cancelling their bookings because they think Cumbria is closed,” says marketing 
co-ordinator Anna Saczek, although she notes strong local support from the 
Penrith and Eden Valley community. “People can still get around – they just 
have to take the scenic route.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe994b275b718c637956ab8b72947b30aa099abab%2F0_171_2464_1477%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe994b275b718c637956ab8b72947b30aa099abab%2F0_171_2464_1477%2F2464.jpg>
 Ticket sales at Lowther Castle near Penrith, are down by 50%. Photograph: Don 
McPhee for the Guardian 
The scenic route isn’t really an option in the central Lake District, where 
the closure of the A591 has virtually cut the national park in two. Recently 
votedone of the UK’s best driving roads, by Avis 
<http://www.avisbestroad.com/uk/the-top-25-roads/>, for its picturesque course 
along the edge of Thirlmere reservoir, it has been damaged by landslides – one 
spot north of Grasmere was almost washed away. The impact in that honeypot 
village, which usually swarms with daytrippers and coach tours stopping off 
between Keswick and Ambleside, has been brutal. “Business is down by 50%-60% 
and we have already started making redundancies,” says Andrew Hunter, co-owner 
of Grasmere Gingerbread, who points out that this week’s assurance by the 
transport secretary Patrick McLoughlinthat the road is set to reopen by the end 
of May 
<http://www.nwemail.co.uk/News/Lakes/Flood-damaged-Cumbria-road-to-re-open-in-May-0750ce43-6b16-4418-bf2f-affd3785a95c-ds>
 comes with no cast-iron guarantees. Once the summer season gets into full 
swing, he adds, the cost to the local tourism sector could reach £100m for 
every month the road remains closed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b672f7d717a38f15c62682f496e3f1df871743%2F4_474_4330_2597%2F4330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b672f7d717a38f15c62682f496e3f1df871743%2F4_474_4330_2597%2F4330.jpg>
 Once the summer season gets into full swing, it is estimated that the closure 
of the A591 will cost local tourism businesses £100m for every month it remains 
closed. Photograph: Ashley Cooper/Barcroft Media 
Hunter’s neighbour Becky Heaton Cooper, of the Grasmere art gallery Heaton 
Cooper Studio <http://www.heatoncooper.co.uk/>, is remaining positive. “I’ve 
been speaking to holiday cottage companies in Ambleside, which is only four 
miles away, and they have lots of bookings for 2016. It is a problem that you 
can’t travel from the south past Thirlmere to Keswick, but everything is still 
here and everything is open. Just plan your holiday in the North Lakes or come 
to the South Lakes.”

On the north side of the A591 gap, Rich Martin of Cyclewise 
<http://www.cyclewise.co.uk/> – whose bike hire centre in Whinlatter Forest 
park has taken a serious hit in visitor numbers as a result of closed roads – 
is pressing on with plans to launch a state-of-the-art fleet of electric 
mountain bikes. “We’re knuckling down and moving forward,” he says, urging 
people not to be put off by the diversions. “If you have to make a detour to 
get where you want to go, it’s still going to be worth it. We’ll welcome you 
with open arms, just as we always have.”
Rachael Oakden

York
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7a2102c7331d71d8e93ffe4dd0bf4b45c2b71c2%2F0_42_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7a2102c7331d71d8e93ffe4dd0bf4b45c2b71c2%2F0_42_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
 Sara Amil-Smith outside her Holmlea guesthouse in York. Photograph: Kevin 
Rushby 
Before the floods hit York on Boxing Day, Sara Amil-Smith was in high spirits: 
her B&B was full, bookings looked good. Then in the space of 48 hours, 
everything changed. “I had a third of New Year’s Eve bookings cancelled. Since 
then it’s only got worse. People are even cancelling for summer. They say they 
don’t feel it’s safe.” The irony is that Sara’sHolmlea guesthouse 
<http://www.yorkbedbreakfast.com> was nowhere near the flood waters that 
propelled the city to the top of the Christmas news agenda. “My heart goes out 
to those that were flooded,” she says, “But 95% of businesses were not affected 
– until now.”

Top 10 budget restaurants, cafes and pubs in York
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/sep/23/top-10-budget-restaurants-york> 
The fact is York’s floods did wash through hundreds of homes and cause big 
losses to more than 150 small shops and businesses in popular streets, such as 
Walmgate and Fossgate, but the city – long accustomed to annual inundations – 
soon bounced back. The damage caused by a tidal wave of media attention has 
been harder to handle. Photos of popular attractions – including theJorvik 
Viking Centre <http://www.jorvik-viking-festival.co.uk/>under a metre of river 
water, or disconsolate shopkeepers filling skips with spoiled stock – can leave 
a lasting stain on a reputation. Tourist bookings to one of England’s major 
tourist cities have plummeted – by up to 40% says the local tourist office,
Visit York <http://www.visityork.org/>, despite the fact that only nine hotels 
and guesthouses out of more than 300 were affected.

For a cafe-bar owners like Sarah and Mike Lakin of Fossgate Social 
<https://www.facebook.com/thefossgatesocial>, the experience was of a rapid 
clean-up (they lost all their draught beer and £6,000 worth of equipment). “We 
were open again in two days,” says Mike, “But then it was very quiet. We also 
do Airbnb in a different non-flooded building and we had people cancel. One guy 
insisted it was too dangerous to come.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb211ac2f0d7274bb829b5f557f501f3a2085a73f%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb211ac2f0d7274bb829b5f557f501f3a2085a73f%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Sarah and Mike Lakin, owners of Fossgate Social cafe-bar. Photograph: Kevin 
Rushby 
York is unusual in having a huge variety of independent businesses and they 
are especially thick on the ground in badly affected areas. Now they are 
struggling with what, even at the best of times, is a quiet period. Local 
councillor Johnny Hayes has been working to promote the independent sector for 
years, helping propel the city’s Bishopthorpe Road from a failing shopping area 
into the 2015 winner ofBritain’s Best High Street 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/bishy-road-york-named-britains-best-high-street-award>
. “York has got loads of interesting little restaurants, quirky bars and great 
cafes. Now we need the world to know that it’s all open again, waiting to 
welcome visitors.” It’s a message backed up by Visit York, which points out 
that most of the centre was not flooded and, even at the peak, tourists were 
still enjoying the city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F684026e33ae8bfac40b9dd952b0a17d585c56c58%2F0_0_1875_1250%2F1875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20floods%3A%20how%20tourism%20in%20the%20Lakes%20and%20York%20hopes%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fafter-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F684026e33ae8bfac40b9dd952b0a17d585c56c58%2F0_0_1875_1250%2F1875.jpg>
 Indie York Now campaign, which launched on 9 January. Photograph: Kevin Rushby.
The real test will come on 15 February when the city’s Jorvik Viking Festival 
<http://www.jorvik-viking-festival.co.uk> starts. Sara Amil-Smith remains 
concerned: “There’s no insurance for lack of customers.” It was Sara’s online 
outpouring of anxiety and frustration that helped kick-start what has become a 
local fightback against the flood-induced downturn: theIndie York Now campaign 
<http://www.indieyork.com/>, an attempt to encourage support for the kind small 
independent businesses that help give York its unique atmosphere.

“There are wonderful shops and cafes here,” she says, brightening up at the 
thought. “You’ve got to go to that cafe, theFlax and Twine 
<http://www.theflaxandtwine.co.uk/>, it’s got the best scones ever! It’s also 
in The Shambles,” she adds, “York’s most beautiful street, and one that was NOT 
flooded.”
Kevin Rushby

Elsewhere in the UK

December storms and flooding caused serious disruption in Scotland, Northern 
Ireland and Wales, affecting tourist businesses, as well as people’s homes. In 
Scotland, Ballater, Braemar, Aboyne and Aberdeen’s Garthdee were worst affected 
by Storm Frank. The tourist town of Ballater was described as being like a “war 
zone”, after the banks of the river Dee burst, destroying a caravan park and 
wrecking homes. Last week, the Queen’s neighbouring Balmoral estate offered a 
40% discount on the estate’s holiday cottages to help bring visitors to area 
and boost the local economy.

Lancashire was also badly affected, particularly the Ribble Valley. Lancaster 
Castle was also forced to close for several days due to power cuts. Though some 
places are still recovering, the tourist board is keen to stress that the 
region is very much open for business.

In Northern Ireland, popular tourist attraction The Gobbins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/16/the-gobbins-cliff-path-antrim-northern-ireland>
 cliff path remains closed due to damage caused by the storm. All bookings were 
cancelled from 30 December onwards and it is expected to cost up to £50,000 to 
repair the cliff path, which opened in August 2015 and recently welcomed its 
5,000th visitor.
Will Coldwell


• This article was updated on 15 January to include details of the Grand Day 
Out in Cumbria.
 