
I moved to Birmingham to make a fresh start. I had been involved in the drugs 
scene and spent a year in prison for dealing. But arriving in a city where you 
have no friends, no family and no home is hard.

The day I walked into a local church in search of a cup of tea and something 
to eat changed my life. Church has always been important to me: my parents were 
God-fearing Christians, though I lost my mum when I was 18. I wanted to get 
involved in the local community and church seemed the best place to start.

Frank's first day out of prison was long and stressful, but I stuck by him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/oct/14/first-day-out-of-prison-mentoring-scheme>
I discovered that one of Birmingham’s six Home-Start  
<http://www.home-start.org.uk/>charities was based there. Home-Start supports 
families under pressure and I chatted to the manager about its work and how I 
might be able to help.

I was one of nine children and, as the parent of a grown-up daughter myself, 
becoming a volunteer for a charity that helps parents and their children seemed 
perfect. My other passion is music – I am musician, and music has been a love 
of mine since I was a small child. It’s one of the best things in my life.

Within days of that first conversation, I signed up to start the Home-Start 
volunteer training course. It’s thorough training and you have to complete it 
before you are ready to be matched to a family. The training covers a wide 
range of subjects, from recognising signs of abuse (what to look for in 
children and parents), to understanding children’s boundaries, confidentiality 
rules, health and safety procedures and how to help parents fill out forms.

Home-Start pairs volunteers with families who are struggling to cope. Every 
week, for just a couple of hours, you visit that family in their home, offering 
a mix of emotional and practical support – essentially walking alongside them 
until they are ready to go it alone.


Because of my background and life experience, the Home-Start manager had a 
certain family in mind for me. Ross was a single dad of two young boys. His 
partner, Helen, had epilepsy, and one day Ross had returned home to find that 
she had suffered a fit and died.

A young woman's success story made me realise the stress had been worth it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/aug/12/a-young-womans-success-story-made-me-realise-the-stress-had-been-worth-it>
Like me, Ross has taken drugs in the past, but he has done incredibly well to 
stay clean for more than 12 years. Losing a loved one can have a devastating 
impact on your life and my role as Ross’s volunteer is to support him through 
that, to be a friend, someone to talk to. I can empathise with his situation – 
and that’s what is so powerful about the Home-Start approach.

When I met Ross, we hit it off right away. As well as having similar 
backgrounds, he shares my love of music and art, and what I like about him is 
that he isn’t afraid to express his feelings. His two boys are loving and smart 
and got talking to me the minute I came through the door. It was like entering 
into a new family.

A year ago, if someone had said to me that I would now be living in a new city 
and putting my life experiences to good use, I would never have believed them. 
It shows how a chance meeting can alter the course of your life forever.


To find out more visit Home-Star <http://www.homestartbirmingham.co.uk/>t’s 
website <http://www.homestartbirmingham.co.uk/>. 


The day I made a difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/the-day-i-made-a-difference>
 is theGuardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.


For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community - it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 