
An effective transport network is essential to keep a region moving, to create 
access to jobs, training, public services, and to support a region’s 
sustainable economic growth.

Bus services are the most important element of the transport network. In 
Greater Manchester, four in every five public transport journeys are made by 
bus, and more people travel to work by bus than by all other means of public 
transport put together.

Wait for a bus and then tell me the market knows best | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/21/why-nobody-complaining-bus-services-deregulation>
But in the 30 years since buses were deregulated, there has been a 40% fall in 
the number of journeys being made by bus in Greater Manchester. This is despite 
a growing population and increased demand  
<http://www.tfgm.com/Corporate/Media_Centre/Pages/facts_figures.aspx>on our 
transport network.

 London is the only place in Britain to which the legislation didn’t apply. In 
the same 30 years, the number of passenger journeys on London’s franchised bus 
networkhas doubled 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/annual-bus-statistics-year-ending-march-2015>
. This has kept the city moving and growing, despite the high demands on their 
network.

So what is the difference between Greater Manchester and London?

In Greater Manchester’s deregulated bus system the private bus companies set 
the routes, frequencies, timetables, fares and quality standards for services. 
Naturally, these are primarily informed by their individual commercial 
interests – and these haven’t aligned with Greater Manchester’s.

Hundreds of millions of pounds of public funding has been invested [pdf 
<http://www.transportforgreatermanchestercommittee.gov.uk/tfgmc/download/downloads/id/4554/item_05_capital_programme_monitoring_and_201314_capital_programme_budget.pdf>
] in our bus infrastructure, including priority routes for buses through busy 
city and urban centres, new bus stations, and the thousands of bus shelters and 
bus stops across the city region. In addition, the public purse supports one in 
five bus services in Greater Manchester 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/transport-committee/bus-services-bill/written/41751.html>
, makes fuel cheaper for bus companies, and pays for free or discounted travel 
for younger people, older people and people with disabilities. That’s around 
£100m a year, equivalent to around 40% of the revenues in the bus market.

It has been impossible for the deregulated market to meet the needs of Greater 
Manchester

Despite the best efforts of Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for Greater Manchester and the bus 
companies, it has been impossible for the deregulated market to meet the needs 
of Greater Manchester. Passengers in London get bus services that connect with 
other transport modes and get people where they want to go. They have simple, 
integrated fares and ticketing, and consistent quality standards. And as a 
result, passenger numbers have grown. That is what we need in Greater 
Manchester.

After 30 years, change is finally on the way. The bus services bill going 
through Parliament will give the elected mayor of Greater Manchester the 
ability to franchise bus services. This could mean that before 2020, people in 
Greater Manchester could, after three decades, finally start getting on board 
buses and trams coordinated by the local transport authority.

Under a franchised system the mayor can decide the routes, frequencies, 
timetables, fares and quality standards for bus services in the city-region. 
The services will still be run by private operators, which will compete with 
each other through a procurement process open to all operators – not only those 
that operate in the area. It will bring together the best of the public and 
private sectors to deliver better transport for customers and for the city 
region.

Finally, councils will have the power to improve local bus services
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jun/02/bus-services-bill-empower-councils-local-transport>
This will help deliver a consistent, integrated transport network which 
effectively integrates with other transport modes and makes it possible for 
every passenger to use their tickets on any bus in Greater Manchester, as well 
as other forms of public transport.

Of course, there will be challenges. Any changes to the bus market will need 
to be implemented in a structured and phased manner. We are adamant that we 
will not see a repeat of the chaos that followed the overnight change to a 
deregulated system 30 years ago.

These are challenges that we must overcome. Our city region deserves a bus 
network that will make travel easier, and better connect people and places.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. 

 