
Any bedtime reading wishlist for Father Christmas is now as likely to feature 
titles by lewd standup comedians as the works of JK Rowling, Philip Pullman or 
Michael Morpurgo. In the wake of the enormous success of David Walliams’s 
children’s books, publishers are looking to Britain’s comedy clubs for fresh 
talent.

Among the long parade of comic stars already taking to children’s literature, 
fromSandi Toksvig <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sandi-toksvig> to The 
Fast Show’s Charlie Higson and Fantasy Football’s David Baddiel, lurk several 
with a reputation built almost entirely on “adult” humour and rudeness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e484f34a03a1d537e20de5c148f8d343dd537af%2F744_164_1348_1684%2F1348.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20David%20Walliams%2C%20publishers%20turn%20to%20standup%20comedians%20for%20children%E2%80%99s%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20David%20Walliams%2C%20publishers%20turn%20to%20standup%20comedians%20for%20children%E2%80%99s%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e484f34a03a1d537e20de5c148f8d343dd537af%2F744_164_1348_1684%2F1348.jpg>
 Sandi Toksvig Photograph: Ken McKay/ITV/REX/Shutterstock  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9194766ef984c972eb0aed15203a69af9de73a68%2F958_213_1249_1561%2F1249.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20David%20Walliams%2C%20publishers%20turn%20to%20standup%20comedians%20for%20children%E2%80%99s%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20David%20Walliams%2C%20publishers%20turn%20to%20standup%20comedians%20for%20children%E2%80%99s%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9194766ef984c972eb0aed15203a69af9de73a68%2F958_213_1249_1561%2F1249.jpg>
 Charlie Higson Photograph: Ken McKay/ITV/REX/Shutterstock  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ad1d330a56f0371f6dd881d3ec167025db38ad6%2F797_296_1046_1307%2F1046.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20David%20Walliams%2C%20publishers%20turn%20to%20standup%20comedians%20for%20children%E2%80%99s%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20David%20Walliams%2C%20publishers%20turn%20to%20standup%20comedians%20for%20children%E2%80%99s%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ad1d330a56f0371f6dd881d3ec167025db38ad6%2F797_296_1046_1307%2F1046.jpg>
 Russell Brand Photograph: Richard Young/REX/Shutterstock  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44dab293dd660e0ac5d5de968af903065d06a69e%2F647_427_1896_2368%2F1896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20David%20Walliams%2C%20publishers%20turn%20to%20standup%20comedians%20for%20children%E2%80%99s%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20David%20Walliams%2C%20publishers%20turn%20to%20standup%20comedians%20for%20children%E2%80%99s%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwalliams-comedians-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44dab293dd660e0ac5d5de968af903065d06a69e%2F647_427_1896_2368%2F1896.jpg>
 David Baddiel Photograph: David Hartley/Rex/Shutterstock 
Russell Brand and Julian Clary, both famed for their explicit content, have 
brought out children’s titles. A second sequel toClary’s critically 
well-received story about a family of hyenas, The Bolds, 
<http://www.andersenpress.co.uk/TheBolds/> is due out from Andersen Press in 
February and before that, in the new year, Adrian Edmondson is to become the 
latest comic talent to succumb to the lure of publishing a potential nursery 
classic.

Edmonson is still probably best known as television’s ultra-violent 
inarticulate punk, Vyvyan, inThe Young Ones and for partnering the late Rik 
Mayall inBottom and on stage as The Dangerous Brothers. His first story for 
children isTilly and the Time Machine 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/puffin/books/298277/tilly-and-the-time-machine/>, 
which is billed by Puffin Books as “a funny and heart-warming adventure” and 
tells of a girl who lives with her inventor father and wishes she could go back 
to a time when her mother was still alive.

Walliams will be featured heavily in the BBC’s television schedules this 
Christmas with his new adult sketch show,Walliams and Friend, and will also be 
reading Roald Dahl’sRevolting Rhymes on BBC1. But despite his continued 
popularity on screen, Walliams revealed in Radio 4’sToday programme on Friday 
that: “I should really give up comedy and just concentrate on children’s books 
because it is so rewarding.”

David Fickling, of children’s specialist publishing house David Fickling 
Books, said it was not surprising that performers such as Walliams enjoyed 
writing for children. “Can you imagine anything better than being able to enter 
the hearts of children with a story that stays with them throughout their 
lives?” he asked. “In fact it is a rare thing to be able to tell a good story – 
maybe a rarer thing than it is to be a good stand-up comedian.”

Fickling cited the example of Lissa Evans, author of Wed Wabbit 
<https://www.waterstones.com/book/wed-wabbit/lissa-evans/9781910989432>, out 
next month, as a comic writer who has a natural ability to grip young readers. 
Evans only picked up the children’s literature habit after working in 
television on programmes including the BBC’sRoom 101.

“All publishers really want is a brilliant story that jumps off the page,” 
said Fickling. “And you can only judge that on the story itself, no matter what 
name is on the cover. Some performers, such asDavid Walliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-walliams>, do write incredibly 
well for children – and I know that is partly because of how hard I hear he 
works on his text. But children’s writing is not a separate ghetto. Just like 
adult literature, a story will only last if it is good. Telling it well is like 
being able to sing – you either can or you can’t.”

Walliams has changed the shape of children’s publishing post-Harry Potter. He 
has put a new industry emphasis on humour and has sold more than 14 million 
books so far, with his work being translated into more than 50 languages.

This month the most anticipated title, for young readers and bookshop owners 
alike, wasThe Midnight Gang, the former Little Britain star’s latest.

Walliams’ nine other children’s novels, including The Boy in the Dress, 
Gangsta Granny and Mr Stink, have justified the industry’s slightly over-hasty 
talk of a successor to Roald Dahl, with an equally mordant, unbridled 
imagination. Television adaptations of Walliams’ books are also now staple 
seasonal fare.

This weekend a stage show based on Walliams’ picture book, First Hippo on the 
Moon <http://www.royalhippodrome.com/shows/details/2/455.html>, began 
rehearsals. It will open, appropriately enough, at the Royal Hippodrome 
Theatre, Eastbourne, on 13 December, before a national tour 
<https://www.worldofdavidwalliams.com/the-first-hippo-on-the-moon-is-going-on-tour/>
.

However, the decision to branch out into children’s literature need not mark 
the end of a stage career. Clary has extended the dates of his current tour, 
The Joy of Mincing, while Baddiel,author of The Parent Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/nov/25/david-baddiel-interview-the-parent-agency>
 andThe Person Controller, has just finished a solo show about his relationship 
with his father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/09/david-baddiel-i-am-going-to-talk-about-difficult-stuff>
, who has dementia.

Similarly Toksvig, who wrote The Troublesome Tooth Fairy in 2000 and Hitler’s 
Canary in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/feb/20/hitlers-canary-sandi-toksvig-review>
, and Higson, the man behindthe Young Bond books 
<http://www.charliehigson.co.uk/books/>, are both still appearing on television.

Actor Mackenzie Crook <http://www.mackenziecrook.com/windvale.html>, star of 
sitcomsThe Office and Detectorists, as well as the Pirates of the Caribbean 
films, has also brought out two popular children’s books,The Lost Journals of 
Benjamin Tooth and The Windvale Sprites.

In Australia, in the meantime, something akin to the Walliams effect has been 
felt this autumn with the unexpected commercial success ofDo Not Open This Book
. Written on a whim in an idle moment by comedian and radio personality Andy 
Lee, it was originally intended as a private publication for his family, but 
was picked up quickly for mass distribution.Its release crashed websites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/09/a-marketers-dream-andy-lees-kids-book-crashes-website-sells-40000-in-two-days>
 and has provided a sudden boost for its independent publishing house, Lake 
Press.It seems it is one thing to make a roomful of adults laugh out loud, or 
to earn yourself a prime-time light entertainment slot on television: but the 
real prize is to make a child want to read your next story.
 