
Airbnb has released data showing the city neighbourhoods experiencing the 
biggest boom in interest from travellers. By analysing the travel patterns of 
more than 40 million people who stayed in homes posted onAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> in 2015, the site has put 
together a list of the areas that have seen the greatest growth in bookings. 
The list is dominated by neighbourhoods in Asia, with areas in Japan, Thailand 
and Malaysia in the top three places.

Bangkok’s best street food: a guide to dishes and districts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/25/bangkok-best-street-food-guide-dishes-districts-thailand>
First is Chūō-ku in Osaka, Japan’s second city, known for its 15th-century 
castle, as well being a popular shopping district, which saw a 7,000% increase 
in guests staying in property listed on Airbnb in the past year. Second is 
Banglamphu in Bangkok, home to famous backpacker hub Khaosan Road and some of 
the city’s most popular sights, which experienced 1,230% growth. This is 
closely followed by the traditionally residential neighbourhood of Brickfields 
in Kuala Lumpur, which saw an increase of 1,200%.

Other neighbourhoods that have shown strong rise in incoming guests over the 
past year include Capucins, in the city of Bordeaux, Koukaki in Athens, and 
Roma Sur in Mexico City. Airbnb says that 74% of its listings are outside 
traditional central districts – and the site has always been popular with 
travellers eager to immerse themselves in the “local” neighbourhoods of a city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworlds-coolest-neighbourhoods-airbnb-rentals-bangkok-japank-kuala-lumpur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4bce2916c69903a404433ed42b4ed13d016ccde%2F0_197_5600_3362%2F5600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb's%20booming%20city%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworlds-coolest-neighbourhoods-airbnb-rentals-bangkok-japank-kuala-lumpur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%27s%20booming%20city%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworlds-coolest-neighbourhoods-airbnb-rentals-bangkok-japank-kuala-lumpur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4bce2916c69903a404433ed42b4ed13d016ccde%2F0_197_5600_3362%2F5600.jpg>
 Osaka skyline and the the Yodogawa River. Photograph: Sean Pavone/Alamy Stock 
Photo 
Sean Davies, an artist from the UK who lives in Osaka, says there has 
definitely been a rise in tourism in over the past few years, especially from 
Chinese visitors, leading to an increase in tax free shops for tourists.

“We actually rented out a room of our sharehouse on Airbnb and we had a mix of 
guests, predominantly from neighbouring Asian countries,” he says. “Japanese 
people I have spoken to on the other hand are generally not familiar with the 
service.”

Bangkok food blogger <http://bangkokglutton.com/> Chawadee Nualkhair says 
Banglamphu has always been home to a selection of the city’s most interesting 
attractions and famous dining establishments, but is now starting to attract a 
different kind of visitor.

Fashion designer Wakako Kishimoto on Osaka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/oct/18/osaka-japan-wakako-kishimoto> 
“Until recently, the only tourists it catered to were the backpackers who 
stayed in the hostels on Khaosan Road,” she says. “Thai foodies started 
exploring the places where their parents and grandparents went as teens, 
sparking a wave of interest in the area among visitors. The realisation that 
people with money – both tourists and Thais – would want to come back has 
spawned bars, more upscale hotels, and much better restaurants.”

Nualkhair adds that even chains such as Starbucks have been making inroads. 
“When the subway stop to Chinatown is completed, the ubiquitous malls and 
condos are likely to take root there as well,” she says. “And Banglamphu could 
become like every other neighborhood in the city.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworlds-coolest-neighbourhoods-airbnb-rentals-bangkok-japank-kuala-lumpur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc9efbe8e2e699fe053c96a2c4c13832afbcfe51%2F0_123_2996_1799%2F2996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb's%20booming%20city%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworlds-coolest-neighbourhoods-airbnb-rentals-bangkok-japank-kuala-lumpur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%27s%20booming%20city%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworlds-coolest-neighbourhoods-airbnb-rentals-bangkok-japank-kuala-lumpur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc9efbe8e2e699fe053c96a2c4c13832afbcfe51%2F0_123_2996_1799%2F2996.jpg>
 Diners outside a cafe in Melbourne’s Richmond district 
Ling Low <http://ling-low.tumblr.com/>, a writer based in Kuala Lumpur, says 
that Brickfields has not traditionally been a tourist centre, though in 2014 a 
major new shopping centre with international shops and restaurant chains opened 
in the area. “My guess is that the convenience of the mall has increased the 
appeal for Airbnb renters looking for modcons and public transport,” she says. 
“Because Brickfields is not in the commercial centre of the city (near the Twin 
Towers) it’s also probably a more affordable option.”

Malaysia road trip: from Kuala Lumpur to the east coast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/oct/11/malaysia-road-trip-kuala-lumpur-east-coast>
“Hopefully, tourists will take the time to venture into Brickfields itself, a 
neighbourhood with quite a few overlooked gems, such as theSri Kandaswamy Temple
 <http://srikandaswamykovil.org/>, the Vivekananda Ashram and the Temple of 
Fine Arts,” she says.

In its trends report, Airbnb highlighted themes across the neighbourhoods that 
made the list. Unsurprisingly, areas that feature galleries and art spaces, 
good food scenes and independent shops feature prominently. According to 
Airbnb, the site has a positive economic impact on areas, with 42% of guests 
spending money in the neighbourhoods where they stayed. It also says the site 
allows local people to supplement their incomes by sharing their homes, with 
half being low-to-moderate earners.

However, the site has been the focus of protests in some cities, such as 
Barcelona, where residents have blamed Airbnb for causing an increase in 
tourist population – and rowdy behaviour – in traditionally residential areas.

The site also made the news last week after several Airbnb hosts reported that 
guests had used their rented homes to throwimpromptu New Year’s Eve parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/07/airbnb-new-years-eve-disaster-stories-around-the-world>
.

Airbnb’s 16 top trending neighbourhoods
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworlds-coolest-neighbourhoods-airbnb-rentals-bangkok-japank-kuala-lumpur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74262d331b5b0f3171c2ea41ac50a47d037b5ab7%2F0_38_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb's%20booming%20city%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworlds-coolest-neighbourhoods-airbnb-rentals-bangkok-japank-kuala-lumpur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%27s%20booming%20city%20neighbourhoods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fworlds-coolest-neighbourhoods-airbnb-rentals-bangkok-japank-kuala-lumpur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74262d331b5b0f3171c2ea41ac50a47d037b5ab7%2F0_38_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 A park in the Poncey-Highland area of Atlanta 
Chūō-ku, Osaka, Japan – 7,000% growth of inbound guests staying in listings on 
Airbnb in 2015

Budapest city guide: what to do, plus the best bars, restaurants and hotels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/20/budapest-guide-hungary-restaurants-bars-hotels>
Banglamphu, Bangkok, Thailand – 1,230%

Brickfields, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia – 1,200% 

Capucins, Bordeaux, France – 960%

Koukaki, Athens, Greece – 800% 

Triana, Seville, Spain – 770% 

Hammerbrook, Hamburg, Germany – 415% 

Kaneohe on Oahu, Hawaii, US – 320% 

Meireles, Fortaleza, Brazil – 285% 

Roma Sur, Mexico City, Mexico – 275% 

Oak Lawn, Dallas, US – 260% 

Poncey-Highland, Atlanta, US – 240% 

District VII, Budapest, Hungary – 145% 

Bukit peninsula, Bali – 130% 

Richmond, Melbourne, Australia – 126% 

Constitución, Buenos Aires, Argentina – 125% 
 