
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> says it needs “a little 
more time” before it starts selling the new wireless ear buds that are designed 
to work with its newest iPhones – the ones that don’t come with a dedicated 
headphone jack.

The technology company showed off what it calls “AirPods 
<https://www.apple.com/airpods/>” last month during a launch event for the 
iPhone 7 smartphones. The iPhones went on sale in late September, and Apple had 
said the AirPods would go on sale in late October. But now the Cupertino, 
California company isn’t saying when they’ll be released, or why it needs more 
time.

iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> users can still listen 
to audio on the new iPhones by using other wireless headsets or plugging into 
the phone’s charging port, although older headsets may need a plug adapter.

At launch, Apple’s senior vice-president of marketing Phil Schiller declared 
the headphone jack to be “ancient” technology and promised that the earpods 
would deliver a “magical experience”.

“It makes no sense to tether ourselves with cables to our mobile devices,” he 
said, discretely acknowledging criticism at the removal of the headphone port 
by saying that it took “courage” for Apple to “move on to do something that 
betters all of us”.

Apple’s decision was widely debated by users, many of whom felt that wireless 
headphones wereless convenient and practical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/apple-airpods-launch-problems-with-wireless-headphones>
 than their wired counterparts. Wireless headphones need regular charging and 
the tiny AirPods could fall out and, without the wire as a lifeline, easily get 
lost.

At the same time, those wanting to continue to use their old headphones can do 
so using a free adapter that plugs into the iPhone’s Lightning port, although 
that does mean the user can’t listen to music or podcasts while the device is 
charging.

Tech analyst Paul Erickson 
<https://technology.ihs.com/Biographies/463361/paul-erickson> at IHS Technology 
suggested that the decision to remove the headphone jack was motivated by 
money. “It should be noted that wireless models are the highest 
revenue-generating products within the headphone market,” hetold the Financial 
Times <https://www.ft.com/content/a122b5d0-757b-11e6-b60a-de4532d5ea35>.

The decision to delay the launch of the “magical” $159 wireless headphones 
comes the day afterApple reported its first decline in annual sales and profit 
in 15 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/25/apple-profits-sales-decline-2016-iphone-7>
.
 