
A Boy’s Own Story is both a masterpiece in the literature of adolescence and 
a pivotal book in the history of gay writing, opening up the landscape of 
teenage homosexuality with revelatory frankness. “What if,” its narrator 
wonders, “I could write about my life exactly as it was? What if I could show 
it in all its density and tedium and its concealed passion, never divined or 
expressed?” The “realism” of the 19th-century fiction he devours seems to him a 
kind of fantasy, creating a “parallel life”, “tinglingly far-fetched”. Could 
there be a new realism that faithfully depicted the inner and outer worlds he 
actually lived in? In the midwest of the 1950s the growing-up of a young gay 
man is a vulnerable, marginal, barely visible thing, riven by confusion, 
self-hatred and doubt. Edmund White’s novel, doing justice to all this 
confusion, tingles none the less with its own excitement: the value, and 
novelty, the sheer teeming interest, of telling the truth. More than 30 years 
on, in a culture in which sexual truth-telling is ubiquitous, it retains its 
power to startle: in the tense insouciance with which it describes 
a 14-year-old’s lust for his father, or his earning money to pay for a hustler; 
or in the hair-raising betrayal that brings the novel to its close, a wilful 
act towards which we see the whole narrative has been moving with an awful 
logic.

If it changed the rules for what was possible in literary fiction, A Boy’s Own 
Story, a bestseller on both sides of the Atlantic, also marked a new direction 
for White, and confirmed the liberating potential of a closely autobiographical 
kind of novel, where the testamentary force of memoir is coupled with the 
artifice of fiction. The embrace of such a genre as a career-long practice was 
a surrender to adventure, undertaken with no knowledge of how the story would 
continue. It was bound to find its form less in the conventional architecture 
of plot than in the symmetries of the narrator’s inner world, the driving force 
of his desires, the selective harmonies of memory. White himself cannot have 
known, when he wroteA Boy’s Own Story, that he would write the sequels that 
were to join it in a kind of first-person trilogy,The Beautiful Room Is Empty 
<http://www.edmundwhite.com/html/beautiful.htm> (1988) and The Farewell Symphony
 <http://www.edmundwhite.com/html/farewell.htm> (1998) – books telling a young 
man’s story, since youth, in the gay world of the 60s and 70s, which seemed 
magically extended until it was brutally curtailed. We see now thatA Boy’s Own 
Story appeared at a turning point in the history that White’s later books would 
unfold, just before the Aids virus violently reconfigured the very world he was 
describing. The trilogy thus has a second personal thread running through it, 
and intimately connected, the growth not only of a gay man, but of a driven and 
ambitious writer, of extraordinary gifts, destined to define gay literature for 
a generation.

White’s earlier two novels, though both first-person narrations, had been very 
different from the astonishingly frank chronicles that were to follow. Each 
approached the question of how to write gay fiction in its own way. His 
brilliant debut,Forgetting Elena <http://www.edmundwhite.com/html/elena.htm> 
(1973), reads the gay social and sexual rituals of New York’s Fire Island in 
terms of the parallel rituals of 10th-century Japanese court life, “idle and 
gossipy”, “profoundly hierarchical if superficially egalitarian”, where 
decorous social behaviour contrasted with brutal sensuality, and ethics were 
liable at any time to be overruled by aesthetics. White’s book is itself an 
aesthetic conundrum, of dreamlike ingenuity, in which an amnesiac narrator 
learns through observation the codes of a specialised world.Nocturnes for the 
King of Naples <http://www.edmundwhite.com/html/nocturnes.htm>, published five 
years later, is a confessedly baroque novel, a sequence of highly wrought 
addresses to an absent male lover. The narrative voice is subjective, 
self-analytic, self-accusing, in the manner of White’s later books, but the 
“plot” unfolds with none of their airy and compulsive candour, being glimpsed 
obliquely, a partial mystery revealed through fragments and refractions. White 
at this time, like other gay artists before him, treasured the baroque 
aesthetic for its moral ambivalence, for making “little distinction between 
ornament and substance” – feelings hidden in digressions, in the expressive 
uncurling of a metaphor.

Our Young Man by Edmund White review – sparkling and steamy tale of a male 
model
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/02/our-young-man-edmund-white-review-male-model-fashion>
Anyone who reads A Boy’s Own Story will be struck by the contrast between a 
plain, brisk, clear-eyed language in which any boy’s story might be told, and 
the luxuriance of its similes, which open up beyond the mundane world a shimmer 
of secret reference and private value. Even when White writes of suppressing 
his urges, the metaphor he uses, of a candle snuffed out, multiplies with an 
unsuppressible life of its own – “a candle, two candles, a row of 20, until the 
lens pulled back to reveal an entire votive stand exhaling a hundred thin lines 
of smoke as a terraced offering before the shrine”. These unfurling images seem 
to translate libido into style, the unstoppable expressions of a hidden life. 
Adolescent experience is both intense and incommunicable; being so much 
discovery it also seems, to the accustomed adult eye, disproportionate: “it’s 
the particular curse of adolescence that its events are never adequate to the 
feelings they inspire, that no unadorned retelling of those events can suggest 
the feelings”. A kind of figurative exuberance (which will never be lost from 
White’s writing, and remains one of its pleasures) is therefore especially 
marked in this book, where it not only gives body to adolescent reverie and 
conjecture, but subtly recreates the frame of reference of a receptive child 
whose sense of the world comes through reading and music as much as through 
direct experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fedmund-white-a-boys-own-story-rereading-gay-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2aa9aaab58f36ab22b5e75f7cb62552d87c604c%2F0_0_2946_2205%2F2946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Hollinghurst%20on%20Edmund%20White's%20gay%20classic%20A%20Boy%E2%80%99s%20Own%20Story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fedmund-white-a-boys-own-story-rereading-gay-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Hollinghurst%20on%20Edmund%20White%27s%20gay%20classic%20A%20Boy%E2%80%99s%20Own%20Story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fedmund-white-a-boys-own-story-rereading-gay-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2aa9aaab58f36ab22b5e75f7cb62552d87c604c%2F0_0_2946_2205%2F2946.jpg>
 Edmund White in Paris, 1986. Photograph: Louis Monier/Rue des Archives/Writer 
Pictures 
A Boy’s Own Story is a book about loneliness – if the story now seems to 
embody the experience of a whole generation, it’s of the essence that to the 
narrator it seems his alone, the belated sharing of something at the time 
incommunicably his “own”. “I had ached and writhed with loneliness, twisting 
round and smearing it on me as though it were a tissue of shame pouring out of 
my body: shameful, familiar, the fell of shame.” The 14-year-old who has been 
reading Wilde and Balzac and Thomas Mann has been reading Hopkins too – “I wake 
and feel the fell of dark, not day” – and wraps himself in the fell, a second 
animal skin, of self-disgust and isolation. Imagining the aura of the male 
bodies around him at school, he sees it as “a kind of oriflamme, if that means 
the golden banner a knight wraps himself in”; he could by now have found out if 
it does mean that, but the potency of the word lies in that first teenage 
surrender to its literary magic, and to its protection.

If his first curiosity will be about their sex lives, he is also hungry for 
the oddities of other people’s life stories

In a book about isolation, likenesses proliferate like daydreams around 
ordinary objects and people, lending fantasy narratives to them, resonances 
that fill the empty spaces. The rapt habit of describing people (White was from 
the start a superb portraitist) entails, at this youthful stage, recasting them 
in images out of art and literature. The body of Kevin, the younger boy with 
whom the narrator first experiences the unguessed miracle of mutual pleasure in 
a simple sex act, is exquisitely described, transmuted against the late sun 
into an emblem, “the waves dragon scales writhing under a sainted knight’s 
halo”. The observer’s gift is also from the start the aesthete’s, 
or alchemist’s. To catch a likeness is, however remotely, to possess, and what 
has been possessed may be retained through the strange mnemonic chemistry of 
metaphor. So in a later book White speaks of giving a young man he was in love 
with his “metaphorical due”, captured and let go like a dragonfly, but fixed 
for ever on the page.

It is the essence of this adolescent’s world that he doesn’t belong there, and 
his mind is burningly, sickeningly possessed by what he can’t have. He seems, 
indeed, to be a figure in the unrealistic literature he reads – a changeling, 
a prince, a person with some as yet unknown but redemptive identity. The 
necessity of escape is also a dream of Europe – that deep American dream that 
has moved generations of writers, and a profound and lasting pull in White’s 
life and writing. The imagery of royalty permeates the book, a further magic 
sprinkled on American democracy, a “secret power”. He sees himself as a “dying 
king”, or as a dauphin; a girl he optimistically dates is “royalty”, her beauty 
“a trooping of the colour”; another beloved boy is seen as a “paupered prince”. 
In his own “fondest if most dangerous fantasy” he is “the harsh young lord, the 
prince with the pewter ornament stuck in his hat”, who dominates and then 
betrays his older lover. The prince as sexual autocrat abuses his own power, 
condemns the older man he has seduced in order to save himself – so there is, 
as he shockingly discovers, something toxic as well as liberating in the 
fantasy persona.

Edmund White: 'I try to be honest. If I lose someone's friendship, so what?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/29/edmund-white-i-try-to-be-honest-if-i-lose-someones-friendship-so-what->
It is a marvel of A Boy’s Own Story that this subjective realm coexists with 
the piercingly exact depiction of the social worlds of the boy’s schools, his 
hometowns, his already divorced parents. The remarried father, an unsociable 
businessman with his own strange routines (working at night) and socially 
ambitious new wife; the desperate amorous mother, taking her son with her to 
restaurants and bars where her efforts to pick up a new man seem hauntingly to 
prefigure the compulsions of the narrator: both are extraordinary presences in 
the book, in their complex mixture (for the son) of power and irrelevance. If 
the compulsions of sex, and of telling the truth about it, are united at the 
heart of White’s writing, he has, almost as strongly, an avid, insatiable 
interest in other people; and if his first curiosity will be about their sex 
lives, he is also hungry for all the oddities and accidents of their life 
stories, and acutely responsive to the strange nexus of character, mood and 
appearance. He is the least boastful, the least narcissistic of 
autobiographers. The intense lifelikeness of the social world in his novels is 
achieved in part through the retentive accumulation of anecdote, gleeful gossip 
tested against sharp observation, and coloured always, however delicately, with 
glamour, a tribute to the mystery of other lives. He absorbs and reconstitutes 
his subjects, but never reduces them. In the longer perspective of his later 
memoirs he returns to individuals – lovers, writers and, most hauntingly, his 
parents – he has already portrayed in fictional form. To contemplate these 
versions side by side is to enter into the imponderables of art, the adjacent 
claims, when it comes to portraiture, of accuracy and artful arrangement, plain 
fact and wise condensation. We see that all are works of art, executed at 
different times and with varying freedoms of style.

To say all this is to run a little ahead of A Boy’s Own Story, which will lead 
to these later books, with their busy social panoramas, but which retains the 
painful essence of being out of, and not yet ready for, the swing of the world. 
Its amazing luxuriance of recall – of what was done, said, felt or merely 
imagined – makes it a defining study of a phase of life many writers struggle, 
if they try at all, to re-enter. It distils a state of mind where loneliness 
and desire are so fused as to be indistinguishable. Something of this must 
lie at the heart of White’s lifelong sex obsession, the thousands of sex 
partners totted up in The Farewell Symphony (and, he later claimed, 
dramatically reduced, for fear readers wouldn’t believe him): the addict’s 
need, less the  pursuit of pleasure than obedience to the terms of his 
addiction. It all makes a deeper sense in the light of the youthful 
self-portrait in A Boy’s Own Story, written when the subject was about 40, and 
judging perhaps that this was the personal as well as the historical moment to 
trace his own earlier history.

• A Boy’s Own Story 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407492/s/a-boy-s-own-story//?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published as a Picador Classic on 16 June.
 