
Alastair Cook – famously – never sweats. Perhaps that was the reason why he 
wandered into the press room looking so calm and collected after his side had 
completeda hard-earned 22-run victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/bangladesh-fall-short-as-england-secure-victory-on-final-day-of-first-test>
. Maybe he is a surprisingly good actor or just an increasingly clinical, 
clear-headed England captain, who has now seen a lot of action.

The overnight target for a historic Bangladesh victory was a modest 33 runs 
with two wickets and one proper batsman, Sabbir Rahman, remaining – a tricky 
situation since England are always supposed to beat Bangladesh. But Cook, who, 
after careful thought and consultation, had decided to give the ball to his 
pacemen rather than his spinners when play resumed, has been in deeper holes 
than this.

Bangladesh fall short as England secure victory on final day of first Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/bangladesh-fall-short-as-england-secure-victory-on-final-day-of-first-test>
“I was fairly confident this morning, if I’m brutally honest,” he said. “I 
thought we would create enough chances; the doubt was whether we were good 
enough to take those chances. I genuinely thought that 280 was going to be 
enough. I didn’t think it would get as close as that and the way they played 
spin in particular was very impressive.

“It was a brilliant Test as it ebbed and flowed over the four days. After the 
first session I certainly didn’t think it would make the fifth day. The crucial 
moments were probably at the beginning of the third day when they were 70 or 80 
behind with five wickets in hand and we managed to get a lead [of 45].”

On a pitch skilfully designed to favour spin bowlers, England’s match-winner 
wasBen Stokes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ben-stokes>, a paceman and a 
batsman who, in the past, has been found wanting against slow bowlers on 
turning tracks. But for his presence in the England side Bangladesh would have 
been celebrating that historic victory.

“I now say it every single time we speak about him,” said Cook. “The guy is 
that x-factor cricketer which every side would love to have. And he balances 
our side and gives us options. The one thing that he has done over the last 
year is to improve his method against spin.”

Bangladesh v England: five talking points from the first Test in Chittagong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/23/england-bangladesh-first-test-chittagong-talking-points>
Much of Stokes’s hard graft in this sphere has been unspectacular and 
seemingly mundane yet vital. The purpose of this work was not to evolve any new 
swashbuckling shots against the slow bowlers. It was to learn how to defend 
more securely against spin bowlers, which means that Stokes is far more 
frequently around to cause a bit of mayhem later in his innings.In the second 
innings the rewards were clear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/england-bangladesh-ben-stokes-cricket>
.

Now the convoy moves on to Dhaka, where the second Test starts on Friday. 
Bangladesh have shown their ambition in the first match. They are seeking wins 
rather than respectability, in which case another spinning track rather than a 
flat one would be desirable for them and more entertaining for us. 
Historically, the ball does not tend to turn so much there.

Whatever the nature of the surface, Cook intimated that England are unlikely 
to field the same XI – without actually dropping anyone. “I’m pretty sure there 
will be some changes just because of what we have coming up,” he said. “If we 
play the same side a lot on the tour we could have a lot of guys with not much 
cricket under their belts coming into a crucial Test match a bit further down 
the line. We were pretty clear when we came out that we would rotate.”

Cook hinted that there could be at least two changes, which are more likely to 
be among the bowlers than the batsmen. Sitting next to him at the time was 
Stokes and he is a bowler, who has expended an awful lot of energy over the 
past five days. The inevitable question arose and it was greeted with the 
inevitable response from England’s latest charismatic all-rounder. “Nah, I’ll 
play all seven … if I still get picked.”

On the evidence of Chittagong there is a very good chance that he will be 
picked over the next month or two – before anybody else.
 