
This novel, with its brightly proclamatory title, a title promising loudness, 
confident statement, irrefutable presence and exuberance, even a kind of jazzy 
brashness or biblical heft, begins in immediate contradiction with a notable 
quietness, a state of wounded and private withdrawal. The first thing it does 
is reveal someone hiding behind closed curtains, peeking fearfully out, keen 
not to be seen. “House and Home” is the title of its opening section. Pretty 
soon we gather that “House and Home” is meant in the sense of a typical media 
heading, like a style section in a newspaper, and that intense media 
observation in the form of a small crowd of paparazzi has left the person 
feeling invaded, hunted, “strange”. “Each time I look at the photographs in the 
papers, I look unreal.”

She – a few pages on we find out that the speaker is a woman – feels guilty, 
even vaguely criminal. So what has she done to merit feeling like this? Has 
there been a death? Is there a scandal? The novel begins with this forced 
unhoming, from both the house and the self (“I am not myself any longer … I 
crept out of my house in the middle of the night with a thief’s racing heart”). 
Pretty soon it becomes clear that “House and Home” stands for a clash between 
the private and public worlds, and that this clash raises questions about how 
we calculate what’s real and what’s imagined about ourselves, and what’s 
allowed and forbidden too. This is just the start – a human, very vulnerable 
start, and sure enough, this extraordinary novel, which came out nearly 20 
years ago, will be in the end very much about homecoming, home truths.

Funny and visceral, this story about marriage, family, death, loss, song and 
above all love, whose “scandalous revelation” is a cleansing, empowering and 
beautiful one, celebrates expansiveness and imaginative shapeshift. So far
Trumpet is Jackie Kay’s only novel. I say “so far” in the knowledge that she’s 
working on another right now and I know this because we’re friends. We didn’t 
know each other, though, in 1998, when I first went into a shop in Edinburgh 
and, seeingTrumpet on a table, bought it immediately – I knew Kay’s poems well 
and had read a couple of her plays too. When I read it, I knew I had never read 
a book like it. There had certainly never been a Scottish book like it, yet 
it came from the Scottish tradition of honouring the margins, the vernacular 
and the ordinariness of things and lives (an “ordinariness” that is always 
extraordinary). It came from a literary tradition of shapeshift itself, one 
that finds voice in unauthorised, unexpected forms and places; one often 
concerned with the search for a communal form, a tradition that can be traced 
in writers such asLewis Grassic Gibbon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/09/classics>, Hugh MacDiarmid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/feb/14/featuresreviews.guardianreview9>,
Nan Shepherd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/27/nan-shepherd-vision-cairngorms-robert-macfarlane>
, Willa Muir,Alasdair Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alasdairgray>, 
Liz Lochhead <https://www.theguardian.com/books/liz-lochhead>, James Kelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/james-kelman>. It came from such tradition 
and expanded it with influences from international black writers such asAudre 
Lorde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/18/my-hero-audre-lorde-jackie-kay>, 
Jamaica Kincaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/01/featuresreviews.guardianreview31>
, and especiallyZora Neale Hurston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/01/classics.fiction> and Toni 
Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tonimorrison>. Plus, it said things 
about and for that Scottish tradition, and about and for a wider British 
tradition as well, concerning gender and ethnicity, that had never been said 
before.

A life in writing: Jackie Kay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/27/life-writing-jackie-kay> 
My 1998 edition summarises its plot on the flyleaf of its dust jacket, in that 
way publishers like to do to catch the attention of a browsing reader: 
“Celebrated Joss Moody has died and the jazz world is in mourning. But in death 
Joss can no longer guard the secret he kept all his life, and Colman, his 
adoring adopted son, must confront the truth: the man whom he believed to be 
his father was, in fact, a woman.” What a spoiler, I thought, especially after 
I’d read the opening sections of the novel and experienced a story so far from 
the bluntness of this summary as to be near unrecognisable. But then again, one 
ofTrumpet’s concerns, along with an ultra-sensitive understanding of “the 
private life that turns suddenly and horrifically public”, is finding a means 
of working against the reductive power of certain kinds of storytelling, 
certain ways of telling “truth” about real lives. It does this on a larger 
scale than just by referencing the media’s way with us. Sophie Stones, for 
instance – the journalist who wants to make a fortune from the story of Joss 
Moody (“Transvestite has a nice pervy ring to it,” she thinks, sure that the 
book she’s writing with Joss’s son will change her life) – reassures herself 
that she’s got every right to get as much money and kudos out of cheap 
true-life revelation as she wants. She thinks that’s the way of the world, and 
for her it’s a particularly gender-trapped way of the world. “Why should I have 
scruples when men have been using me for years?”

Trumpet is, in a consciously much more subtle way, very much about revelation. 
It’s about the stories that change our lives, about the unexpected 
possibilities in those closest to us, and the unexpected shapes real family 
takes. It repeats its “shocking” revelation about Joss’s gender over and over, 
to calibrate a shimmering response from the repeating unbindings (as if 
unbinding the question of gender each time) so that we judge human nature not 
by the shock of the revelation of Joss’s gender but by people’s responses to 
it. “The trumpet man that turned out to be a woman”: one ofTrumpet’s 
inspirations was the real-life story that broke in the media in the 1990s of 
Billy Tipton, an American jazz musician and bandleader born a woman, Dorothy 
Lucille Tipton. The story became international news after Tipton’s death, as 
his family wrangled over his will. Jackie Kay’s Joss Moody / Josephine Moore 
perhaps gestures more, though, to the dancer, singer, civil rights and 
resistance worker Josephine Baker. Born in Missouri, she was the first 
world-famous black woman, and a woman who, incidentally, outlived her first 
obituaries and the wartime report of her own death by three decades.

Trumpet is a novel fascinated by “the significance of names”, and by what 
words do when they’re meant to mean, well, us. In a defining act, the doctor 
who examines Joss’s corpse overwrites in “large childish letters” the word male 
with the word female on the death certificate, then goes out into the “pale, 
bloodless light” of a new morning – and blood is important in a book that so 
profoundly declares itself to be about parenting, family and, crucially, the 
role the imagination plays in these matters. “Make up your own bloodline, 
Colman. Make it up and trace it back. Design your own family tree – what’s the 
matter with you? Haven’t you got an imagination?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Frereading-trumpet-jackie-kay-ali-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3929b79256ecbaf41f09f3f7b632596690ed6f76%2F34_0_2334_2452%2F2334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ali%20Smith%20on%20Trumpet%20by%20Jackie%20Kay%3A%20a%20jazzy%20call%20to%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Frereading-trumpet-jackie-kay-ali-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ali%20Smith%20on%20Trumpet%20by%20Jackie%20Kay%3A%20a%20jazzy%20call%20to%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Frereading-trumpet-jackie-kay-ali-smith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3929b79256ecbaf41f09f3f7b632596690ed6f76%2F34_0_2334_2452%2F2334.jpg>
 The Billy Tipton Trio, from left to right, Ron Kilde, Tipton and Dick O’Neil. 
Photograph: Personalities/Credit : Topham Picturepoint 
The book’s protagonists, Millie and Joss, one black, one white, fall for each 
other at a time when it’s still close to taboo, and first see each other when 
they’re giving blood (Baker’s own anti-racism novelMy Blood in Your Veins was 
published in 1931 and she went on to adopt a family of children of different 
ethnicities – her “rainbow tribe”).

Jackie Kay’s work, formally expansive and inclusive, often an exploration of 
the hurt done by small-mindedness and its attendant exclusivity, is always 
about the opening up of our notions of identity. Here Joss’s public/private 
fusion of identity – a fusion that produces the possibilities of improvisation, 
a different music, a sense of play between all the selves, of possibilities for 
quite other selves in those round him and in us too – is a question of open 
source. He makes the world more local and more open both at once. “His father 
was African, his mother Scottish. He doesn’t know the exact country, just the 
continent, he laughs gamely. ‘It’s a big fucking continent, so it is.’”

Then there’s the trumpet itself, phallic and feline at once, purring from its 
fur-lined box in descriptive terms you’d never expect to see applied to 
something like a trumpet. As a symbol, and in reality, a trumpet is not exactly 
subtle. We expect it to be brash. We expect it to be loud. We expect it to be 
undeniable. Here it becomes a whole new blues double-entendre. “Why not a woman 
playing a fucking trumpet, man, what’s wrong with that?” as Colman puts it, 
while the novel laughs at the daftness in our traditionally received notions 
about gender and overturns them to such an extent that it starts to become 
obscene, an act of deep disrespect and ignorance, when people refer to the Joss 
we know as “she” instead of “he”.

It is just one of the magical reversals of preconception in the novel. “Joss’s 
trumpet was like a magician’s hat.” The funeral director, one of the many 
“mouth pieces” that come together to make this novel’s orchestration, thinks to 
himself, amazed, how “he had never had a man turn into a woman before his very 
eyes. He felt it to be one of those defining moments in his life that he would 
be compelled to return to again and again.”

The moment at which definition breaks open – that’s the true defining moment, 
in a book full of “the peat smell of jazz”, built from the layered echoes, 
repetitions and rhythms of a music that earthily “unwraps” us, frees us from 
sex, race and memory; its music acts as lifeblood, birth, lovemaking and 
transformation, most especially in the extraordinary section called “Music”, in 
which any notion of the fixed self, any too-fixed summarising, ecstatically 
gives way, “collapses”.

Kay has always been a watcher, a tracer of the “true” story, or, as Millie 
sees it, the difference between living a lie and living a life – maybe even an 
afterlife, sinceTrumpet is also its own book of revelation. Here are Millie and 
Joss now, in the 21st century, coming out of a Glasgow jazz bar back in the 
1950s and into the dark of the brave new world like “people who have 
just landed on the planet all at once together with the same pioneering, fierce 
look on our faces”. This fiercely pioneering work makes the walls between us 
come tumbling down. In a love song to our human versatilities, a uniting of 
many voices into a forgiving set of harmonies; a jazzy call to action, 
it trumpets subtlety, imagination, generosity, life-force, to the rooftops.

• Trumpet <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/trumpet.html> is published as a 
Picador Classic.
 