
I’d been avoiding the news all week. But whispers about the police shootings 
of black men inTulsa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/tulsa-oklahoma-police-shooting-suv>
 andCharlotte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/21/charlotte-protests-keith-scott-shooting>
 had seeped into the rehearsal room for our London production of One Night in 
Miami by Kemp Powers. How could they not? The play, set in 1964, has a cast of 
six black actors – portraying Cassius Clay (asMuhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-obituary> was then 
known),Malcolm X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/21/malcolm-x-assassination-records-nypd-investigation>
,Sam Cooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/dec/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview2>
, the American football player (and soon to be actor)Jim Brown 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C9HtSeVrn7s>, and two Nation of Islam security 
men.

As he walked into the room, one of the actors asked: “Have you heard about 
what happened in Tulsa?” There was a searching in his voice. In truth he wasn’t 
really asking if we’d heard. He was asking why this nightmare keeps recurring.
Again and again and again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/counted-us-police-killings>. I 
looked around at the other men in the room, particularly our American cast 
member Francois Battiste, and I decided to shut the discussion down.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fmuhammad-ali-america-one-night-in-miami%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee364d50dae5d32652791de49acacb70406c010a%2F0_448_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ali%20fought%20for%20change%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20let's%20celebrate%20those%20on%20the%20front%20foot%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fmuhammad-ali-america-one-night-in-miami%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ali%20fought%20for%20change%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20let%27s%20celebrate%20those%20on%20the%20front%20foot%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fmuhammad-ali-america-one-night-in-miami%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee364d50dae5d32652791de49acacb70406c010a%2F0_448_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Sope Dirisu as Cassius Clay, right, and David Ajala as football star Jim Brown 
in One Night in Miami. Photograph: Johan Persson 
For anyone who has worked with me, the idea that I would exclude anything from 
the rehearsal room may come as a surprise. My process revolves around the 
exploration and articulation of everything the world throws at us and delving 
into our own deep emotional hinterland; the two then collide through the text 
of the play. This process does not allow for the exclusion of seismic events 
that personally touch each individual in the room.


I asked the actors if we could do something radical that day. We removed 90% 
of the furniture from the set and, rather than work scene by scene as we had 
planned to, I suggested we run the play non-stop from beginning to end. No 
discussion, no preparation, just take to the air and see where we land. This 
would be almost a week earlier than we had planned, but the actors all agreed 
to just hit it.

I’m sure there’s a clear psychological explanation for my reaction. Avoidance 
is a tool I use successfully each time I’m about to start writing a new 
narrative. (Never is my house cleaner, or my garden in better shape.) But this 
was neither an act of avoidance nor of channelling rage or pain into the work. 
It was an attempt to not allow the bandwidth of my company be decreased by acts 
of terror that have the potential to traumatise beyond their geographic 
location.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fmuhammad-ali-america-one-night-in-miami%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdffd955e25770cbf95aa976bd1852a14d8327531%2F0_448_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ali%20fought%20for%20change%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20let's%20celebrate%20those%20on%20the%20front%20foot%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fmuhammad-ali-america-one-night-in-miami%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ali%20fought%20for%20change%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20let%27s%20celebrate%20those%20on%20the%20front%20foot%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fmuhammad-ali-america-one-night-in-miami%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdffd955e25770cbf95aa976bd1852a14d8327531%2F0_448_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Something radical … director Kwame Kwei-Armah, right, in rehearsal with cast 
member Arinzé Kene (playing Sam Cooke). Photograph: Johan Persson 
I had witnessed this trauma in my adopted city of Baltimore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/02/kwame-kwei-armah-center-stage> 
after theacquittal of George Zimmerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/14/zimmerman-acquitted-killing-trayvon-martin>
 for the murder of Trayvon Martin. I saw in the eyes of black mothers and 
fathers alike, an almost existential angst as they tried to realign this new 
reality, against age-old strategies they had used to protect their children, 
their boys, from the ravages of extreme racism. I remember arriving at my 
theatre the next morning and seeing that pain in the eyes of some of my African 
American staff members. All of us were asking ourselves: how can I, how can 
art, help at this moment? We decided to commission eight local artists to write 
and perform whatever they wanted to on the subject, so long as they looked the 
trauma in question right in the eye. They performed these pieces on the 
streets, in community centres, in the homes of those most touched by the events 
and then led a post-show discussion around the issues. We were less interested 
in discussing police brutality, far more interested in discussing new tools for 
a new age. Our theory being that trauma binds you to the present and the past. 
There is no room for tomorrow in there. And without tomorrow, what do we have? 
Survival. Is that enough?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fmuhammad-ali-america-one-night-in-miami%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F322440ba522fa1ab3dd9dd09dcb376098a305980%2F0_0_4096_3142%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ali%20fought%20for%20change%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20let's%20celebrate%20those%20on%20the%20front%20foot%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fmuhammad-ali-america-one-night-in-miami%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ali%20fought%20for%20change%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20let%27s%20celebrate%20those%20on%20the%20front%20foot%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fmuhammad-ali-america-one-night-in-miami%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F322440ba522fa1ab3dd9dd09dcb376098a305980%2F0_0_4096_3142%2F4096.jpg>
 In a protest against racial injustice, Colin Kaepernick kneels during the US 
national anthem before the NFL game between the Dallas Cowboys and the San 
Francisco 49ers in October 2016. Photograph: John G Mabanglo/EPA 
We got to the end of the run-through of One Night in Miami and the actors and 
I began to discuss what, if any, discoveries we had made. It was impossible to 
avoid the parallels of then and now. The play is set in 1964, during thefirst 
civil rights era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/01/civil-rights-america-1960s-activists-voting-rights-vietnam>
. Each of the characters had lived through the kind of systemic inequalities 
that make or break you. Far from being broken, these men had soared! They were 
truly celebrated individuals. So celebrated that, in segregated Miami, Sam 
Cooke (albeit under cover) was allowed to stay at a whites-only hotel on the 
nightClay beat Sonny Liston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/feb/23/muhammad-ali-sonny-liston> 
to become the heavyweight champion of the world. However, at the heart of our 
play, these men are in Malcolm X’s segregated hotel room, negotiating how to 
serve. How to contribute. How to not be set apart from the community but help 
to elevate it.

My cast of actors began to think of the modern black artists, entertainers and 
sportspeople and the questions they must be asking themselves amid what many 
are calling a second civil rights era.Beyoncé’s Lemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/01/beyonce-lemonade-visual-album-review-woman-scorned>
. The footballerColin Kaepernick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/30/colin-kaepernick-stay-seated-national-anthem-until-racial-oppression-ends-video>
 sitting for the national anthem. The actorJesse Williams 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/28/arts/television/bet-awards-jesse-williams.html?_r=0>
’s Black Lives Matter speech at the BET awards. All of these acts of defiance 
and service rush to the surface. And although I applaud these acts from my 
soul, I find myself dissatisfied.

Dissatisfied because the thing I find most fascinating about the icons in the 
play is not their acts of defiance but that they were intellectually on the 
cutting edge of new thoughts and ideas.Sam Cooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/nov/20/popandrock.urban1> was way ahead 
of nearly every artist in owning his own record label and the publishing rights 
to his songs. Jim Brown was making the transition from a career in football to 
being a movie star and was soon to create the Black Economic Union, designed to 
help black businesses. Clay was about to announce his name change and 
membership of the Nation of Islam, andMalcolm X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/10/malcolm-x-reinvention-review-manning-marable>
 was laying the groundwork for his new organisation, taking the United States 
to the United Nations on charges of crimes against humanity for its treatment 
of its black community.

Kwame Kwei-Armah: 'I found myself constantly moaning in London'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/02/kwame-kwei-armah-center-stage> 
These men were future-scoping. Owning their todays while shaping their 
tomorrows. Who are these people today? And what might they be thinking about? 
What ideas are exciting those people? Might Malcolm be into the “renegade” 
scientistRobert Lanza’s biocentric view 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/is-there-an-afterlife-the-science-of-biocentrism-can-prove-there-is-claims-professor-robert-lanza-8942558.html>
 of the universe and consciousness? Might Sam Cooke be jazzed by thedigital 
disruptors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/davos-braces-digital-disruptors-taavert-hinrikus>
? MightJim Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/30/jim-brown-colin-kaepernick-rodney-harrison-anthem-protest>
 be thinking aboutglobal microfinancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/microfinance>? Might Ali … who 
knows what he might be thinking about! But most importantly, who are their 
modern comparisons, beyond gender and beyond race?

The rest of the week we stayed in this area of discussion, never tipping into 
the pain of what was happening in cities across the United States to men that 
look like them. I felt good about this. I felt we had found a way to speak to 
the young people who will come and see One Night in Miami. A way to not let 
them ignore the realities of today but not be bound in the agonies of them.


Then I opened my newsfeed and I saw the video of Keith Scott being shot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/25/charlotte-mecklenburg-police-release-footage-of-keith-scott-shooting-video>
 in Charlotte. Thevideo of his wife begging 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/24/us/charlotte-keith-scott-shooting-video.html>
 the officers not to kill him. I cry. I write to my cast and I apologise for 
not letting us process the pain of this terror together. Because sometimes, 
tomorrowis just another day. 

 * One Night in Miami is at the Donmar Warehouse, London 
<http://www.donmarwarehouse.com/whats-on/donmar-warehouse/at-the-donmar/2016/one-night-in-miami#k4rWv2S42PvfDSbe.97>
, until 3 December. Box office: 0844 871 7624.
 