
If you didn’t win a Willy Wonka-esque Golden Ticket in the recent competition, 
you won’t be aboard the first departure of theBorders Railway 
<http://www.bordersrailway.co.uk/> train on Saturday. Normal (paying) customers 
can travel on the longest new domestic line constructed in a century – from 
Sunday.

To celebrate the opening, three VIP trains will run on Saturday, between 
stations decked out with bunting, bands and marquees … A fair bit of fanfare, 
with the Queen officially opening the line on 9 September. The lucky passengers 
will be those who found a golden ticket inside special chocolate bars created 
by local chocolatierCocoa Black <http://www.cocoablack.com/>.
Borders Railway map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/travel_edinburgh_train/giv-300801MrPV6G995HE/>
The route follows the old Waverley Line, which once linked Edinburgh to 
Carlisle through the Scottish Borders, but was decommissioned in 1969 as a 
result of the 1963 Beeching Report. Now, for the first time in almost 50 years, 
rail passengers can explore this bucolic corner of southern Scotland by train 
on 30 miles of new track running from Edinburgh Waverley to a new station, 
Tweedbank, just outside Melrose. And there’s already talk about extending the 
line south to Hawick – famous for cashmere and tweed – and maybe as far as 
Carlisle. All the hype is aimed at making tourists rethink their plan of 
galloping north to the Highlands in search of the “real” Scotland.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298122194%2Fdf7bb62a-963b-4680-a6ba-65d825a1dec1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298122194%2Fdf7bb62a-963b-4680-a6ba-65d825a1dec1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mountain biking at the Tweed Valley forest park, Glentress 
From 10 September, and on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays for the next six 
weeks, specialsteam trains 
<http://www.scotrail.co.uk/scotland-by-rail/steam-trains-update> will puff 
Hogwarts Express-style along the route. Tickets for these trips are already 
sold out, but fans can join awaiting list 
<http://www.scotrail.co.uk/form/steam-trains-register-interest> and get updates 
on the next journeys planned.

Alternatively, anyone will be able to climb aboard one of the slightly shabby 
ScotRail carriages – the project may have cost £350m but that didn’t stretch to 
new rolling stock – to ride the line that roughly follows the tortuous and 
notoriously slow A7. The journey takes just under an hour and stops at 
Newcraighall and Brunstane, and at new stations at Shawfair, Eskbank, 
Newtongrange, Gorebridge, Stow and Galashiels. More buses have been laid on 
from these stations to meet the expected extra demand, including a new Sunday 
service between Galashiels and the pretty little hamlet of St Boswells, and a 
new service between Galashiels and Jedburgh (with its abbey, Georgian jail and 
Mary Queen of Scots house).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441297744385%2F276cde6c-4498-4408-a3ad-b02e53ca35b9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441297744385%2F276cde6c-4498-4408-a3ad-b02e53ca35b9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rosslyn Chapel 
Some attractions have really got behind the new line, offering a shuttle 
service from certain stations.Rosslyn Chapel <http://www.rosslynchapel.com/> – 
of Da Vinci Code fame – has pledged to meet each train and ferry visitors to 
the chapel from Eskbank station in a minibus.

The Borders landscape may be gently undulating, but its history is every bit 
as dramatic as that of the north. The border between England and Scotland has 
seen its share of bloody battles, and there are more impregnable-looking 
castles than you can toss a caber at – as well as Georgian gems that wouldn’t 
look out of place in a Jane Austen dramatisation. Architect Robert Adam 
completed honey-huedMellerstain House <http://www.mellerstain.com/>, and his 
father William designed grandFloors Castle 
<http://www.roxburghe.net/castle/floors-castle-intro>.

The line brings 1,500 miles of walking trails within reach, from long-distance 
hikes such as theSouthern Upland Way  <http://www.southernuplandway.gov.uk/cms/>
to shorter rambles and also cycling routes, including the 250-mileBorderloop 
<http://www.cyclescottishborders.com/route/borderloop/>. The area is also known 
for the spectacular ruins of four great 12th-century abbeys – Dryburgh, 
Melrose, Jedburgh and Kelso – now also linked bycycling 
<http://www.cyclescottishborders.com/> and walking routes. The Borders Abbeys 
Way <http://bordersabbeysway.com/> is a picture-postcard 64-mile walking route 
running through dappled woodland, along the banks of the salmon-rich Tweed and 
across gently rolling farmland, punctuated by the crumbling ecclesiastical 
ruins.

The historical highlights aren’t all so ancient, however. Newtongrange 
station, now just 20 minutes from Edinburgh, is connected by a walkway to the
National Mining Museum <http://nationalminingmuseum.com/>. This is on the site 
of the 1890 Lady Victoria Colliery, with an impressive 500-metre shaft and a 
winding tower powered by Scotland’s largest steam engine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441297859521%2F90a523fb-f174-4ada-a42a-dcf556002209-bestSizeAvailable.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441297859521%2F90a523fb-f174-4ada-a42a-dcf556002209-bestSizeAvailable.jpeg>
 National Mining Museum Scotland. Photograph: Alamy 
From Gorebridge you’re handy for 14th-century Crichton Castle 
<http://www.historic-scotland.gov.uk/propertyresults/propertyoverview.htm?PropID=pl_076&PropName=Crichton%20Castle>
, while Stow is the hopping-off point for 16th-centuryThirlestane Castle 
<http://thirlestanecastle.co.uk/> and is on the National Cycle Network 
<http://www.sustrans.org.uk/ncn/map/national-cycle-network>. Speaking of 
cycling, the Tour of Britain will arrive in the Borders a few days after the 
railway opens, finishing stage three on 8 September in Kelso, with its huge 
cobbled square and abundance of fishing tackle shops.

The region is also a mountain-biking hot spot. From Galashiels it’s a 
half-hour bus ride to Innerleithen for some of Scotland’s best mountain biking, 
at theGlentress Forest  <http://www.glentressforest.com/>centre, with trails 
for all grades. Galashiels is also close toTraquair House 
<http://www.traquair.co.uk/>, one of the oldest stately homes in Scotland. 
Dating from 1107, it is charmingly ramshackle and has its own brewery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298205732%2F8d905c4f-03de-41c4-88b4-1e0a2fad3ea5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298205732%2F8d905c4f-03de-41c4-88b4-1e0a2fad3ea5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Born in the Borders cafe at Galashiels Station 
The cafe at the new Galashiels station is a second outpost for Born in the 
Borders <http://www.bornintheborders.com/>, a visitor centre, restaurant, shop 
and microbrewery in Lanton Mill, outside Jedburgh, that showcases the best 
local produce and crafts – with beers including Foxy Blonde, Holy Cow and 
Flower of Scotland, plus Wild Harvest, which is flavoured with foraged 
ingredients.

Melrose itself is the prettiest of the little Borders towns, with chic shops, 
cosy cafes and delis to mooch around. Its abbey ruins are rose-tinged – and 
Robert the Bruce’s heart is buried there.

The Buccleuch Arms <http://www.buccleucharms.com/> in St Boswells won Scottish 
Inn of the Year 2015: it has antler chandeliers and signature steaks, from 
feather to thick rib. Round the corner, bookshop-cafe-deli theMain Street 
Trading Company <http://www.mainstreetbooks.co.uk/> is great for a rummage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441310765379%2F55e93761-6254-407f-9585-b7f1e5f90675-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20aboard%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20new%20Borders%20Railway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fscotland-new-borders-railway-edinburgh-waverley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441310765379%2F55e93761-6254-407f-9585-b7f1e5f90675-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Abbotsford House, the home of Sir Walter Scot 
Walking distance from Tweedbank station is Abbotsford House 
<http://www.scottsabbotsford.com/>, the home of Sir Walter Scott. It was Scott, 
ironically, who kickstarted tourism to the Highlands, changing the perception 
of a wild and dangerously unruly land to the romantic image of majestic 
mountains, tumbling burns, icy lochs and brooding castles.

The grand baronial mansion Scott designed has an armour-lined entrance hall, a 
library with 9,000 rare volumes, and an exhibition centre with a moving 
documentary. The novelist died here in 1832 and is buried in the most 
hauntingly beautiful of Borders abbeys, Dryburgh, among gnarled yews and cedars 
of Lebanon said to have been planted by Crusaders. It’s a fitting end to a trip 
on the revamped Waverley Line – named, of course, after Scott’s famous series 
of novels.

• Borders Railway <http://www.bordersrailway.co.uk/> day returns from 
Edinburgh cost from £3.70 (to Shawfair) to £11.20 (to Tweedbank). For steam 
train updates and tickets, visitSteam Dreams 
<https://www.steamdreams.co.uk/Executables/GT410WebContent.exe?&ActionCode=scotrail&SS=SDSVR01&DB=SteamDreams&Division=A>
 – first-class returns from Waverley to Tweedbank £75, standard-class £40, 
under-16s £20, family ticket £100 – the return leg is diesel-hauled. More 
information fromscotrail.co.uk <http://www.scotrail.co.uk/> and 
bordersrailway.co.uk <http://www.bordersrailway.co.uk/>
 