
I am holding on hard to the 112-year-old Bessie Ellen 
<https://bessie-ellen.com/>. We are in a force eight gale off the Hebrides. I 
am wearing every piece of clothing that I possess under my oilskins and I’m 
still cold. But that doesn’t matter. What does matter is that I continue to 
hold on to this rope.

There is a pause before frantic activity. Into that pause comes stinging hail. 
My hands are numb. Then someone shouts “Run!” and I’m running with the rope as 
fast as I can. Only that’s not fast enough. The Bessie Ellen is pitching in the 
high seas, so I am running uphill on wet wooden boards. Like a cartoon 
character, I’m going nowhere.

One of the ship’s crew sees my predicament, reaches for the rope and, with 
younger legs, runs for me. The Bessie Ellen turns and fairly whips through the 
grey-white waters of north-westScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/offers/scotland>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F134e3c55c618b833bd17c27a31924705f78e76c8%2F0_64_4236_2541%2F4236.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20at%20sea%3A%20sailing%20in%20the%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20at%20sea%3A%20sailing%20in%20the%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F134e3c55c618b833bd17c27a31924705f78e76c8%2F0_64_4236_2541%2F4236.jpg>
 All hands on deck: lunch off the island of Lunga. Photograph: Clare Kendall 
The Bessie Ellen is Britain’s last remaining ketch – a wooden sailing ship of 
the kind that once transported cargo around the west of England – still under 
sail, and we are whizzing past the rain-masked coasts of the Hebrides at an 
exhilarating top speed of 8.4 knots (about 10mph). Around me the rest of our 
18-strong crew are recovering from our jibe in high winds (that’s changing 
direction to you and me); I joke with one of my fellow passengers, Eve Hallam, 
a 33-year-old paediatric intensive care nurse, that my gloves turned white with 
the hail. “What hail?” she asks, and laughs, realising she hadn’t noticed the 
weather.

I’ve never sailed before, but if this is sailing, then I’m addicted. So, it 
seems, is everyone else: 85% of the Bessie Ellen’s guests return for further 
sailing adventures.

The story began in Plymouth in 1904 with a shipbuilder called William Kelly. 
Times were hard in the shipyard at that point and rather than lay his men off, 
he built the Bessie Ellen to keep them employed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97e5a16d52fc7478d95432e37e8e54507f3da4a4%2F242_0_3900_2341%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20at%20sea%3A%20sailing%20in%20the%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20at%20sea%3A%20sailing%20in%20the%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97e5a16d52fc7478d95432e37e8e54507f3da4a4%2F242_0_3900_2341%2F3900.jpg>
 Nesting instincts: Atlantic puffins in their mating plumage on the island of 
Lunga in the Inner Hebrides. Photograph: Clare Kendall 
For 41 years the ship sailed round Britain’s western coasts and Ireland 
delivering cargo. Its first shipment was 150 tonnes of manure from Plymouth to 
Bideford; but during the Second World War it also carried pit props, hops, salt 
and ultimately a hull full of tinned fruit and white flour to American service 
personnel based in the UK. In 1947 it was bought by a Dane, and ran cargoes 
around Denmark until the 1970s.Sailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sailing> on it is a real-life history lesson 
and – as there is no phone signal – a chance to get away from modern life.

“Having a finger on our past is important,” says the Bessie Ellen’s skipper 
and owner, Nikki Alford. “The ship is a moving part of our heritage.”

I’m sailing for four days round the Hebrides. We call in for half an hour at 
Tobermory on the Isle of Mull. The rest of the time we are at sea. Dolphins 
swim alongside our prow one evening. Inquisitive seals pop up and check us out. 
Puffins, oystercatchers, fulmars and shags get on with their lives around us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff20c4970e3a8832fdac557f58935ea81b5e3145a%2F0_19_5846_3507%2F5846.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20at%20sea%3A%20sailing%20in%20the%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20at%20sea%3A%20sailing%20in%20the%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff20c4970e3a8832fdac557f58935ea81b5e3145a%2F0_19_5846_3507%2F5846.jpg>
 Wouldn’t you like to go… :the brightly coloured quayside of Tobermory on the 
island of Mull. Photograph: Clare Kendall 
A bond quickly forms between the 12 guests and six crew. As guests, we are 
living in the former cargo hull, eating sumptuous meals prepared by chef Peter 
Thompson in a tiny galley. The smell of the next meal wafts through into our 
living space. Will tonight be nettle risotto, or Moroccan fish stew? We sleep 
in small bunks along the Bessie Ellen’s sides, our modesty protected by flowery 
curtains that Nikki made. You can reach out and touch the original wooden 
boards put in place by Devon craftsmen more than 100 years ago.

Fortunately there are no night watches for the guests, only the crew. We are 
woken in the morning by the thin light of a Scottish dawn filtering through the 
portholes and Peter heading to the kitchen to make tea, porridge and bread. 
Meals are hugely convivial. Having exhausted ourselves pulling ropes, hoisting 
the mainsail (which requires effort from everyone) and keeping the Bessie Ellen 
shipshape, we are ravenously hungry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F742ceab51cdaef14d1e0758fc13c7e055b7acff0%2F0_150_4512_2707%2F4512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20at%20sea%3A%20sailing%20in%20the%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20at%20sea%3A%20sailing%20in%20the%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsailing-in-hebrides-scotland-holidays-first-timer-ketch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F742ceab51cdaef14d1e0758fc13c7e055b7acff0%2F0_150_4512_2707%2F4512.jpg>
 Ship shape: full-time crew member Elin Dieme, 18, tying sails on the bowsprit. 
Photograph: Clare Kendall 
On our way towards Lunga – an island famed for its puffins – Eve and I are 
given charge of the ship and allowed to steer. “Just keep the headland between 
the prow and the rigging,” says Nikki, and wanders off. At first, being at the 
helm is unnerving, then magical. Some people refuse meals and remain on deck 
just for the sheer pleasure of sailing the ship.

First to volunteer to climb the rigging is 74-year-old Arthur Winterburn, a 
former builder. He’s been brought along by his nephew, Doug, as his wife of 48 
years, Sylvia, has recently died.

Elin Dieme, from Graham Island off the coast of British Columbia, is the 
youngest person aboard. Having grown up on an island with just over 3,000 
people and one road, she felt the need to see the world. “I had my 18th 
birthday, sat my last exam and flew out here,” she says. “It’s been amazing.”

On our last night we weigh anchor just off the island of Kerrera. Highland 
cattle and hardy sheep are grazing. There isn’t a soul in sight. Over a dram of 
whisky everyone agrees that turning the Bessie Ellen around in a force eight 
gale was the highlight of the trip.

“Where are you going next?” I ask Nikki. “The Arctic,” she says. “Want to 
come?”

• Berths are available for seven-day trips from Douarnenez, Brittany to Newlyn 
(departing 23 July, £750), Newlyn to Oban (30 July, £690) and Oban to Aalborg 
in Denmark (3 September, £850). For more information, go tobessie-ellen.com 
<https://bessie-ellen.com/>
 