
The Amazon Echo Dot is essentially all the bits of an Amazon Echo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/amazon-echo-review-the-best-combined-speaker-and-voice-assistant-in-the-uk>
 that make it interesting, but without the speaker beneath it – and so it costs 
just one-third of the price.


The Dot is one of three Alexa-enabled products from Amazon that puts the 
company’s voice assistant front and centre. Only two, the Echo Dot and the Echo 
are available in the UK: the third, the portable Bluetooth speaker calledAmazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> Tap, is only available in the 
US.

What is it?
 The microUSB cable and 3.5mm audio cable plug into the back. Photograph: 
Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The Dot is a small black or white puck with a ring of lights at the top, four 
buttons and a seven-microphone array – the same system that makes the Echo 
speaker so good at hearing you from pretty much anywhere.

It listens out for a “wake word”, which by default is the name of the voice 
assistant contained within the Dot: “Alexa”. Say the wake word and the voice 
assistant comes to life to answer questions, take commands and perform actions.

The Dot has a small built-in speaker, which is good enough for all the voice 
responses Alexa spits out, alarms and other alerts, but is not really designed 
to play music, producing tinny sound.

Instead the back of the Dot has a audio-out port, which is intended plug into 
your existing speakers. Alternatively, it can pair to a wireless speaker via 
Bluetooth.

What does it look like?
 The white Dot still has a black top, but its simple design doesn’t look out 
of place on a bed-side cabinet or speaker. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the 
Guardian 
The Dot is surprisingly discreet sitting on a countertop or stuck to the wall. 
There’s a rotating light ring around the top that indicates when it’s actively 
listening to you and turns red when you hit the mute button, electrically 
disconnecting the mics, so you know when it is and isn’t listening in.

The white Dot has a grey top, which means it stands out more than it might on 
a white bed-side table, for instance. You can get little jackets for the base 
in leather or fabric if shiny plastic doesn’t quite cut it with your decor.

What does it do?
 Press the buttons on the top to control the volume of the built-in speaker or 
output to your connected speakers. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The Echo Dot can do whatever Alexa can do. The set up is the same as the Echo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/amazon-echo-review-the-best-combined-speaker-and-voice-assistant-in-the-uk>
: plug it in, open the Alexa app on your smartphone and follow the instructions 
to connect it to your Wi-Fi network.

Once up and running, Alexa can perform a variety of your typical assistant 
features. It’ll set timers, tell you the time, set alarms, tell you what your 
day looks like from your connected calendar, tell you about your commute or the 
weather and answer questions about all sorts of things.

Alexa has access to quite a lot of information, but the sheer volume of data 
Google has at its fingertips, which means Alexa will struggle with certain 
questions when a Google voice search may not.

The big difference is that Alexa replies in a surprisingly human way, and can 
almost always understand what you’ve said even if it can’t answer the question, 
which means it should get better over time as more data is shovelled into the 
backend artificial intelligence.

Alexa has so-called skills that can be added to her. These app-like things 
give her new abilities. Lots of companies and services have skills. The 
Guardian skill will read you the news, headlines or reviews, for instance. The 
National Rail skill will tell you what your rail commute looks like. The 
Allrecipies skill will be able to read you one of 60,000 different recipes.

But perhaps the best set of skills available for the Echo Dot are smart home 
controls. Here is where the Dot shines: it has a wide range of support for 
smart connected devices, from speakers and remote controls, to lights, coffee 
machines or anything connected to aSamsung SmartThings hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/08/samsung-smartthings-hub-review-internet-of-things>
.

Alexa, turn on the lights in the living room
 The red light on the mute button and light ring show when Alexa can’t hear 
you anymore for when you want a little privacy. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for 
the Guardian 
Out of the box it works with Philips Hue, while skills exist for Nest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/03/google-nest-learning-thermostat-third-generation-home-gadget-smart-heating>
, Hive, Honeywell, Tado, LightwaveRF and LIFX, with Sonos expected soon.

Once hooked up you can command just about anything. You have to remember the 
name of the thing you’re trying to command, but within the Alexa app you can 
group things to turn them on and off with one command.

Unlike most other smart home systems, a single item can be placed into 
multiple groups meaning a bedroom light could be in the “bedroom” group as well 
as in the “upstairs” group and perhaps a “house” group, so that you can turn 
just the bedroom lights on, the whole of the upstairs or turn off the whole 
house when you’re walking out the door.

You can also set brightness, colour, scene or anything else your lights 
support, but lighting is just the start. Almost any smart home appliance can be 
controlled via voice with the right connection.

You can set the temperature via a Nest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/03/google-nest-learning-thermostat-third-generation-home-gadget-smart-heating>
, set the coffee going via a smartplug, switch the TV on or off, set the 
channel or do pretty much anything with devices connected to a SmartThings hub.

The Echo Dot doesn’t have to be used in isolation either. If you’re in earshot 
of two Dots or another Echo device, only the nearest one will reply to your 
commands. Amazon even sells them in packs: buy five get a sixth free, or buy 10 
and get two free. Clearly it wants you to put them all over your house.

Observations
 Here I’ve used masking across the back of the Dot and a sticky fixer to 
temporarily mount it to the wall. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
 * It works surprisingly well when mounted to the wall, but you have to pull 
off the rubber pad or make you own bracket 
 * Alexa ads on the TV set them off 
 * Occasionally the radio will set them off 
 * When you’ve got it hooked up to speakers the Dot will only output its audio 
through those speakers, so they need to be left on all the time to enable it to 
speak to you even if you’re not playing music 
 * IFTTT and Logitech Harmony support are coming soon, which will greatly 
extend Alexa’s smart home support 
 * You have to think carefully about what you’re going to call each of the 
connected devices because you will have to say their names to Alexa for them to 
be activated on an individual basis 
Price

The Amazon Echo Dot costs £50 in either black or white. The larger Echo costs 
£150 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/amazon-echo-review-the-best-combined-speaker-and-voice-assistant-in-the-uk>
.

Verdict

The Echo Dot is everything that’s great about the larger Echo speaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/amazon-echo-review-the-best-combined-speaker-and-voice-assistant-in-the-uk>
 condensed into a small puck that costs one-third of the price.

Being able to voice control things without having to pull out a phone or push 
a button marks a massive step forward for theInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> of Things. Activating, 
changing, switching things off and firing up automation routines via voice 
feels natural and satisfying: there’s nothing quite like marching into a room 
and commanding the lights to turn on.

Alexa isn’t quite the all-conquering voice assistant it promises to be just 
yet, but the Dot gets the job done in a way nothing else can.

Pros: excellent mic array means it can almost always hear you, small but loud 
enough to be heard clearly, great device support, clear mute, turns your old 
Hi-Fi into a smart, voice-controlled speaker, voice control IoT devices

Cons: really needs to be connected to a speaker for music, can’t always answer 
the question, always-listening object in your house, doesn’t support multiple 
user calendars or personal information, only one Spotify or Amazon music 
account can be linked at any one time

Other reviews

 * Amazon Echo review: the best combined speaker and voice assistant in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/amazon-echo-review-the-best-combined-speaker-and-voice-assistant-in-the-uk>
 * Samsung SmartThings Hub review: an Internet of Things to rule them all? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/08/samsung-smartthings-hub-review-internet-of-things>

 * Withings Body Cardio review: stylish scales for health obsessives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/10/withings-body-cardio-review-stylish-scales-health-obsessives>

 * Nest Learning Thermostat third-gen: the simple, effective heating gadget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/03/google-nest-learning-thermostat-third-generation-home-gadget-smart-heating>

 * Logitech Harmony Elite review: easy to use remote that takes charge of your 
home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/04/logitech-harmony-elite-review-remote-control-home-nest-smartthings-tv-sky> 