
While the Amazon founder Jeff Bezos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jeff-bezos> dreams of drones carrying 
out deliveries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/12/amazon-drones-cambridge-prime-air-testing>
, the online giant has revealed that a horde of robots is already in action in 
10 of its US warehouses.


Orange, oblong and squat, the wheeled robots roll beneath shelves of goods, 
which they then lift and ferry around the warehouse, navigating by barcodes on 
the floor.Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> is employing 
more than 15,000 of the robots, each of which weighs 320lbs and is able to 
carry as much as 750lbs, at 10 of its 109 global “fulfillment centers”.

The robots could be harbingers of a new era, vastly simplifying the jobs of 
Amazon’s human workers and coming in particularly handy during the hectic 
holiday shopping season. In unequipped warehouses, employees must trek through 
miles of stacks to shelve and pick goods. In warehouses with robots, machines 
now bring those goods to stations where people pack boxes for storage or 
shipping.

Amazon’s senior vice president for operations, Dave Clark, told reporters the 
robots cut one warehouse’s operating costs by 20%. He explained that with the 
robots, shelves can be stacked closer together and warehouses can hold more of 
the books, specialty keyboards, hot sauces, patio furniture and assorted 
esoterica that Amazon ships in massive quantities around the world.

Because “the majority of the aisles disappear”, as Clark put it, the robots 
significantly shorten the time it takes to deliver packages. In some instances, 
he said, Amazon can ship packages in as little as 13 minutes from a customer’s 
order. It previously took more than an hour for an employee to compete such a 
task alone, he said.

“It’s always faster to have inventory in one place … we’re dramatically more 
efficient than we were,” Clark said. A robot-boosted warehouse can ship as many 
as 700,000 items a day during peak periods.

In 2012, Amazon bought the robotics company Kiva Systems for $775m, and began 
installing the robots and necessary equipment in California, Texas, Florida, 
New Jersey and Washington. Company filings made in June 2013 estimated that at 
one Florida warehouse, installation cost about $46m. Clark said the acquisition 
was “certainly proving out that it’s justified itself”.


The company also hopes to prevent the mistakes of the 2013 shopping season, 
when winter storms and a surge of orders swamped Amazon’s warehouses and 
delayed deliveries.

Clark insisted the machines would not threaten jobs at Amazon, which plans to 
hire80,000 short-term employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2014/oct/21/holiday-shopping-amazon-temp-workers-rights>
 for the holiday season. He told reporters increased efficiency meant growth, 
which increased hiring, and said he saw a “virtuous cycle”: “I see that cycle 
continuing for a long time … we continue to add employees, and no employee has 
been negatively impacted by Kiva coming on board.”

Some fulfillment center employees have complained of a brutal pace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/28/being-homeless-is-better-than-working-for-amazon>
, which Kiva bots could mitigate substantially. In 2011, for instance, workers 
at a Pennsylvania warehousedescribed debilitating heat 
<http://articles.mcall.com/2011-09-18/news/mc-allentown-amazon-complaints-20110917_1_warehouse-workers-heat-stress-brutal-heat>
 and distances, saying the company kept ambulances outside for employees who 
suffered heat stroke, exhaustion or collapse. (Amazon has since installed air 
conditioning.)

Critics also say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/may/04/amazon-seasonal-work-homeless-jobs-unemployment>
 mandatory overtime and temporary employment perpetuate the ills of long-term 
unemployment. Writing for the Guardian, former worker Nichole Gracelyaccused 
the company and its temp agency contractors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/28/being-homeless-is-better-than-working-for-amazon>
 of offering ruthless terms. But whilelabor disputes have increased 
<http://www.wired.com/2013/12/amazon-warehouse-labor-disputes/> in recent 
years, they have so farfailed to produce results 
<http://www.wired.com/2014/01/amazon-union-rejected/>.

Robots could ease such pressures – or they could displace some jobs entirely. 
Nearly 2,000 artificial intelligence and economics experts agreed that machines 
will continue to displace work, but they were split as to whether this means 
more or fewer jobs, according toa report by Pew Research 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/packages/the-web-at-25/>. 

About 52% thought automation will create more jobs than it displaces – and a 
new economic boom will value “uniquely human capabilities”. The remaining 48% 
foresaw a future with growing unemployment and inequality, as only the most 
wealthy and educated people retain control over economic levers.

Similarly, an Oxford University study found  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/22/robot-jobs-humans-used-to-do-fight-back>
that 47% of the US labor market is at risk of displacement by machines.
 