
 Amelia Boynton Robinson, a civil rights activist who nearly died while 
helping lead the Bloody Sunday civil rights march in 1965, championed voting 
rights for blacks and was the first black woman to run for Congress in Alabama, 
died early Wednesday at age 104, her son Bruce Boynton said.

Boynton Robinson was among those beaten during the voting rights march across 
theEdmund Pettus bridge in Selma, Alabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/07/selma-solidarity-march-brooklyn-bridge-new-yrok>
, in March 1965 that became known as “Bloody Sunday”. State troopers 
tear-gassed and clubbed the marchers as they tried to cross the bridge. A 
newspaper photo showing Boynton Robinson, who had been beaten unconscious, drew 
wide attention to the movement.

Fifty years later, Barack Obama, the first black president of the United 
States, joined her in a trip across the span during a commemoration.

Boynton Robinson, who was hospitalized in July after having a major stroke, 
turned 104 on 18 August. Her son said she had been living in Tuskegee and was 
hospitalized in Montgomery. Boynton Robinson’s family said in a written 
statement that she was surrounded by relatives and friends when she died around 
2.20am.

Selma solidarity demonstrators march across Brooklyn Bridge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/07/selma-solidarity-march-brooklyn-bridge-new-yrok>
 In January, Boynton Robinson attended the State of the Union address as a 
special guest of Democratic Alabama representative Terri Sewell, who said 
Boynton’s 1964 run for Congress paved the way for her. Sewell is Alabama’s 
first elected black congresswoman. Boynton was the first woman to run on a 
Democratic ticket in Alabama and the first black woman to run for Congress in 
the state, according to the Encyclopedia of Alabama.

“Mrs Boynton Robinson suffered grave injustices on the Edmund Pettus bridge in 
Selma at the hands of state troopers on Bloody Sunday, yet she refused to be 
intimidated,” Sewell said in January. “She marched with DrMartin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king>, my colleague 
Representative John Lewis and thousands of others from Selma to Montgomery and 
ultimately witnessed the day when their work led to the passage of the historic 
Voting Rights Act of 1965.”

Boynton Robinson had asked Martin Luther King Jr to come to Selma to mobilize 
the local community in the civil rights movement. She worked with the Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference and helped plan the Selma to Montgomery march. 
She was invited as a guest of honor to attend the signing of the Voting Rights 
Act of 1965 by President Lyndon B Johnson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Famelia-boynton-robinson-dies-civil-rights-activist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c200c3f306806f2ae99b1675b432c259ff6b690%2F0_0_2922_1752%2F2922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amelia%20Boynton%20Robinson%2C%20civil%20rights%20activist%20beaten%20in%20Selma%2C%20dies%20at%20104&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Famelia-boynton-robinson-dies-civil-rights-activist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amelia%20Boynton%20Robinson%2C%20civil%20rights%20activist%20beaten%20in%20Selma%2C%20dies%20at%20104&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Famelia-boynton-robinson-dies-civil-rights-activist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c200c3f306806f2ae99b1675b432c259ff6b690%2F0_0_2922_1752%2F2922.jpg>
 In this 7 March 2015 file photo, President Barack Obama holds hands with 
Representative John Lewis and Amelia Boynton Robinson as they walk across the 
Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama, for the 50th anniversary of Bloody 
Sunday. Photograph: Jacquelyn Martin/AP 
 Her role in the event was reprised in the movie Selma, in which she was 
portrayed by actress Lorraine Toussaint.

“The truth of it is that was her entire life. That’s what she was completely 
taken with,” Bruce Boynton said of his mother’s role in shaping the civil 
rights movement. “She was a loving person, very supportive – but civil rights 
was her life.”

Boynton Robinson, born in Savannah, Georgia, worked as an educator there and 
with the US Department of Agriculture in Selma, Alabama. She educated local 
residents on food production, nutrition, health care and more, according to the 
Encyclopedia of Alabama.

Tuskegee University officials have said Boynton Robinson graduated from the 
school in 1927 and in recent years donated much of her personal memorabilia 
from the 1950s and 1960s to the university.

Boynton said the family is planning events in his mother’s honor in Tuskegee 
and is also working to arrange a ceremony at the Edmund Pettus bridge on 8 
September.

 