
Now that the electoral college has formally selected the next president of the 
United States, it’s worth taking a deep breath and asking: what kind of 
democracy do we live in?

The will of the people ought to be clear after an election. But as 2016 draws 
to a close, there are deeply troubling signs that American democracy – after 
227 years of seeking a more perfect union – has left the rails.

It turns out it’s possible to win the governorship in North Carolina but find 
thejob is stripped of power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/north-carolina-strips-some-power-governor-roy-cooper>
 before you’re sworn into office.

Donald Trump will violate the US constitution on inauguration day | Laurence H 
Tribe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/donald-trump-violate-us-constitution-inauguration-day>
And across the nation, we abide by the archaic rules of an electoral college 
that has all but renounced its first responsibility: to elect someone fit to be 
president.

The Founders may have wanted to prevent demagogues from taking power, but 
party hacks ignored all that original intent. It makes you wonder why the 
candidates and voters abide by the rules of a game that nobody is interested in 
playing.

It doesn’t matter, apparently, that Donald Trump lost the popular vote 
<http://cookpolitical.com/story/10174> by almost 3 million. The state-by-state 
popular vote, and the allocations of electoral college votes, are more 
important. That would be fine if the electoral college itself did what 
Alexander Hamiltonwanted 
<https://www.congress.gov/resources/display/content/The+Federalist+Papers#TheFederalistPapers-68 
https://www.congress.gov/resources/display/content/The+Federalist+Papers#TheFederalistPapers-68>
: ensure that the presidency would “never fall to the lot of any man who is not 
in an eminent degree endowed with the requisite qualifications”. But, they 
didn’t.

Judging from his tweets this past weekend, it’s unclear that Donald Trump can 
spell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/17/donald-trump-china-unpresidented-act-us-navy-drone>
requisite. It would also be unpleasant to discuss whether he is eminently 
endowed with anything.

The electoral college won't dump Trump. After inauguration, we fight | Ross 
Barkan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/electoral-college-donald-trump-after-inauguration-fight>
The nature of what we call democracy is sadly no longer an abstract discussion 
beloved of political science professors. Trump won Florida by little more than 
100,000 votes. Yet as the Brennan Center points out, the state disenfranchises 
1.6 million from voting, including one in five African Americans.

Florida is one of just three states to impose an effective lifetime voting ban 
on anyone with a past felony conviction. Restoring voting rights in Florida is
the exception, not the rule 
<https://www.brennancenter.org/publication/florida-outlier-denying-voting-rights>
. Denying voting rights is the racist legacy of Jim Crow laws, and its survival 
to this day is a stain on our democracy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Famerican-democracy-derailed-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1eff3a47e772eabbef0ec5f7816ebc91e40da6e%2F0_213_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20democracy%20is%20being%20derailed.%20Can%20faith%20be%20restored%3F%20%7C%20Richard%20Wolffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Famerican-democracy-derailed-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20democracy%20is%20being%20derailed.%20Can%20faith%20be%20restored%3F%20%7C%20Richard%20Wolffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Famerican-democracy-derailed-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1eff3a47e772eabbef0ec5f7816ebc91e40da6e%2F0_213_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 A man holds a sign inside the state capitol shortly after the electoral 
college cast their vote in Austin, Texas, putting Donald Trump over the 270 
votes needed. Photograph: Tamir Kalifa/AP 
Many inside the conservative echo chamber raise the specter of voter fraud to 
justify their ever-expanding efforts to limit or stop early voting, and impose 
voter identification laws that discourage older, minority voters from 
exercising their right to vote. But it’s clear from the reports of election 
officials across the country that such fraud is almostnon-existent. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/18/us/voter-fraud.html?smprod=nytcore-iphone&smid=nytcore-iphone-share&_r=0>

No matter what the president-elect claims, there were no cases of widespread 
fraud that denied him victory in the popular vote. The only surprise is thata 
majority of Republicans believe, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/12/18/a-new-poll-shows-an-astonishing-52-of-republicans-think-trump-won-the-popular-vote/?utm_term=.30f4e581e518>
 wrongly, that Trump won the popular vote at all.

Real voter fraud is institutional, not individual. You can find it in North 
Carolina, where the defeated Republican governor claimed he lost more than half 
the state’s counties to voter fraud. (In fact, just a handful of cases of 
emerged.)

Pat McCrory was not content 
<http://www.newsobserver.com/news/politics-government/state-politics/article95817457.html>
 with imposing voter ID laws that a federal appeals court condemned for 
“discriminatory intent” that would “target African Americans with almost 
surgical precision”.

His parting gift for his Democratic successor, Roy Cooper, was to strip him of 
his powers to appoint a majority to the state board of elections, and with it, 
all the county boards of elections. By some remarkable twist of fate, the new 
laws give Republicans a majority on these boards in congressional and 
presidential election years.

Truth is evaporating before our eyes | Francine Prose
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/truth-is-evaporating-before-our-eyes>
In case you think this kind of thing is normal in a place like North Carolina, 
this is a system thathas been in place since 1901. 
<http://www.newsobserver.com/news/politics-government/politics-columns-blogs/rob-christensen/article121532657.html>

Donald Trump’s victory is often mentioned in the same sentence as the Brexit 
vote in the UK to leave the European Union. The nationalist sentiments behind 
both results, along with their racist and anti-immigrant overtones, make such 
comparisons all too easy.

But the truth is that Trump’s win differs from the Brexit referendum in one 
rather important regard: he does not represent the will of the people. The 
critics of the Brexit result are constantly hectored into silence by those who 
brandish the voting tallies: anyone who opposes Brexit is surely an 
undemocratic elitist.

Trump can make no such claim to represent the majority of Americans. That may 
not stop him from doing so. But the facts are stubborn things: he only 
represents the majority of the electoral college.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Famerican-democracy-derailed-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaac61dd03bee061de77ac98c21e998936ccb16e%2F0_0_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20democracy%20is%20being%20derailed.%20Can%20faith%20be%20restored%3F%20%7C%20Richard%20Wolffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Famerican-democracy-derailed-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20democracy%20is%20being%20derailed.%20Can%20faith%20be%20restored%3F%20%7C%20Richard%20Wolffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Famerican-democracy-derailed-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaac61dd03bee061de77ac98c21e998936ccb16e%2F0_0_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Donald Trump is the fifth president to lose the popular vote but win the White 
House. Photograph: Tamir Kalifa/AP 
The last time this happened, after the disputed recount in Florida (where 
voting rights are so carefully respected), George W Bush promised to govern as 
a uniter. Having lost the popular vote by more than half a million, Bush’s 
first major legislation was on education reform, and it was led by that 
Democratic lion, the late Ted Kennedy.

If Trump is planning some major bipartisan healing, with a prominent 
Democratic senator leading the way, he has a greater capacity for secrecy than 
his Twitter feed suggests.

For the record, Trump will be just the fifth president to lose the popular 
vote but win the presidency. Trump’s defeat in the popular vote is greater than 
all his freak-result predecessors combined. All of them limped into office and 
never recovered bipartisan support.

How people are preparing for Trump's presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/17/how-people-are-preparing-for-trumps-presidency>
Then again, Republicans denied their support for eight years to the man who 
clearly won both the popular vote and electoral college in 2008 and 2012.

For his part, Barack Obama sounded astonished at the state of our democracy. 
“In some cases, you have voters and elected officials who have more confidence 
and faith in a foreign adversary than they have in their neighbors,” he said in 
his otherwise muted press conference last week.

“People have asked me: how do you feel after the election and so forth? And I 
say: well, look, this is a clarifying moment. It’s a useful reminder that 
voting counts, politics counts.”

Voting surely counts, and too many Democrats failed to realize that until it 
was too late. But it’s also true that not all votes count equally today, and 
not all voters are treated equally.

After four more years of underhand tactics in places like North Carolina and 
Florida, Democrats will need to work much harder to restore their faith in 
democracy.
 