
An amnesty for gay and bisexual men convicted of consensual sex with people of 
the same sex has been extended toNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. Until Wednesday, the region 
was excluded from legislation that posthumously pardons men convicted of sexual 
offences that are no longer illegal and allows the living to apply to have 
convictions overturned.

The legislation did not apply to Northern Ireland because justice powers have 
been devolved to the Stormont parliamentsince 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/apr/12/northern-ireland-justice-minister-david-ford>
. But an amendment to the policing and crime bill tabled in the House of Lords 
by Lord Lexden on Wednesday was passed, and means that hundreds of Northern 
Irish gay and bisexual men can apply to have their names cleared of such 
offences.


Announcing the measure, Northern Ireland Office minister Kris Hopkins said: 
“It is hugely important that we pardon people convicted of historical sexual 
offences who would be innocent of any crime today. While respecting that this 
is a devolved issue in Northern Ireland, both the secretary of state and I 
voted in support of equal marriage in England and Wales in 2013 and will 
continue to advocate LGBT equality issues across the UK.

“Today’s amendment is an important milestone for tolerance and equality in 
Northern Ireland and I welcome it unreservedly.”

An applicant from Northern Ireland will now be eligible for a “disregard” if 
the other person involved consented and was aged 17 or over at the time, and 
the conduct would not now constitute the offence of sexual activity in a public 
lavatory. The Northern Ireland Department of Justice must be satisfied that the 
conduct is no longer criminal. A similar scheme operates for offences in 
England and Wales.

The legislation has been nicknamed Turing’s law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/20/posthumous-pardons-law-may-see-oscar-wilde-exonerated>
, after the Bletchley Park codebreaker and father of modern computing, Alan 
Turing, who killed himself in 1954 after being convicted of gross indecency 
with a 19-year-old man in 1952. The British government only pardoned Turing for 
his conviction in 2013.

The amendment is different from the “Turing law” proposed by John Nicolson of 
the SNP, which would have given an automatic pardon to men convicted under the 
obsolete laws relating to gross indecency with other men. It wasobstructed in 
October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/21/chris-bryant-commons-plea-gay-pardon-law>
 by a justice minister, Sam Gyimah, who ensured the bill could not go forward 
because he spoke for so long that it ran out of time.

However, the Scottish parliament is bringing forward a Scottish “Turing law” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/gay-men-convicted-under-outdated-scottish-laws-to-get-full-pardon>
 to automatically pardon gay and bisexual men convicted of sexual offences that 
are no longer criminal.

Northern Ireland is still the main battleground in the UK in the struggle for 
gay rights. It remains the only region wheregay marriage is not recognised in 
law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/02/northern-ireland-assembly-votes-to-legalise-same-sex-marriage>
, mainly due to the opposition of the Democratic Unionist party in the Northern 
Ireland Assembly.
 