
A herd of pink unicorns peer into the window, clutching their phones and 
arguing about the best way to reach Leidseplein. It’s raining outside, and the 
unicorns’ plush costumes are saturated and muddy at the ankles. Stag parties 
are a common sight around the Oude Kerk, the heart of Amsterdam’s red-light 
district. Another group appears, wearing matching T-shirts saying “Dave’s 
Lash-On: Only Pints and Strippers”. They too, stare.

This scrutiny is irritating but understandable; I am sitting in the window of 
Amsterdam’sProstitution Information Centre (PIC) 
<http://www.pic-amsterdam.com/wordpress/en/>. Just two doors away, scantily 
dressed women sit in the windows, looking for customers. The PIC is a dark, 
warm cafe, plastered with historical articles about prostitution, alongside 
sparkly Christmas decorations. Like the red-light district itself, it’s a 
combination of suggestive camp and gaudy commercialism. Set up by former sex 
worker and author Mariska Majoor as an information resource, tourism business 
and cake shop, it’s the kind of place where you can ask for a third slice of 
apple tart or the local rate for a blow job in the same breath.

How long this matter-of-fact way that sex is addressed in Amsterdam will last, 
however, has Majoor very concerned. A government plan called Project 1012 set 
out to “clean up” the red-light district and, since it began in 2007, an 
estimated 126 windows have been closed, leading to protests from brothel 
owners, a march on city hall and accusations that politicians are scapegoating 
the sex trade to justify a blatant land grab. Some respite came for those who 
protested when it was announced at the end of 2015 that the council would stop 
closing windows. But for some of the red-light district’s residents, the damage 
had already been done.

Project 1012 rewarded legitimate business owners and suspected criminals alike 
with large payoffs

Named after the district’s postcode, Project 1012 aims to replace brothel 
windows with luxury boutiques, upscale cafes and art projects. The idea is to 
make it less attractive to already rampant organised crime, and bring in a 
higher class of tourist (under the somewhat questionable assumption that 
wealthy people don’t visit sex workers). Two new ventures, Red Light radio 
station andthe Red Light Secrets museum <http://www.redlightsecrets.com/>, are 
the advance guard of this gentrifying project, which has played well in the 
Dutch national press. But many locals still need convincing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Famsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f584fdcd86f930ea081c7bdbef9448b029c0276%2F0_22_1996_1478%2F1996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amsterdam's%20sex%20workers%3A%20the%20unlikely%20victims%20of%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Famsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amsterdam%27s%20sex%20workers%3A%20the%20unlikely%20victims%20of%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Famsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f584fdcd86f930ea081c7bdbef9448b029c0276%2F0_22_1996_1478%2F1996.jpg>
 The new Red Light Secrets museum of prostitution in Amsterdam’s red-light 
district. Photograph: Beulah Devaney for the Guardian 
“It’s not so easy to gentrify an area,” Majoor says. “All the old must go and 
all the new and fancy people must be attracted. [The government] knew this 
would not be easy to do in such a famous, complicated area. But human 
trafficking and organised crime are things that nobody wants – so they focused 
the debate on that.”

When Project 1012 was announced, it quickly became clear that many people 
would do well out of it – except the sex workers. Under the justification of 
tackling crime, the government forced brothel owners to sell their leases on 
this extremely valuable real estate. (All land in Amsterdam is owned by the 
government and leased to landlords.) While there is no doubt that some of the 
brothel owners were involved in illegal activities – much of the red-light 
district was believed to be controlled by organised crime – Project 1012 
rewarded everyone, legitimate business owners and suspected criminals alike, 
with a series of multimillion-euro payoffs.

There are no publicly available figures on how much the government paid for 
individual buildings, nor for the amount spent on subsidising new businesses to 
move into the vacated brothels. Justifying the expense, Joris Bokhove, Project 
1012 coordinator, said: “We try to support young entrepreneurs as much as we 
can, although our resources are limited. In some cases we have been able to 
subsidise startups, and real estate partners are willing to lower the rent for 
the startup period. We connect entrepreneurs with each other to encourage new 
partnerships, and actively involve them in the development of the 
neighbourhood.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Famsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b3d5ecfec69b56d0cf25cfe963ba69df8cf05d2%2F0_0_3834_3215%2F3834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amsterdam's%20sex%20workers%3A%20the%20unlikely%20victims%20of%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Famsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amsterdam%27s%20sex%20workers%3A%20the%20unlikely%20victims%20of%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Famsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b3d5ecfec69b56d0cf25cfe963ba69df8cf05d2%2F0_0_3834_3215%2F3834.jpg>
 Amsterdam sex workers protesting against the closure of window brothels in 
2015.
 Photograph: Robin van Lonkhuijsen/EPA 
The only people who didn’t get land, money or new opportunities were the women 
working in the windows – the very people Project 1012’s anti-trafficking 
initiative was supposed to benefit. While there have been numerous prosecutions 
of human traffickers around Amsterdam, only a dozen or so have fallen within 
the project’s remit, yetmore than 100 windows have been closed 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/amsterdam-prostitutes-protest-closure-window-brothels-1495685>
. It suggests that a crackdown on crime or the safety of the sex workers was 
merely a convenient excuse.

The sweet smell of Amsterdam … and it's not just cannabis, say odour mappers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/07/smell-amsterdam-cannabis-odour-mappers-kate-mclean>
The selloff sent ripples of confusion through the red-light district. Brothel 
owners began to worry that if they didn’t sell immediately, their business 
would be forcibly shut down at a later date. Suspicion over who was selling and 
who would hold out became rife, disrupting a tight-knit community that until 
the 1990s had mainly been run by small, local entrepreneurs. This resilient 
community was tested a couple of decades ago when a number of eastern European 
brothel owners (the group most often accused of trafficking) moved into the 
area.

A number of the Dutch brothel workers I spoke to cited their eastern European 
counterparts as the real reason for Project 1012. Despite these accusations, 
it’s clear that Project 1012 was not just targeting foreign owners; Dutch 
owners were also approached by the government and pressured to sell their 
buildings.

Majoor does not condemn the brothel owners who sold up. “When you get a huge 
offer of money, and you’re insecure about the future of your business, it’s 
very tempting to say yes.” She does believe, however, that everyone has 
underestimated the importance of the windows. “Sex workers must have a bigger 
voice in this discussion,” she says. “The red-light district is about more than 
sex, drugs and rock’n’roll, but the entire neighbourhood is supported by the 
window brothels.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Famsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9048ce34a9d5bfe079b792b09c15fbdbf6445a1c%2F0_0_1830_1500%2F1830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amsterdam's%20sex%20workers%3A%20the%20unlikely%20victims%20of%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Famsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amsterdam%27s%20sex%20workers%3A%20the%20unlikely%20victims%20of%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Famsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9048ce34a9d5bfe079b792b09c15fbdbf6445a1c%2F0_0_1830_1500%2F1830.jpg>
 Oude Kerk in Red Light District. Photograph: Beulah Devaney for the Guardian 
In April 2015, more than 200 sex workers, led by PIC and PROUD, the Dutch sex 
workers union <http://wijzijnproud.nl/en/index.html>, marched through 
Amsterdam’s city centre toprotest at the demonisation of their industry 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/amsterdam-prostitutes-protest-closure-window-brothels-1495685>
 and the closure of the windows. The largest such protest in Dutch history drew 
public attention to the potential downside of gentrifying the red-light 
district. It felt, says Majoor, “like a return to solidarity in the area”.

“Closing the windows makes it harder for sex workers to find work,” says 
Felicia, a sex worker from Romania who runs the popular blogBehind the Red 
Light District <http://behindtheredlightdistrict.blogspot.nl/> and works in the 
windows around Oude Kerk, just a few doors down from the PIC. “There are a lot 
of girls in the evening who are already having to walk around, looking for 
work, because there are more girls than windows now.”

Not everyone agrees that the red-light district has a sense of community worth 
preserving. Dana (not her real name) was trafficked into Amsterdam from 
Bulgaria in 2008. Six months later, she escaped her captors, but decided to 
continue working in the windows so she could send money home to her mother and 
younger brother. We met in a light, airy cafe on the bank of the River Amstel, 
among perma-tanned locals enjoying the sunshine.

If Sesame Street can gentrify, are any TV streets safe?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/15/sesame-street-gentrify-tv-oscar-grouch-coronation-st>
“How can these people care about someone like me?” Dana asks, gesturing to our 
fellow customers, one of whom notices and gives us a rather uncertain toast. 
“Working in the windows is just a job. The people who live here don’t care 
about the prostitutes and we don’t care about them. They only value us because 
we bring money into the area. But there’s no community here. Unless you call 
‘community’ only talking to other prostitutes because no one else will talk to 
you.”

Despite her dislike of the area’s residents, Dana still supports the PIC’s 
effort to campaign against Project 1012. She may not like the red-light 
district, but working there pays the rent on her mother’s apartment in 
Bulgaria. Without steady income from the window brothels, Dana worries that she 
will either have to work from her own apartment (which would violate her rental 
agreement) or move to more isolated locations, with fewer customers – and less 
protection from police.

There is palpable resentment among the red-light district’s sex workers that 
the government used the issue of human trafficking to buy up some of the area’s 
most valuable buildings. Women such as Dana who have been trafficked are left 
wondering why the business owners who allegedly trafficked them are being 
offered massive payoffs.Dutch organisations working with the victims of human 
trafficking 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/24/world/europe/24amsterdam.html?_r=0> have 
condemned the project for making vulnerable women less easy to reach. 
Meanwhile, residents such as Majoor and Felicia are watching an area they love 
being parcelled up and sold off, along with its sense of community.

Does Majoor think the protests will stop the selloff? “We always will have 
window prostitution and sex theatres in the red-light district,” she says. “It 
will stay a red-light district, only smaller. They want to keep the image of an 
exciting, enticing city … But less scary for fancy people who come here to 
spend a lot of money.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 