
In five words 

Better than you think, honest …

What sound defines your city?

At the confluence of the rivers Hull and Humber is the Pierhead, where boats 
carrying fruit from exotic places used to dock. Next to it is the Oss Wash, a 
slipway where traders could (you can probably guess) wash their horses. At 
mid-tide, the water laps around the Pierhead’s wooden support beams and bigger 
waves break on to the Oss Wash. If you sit at just the right place, at just the 
right time you hear the sound of water all around you. It reminds you what made
Hull <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> one of the greatest ports in 
the world.

Best building 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2581fbb39c71835c785f694a352ffd6958dab118%2F0_0_2048_1525%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20'It's%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20%27It%27s%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2581fbb39c71835c785f694a352ffd6958dab118%2F0_0_2048_1525%2F2048.jpg>
 Symbolic of Hull’s bloody-minded spirit … the Adelphi Club. Photograph: Dave 
Lee 
The obvious thing would be pick one of the glorious old buildings down the 
High Street but, while they are beautiful, they are pretty similar to those of 
any mature English city. I’d rather go for something that symbolises the 
make-do-and-mend, bloody-minded, independent spirit of the people of Hull: The 
Adelphi Club. It used to be a normal, small, Georgian terraced house but 
(thanks to Hitler and the second world war) it became a semi-detached, and then 
(thanks to Hull legendPaul Jackson <http://www.theadelphi.com/history/>) it 
became a magical musical wonderland.

Peter Porter described us as the 'most poetic city in England'

The Housemartins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/26/old-music-housemartins-sheep> 
started life there and – for 30 years now – the tiny stage has been trodden by 
the likes ofOasis <https://www.theguardian.com/music/oasis>, Radiohead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/radiohead>, The Stone Roses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/stone-roses> and Pulp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pulp>. There may be better looking or more 
architecturally significant buildings, but the Adelphi is known throughout the 
world and loved throughout the city – and that makes it the most important.

And the worst 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6407a400070a7edbcffd405c8c60194550c3a18%2F0_182_3936_2362%2F3936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20'It's%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20%27It%27s%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6407a400070a7edbcffd405c8c60194550c3a18%2F0_182_3936_2362%2F3936.jpg>
 Due for demolition, thank goodness … Kingston House, Hull. Photograph: Dave Lee
Without a doubt, it’s the 1960s office block Kingston House. Universally 
loathed for its striking ugliness, it was designed by modernist architects Drew 
and Partners and was intended to be part of an even larger development with a 
shopping centre, footbridge and a hotel. Thankfully, the horror ended with just 
the first part complete, but it’s spent 50 years obscuring the best view of the 
city’s handsome old maltings building. It’s now due for demolition, and it 
won’t be missed.

What does your city do better than anywhere else?

The extraordinary story of Hull's 'major general' and the siege of Wyndham 
Street
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/01/hull-major-general-barry-nuttall-army-war-council-housing-demolition>
Probably poetry. Over the centuries – from Andrew Marvell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/nov/17/to-his-coy-mistress-andrew-marvell>
 in the 1600s – we’ve seen a stream of poets coming from, moving through or 
settling in the city.Stevie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/04/amy-jenkins-stevie-smith-waving-drowning>
,Carol Rumens <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/carolrumens>, Christopher 
Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/oct/28/christopher-reid-life-in-writing>
,Tom Paulin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/mar/23/poetry.academicexperts> – the 
list goes on. Not all stayed, but Hull influenced every one of them.

Hull has a distinctly poetic feel, with famous lines etched into pavements and 
walls. The people are proud that Peter Porter described us as the “most poetic 
city in England <http://www2.hull.ac.uk/fass/english/research/hullpoets.aspx>”. 
Even Hull’s most famous adopted sonPhilip Larkin  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiplarkin>was grudgingly but undeniably 
fond of the place.

These days there is a vivid and vital poetry scene in the city. Seek out the 
work ofCliff Forshaw <http://www.cliff-forshaw.co.uk/>, Kath McKay 
<http://www.poetrybusiness.co.uk/kath-mckay>, Russ Litten 
<http://www.russlitten.com/>, Adelle Stripe <https://adellestripe.com/>, Pete 
Knaggs and Mike Watts.

Favourite venue of the moment 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cdfd2fc99679ffc930abb4f21d31f87e62d14c2%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20'It's%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20%27It%27s%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cdfd2fc99679ffc930abb4f21d31f87e62d14c2%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
 The venue in the fruit market … both cool and cold. Photograph: Dave Lee 
There are so many new venues popping up, it’s hard to pick. Special mention 
must go toKardomah <http://www.kardomah94.com/>, a repurposed office block 
that’s been turned into a theatre and multi-arts space. ButFruit 
<http://www.fruitspace.co.uk/> – in the Fruit Market – deserves praise for 
surviving the failures of various city developments to become one of the 
coolest (and coldest) venues in the city. It’s an old fruit warehouse and hosts 
theatre, comedy, music and even has a market inside on Sundays.

Homegrown talent 

Dean Wilson 
<https://www.morningstaronline.co.uk/a-52cf-Five-poems-by-Dean-Wilson#.V82gB2VLOh8>
 is an enigma. Some say he’s a postman, some say he’s a nightshift security 
guard – what is for sure is that he’s easily the best poet in Hull. His poems 
are best heard in his thick Hull accent, so you really need to see him live. He 
has a completely unique delivery that’s part-staccato, part-vulnerability, 
part-panic and part-lustiness. If you’ve not experienced him before you wonder 
if he’s putting it on, but he’s not – he really lives his life in the world his 
poems describe. In his own way he’s every bit as brilliant as Larkin, but a 
million times funnier.

Street Style 

Traditional Hull garb veers from flat cap and woolly cardigans through to 
trackie and trainers chic, but the look that’s best captured the recent 
adventurous style of Hull can be seen in the work of artist Anna Bean. She has 
an obsession with gaudy leopard skin, feather boas, animal heads and kitsch – 
and this exotic aesthetic has spread through the whole city.

What is your city’s most underrated location?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7211d31f1eb63d04672105361b56c512b8f0985%2F0_0_3936_2624%2F3936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20'It's%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20%27It%27s%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7211d31f1eb63d04672105361b56c512b8f0985%2F0_0_3936_2624%2F3936.jpg>
 Pastel hues on Princes Street, Hull. Photograph: Dave Lee 
The old town is fabulous. Despite 90% of the city centre being destroyed by 
second world war bombing raids, much of the this area survived, and is now 
being discovered by feature film scouts as it has remained relatively unchanged 
for a couple of centuries. The highlight is possibly Princes Street, hidden 
through an arch off Market Place. It’s a curved row of pastel-coloured Georgian 
residential houses – unknown even by many people in the city – but as 
picturesque as any in the country.

Biggest controversy 

Winning City of Culture status in 2017 has caused a couple of significant 
rows. One is thedestruction of many ill-preserved heritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/01/hull-major-general-barry-nuttall-army-war-council-housing-demolition?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
 buildings in the city centre to make way for supposedly required new builds. 
Most prominent of these is the old Rank Hovis flour mill, the place where J 
Arthur Rank <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J._Arthur_Rank> built the fortune 
with which he impacted the British film industry. It was a handsome, monolithic 
building that should have been turned into an art gallery, instead it was 
flattened to make way for a bland boutique hotel.

Best Instagram account

Steve Cobby is a musician and DJ who works all over the world, but when he’s 
home he takes marvellous iPhone pictures of the city. He has an excellent eye. 
The pictures highlight the best of the city’s everyday architecture and 
maritime heritage.

Moment in history 

Hullensians are inordinately proud of the part their city played in kicking 
off the English Civil War. A group of influential citizens decided to refuse to 
let Charles I enter the city in 1642, sparking theSiege of Hull 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siege_of_Hull_(1642)>, which is seen as the 
first major action of the war. To this day we have a healthy disrespect for 
authority and this manifests itself in ourhabit of sitting statues of monarchs 
atop public toilets 
<http://bartie-blog.blogspot.co.uk/2011/03/please-help-us-keep-royal-wee.html>. 
The Plotting Parlour where the planning of the event allegedly took place can 
still be found upstairs inYe Olde White Harte pub 
<http://www.yeoldewhiteharte.com/ye-olde-white-harte-pub-yorkshire/plotting-parlour/>
.

Best local artist 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F934c5435c474edf00c94877c1c76e302c266cd3d%2F64_65_1843_1106%2F1843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20'It's%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20%27It%27s%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F934c5435c474edf00c94877c1c76e302c266cd3d%2F64_65_1843_1106%2F1843.jpg>
 A sketched scene of Hull by Gareth Sleightholme 
It’d be a bit cheeky to claim David Hockney as a local artist. Despite him 
spending over a decade painting virtually every field and tree within a 
20-minute drive of the city, he’s never actually painted Hull. Instead, have a 
look at the work ofGareth Sleightholme 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/128387023918707/permalink/497826033641469/>. 
Primarily a comic book artist, his sketch book drawings of Hull are the most 
vivid, inspiring and realistic images of the city I’ve ever seen. With just a 
few pen lines he perfectly captures centuries of life and history.

How green is your city?

The benefit of being very flat (and therefore an excellent city to cycle 
around) is offset by Castle Street, a major carriageway running through the 
city centre carrying 50,000 vehicles to and from the docks every day. Green 
credentials are about to be boosted, though, asSiemans have recently pitched up 
in the city 
<http://www.itv.com/news/calendar/update/2016-09-08/new-apprentices-make-first-visit-to-new-siemens-wind-turbine-blade-factory-in-hull/>
 to create thousands of jobs building the blades for offshore wind farms. 
Hopefully this won’t make Castle Street any busier.

Top insider’s tip 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5574111888e93863cd1a3bff977e314b1dd352bb%2F0_13_3936_2362%2F3936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20'It's%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20%27It%27s%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5574111888e93863cd1a3bff977e314b1dd352bb%2F0_13_3936_2362%2F3936.jpg>
 A Hull delicacy … the pattie butty. Photograph: Dave Lee 
The pattie butty. Hull’s greatest contribution to the gastronomic world is 
unknown outside of the city. It’s just battered mashed tatty and sage shoved in 
a bread bun, but if you sprinkle it with chip spice (another Hull invention) 
and douse it liberally in vinegar, you’ve got the most delicious and satisfying 
grub on earth.

Five to follow 

Boaking Heads  <https://mobile.twitter.com/BoakingHeads>

Hull Music Archive <https://www.facebook.com/hullmusicarchive>

Neil Holmes <https://www.flickr.com/photos/neilholmes/>

Jerome Whittingham <https://www.instagram.com/jeromeleew/?hl=en>

Warren Records <https://soundcloud.com/warrenrecords> 

From me
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe67adf5161fa7da8aa8643ef58a411300681c03%2F0_97_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20'It's%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Hull%3A%20%27It%27s%20better%20than%20you%20think%2C%20honest%20%E2%80%A6%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finsiders-guide-hull-yorkshire-better-than-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe67adf5161fa7da8aa8643ef58a411300681c03%2F0_97_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
 This is me … Dave Lee. Photograph: Dave Lee 
Dave Lee <http:// https://mobile.twitter.com/davelee1968> is a freelance TV 
producer, writer, film-maker and restaurant reviewer who has lived in Hull all 
his life. He also taught Bill Hicks how to play snooker, but rarely mentions it.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 