
I migrated in the last decades of the 20th century to Glasgow to study 
architecture at the recently incinerated Glasgow School of Art. I’ve recently 
retrained as a building surveyor specialising in building pathology — how 
buildings decay and require maintenance cycles. My work has a heritage twist 
that is rooted in my passion for the city’s architecture. Glasgow has an 
endless range of construction styles and the finest Victorian architecture in 
the UK. The tenements and impressive civic and business buildings used the 
local slate and stone to build the city in the 19th and early 20th centuries. 
Recording these buildings, and attempting to grasp the reasons behind their 
increasingly vacant, derelict and ruinous existence, is at the heart of my 
website.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913861984%2Fbeeaf714-6902-4456-a91d-75dff9ea6153-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913861984%2Fbeeaf714-6902-4456-a91d-75dff9ea6153-1020x612.jpeg>
 A southside tenement. The building on the right has been sandblasted, unlike 
its neighbour, which is hidden behind decades of pollution. All photographs: 
Joe Shaldon 
I live in a draughty c.1900 tenement in the city’s southside with my partner 
and a designer feline. Photographing the city fills my spare time while punk 
music fills my ears. In a city passionate and divided by football, I am perhaps 
the sole male who is immune to the lure of men chasing around after a ball.

Introduce your city 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913761560%2F1d31944b-341e-4a9c-b3d4-5da4033782a6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913761560%2F1d31944b-341e-4a9c-b3d4-5da4033782a6-1020x612.jpeg>
 George Square, in the centre of the city, with its collection of marble 
statues and monuments. 
Glasgow, an economic powerhouse, is a fascinating city full of bluster, 
confidence and blagging. From the pompous shiny-faced politicians in the George 
Square “palace” of marble, to the occasional obscene example of contemporary 
wealth, through to the sectarian undercurrents of religious and football 
divides, it is a city in constant flux. Beauty is often juxtaposed by ugliness.

The people are approachable, friendly, humorous, clever and passionate. At 
times they may hate Glasgow or love it – opinions are never hard to find here. 
The city has a history of partially failed reinvention stretching back decades 
to its industrial glories. Perhaps more than any other it has tried to 
regenerate itself in the face of unparalleled social deprivation.

Everything is to be found here: vibrant arts and music, culture, leisure and 
history, stunning museums and architecture, exceptional seats of learning, 
wonderful multicultural neighbourhoods, third-sector community projects – all 
juxtaposed with the dark side: violence, corruption, poverty, unemployment, 
slum housing, homelessness as well as drugs and alcohol in alarming abundance. 
It is a city full of hope and yet underpinned by the dark Scottish fatalism, 
humour and insight.

Best building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913681763%2F2fadb4b8-403f-4dc3-b45b-17237f14674f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913681763%2F2fadb4b8-403f-4dc3-b45b-17237f14674f-1020x612.jpeg>
 In architectural terms, Lion Chambers combines Scottish castle with miniature 
skyscraper, but the building is now sliding into decay. 
Lion Chambers (1904-07), is a centrally located A-listed blend of miniature 
skyscraper and Scottish castle. It combines a small footprint (10 by 14 metres) 
with use of what was then cutting-edge technology, to rise more than eight 
storeys. Exhibiting a host of traditional tower-house stylings in tandem with 
its experimental structural system, it soars above its neighbours.

At the time of its construction, squat powerfully proportioned tenements still 
rose around the city, using brick and stone-mass walling tied together with 
timber floors. The revolutionary reinforced-concrete techniques employed at 
Lion Chambers displayed a modernity of experimental technique in stunning 
contrast to that of the tenements.

Today the building lies vacant and in a very poor condition. Alexander 
Thomson’s Egyptian Halls, to the south, is another of Glasgow’s most prominent 
and centrally located A-listed architectural icons locked in a complex 
drawn-out spiral of decay. Some strive to save it, others to demolish it, and 
yet the impetus, willpower and solutions to offer a better future for the 
building remain just out of reach.

... and the worst?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913624599%2F02eec792-fc6f-4b2b-ace2-0899162ed983-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913624599%2F02eec792-fc6f-4b2b-ace2-0899162ed983-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Bluevale building is perhaps the finest example of Glasgow’s deeply 
divisive brutalist architectural period. 
Bluevale tower, one of the twin towers at Bluevale/Whitevale in the East End 
of Glasgow is perhaps the finest example of the city’s deeply divisive 
brutalist architectural period and has parallels to Lion Chambers in structural 
efficiency. A ruthlessly pared-down square design, it soars higher than any 
other. The audacity of its design can be breathtaking in its conviction and the 
imposition of form over function. There is a certain bold beauty to this power, 
defiance and strength, and yet it is terrifyingly bleak and unremittingly awful 
in other ways.

No European city embraced social housing towers as Glasgow did after the 
second world war. Today the skyline is changing as these towers are declared 
unfit for habitation and regular demolitions take place. Perversely this mode 
of housing is still regarded as suitable for asylum seekers or in the private 
sector where they are labelled “luxury apartments”.

Suffering poor construction and isolationist design, and following a riot of 
bad management over decades, the Bluevale/Whitevale towers are now awaiting 
demolition. The destruction of many of the city’s brutalist towers often seems 
ideologically driven. While some are undeniably horrendous, others could be 
given new lives, more effectively than at present, given the huge waiting lists 
for housing.

How clean is the city? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913544455%2F107a7127-1300-4c0f-987f-a58281174fd2-2060x969.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913544455%2F107a7127-1300-4c0f-987f-a58281174fd2-2060x969.jpeg>
 An endless number of sofas and mattresses find their way onto Glasgow’s 
streets on a weekly basis, as the city struggles with waste disposal. 
Glasgow smokes, Glasgow chews gum, Glasgow eats takeaways. Glaswegians are 
divided in their use of litter bins or their ability to – without remorse – 
continue the constant rain of discarded spent consumerism. This is compounded 
by the unbelievable quantity of discarded mattresses and sofas that are dumped 
on the streets on a weekly basis. Battling this, the city’s cleansers prowl 
with mighty dustcarts endlessly carrying out their thankless task of chomping 
them down and removing them to unsustainable landfill.

On the tarmac of the UK’s most polluted city, the mass of buses and traffic 
curse us with the silent killer of pollution particles with levels far in 
excess of those considered healthy. In some pollution hotspots, the deep 
breathing of the speedy cyclists draws so much pollution into their lungs that 
you wonder whether it’s the equivalent of lycra-clad chain-smoking. Glasgow has 
a long way to go to clean up its act, recycle, re-use and learn from many of 
its European neighbours.

What’s the best way to get around? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913464058%2F9f5f94ad-1ff5-4f30-a419-b5ffb76d033b-1020x828.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913464058%2F9f5f94ad-1ff5-4f30-a419-b5ffb76d033b-1020x828.jpeg>
 Glasgow is reported to have the worst air pollution of any UK city, adding to 
the burden of urban cyclists struggling with poor provision of cycle lanes. 
Some years ago Glasgow was slashed with the planning equivalent of a “Glasgow 
kiss”, or headbutt, in the form of the vertical smile of the M8 urban motorway 
– carved across the city after the war. Like all urban motorways, a heavy price 
was paid with the destruction of architecture, communities and the city’s 
Chicago-esque grid. To this day the convenience proffered faces off the 
pollution suffered. The endless traffic lights provoke “amber gambling”, which 
now seems to have run into “red peril” as many take further risks. Bus lanes 
are increasingly being monitored, provoking fury as motorists incur fines for 
minor infractions often caused by poor signage or undertaking those turning 
right.

Step out the metal machine and the subway provides effective transport for the 
shorter members of society or those prepared to stoop due to its toy-train 
proportions. Fortunately this is supplemented by a good railway, largely 
electrified and the mass of buses. I have always cycled and our numbers are 
ever increasing and yet the infrastructure fails us and the risks can be great. 
Cars parked in cycle lanes and nonsensical cycle lanes sometimes just yards 
long are a regular sight.

What does your city sound like? 

Glasgow can be remarkably quiet, peaceful and beautiful. There is still much 
of the “dear green place”. At any time this can be shattered by sirens: the 
emergency services love a bit of the New York wail of “get the fuck out the 
way!’ For many the aural isolation of permanently affixed headphones cuts out 
both this and the diesel rumble of buses and the unique nasal drawl of the 
“weegie” accent peppering the streets.

Finally, the summer marching season can mean you are rudely awoken by pipes 
and drums in a throwback to the past and others’ tribal traditions. Without a 
Christian background, I have no side to take. I can see why the preservation of 
freedom of speech and the right to assemble means that dismantling the marches 
could backfire, though the trouble and expense such marches impose can be 
deeply demoralising to many.

Best place for a conversation 

I would favour conversing while walking through my local park, or perhaps 
sitting with a pint in a local hostelry. But frankly, for Glaswegians, anywhere 
will do – my fellow citizens are full of banter regardless of location. Unlike 
many cities I have visited, here the locals will help and speak to you, they 
will not pass by like drones.

What one thing is indispensable for life in your city? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913154597%2Facea0912-e9fc-4bc5-b969-9546b9280327-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913154597%2Facea0912-e9fc-4bc5-b969-9546b9280327-1020x612.jpeg>
 The discarded green glass bottles of Buckfast Tonic Wine have become 
synonymous with the darker side of the city, of antisocial behaviour and 
alcoholism. 
As I crisscross the city photographing the architecture and more, it seems for 
many it is the electric soup of Buckfast Tonic Wine. While many cities pedal 
the urban myth of proximity to a rat, here the green glass bottle of the tonic 
wine never seems far away. As a photography side project, every time I see one 
of these I’ll snap it. Hundreds of photos later, this obscure gallery of glass 
features shattered and intact examples from across all areas of the city. 
Personally, the one indispensable item is a camera and for all in Glasgow, a 
wee bit of attitude and humour goes a long way.

Are you optimistic about your city’s future? 

There is a degree of tempered optimism. The 2014 games promises much in terms 
of legacy, but will the Commonwealth Games add to the wealth of the common? 
Only analysis numerous years hence will show the truth. For now it has 
undeniably given the city fresh hope, profile and vibrancy.


From an architectural perspective, there is an ever-ageing crumbling building 
stock (80% of current stock predicted to be in use in 40 years). Underfunded 
and lacking priority, this is problem being stored up for future generations 
and will be exacerbated by climate change. Combined with this, there is a 
shameful social housing crisis with demolitions massively outstripping the 
delivery of new-builds, which falls way short of those promised.

However it is our city, and hope and optimism should always be encouraged to 
flourish, no matter how dark are certain corners of Glasgow’s problems. 
Learning from others and our own history, embracing multiculturalism and 
seeking change combined with the local indefatigable spirit means Glasgow 
always stands a chance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913922453%2Fb96a7282-514f-4e6e-9816-862756063280-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%20guide%20to%20Glasgow%3A%20%E2%80%98Glasgow%20smokes%2C%20Glasgow%20chews%20gum%2C%20Glasgow%20eats%20takeaways%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Furbanist-guide-glasgow-architecture-brutalist-beautiful%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406913922453%2Fb96a7282-514f-4e6e-9816-862756063280-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘Let Glasgow flourish’ is the city’s motto, and epitomises its energy and 
sense of constant renewal.  