
Snow enhances the impact of man-made features on this open landscape, high 
above the prevailing green of fields in the Lynher and Tamar valleys. Up here 
wavelets of snow engulf tufts of withered grass, and chunks of ice dangle on 
yellow-flowering, stunted, gorse.

Footprints of walkers and their dogs weave across the smoother white ground, 
along sparkling paths and tracks once followed by quarry workers and miners 
going to work and wagons taking stone for use on lower land.

Wads of snow streak the sides of standing stones in the prehistoric Hurlers 
circles and, close by, whitened hummocks of spoil are interspersed with old 
prospecting pits full of slushy water.

The north-west wind blasts across from a cold haze around Brown Willy but the 
sheltered south face of the nearby Cheesewring quarry is snow free, as are the 
heaps of discarded stones around Gold Diggings on the hillside above the brown 
rushes of Witheybrook marsh. Yet, across the undulating moorland, overlooked by 
the precariously balanced tors on Stoweâ€™s hill, mini snow drifts outline and 
exaggerate shadowy tool marks on almost every granite outcrop, rocky ledge and 
part buried boulder.

For centuries lumps of moorstone were laboriously split and carted away to 
leave icy pools, squared-off blocks and sharp edges now colonised and softened 
by grey lichens and emerald mosses.

Shrivelled haws and swags of bearded lichen grace the gnarled hawthorn trees, 
which most likely owe their germination and long-term survival to the jumble of 
jagged stones that crowd against fissured trunks and keep off grazing sheep. 
The low midday sun glints on quartz and ice crystals and casts dark shadows in 
the clitter of broken and tumbled rocks.

The sea off the distant coast gleams golden, and the ruined mine engine houses 
and stacks appear as silhouettes scattered across this once industrialised 
land. Dark clouds encroach and snowy Dartmoor is already veiled. Back in the 
village of Minions snow has melted, the slush confined to road edges. Soon 
heavy rain will wash away all trace of white.

Twitter: gdncountrydiary <https://twitter.com/gdncountrydiary>
 