
Russian novelist Andreï Makine has criticised the last three French presidents 
as “arrogant ignoramuses” and lamented that “once, French presidents not only 
read novels but knew how to write them”, while receiving France’s highest 
literary honour.

The Siberian-born novelist made the comments in a speech as he was inducted 
into the prestigious Académie française.

In the speech, reported by news channel France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> 24, Makine also slammed western 
policy in the Middle East as “criminal”, saying politicians were “playing with 
fire by delivering weapons into the hands of fundamentalists and pushing them 
into a strategy of chaos in the Middle East”.

The 59-year-old author, who was granted political asylum under President 
Mitterrand in 1987 and writes in French, added: “Who today would have the 
impudence to question the martyrdom of so many peoples, Muslim or otherwise, on 
the altar of the new globalised world order?”

Hours earlier, France’s current president François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> had attacked Russia for 
its failure to safeguard civilians in Aleppo, where Moscow-backed troops have 
aided Syrian president Bashar al-Assad against rebel fighters. Assad’s forces 
have been accused of atrocities as they take control of the besieged city.

Makine said the past three presidents had showed “a shameful arrogance with 
which they admit their lack of culture”. Citing “the force of General de 
Gaulle’s pen, which like that of Winston Churchill should have earned him a 
Nobel prize for literature”, he said of the past three French leaders: “They 
forget, these ignorants in power, that once, French presidents not only read 
novels but knew how to write them.”

Makine’s use of his induction into the Académie to attack the president has 
more than a tinge of biting the hand that feeds him, as the French president 
has final say over who is elected.

France’s leaders were not the only targets of Makine’s ire. Bloodshed in 
Ukraine was, claimed the author of 19 novels, a direct result of western 
intervention in the region. East Ukraine’s bloody civil war was, he added, “a 
fratricidal war orchestrated [in Kiev] by the strategic criminals ofNato 
<http://www.france24.com/en/tag/nato/> and their unthinking European lackeys”.

Although Makine describes himself as pro-Russian, he has refused to say if he 
is a supporter of Russian president Vladimir Putin.

Makine is best known for his 1995 work Le Testament Français, published in the 
US as Dreams of My Russian Summers. The book received the Prix Goncourt and 
Prix Médicis, a rare double honour.

In 2011, he was at the centre of an Elena Ferrante-style literary mystery, 
after he was unmasked as the writer behind Gabriel Osmonde, a pseudonym he 
adopted for four novels.

Election to the Académie, which is notoriously protective of the French 
language, is the country’s highest honour. Only 40 living members – known as 
“Immortals” – are allowed, with new members inducted to a specified seat after 
the death of the previous incumbent. Makine was elected to seat five in March, 
following the death of Algerian-born writer Assia Djebar.

Despite the controversy of his remarks, Makine will be highly unlikely to lose 
his position at the heart of French high culture. It is rare to be dismissed as 
an Immortal. In the past 100 years, only three have been sacked:Philippe Pétain 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philippe_P%C3%A9tain>, Abel Bonnard 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abel_Bonnard>, Abel Hermant 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abel_Hermant>, and Charles Maurras 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Maurras> were kicked out for their 
involvement with the Vichy regime.
 