
Part of me is blissfully happy when I’m locked up in dusty archives and 
wonderful libraries for weeks on end. I love falling into the words and worlds 
of “my” protagonists, immersing myself into their lives and thoughts. I become 
a hermit and disappear for while, but there always comes a point when my 
restlessness takes over and I have to get out, I need to see and feel the 
“real” world.

So researching and writing a book about an intrepid explorer who likened his 
own adventurous drive to being chased by “10,000 pigs” was the perfect 
combination. Writing about Alexander von Humboldt in The Invention of Nature 
was a journey through thousands of letters and books, but also through 
spectacular landscapes.

The Invention of Nature: The Adventures of Alexander von Humboldt, the Lost 
Hero of Science by Andrea Wulf – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/13/the-invention-of-nature-the-adventures-of-alexander-von-humboldt-andrea-wulf-review>
Humboldt was the most famous scientist of his age and a daring adventurer. In 
1799, he went on a five-year exploration of Latin America, returning to Europe 
with a new concept of nature that still shapes our thinking. He came up with 
the idea that nature is a web of life and that earth is a living organism. He 
even predicted harmful human–induced climate change and warned about the 
devastating environmental effects of monoculture, irrigation, deforestation and 
industrial pollution.

Having read his letters and diaries, I was determined to travel to the Andes, 
where he had spent several months, and to the Orinoco where he had been stunned 
by the rich life in the rainforest. I was lucky, because in 2013 I was the 
Eccles British Library writer-in-residence, a generous award that allowed me to 
follow Humboldt’s footsteps through South America. It was as exhilarating as it 
was hard. At the Orinoco in Venezuela, I encountered (too many) tarantulas, but 
I also observed river dolphins and listened to the bellowing cries of howler 
monkeys at night. In the Andes, I was trying to experience what Humboldt must 
have felt but there was absolutely no way that I was going to hang over a 
precarious small ledge on Pichincha to stare in the crater of the volcano as he 
had done. At 13,000 feet on Antisana volcano in Ecuador, I was thrilled to find 
the hut in which Humboldt had spent a miserable night in 1802. At that very 
moment, a herd of wild horses surrounded me and four majestic condors circled 
above – a pretty good day’s research!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fandrea-wulf-a-journey-through-thousands-of-books-and-spectacular-landscapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2389f3285099215511de3ccbfd227bc131006f2e%2F0_154_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrea%20Wulf%20on%20a%20scientific%20adventurer%20'chased%20by%2010%2C000%20pigs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fandrea-wulf-a-journey-through-thousands-of-books-and-spectacular-landscapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrea%20Wulf%20on%20a%20scientific%20adventurer%20%27chased%20by%2010%2C000%20pigs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fandrea-wulf-a-journey-through-thousands-of-books-and-spectacular-landscapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2389f3285099215511de3ccbfd227bc131006f2e%2F0_154_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Andrea Wulf on top of Antisana volcano in Ecuador. Photograph: Julia-Niharika 
Sen 
But the most exciting moment for me was climbing Chimborazo, a mountain that 
had been foundational in Humboldt’s vision of nature. I made it only to 
16,400ft – it rises to more than 20,000 – but my admiration for his endurance 
and achievements grew with every heavy step. The clouds rolled in below me, but 
I was bathed in sunshine. It felt like standing on the top of the world (and 
somehow next to Humboldt).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fandrea-wulf-a-journey-through-thousands-of-books-and-spectacular-landscapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F223c79ed2e89bfd3397f81be923d20975569ed76%2F0_134_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrea%20Wulf%20on%20a%20scientific%20adventurer%20'chased%20by%2010%2C000%20pigs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fandrea-wulf-a-journey-through-thousands-of-books-and-spectacular-landscapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrea%20Wulf%20on%20a%20scientific%20adventurer%20%27chased%20by%2010%2C000%20pigs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fandrea-wulf-a-journey-through-thousands-of-books-and-spectacular-landscapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F223c79ed2e89bfd3397f81be923d20975569ed76%2F0_134_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 A Humboldt penguin (Spheniscus humboldti) swimming under blue water. 
Photograph: Alamy 
In many ways, The Invention of Nature continues to be a journey. For the past 
few years, whenever I told people that I was writing a book about Alexander von 
Humboldt, the most common response was a blank face. Today, he’s almost 
forgotten in the English–speaking world, but his name lingers everywhere – from 
the ocean current that hugs the west coast of South America to a penguin, 
dozens of mountains, plants, rivers and a glacier in Greenland. There are more 
places, plants and animals named after him than anyone else.

I’m determined to restore Humboldt to the pedestal in the temple of nature and 
science where he rightfully belongs. He’s the founding father of 
environmentalism and his approach to the natural world is still immensely 
relevant. He was an interdisciplinary scientist who brought the arts and 
sciences together.

Humboldt believed that we can only understand nature by using our imagination. 
He was driven by a sense of wonder for nature that I believe is missing in 
today’s political debates about climate change. When I give talks or 
interviews, I don’t feel that I’m promoting my book, but that I’m doing 
publicity for him.

When the book was published last year, I was worried that no one would buy a 
biography about a man they had never heard of – but they did.It even won the 
Costa biography prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/04/kate-atkinson-wins-costa-novel-prize-for-a-god-in-ruins>
. I just returned from a 34–talk US book tour and every single time I go on 
stage to talk about Humboldt, I’m excited to see how people respond to him. 
Young readers, environmentalists, conservationists or people who are usually 
not interested in history tell me how amazed they are about this man. That is a 
part of my journey that makes my heart skip every day.

Extract

They were crawling on hands and knees along a high narrow ridge that was in 
places only two inches wide. The path, if you could call it that, was layered 
with sand and loose stones that shifted whenever touched. Down to the left was 
a steep cliff encrusted with ice that glinted when the sun broke through the 
thick clouds. The view to the right, with a 1,000-foot drop, wasn’t much 
better. Here the dark, almost perpendicular walls were covered with rocks that 
protruded like knife blades.

Alexander von Humboldt and his three companions moved in single file, slowly 
inching forward. Without proper equipment or appropriate clothes, this was a 
dangerous climb. The icy wind had numbed their hands and feet, melted snow had 
soaked their thin shoes and ice crys­tals clung to their hair and beards. At 
17,000 feet above sea level, they struggled to breathe in the thin air. As they 
proceeded, the jagged rocks shredded the soles of their shoes, and their feet 
began to bleed.

More about the book

Wulf imbues Humboldt’s adventures there with something of the spirit of 
Tintin, relishing the jungles, mountians and dangerous animals at every turn … 
[She] has an unfailing ability to spot an interesting quotation or a curious 
situation. She is very good on the cities where Humboldt lived and the rival 
atmospheres of Paris and Berlin … a superior celebration of an adorable figure. 
-Simon Winder

Read the full review. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/13/the-invention-of-nature-the-adventures-of-alexander-von-humboldt-andrea-wulf-review>

Buy the book

The Invention of Nature is published by John Murray at £9.99 and is available 
from the Guardian Bookshop for £6.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/404858/s/the-invention-of-nature/>
.
 