
This is a landmark week for Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> in their attempt to become the 
first county since Warwickshire in 1994 to win three trophies in a single 
season. They go to Canterbury on Thursday to face Kent in a Royal London Cup 
quarter-final and then travel to Edgbaston on Saturday for only their second 
appearance at T20 Finals Day.

First of all, however, they need to get something out of this Championship 
matchagainst their nearest and dearest rivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/15/county-cricket-lancashire-v-yorkshire-and-much-more-live>
 as they look to win their four-day crown for the third year running.

County cricket: Lancashire v Yorkshire and much more – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/15/county-cricket-lancashire-v-yorkshire-and-much-more-live>
And, thanks largely to two men who are unlikely to be involved in the bid for 
white-ball silverware during the next few days, they look set to do just that, 
despite being second best in the first three days.

After allowing Lancashire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> to 
post a first-innings 494 on day two Yorkshire knew they had to reach 345 to 
avoid the follow-on, which they managed just before tea on day three, eight 
wickets down before later being bowled out for 360.

Their heroes were the limited overs captain, Alex Lees, with 85, four-day 
captain, Andrew Gale, with 83 and back-up wicketkeeper Andrew Hodd with a late 
43 that led an afternoon recovery from 283 for seven when the Yorkshire were 62 
runs short.

Hodd has been a regular in Yorkshire’s first team this year such has been the 
success of Jonny Bairstow in an England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/england-pakistan-third-test-day-four-match-report>
 shirt. But Bairstow, Joe Root and Gary Ballance have all been made available 
for the Kent game and Finals Day by Trevor Bayliss. That means Hodd will miss 
out, a decision which is understandable but nonetheless cruel.

Gale, who also posted a season’s best score, is in a slightly different 
position. He was told at the start of the summer by Lees and the coach, Jason 
Gillespie, that he was not considered to be in the best 15 limited overs 
players in the Yorkshire squad and has therefore not figured at all against the 
white ball in 2016.

Jonny Bairstow takes control for England to leave Pakistan wilting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/england-pakistan-third-test-day-four-match-report>
The left-hander had scored only one Championship fifty all season prior to day 
three, which he started on 36 not out. He went on to reach his second in the 
midst of a watchful third-wicket stand of 130 inside 63 overs with Lees.

Both men fell before lunch, with Lees trapped lbw by Kyle Jarvis and Gale, who 
also shared 52 with the debutant Jake Lehmann, steering Tom Smith to gully.

Even then, at 243 for four at lunch, Yorkshire were in reasonably safe 
territory. But the nerves were jangling in the away dressing room when Jarvis 
took two of three wickets to fall for 11, including Lehmann – the son of the 
former Yorkshire batsman and current Australia coach Darren – for an 
eye-catching 46, to leave the champions seven down.

Hodd and the seamer Steve Patterson, thankfully for them, shared a vital 58 
for the eighth wicket to ease tensions, although the former fell to a stunning 
running and diving catch from Liam Livingstone, fielding at slip, off Simon 
Kerrigan’s left-arm as a top-edged sweep looped into the gully region. Shortly 
afterwards Patterson drove Nathan Buck for four to take the score to 345 for 
eight.

Yorkshire, who are lagging 35 points behind the Championship leaders 
Middlesex, are not safe just yet. Lancashire later built on a first-innings 
lead of 134 during the final 21 overs before close through Tom Smith and the 
first-innings centurion Haseeb Hameed, but it would be a surprise if they were 
able to force victory in the remaining time available. The hosts are not yet 
safe from the threat of relegation and so are unlikely to give Yorkshire a 
sniff of a win.
 