
After the fuss over Tyson Fury’s homophobia and sexism, it was good to see the 
BBC Sports Personality of the Year award get back to its problem with 
blandness. On winning,Andy Murray quipped 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/sports-personality/35130585>: “A friend sent me a 
message the other day with an article from a newspaper that said, ‘Andy Murray 
is duller than a weekend in Worthing’. Which I thought was a bit harsh. To 
Worthing.”

Was it? According to Daniel Humphreys, the leader of Worthing council, the 
choice of his town as an archetype of dullness has “a little bit more to do 
with alliteration” than reality. When asked which is more interesting – 
Worthing or Murray – Humphreys tactfully says: “I wouldn’t like to go down that 
route of setting one against the other.” We would, however. Here are the 
(boring) facts.

History

Murray Born in Dunblane on 15 May, 1987. His mother Judy was a tennis 
professional who introduced him to the sport when he was three. As a boy, he 
also enjoyed football, but gave it up to focus on tennis. “I’m not so good when 
I’m part of a team,”he said later 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/tennis/get_involved/4237382.stm>. “I’m better 
when I’m by myself.” WINNER

Worthing The modern borough of Worthing has been settled since at least the 
fifth century BC, when it was a leading centre for neolithic flint mining. By 
1218 it had acquired the name Wurddingg, but the expansion from fishing village 
to resort town only began in the late 18th century, during the fashion for “sea 
cures”.

Leisure

Murray Few interests outside sport. He and his wife Kim own a border terrier 
called Maggie May. In his spare time, Murray likes go-karting, follows 
Hibernian FC, watches basketball, plays fantasy football and PlayStation games, 
especially Pro Evolution Soccer and GoldenEye 007. He enjoys jet-skiing, gym 
visits and watches an average of three sets of tennis on TV each day. WINNER

Worthing World-class kitesurfing facilities, which Murray might enjoy. 
Recently, the town became famous when champion kitesurfers Lewis Crathern and 
Jake Scrace used a day of high winds toleap over the top of Worthing Pier 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bQMzlwej4Tc>. Besides this, there was a 
“street velodrome” in the summer, which will return next year along with a 
“summer of circus”. As Humphreys points out, there is also “a fantastic, 
relatively new leisure centre”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fandy-murray-v-worthing-which-is-dullest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdaccb5cd776777ffd7e22be3703bd9d59e3abd41%2F0_154_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Murray%20v%20Worthing%3A%20which%20is%20duller%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fandy-murray-v-worthing-which-is-dullest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Murray%20v%20Worthing%3A%20which%20is%20duller%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fdec%2F21%2Fandy-murray-v-worthing-which-is-dullest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdaccb5cd776777ffd7e22be3703bd9d59e3abd41%2F0_154_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
 Worthing Pier. Photograph: EuniceBergin/Getty Images/Moment Open 
Food

Murray His favourite food is sushi, but during Wimbledon last year he ate 
salmon, chicken and steak on a three-day rotation. He eats a lot of fruit, but 
doesn’t like bananas unless they are mashed up on top of a bagel. In January 
2013, he went through a period ofenjoying spicy Mexican chicken sandwiches 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/tennis/21115739>. He doesn’t like hot drinks. Asked 
to choose between fish and chips, he says: “I would never have battered fish, 
like cod from the chip shop. So I’ll go for chips.” Sometimes he eats 
shortbread.

Worthing The nearest restaurant to Worthing that gets mentioned in the 
Michelin Guide is the George pub at Burpham, seven-and-a-half miles away, which 
boasts “a seasonal menu full of tasty, popular classics”. The town itself hosts 
a food festival every July in the Pavilion Theatre. This year, it included 
cookery demonstrations and competitive doughnut-eating. WINNER

People

Murray Judy made a very respectable showing on Strictly Come Dancing. His 
brother Jamie is another elite tennis player, part of the winning Davis Cup 
team and ranked the UK No 1 in doubles. Kim, famous for her glamorous 
appearance and full-blooded swearing, grew up in Sussex, not far from Worthing. 
She paints portraits of people’s pets and has written a book from the point of 
view of their dog.

Worthing Jane Austen stayed in Worthing, and apparently based her unfinished 
novel Sanditon on it. Oscar Wilde wrote The Importance of Being Earnest while 
holidaying in the town, where the Nobel laureate Harold Pinter also lived for 
many years.Emperor Haile Selassie stayed in the Warnes hotel 
<http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/yesterdays/features/13897918.Haile_Selassie_s_visit_to_Sussex_remembered/>
 after the Italian invasion of Ethiopia. Chris Evans declares himself a 
“regular visitor”. WINNER

Culture

Murray Enjoys the TV series Dexter, and was very frustrated by the delayed 
release of Anchorman 2. Regarding his taste in music, he says: “I don’t really 
listen to music any more, so literally anything that’s on the radio. I love 
listening to Ed Sheeran.” WINNER

Worthing Home to the Worthing Symphony Orchestra and four theatre and film 
venues, including the beautifully restored old Dome Cinema and the art deco 
Connaught Theatre, where “just this afternoon”, Humphreys will be seeing The 
Cat in the Hat with his family. Worthing Pier hosts the International Birdman 
competition.

RESULTS

Murray 3, Worthing 2

Murray wins in five sets to be confirmed, as he suspected, duller than the 
Sussex seaside town. He will now face Gareth Bale or Swindon in the next round.
 