
Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> has delivered 
a staunch defence of her open-door policy towards refugees, insisting she feels 
no guilt over a series of violent attacks in Germany and was right to allow 
hundreds of thousands of migrants and refugees to arrive last summer.

“A rejection of the humanitarian stance we took could have led to even worse 
consequences,” the German chancellor said, adding that the assailants “wanted 
to undermine our sense of community, our openness and our willingness to help 
people in need. We firmly reject this.”

Cameron 'made last-ditch plea to Merkel over free movement before EU vote'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/23/cameron-merkel-free-movement-migration-eu-referendum>
Repeating her wir schaffen das (we can manage it) mantra delivered last summer 
at the peak of the refugee crisis, Merkel said: “I didn’t say it would be easy. 
I said back then, and I’ll say it again, that we can manage our historic task – 
and this is a historic test in times of globalisation – just as we’ve managed 
so much already, we can manage it.”

“Germany is a strong country,” she added.

Within the space of a week, Germany has been rocked by an axe attack on a train
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/about-20-people-injured-in-axe-attack-on-train-in-germany>
,a mass shooting in Munich that left nine dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/23/munich-shooting-loner-facebook-ali-sonboly-bullied-killer>
,a machete attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/24/man-with-machete-kills-woman-in-southern-germany>
 in which a pregnant woman was killed anda suicide bomb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/bomb-attack-southern-germany> in 
Ansbach.


Three of the attacks were carried out by refugees, and two of them – the axe 
attack in Würzburg in which four people were injured, and the suicide bombing 
in Ansbach – are believed to have an extremist motive.

The teenager who carried out the Munich shooting, meanwhile, was a 
German-Iranian whoprided himself on sharing a birthday with Adolf Hitler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/27/munich-gunman-saw-sharing-hitlers-birthday-as-special-honour>
 and appeared to have targeted foreigners.

Thursday’s press conference, which was brought forward by a month so Merkel 
could confront critics who have accused her of being too silent on the security 
threats facingGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, was 
dominated by the attacks, which she called “shocking, oppressive and 
depressing”.

She said the attacks carried out by refugees who had “sought protection in 
Germany – or at least made out that they sought protection” were an “affront to 
the country that took them in, and an affront to all those who have volunteered 
to help them, as well as to the many law-abiding refugees”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fmerkel-rejects-calls-to-change-germanys-refugee-policy-after-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa17c2db03eee0f7a9f82f9fc71bb86ed7074812a%2F0_9_4159_2495%2F4159.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Merkel%20defends%20Germany's%20refugee%20policy%20after%20attacks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fmerkel-rejects-calls-to-change-germanys-refugee-policy-after-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Merkel%20defends%20Germany%27s%20refugee%20policy%20after%20attacks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fmerkel-rejects-calls-to-change-germanys-refugee-policy-after-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa17c2db03eee0f7a9f82f9fc71bb86ed7074812a%2F0_9_4159_2495%2F4159.jpg>
 People stand next to flowers laid for the victims of the shooting near the 
Olympia Einkaufszentrum shopping centre in Munich. Photograph: Christof 
Stache/AFP/Getty Images 
She said it was irrelevant whether the refugee attackers “had come to Germany 
before or after 4 September” a reference to her historic decision on that night 
in 2015 to open the German border to more than 10,000 refugees who were 
stranded in Hungary. In the following weeks tens of thousands arrived in 
Germany.


While insisting Germany would remain open to those in need of asylum, the 
chancellor acknowledged that Islamic State had sought to take advantage of the 
refugee influx.

Isis “used the refugee movement to smuggle terrorist forces [into Europe], as 
we’ve seen in France”, Merkel told the annual press conference. “That we should 
check all the ways [they use] has been clear for a long time, which is why 
internal and external security can no longer be distinguished from each other. 
We unfortunately have to accept that many Islamist fighters fromEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> have gone to Syria.”

Appearing resolute and unruffled by the events of recent days, Merkel, who had 
interrupted a summer walking holiday in South Tirol to attend the press 
conference, insisted authorities were carrying out detailed analysis of the 
attacks, and would announce concrete measures that would be taken as a result 
of them.

She said she recognised how fearful people were about their personal safety. 
“We’re doing everything humanly possible to ensure security in Germany,” she 
said, acknowledging the “huge degree of insecurity people feel as a result of 
the recent events, that people are scared”. But, she said, “fear cannot be a 
counsel for political action”.

She also outlined a nine-point plan to increase security in Germany, which 
would include: an office for information technology that would concentrate on 
decoding internet communications between would-be attackers and terror groups; 
an increase in personnel at Germany’s intelligence agencies; a national 
register to monitor people entering and leaving the country; a lower threshold 
for deporting asylum seekers who break the law; regular joint exercises with 
the police and military to practice measures necessary in case of a terror 
attack; and an “early-warning system” to flag up radicalisation among refugees.

The Guardian view on terror in Europe: the search for a political answer | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/27/the-guardian-view-on-terror-in-europe-the-search-for-a-political-answer>
Following the Ansbach suicide attack perpetrated by a 27-year-old Syrian, 
political leaders in Bavaria declared that “Islamic terrorism has finally 
arrived in Germany.”

On Thursday Merkel rebuffed such rhetoric. “I think it arrived some time ago 
already,” she said, citing previous recent attacks on US soldiers at Frankfurt 
airport and an attack on a policeman in Hanover, both of which are believed to 
have had Islamic extremist motives.

“We are facing a huge test – that applies to Germany as well as to Europe,” 
she said, making repeated reference to the recent attacks in France, as well as 
incidents of deadly violence in Belgium, Turkey and the US state of Florida.

“Taboos of civilisation are being broken,” she said. “These acts happened in 
places where any of us could have been.”

She said it was the goal of terrorists to “undermine the way in which we live 
our lives. They sow hate and fear between cultures and they sow hate and fear 
between religions.”

Asked how she coped with the onslaught of global challenges that have only 
risen in weight and scope since she took office 11 years ago, Merkel said: “I 
do sometimes enjoy being able to go to bed at night – put it this way, I am not 
under-stretched”.
 