
Bird song, or something like it, fills the air. “Art! Art! Aaaartschwager! 
Beuys. Beuys. Schnaaaabel!” The names of big-time boy artists, screeched and 
cackled by Louise Lawler in her 1972-81 sound-workBirdcalls 
<http://www.ubu.com/sound/lawler.html>, greet visitors to Animality 
<http://mariangoodman.com/exhibition/3806/press-release>, a funny and 
thoughtful exhibition about our relationship with the animal kingdom. “Gilbert 
& George, Gilbert & George! Polke Polke Polke! Richter, Richter!” screech the 
birds. Over our heads, on a branch, a stuffed magpie spreads its wings.

To cancel out the creature’s bad luck, I was always told you should greet the 
first magpie of the day with a polite good morning. This one, by Cerith Wyn 
Evans, is called Please Pay Attention Motherfucker. I give it the bird. Nearby, 
inElmgreen and Dragset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/elmgreen-dragset>’s Dawn, Fig 2, a 
pure-white bronze boy in his underpants looks down. He only has eyes for the 
white slug at his feet. What does this reverie entail? The boy looks at the 
slug and the slug does its slug thing. Both are bronze, but the relation 
between slugs and boys is complex. What do they share? Is the boy asking 
himself if that is what he is made of, looking back down the evolutionary 
slope? Is it an inexplicable moment of wonder, or does the boy want to know 
what a slug would look like if he squished it? A slug cannot acknowledge a boy, 
so far as we can tell, and is perhaps unaware of its own, let alone the boy’s 
sentience.
 Elmgreen and Dragset’s Dawn, Fig 2, 2016 Photograph: courtesy the 
artist/Marian Goodman Gallery 
Our relation to animals is complicated, sentimental, fearful. Some can eat 
you, and you can eat some of them, or render them extinct, just as microscopic 
bugs might do for us as a species, if we don’t commit planetary suicide first.

Animality, curated by Jens Hoffmann 
<http://thejewishmuseum.org/about/staff-profile/jens-hoffmann>, is a mix of 
myth and science, fairytale and speculation, and has several such 
one-thing-leads-to-another moments. At the bottom of a wall,Fischli and Weiss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/08/fischli-and-weiss-hamming-it-up-guggenheim-retrospective>
’s video Kitty has a cat endlessly lapping milk from a bowl. The cat is 
unconcerned by the squeaky-voiced argument going on down the gallery corridor 
behind the door of Maurizio Cattelan’s Mouse House. Light comes out from under 
the door of the mouse hole, and a tiny, perfectly fabricated dustbin stands 
outside.

Animality is filled with startling and wonderful things. George Shiras’s early 
flash photographs 
<http://proof.nationalgeographic.com/2015/11/20/meet-grandfather-flash-the-pioneer-of-wildlife-photography/>
 of wild animals at night – a doe caught in the light, a beaver chomping a 
tree, a spectral albino porcupine and a lynx staring at the camera across the 
water, at Loon Lake, Ontario, in 1902 – capture what is now a disappearing 
natural world. First published in a 1906 edition of National Geographic 
magazine, Shiras’s grainy black and white images still have the capacity to 
astonish; nature is caught in the act in a sudden flare.

It is hard not to look at Albrecht Durer’s 1620 woodcut of a rhinoceros or 
Albertus Seba’s 18th-century illustrations of exotic and sometimes imaginary 
creatures without asking how much time any of these animals have left. The 
historical works in the vitrines are frequently breathtaking. Almost as 
fascinating are the stories of the people, such asMaria Sibylla Merian 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2016/01/the-woman-who-made-science-beautiful/424620/>
, who in 1699 travelled with her daughter from Amsterdam to Suriname to draw 
and catalogue the wildlife, making ravishing records of mostly unknown worlds. 
All manner of living things, and some things that never existed, writhe and 
scuttle from the papers.
 A still from Steve McQueen’s film Running Thunder, 2007. Photograph: courtesy 
the artist and Marian Goodman Gallery 
Louis Renard’s coloured copper engravings of sea life 
<https://www.royalcollection.org.uk/collection/1057042/poissons-ecrevisses-et-crabes-que-lon-trouve-autour-des-isles-moluques-et-sur-les>
, published in 1754, have a sense of design and of pattern that turns nature 
into lively and almost unbelievable abstraction, and find their counterpart in 
much more recent works by the American illustrator and painterCharley Harper 
<https://www.charleyharperprints.com/>, whose mid-20th-century depictions of 
possums and sharks, the buffalo and the meadowlark, are rendered with a chirpy, 
clipped sophistication. Harper called his style “minimal realism”. Somehow, it 
is neither realist or minimal but full of sympathy and life.

Carsten Holler’s big pink octopus squats on the floor. A peacock shakes its 
feathers, doing its mating strut inPaiva and Gusmão 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/04/papagaio-mad-magical-mesmerising-gusmao-and-paiva-review>
’s slow-mo film. InSteve McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen>’s 2004 Running Thunder, a 
dead horse lies in a meadow. Only the flies and grass move, in a silent loop on 
a summer’s day. The horse grins, but it is not a grin. You can sit on cushions 
and watch John Halas and Joy Batchelor’s 1954 British animated feature film of 
George Orwell’sAnimal Farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/mar/07/artsfeatures.georgeorwell> 
(the film covertly sponsored by the CIA, who changed the ending), or pop 
upstairs and reacquaint yourself with Disney’s 1967 cartoon Jungle Book. In 
2002, Pierre Bismuth re-edited the soundtrack so that each of the animals in 
the movie speaks in one of the many languages the film had been translated 
into. Baloo the bear speaks Arabic; Mowgli is Spanish, there’s a Japanese 
orangutan and a Norwegian vulture. Shere Khan, of course, retains George 
Sanders’ suave and evil English voice. Who wants to be like who? A sly delight, 
playing on national stereotypes, Bismuth’s reworking of Disney’s film is also 
oddly uplifting. It doesn’t matter we can’t understand the half of it, because 
we already know the words.
 John Baldessari’s Camel (Albino) Contemporary Needle (Large), 2013, at Marian 
Goodman Gallery, London. Photograph: Thierry Bal 
Like JJ Grandville’s 1842 etchings of dressed-up monkeys and ducks going about 
everyday human affairs, Stephan Balkenhol’s folkloric carved and painted-wood 
figures – a raincoated Raven Man and a foxy Fox Lady – who hang around on the 
solid wood plinths from which they were carved, are a further play on 
anthropomorphism. Looming over them, and the biggest thing in the room, is a 
huge albino camel, by veteran Californian conceptualistJohn Baldessari 
<http://www.baldessari.org>. The camel’s smooth and perfectly sculpted form was 
manufactured by Ferrari. Raising its head, the camel gazes longingly into the 
eye of a giant stainless steel needle. The sculpture is monumental, but what is 
it a monument to? Purchased by the US State Department, the sculpture was 
intended to be installed at the US embassy in Islamabad, but it never happened, 
any more than that the camel could pass through the needle’s eye, or the rich 
man into heaven.

Animality is filled with curiosities and pleasures, the serious, the daft, the 
astonishing. On Friday afternoon, I sat in a seance conducted by the Guatemalan 
artistNaufus Ramírez-Figueroa <http://uvuvuv.com/uv/naufusramirezfigueroa.html>
, who gathered a group of visitors into a circle to draw imaginary extinct 
birds. Then, eyes closed and holding hands, we summoned their calls, 
channelling bird spirits from our own imaginations. We were all at it, going 
through our repertoires of mewings and whistlings, drawn-out hoots and 
teeth-sucking chirrups, as our minds wandered the primordial forests and 
foreshores. I don’t know why we all had to wear linen napkins on our heads and 
douse ourselves with rosewater, though Ramírez-Figueroa probably does. 
Whiffling and snorting, I was away with the birdies for a while. My party-piece 
coughing sheep impersonation got in there somewhere, but I pretended it was the 
cry of the aquatic owl. What a zoo it all is.

 * Animality is at Marian Goodman Gallery 
<http://www.mariangoodman.com/exhibition/3806/press-release>, London, until 17 
December.  