
Apple’s built-in gif feature for its iOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> 10 Messages app, used by adults 
and children alike, is suggesting a sexualised animation of a My Little Pony 
character bending over and pulling down her underwear for searches for the word 
“butt”.

The new feature is part of Apple’s big revamp of the Messaging app, to bring 
it in line with competitors such as Facebook Messenger. It allows users to 
search for gifs, share music and add features from third-party apps.

Searching for the word “butt” returns the gif – which the Guardian is choosing 
not to publish – depicting the female My Little Pony horse character called 
Fluttershy as the number one result. The anthropomorphised moving image shows 
Fluttershy bent over and pulling down her underwear. Her head is turned back 
towards the viewer displaying what looks like an expression of shame or 
embarrassment and which transforms into a coquettish smile once the underwear 
is down.

The gif search, which is a default part of the new Messages, is labeled as 
being powered by Microsoft’s Bing. Searches for other similar words, including 
breasts, cock, penis, vagina, arse, ass, sex and porn and are blocked from 
showing results, but searches for drugs does brings up results.

Other gif search engines such as Giphy return images of jiggling bottoms and 
people in bent over poses, but the image of Fluttershy pulling down her 
underwear is not displayed within the first 20 results. A search for “butt” 
within Facebook Messenger’s built-in gif search does not return the Fluttershy 
image.

Apple’s new Messages platform has opened up the service, which is available on 
all of Apple’s smartphones from the iPhone 5 and newer, all of Apple’s tablets 
from the iPad 4 or iPad mini 2 and newer, and the sixth generation iPod touch, 
to a large collection of new content.

But that opening up of the platform, used by millions of children, has 
increased risk, as demonstrated by the inappropriate gif.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> did not immediately 
respond to request for comment.

 * iOS 10: the top 10 things you need to know about Apple’s new iPhone and 
iPad software 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/13/ios-10-apple-new-iphone-ipad>

 * How to fix a broken iOS 10 update that’s bricked your iPhone or iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/fix-broken-ios-10-update-bricked-iphone-ipad-itunes>
 