
A botched attempt to break into the iPhone of an Arab activist using hitherto 
unknown espionage software has triggered a global upgrade of Apple’s mobile 
operating system, security researchers said on Thursday.

The spyware took advantage of three previously undisclosed weaknesses in 
Apple’s iPhone to take complete control of the devices.

It’s a story worthy of a high-tech spy novel. When Ahmed Mansour opened his 
iPhone 6 on 10 August, he spied two suspicious text messages claiming to offer 
new information about dissidents being held and tortured in prisons in the 
United Arab Emirates (UAE). Each message held a link to a website where Mansour 
could obtain more information.

Mansour – a decorated human rights activist who had been targeted twice before 
by the UAE government – knew better than to click the links. Instead, he 
forwarded them to security researchers at the Citizen Lab, which examined the 
links with the help of another security firm,Lookout Mobile. 
<https://blog.lookout.com/blog/2016/08/25/trident-pegasus/>

Bounty hunters are legally hacking Apple and the Pentagon – for big money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/bounty-hunters-hacking-legally-money-security-apple-pentagon>
What they found was an extremely sophisticated piece of spyware that, when 
launched, would jailbreak Mansour’s iPhone and take complete control of the 
operating system, bypassing any security controlsApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> put in place.

Detailed reports issued by Lookout and Citizen Lab outlined how the technique 
worked, potentially compromising an iPhone with the tap of a finger – a trick 
so coveted in the world of cyberespionage that in November one spyware broker 
claimed it had paid a $1m dollar bounty to programmers who’d found a way to do 
it.

When researchers found that the attack had used three separate “zero-day 
exploits” – attacks never before encountered by security researchers – they 
decided to name the attack “Trident”, says Mike Murray, vice-president for 
security research and response at Lookout.

The first attack exploited a vulnerability in the Safari, fooling the phone 
into launching a browser session. The second located the core of the phone’s 
operating system, known as the kernel. The third exploit replaced the kernel, 
becoming a part ofiOS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios>. “Once you 
become the kernel, at that point you are the phone,” Murray says. “You can load 
any software you want.”


From that point, it would have been possible for attackers to spy on virtually 
anything Mansour did – phone calls, text messages, Gmail, Skype, and Facebook – 
as well as scan his calendar, and steal passwords and other personal 
information.

By tracking the domains used to launch the attack, as well as code embedded 
inside those sites, Citizen Lab traced it to a private Israeli security firm 
called NSO Group. That organization sells surveillance software called Pegasus 
to nation states; in 2012,NSO sold 300 licenses to the government of Panama 
<http://www.insightcrime.org/news-briefs/wiretaps-paint-unflattering-picture-of-former-panama-president>
 for $8m.

In a statement that stopped short of acknowledging that the spyware was its 
own, the NSO Group said its mission was to provide “authorized governments with 
technology that helps them combat terror and crime”. The company said it had no 
knowledge of any particular incidents.

Citizen Lab also uncovered links between NSO and a group known to have 
launched attacks on other UAE citizens known as Stealth Falcon. The hacking 
group shared a handful of Internet servers with NSO. “So the link we suspect 
between Stealth Falcon and NSO is that Stealth Falcon is an NSO customer,” says 
Bill Marczak, senior researcher for Citizen Lab.

Stealth Falcon, in turn, had targeted other UAE dissidents in the past who 
were later imprisoned or convicted in absentia, Marczak adds. In addition, the 
material Stealth Falcon used as bait to lure victims into clicking the fatal 
link “was overwhelmingly geared towards the UAE”, he says.

“The high cost of iPhone zero-days, the apparent use of NSO Group’s 
government-exclusive Pegasus product, andprior known targeting of Mansoor 
<https://citizenlab.org/2012/10/backdoors-are-forever-hacking-team-and-the-targeting-of-dissent/>
 by the UAE government provide indicators that point to the UAE government as 
the likely operator behind the targeting,”Citizen Labs’ report concludes 
<https://citizenlab.org/2016/08/million-dollar-dissident-iphone-zero-day-nso-group-uae/>
.

While nation states targeting individuals is nothing new, this attack was 
something no one has ever seen before, says Lookout’s Murray.

“I cannot remember a single malware attack that contained three distinct 
zero-day exploits,” he says. “They picked the iPhone, the hardest platform to 
compromise. They created spyware with the most comprehensive feature set you 
can have, and they deployed it in a way that no one would catch it for years.

“Put it all together, this is unprecedented.”

Apple said in a statement that it fixed the vulnerability immediately after 
learning about it.
 