
Apple has unveiled the iPhone 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-7> and 7 Plus, its next 
generation smartphones, which have a similar aluminium look but now waterproof 
with new insides, new pressure-sensitive home button, new dual-camera features 
and no headphone socket.


Apple’s senior vice president of worldwide marketing, Phil Schiller, took to 
the stage at the Bill Graham Civic Auditorium in San Francisco to announce the 
smartphone, the first to launch with the company’s latest iOS 10 software for
iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> and iPad with improved 
notifications and messaging features.

The biggest change to the new iPhone, however, is the removal of the universal 
3.5mm headphone jack, which used to be cut into the bottom of the smartphone 
and is common to almost all forms of audio-producing electronics. Instead,Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> hopes users will embrace the 
Lightning port, which is commonly used for power and file transfers, for audio, 
or wireless headphones such as those made by Apple’s Beats headphones brand.

Lightning connector headphones and a Lightning-to-analogue adapter will be 
included with the new iPhone.

Schiller said: “Apple EarPods are the most popular headphones in the world. 
Now we’re moving them to Lightning. Why? Because it provides digital audio, 
power, and many other advantages that are simply not possible over an analogue 
connection.

“The analogue headphone jack has been with us for a very long time. But the 
reason to move on is courage. The courage to move on and do something new that 
betters all of us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fiphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a4a19ab536585b501441fd7a725fcb4c2bdacc%2F0_233_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20reveals%20waterproof%20iPhone%207%20with%20new%20camera%20...%20and%20no%20headphone%20jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fiphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20reveals%20waterproof%20iPhone%207%20with%20new%20camera%20...%20and%20no%20headphone%20jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fiphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a4a19ab536585b501441fd7a725fcb4c2bdacc%2F0_233_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Apple’s new in-ear wireless earphones, AirPods. Photograph: Stephen Lam/Getty 
Images 
Apple also announced a new set of its EarPod in-ear buds, this time without 
the cable, called AirPods, which it hopes will ease the transition from the 
headphones port.

Bluetooth headphones are widely available in a range of prices and 
capabilities, and havebecome popular in the past two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/05/apple-headphone-jack-iphone-7-lightning-usb-c-port>
, but truly wireless in-ear buds have struggled to overcome the technological 
constraints of short battery life and weak connectivity. Several new models 
released this year from companies such as Motorola, Bragi and Samsung hope to 
solve those problems.

Phil Schiller, senior vice president of worldwide marketing, said: “Up until 
now no one has taken on the challenge of fixing the things that are difficult 
to do in the wireless experiences so we can all enjoy them. So that’s what 
we’re doing with the Apple AirPods.”

AirPods will cost $170 and be available in late October. Apple’s headphone 
brand Beats will also release new wireless models.

Faster A10 Fusion chip

As with all previous iPhone updates, the iPhone 7 and 7 Plus have faster, more 
powerful processors – the Apple A10 Fusion replacing the A9 from last year’s 
iPhone 6S – with the outside of the new smartphones seeing subtle changes in 
design.

The new quad-core A10 Fusion processor will have 120 times the performance of 
the original iPhone and Apple says it will also extend battery life through 
improved power efficiencies.

Apple estimates that the iPhone 7 will deliver, on average, two more hours of 
battery life than the iPhone 6S.

The iPhone 7 comes in a new gloss black colour and has hidden the previously 
visible antenna lines on the back marking a couple of small visual tweaks to 
the new phones over predecessors. The new iPhone is also now waterproof to IP67 
standards, bringing it into line with rivals from Samsung and others.

The home button has also been tweaked to use a similar pressure-sensitive 
technology as Apple’s MacBook trackpads and the 3D touch screen of the iPhone 
6S, which simulate movement using a small vibrating sensation when pressed 
without actually depressing. The new button will allow further gesture control 
and could pave the way for the button to be removed entirely in subsequent 
version of the smartphone.

For many, the home button has been one of the weak points of the iPhone, 
requiring replacement which has proved tricky due to thefingerprint sensor and 
secure chip hidden underneath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/19/error-53-apple-issues-fix-bricked-iphones>
.

Plus dual-camera
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fiphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50169b4d73f7e1178e7807bb852f4207c2159591%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20reveals%20waterproof%20iPhone%207%20with%20new%20camera%20...%20and%20no%20headphone%20jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fiphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20reveals%20waterproof%20iPhone%207%20with%20new%20camera%20...%20and%20no%20headphone%20jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fiphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50169b4d73f7e1178e7807bb852f4207c2159591%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 The iPhone 7 Plus will have two cameras on the back. Photograph: Monica 
Davey/EPA 
The iPhone 7 will also have an improved camera system to keep up with rivals. 
The iPhone used to have the best camera in the business, but the iPhone 6S 
faced stiff competition from not only Samsung, but HTC, LG and rising star 
Chinese firm Huawei.

The camera now has a faster, larger 12-megapixel sensor, a faster f1.8 lens 
for better low-light photography and an enhanced true-tone flash. All versions 
of the iPhone will now have optical image stabilisation, not just the larger 
Plus models.

The update will see a new dual-camera fitted to the back of the larger iPhone 
7 Plus - one 12-megapixel telephoto lens and one 12-megapixel wide-angle lens - 
similar to those fitted toLG’s G5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/11/lg-g5-review-power-users-friend-that-just-misses-mark>
. Both Huawei and LG have released smartphones in the last year using two 
cameras on the back to varying degrees of success.

Apple allows optical zoom now up to 2x with both lenses, using digital zoom to 
go beyond. A free update will also allow users to blur the background using 
both lenses to judge distance and create a bokeh effect, similar to software 
effects produced by rivals.

Schiller said: “On a dSLR you can move lens elements to zoom with a large 
lens. But on a phone you can’t do that. So we’re using two cameras and two 
lenses to do the same. The quality of the zoom, even with software zoom, is so 
much better than before we decided to push it up to 10x.”

The iPhone 7 will be available in four colours starting on 16 September at 
$649 for 32GB of storage - increased from last year’s 16GB base storage with 
128GB and 256GB options. The iPhone 7 Plus will cost from $769, again with 32GB 
of storage. The jet-black models will be 128GB and 256GB variants only.

Last year’s iPhone 6S, 6S Plus and the iPhone SE will be still available, now 
starting with 32GB of storage. The iPhone upgrade programme will also be made 
available in the UK.

Tick, tock, tock?

Until now, Apple’s smartphones have had a complete redesign every two years 
according to its traditional release schedule, with improved processors and a 
few new features every other year making up the “tock” in the cycle. Intel and 
others also use the tick, tock product cycle, traditionally displaying improved 
battery life on the tick.

The iPhone 6 was the tick, which means the iPhone 6S was the tock. The iPhone 
7’s use of the similar industrial design of previous iPhones plus new colours 
bucks the trend, meaning the new iPhone could be considered as a second-such 
tock. Whether improved specifications and a few new features, some of which 
will come to 2015’s iPhone 6S through software updates, will be enough to 
continue to woo customers remains to be seen.

“Apple’s biggest challenge is how to manage its large install base – the 
biggest in the industry – and convince them to replace their smartphones and 
spend more on services and in the company’s ecosystem,” said Francisco Jeronimo 
IDC’s research director for European mobile devices. “As we approach 80-85% 
smartphone penetration, it’s no longer about people buying their first 
smartphone but attracting customers from rivals.”

In the UK, Apple is fighting a war with chief rival Samsung over the 20% of 
users that switch between operating systems. It scored the most switchers with 
the iPhone 6, which introduced new screen sizes, but now it must attempt to 
convince users to upgrade from previous iPhones.

 * Does Apple really think we’re ready to ditch the headphone jack? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/05/apple-headphone-jack-iphone-7-lightning-usb-c-port>

 * The Chinese are coming. Samsung is steady. Apple’s iPhone 7 has to impress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/04/iphone-7-apple-needs-to-impress-chinese-coming-samsunfg-steadfast>

 * Bose QC35 wireless headphones: simply unrivalled noise cancelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/21/bose-qc35-wireless-bluetooth-noise-cancelling-headphones-review>
 * Marshall Major II Bluetooth headphones: they last for ages and sound great 
too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/15/marshall-major-ii-bluetooth-headphones-battery-life-sound-wireless> 