
Apple has acknowledged <http://www.apple.com/support/iphone6plus-multitouch/> 
a significant flaw that causes touchscreens to fail in some iPhone 6 Plus 
smartphones, claiming the problem can be triggered when devices are dropped 
multiple times.

Announcing the “Multi-Touch Repair Program for iPhone 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-6> Plus” on Thursday, Apple said 
some devices may “exhibit display flickering or Multi-Touch issues after being 
dropped multiple times on a hard surface and then incurring further stress on 
the device”.

The company’s statement <http://www.apple.com/support/iphone6plus-multitouch/> 
said that users could pay $149 to fix the issue, if their phones still work and 
don’t have a broken or cracked screen. Those who have already paid to have 
their phones repaired should contact Appledirectly 
<https://getsupport.apple.com/>.

iOS flaw lets hackers access iPhones using an iMessage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/22/stagefright-flaw-ios-iphone-imessage-apple>
Yet the problem, dubbed “touch disease”, has been followed closely by the 
consumer siteifixit.org 
<http://ifixit.org/blog/8576/apple-responds-touch-disease/> since August, which 
claims the problem of unresponsive touchscreens is not limited to devices that 
have been dropped.

It claims the problem is actually caused by structural design flaws – the same 
ones flagged by “bendgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/24/iphone-6-plus-bend-pockets-complain>
”, in which iPhones were found to bend when carried in tight pockets – and that 
Apple should admit the problem and extend consumers’ warranties under which the 
device would be repaired for free.

A class action lawsuit 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/326852840/iPhone-Touch-Screen-Amended-Complaint-CONFORMED-COPY#from_embed>
 brought in October also claims that tens of thousands of iPhone 6 Plus users 
have been affected. The suit targets “Apple’s concealment of a material 
manufacturing defect that ultimately causes iPhone touchscreens to become 
unresponsive and fail for their essential purpose as smartphones”.

It describes in detail how the problem manifested for a variety of iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 6 Plus users, including 
Pennsylvania resident Thomas Davidson, whose phone became unusable less than 
two years after purchase.

“The touchscreen on Mr Davidson’s iPhone 6 became unresponsive. Mr Davidson 
went to theApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> Care website on 
or about August 24, 2016,” the complaint states.

“Mr Davidson discovered that he would be charged $320 for a replacement iPhone 
6 if he sent his iPhone 6 in for service. He declined to do so and has 
discontinued use of the iPhone as the result of the touchscreen defect.

“When the touchscreen defect manifests, Mr Davidson is unable to send or view 
text messages, take pictures, capture video, play music, browse the internet, 
send or view emails, use GPS navigation, use the touchscreen to make and take 
calls and download or use various applications, among other things.”

Apple said it was not providing any further comment on the issue.
 