
Apple is raising prices on its UK App Store by almost 25% to reflect the sharp 
depreciation of the pound following June’s vote to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

The new prices enshrine parity between the dollar and the pound, at least for 
apps on the iOS and Mac app stores. An app that costs $0.99 in the US, and used 
to cost £0.79, will now cost £0.99.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> announced the price rises 
in an email to app developers on Tuesday, and told them “when foreign exchange 
rates or taxation changes, we sometimes need to update prices on the App 
Store”. It says the new prices will roll out over the next seven days, giving 
customers a short opportunity to beat the price increase.

Similar price increases are expected to hit other Apple stores, including the 
iTunes Store for music and video and the iBooks Store.

Britain isn’t the only country experiencing price changes. India is seeing 
price increases due to changes in service taxes, while Turkish prices are also 
rising due to depreciation of the Turkish Lira.


Since the vote to leave the European Union, the value of the pound has fallen 
by 18.5% against the US dollar. Apple has already acted to change other British 
prices since the vote to leave the European Union: in October,it marked the 
launch of new Macs with a 20% price rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/brexit-apple-mac-customers-prices-rise-us-dollar-pound-sterling>
 across the line. One computer, the Mac Pro, saw its price jump by £500 
overnight.


In a statement, Apple said: “Price tiers on the App Store are set 
internationally on the basis of several factors, including currency exchange 
rates, business practices, taxes and the cost of doing business. These factors 
vary from region to region and over time.”

The price rises were announced the same day UK inflation surged to 1.6% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/uk-inflation-hits-two-year-high>
, higher than expected. The Office of National Statistics said the increase was 
driven by rises in air fares and the price of food, along with prices for motor 
fuels.
 