
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has launched the first 
new version of its MacBook Pro laptop in 18 months, with a new OLED touchscreen 
on the keyboard capable of inserting emoji into text, as well as updates to the 
rest of its laptop line.

The new MacBook Pro is thinner, lighter and comes complete with fingerprint 
scanner. It also continues Apple’s rollout of USB-C, which began with the 
MacBook last year.

It has two USB-C Thunderbolt 3 ports along each side – four in total – that 
are used for both power and connectivity. However, there are no standard USB 
type A ports, which are still regarded as the global standard, and are used by 
Apple for their Lightning cable , which comes with the company’s iPhones.

The new laptop does not come with the SD card reader, HDMI port, the two 
Thunderbolt ports that doubled as a mini DisplayPorts, or the two USB-A ports 
that the last model did, so will require adapters to use existing accessories. 
It also lacks the MagSafe power adapter, instead relying on USB-C. It does have 
a 3.5mm headphone socket, however.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fapple-launches-new-macbook-pro-laptop-touch-bar-instant-emoji-ports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb28141cf5edf94023587b8979882b010636510%2F0_0_4365_2618%2F4365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20launches%20new%20MacBook%20Pro%20laptop%20with%20Touch%20Bar%20for%20instant%20emoji&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fapple-launches-new-macbook-pro-laptop-touch-bar-instant-emoji-ports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20launches%20new%20MacBook%20Pro%20laptop%20with%20Touch%20Bar%20for%20instant%20emoji&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fapple-launches-new-macbook-pro-laptop-touch-bar-instant-emoji-ports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb28141cf5edf94023587b8979882b010636510%2F0_0_4365_2618%2F4365.jpg>
 The Touch Bar is a customisable and context-sensitive OLED touchscreen 
positioned above the keyboard. Photograph: Stephen Lam/Getty Images 
The biggest change to the design of the machine is a new OLED touch panel 
above the standard keyboard, which replaces the multi-function “F” keys, and 
allows dynamic shortcuts to functions such as volume control and window 
management.

Phil Schiller, senior vice president of worldwide marketing for Apple, said: 
“It’s a retina display, multitouch, responding to gestures and taps. We call it 
Touch Bar. First it replaces the standard system functions, but it goes way 
beyond that. It adapts to whatever software you’re using.”

Craig Federighi, senior vice president of software engineering for Apple, 
showed that the Touch Bar could be used for navigation in browsers, photo 
manipulation and text suggestions when typing. It can also suggest and insert 
emojis without leaving the keyboard.

The right end of the strip now contains Apple’s Touch ID fingerprint scanner 
integrated into the power button, which is similar to the one fitted to the 
iPhone and iPad and can be used to unlock the laptop and confirm payments. The 
new Force Touch trackpad is also twice the size of the old one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fapple-launches-new-macbook-pro-laptop-touch-bar-instant-emoji-ports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96bc07f0a00032ebb19757981d6cba6bc064eb56%2F0_0_4827_2896%2F4827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20launches%20new%20MacBook%20Pro%20laptop%20with%20Touch%20Bar%20for%20instant%20emoji&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fapple-launches-new-macbook-pro-laptop-touch-bar-instant-emoji-ports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20launches%20new%20MacBook%20Pro%20laptop%20with%20Touch%20Bar%20for%20instant%20emoji&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fapple-launches-new-macbook-pro-laptop-touch-bar-instant-emoji-ports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96bc07f0a00032ebb19757981d6cba6bc064eb56%2F0_0_4827_2896%2F4827.jpg>
 Schiller speaks under a graphic of the processor of a new 15in MacBook Pro 
during an Apple media event in Cupertino. Photograph: Beck Diefenbach/Reuters 
Apple said the new 13in MacBook Pro can be equipped with dual-core versions of 
the Intel i5 or i7 processor, 8GB of RAM, 256GB storage and Intel’s Iris 550 
integrated graphics chip with 103% faster gaming performance and 76% faster 
video editing and 3D graphics performance than the previous version.

But the new 15in MacBook Pro is by far the more powerful, with a quad-core 
version of Intel’s i7 processor, 16GB of RAM and 256GB of storage. It also 
comes with an AMD Radeon Pro 450 graphics chip that offers up to 4GB of video 
RAM, with 130% faster 3D graphics, 60% faster gaming and 57% faster video 
editing.

Both models have up to 10 hours of battery life, Apple said.

The new MacBook Pro will be for sale immediately, shipping in two to three 
weeks, with the 13in version costing $1,799 in the US and £1,749 in the UK and 
the 15in costing $2,399 in the UK and £2,349 in the UK. Apple is also making a 
lower specification 13in version without the Touch Bar, Touch ID and only two 
Thunderbolt ports costing $1,499 in the US and £1,449 in the UK, which will 
ship immediately.

Apple has kept the 13in MacBook Air, but dropped the smaller 11in version. The 
company did not announce updates of its Mac Pro or iMac desktop computers.

The new laptop, which has been favoured by those in the creative industry for 
years, is a key part of Apple’s Mac computer line, but has stood stagnant in 
recent times, seeing only small specifications increases since the introduction 
of the retina MacBook Pro in 2012.

While a design and specification update will be welcomed, the dropping of 
ports and connectivity options has proved divisive in the past. USB-C is seen 
as the future of multi-purpose connections, but is still a new connector. It is 
primarily used by Android smartphones and tablets, but not with such 
accessories as external storage and cameras, two pieces of equipment that are 
often critical tools for creative professionals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fapple-launches-new-macbook-pro-laptop-touch-bar-instant-emoji-ports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F819291c8aedc6fdc21f98fddcc617c5de3e8592f%2F0_0_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20launches%20new%20MacBook%20Pro%20laptop%20with%20Touch%20Bar%20for%20instant%20emoji&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fapple-launches-new-macbook-pro-laptop-touch-bar-instant-emoji-ports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20launches%20new%20MacBook%20Pro%20laptop%20with%20Touch%20Bar%20for%20instant%20emoji&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fapple-launches-new-macbook-pro-laptop-touch-bar-instant-emoji-ports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F819291c8aedc6fdc21f98fddcc617c5de3e8592f%2F0_0_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 Four Thunderbolt 3 USB-C ports mean that all old USB accessories will require 
adapters to connect them to the new MacBook Pro. Photograph: Tony Avelar/EPA 
The updates come at a time when Apple’s Mac shipments have seen three straight 
quarters of decline, culminating in a greater than 14% drop year-on-year in the 
last quarter. The decline follows Apple’s total sales of Macs growing by almost 
6% in 2015, to which the launch of the new retina MacBook contributed.


At the same time, total PC shipments shrank by 8% globally year-on-year in 
2015 and 0.2% year-on-year in 2014, according to data from Gartner. Even 
Lenovo, the world’s largest PC manufacturer, has shown decreasing sales, down 
3.1% in 2015 and down three straight quarters in 2016.

Revenues from Apple’s Mac computers are now worth less than those of its 
services, such as the App Store and iTunes. The company will be hoping that the 
renewed laptops and computer will buoy sales and return the Mac line to second 
place behind the iPhone in total revenue contribution to Apple’s bottom line.
 