
The latest version of Apple’s mobile operating system, which powers the iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> and iPad, iOS 10, has suffered 
issues during its launch with reports of it “bricking” devices.


Millions of users have accessed the update, however, some users have reported 
their smartphones and tablets crashing.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> issued a statement 
confirming a “brief issue with the software update process affecting a small 
number of users during the first hour of availability”, but this has now been 
fixed.

However, some users were reporting continued problems on Wednesday, saying 
their phones or tablets had been bricked by the update and they were unable to 
make them work.

The Guardian has seen an iPhone locked in a reboot cycle which iTunes will not 
recognise following the update, whileEngadget reported 
<https://www.engadget.com/2016/09/13/ios-10-update-bricked-my-iphone/> one of 
its journalists had suffered similar issues.

The free upgrade includes a variety of new features, including an overhauled 
Messages app with more emojis and animations, a new notification system for the 
lock screen and virtual assistant Siri being able to integrate into more apps.

Users of the iPhone and iPad in the UK with a compatible device – iPhone 5 and 
newer, oriPad <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> mini 2 and newer – 
are eligible for the update.

Having been first revealed at the world’s biggest tech company’s developer 
conference in June,iOS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> 10 also 
sees more artificial intelligence implanted into the software, with the Photos 
app now better able to identify and show you photos in your library based on 
time, location, people and even the items in them.

The iOS keyboard has been given a similar intelligence boost, Apple says, and 
is now able to better understand context as you type, including showing you a 
snapshot of your calendar as you discuss making plans with contacts.

The firm’s Apple Music has also been redesigned as part of the update, having 
been criticised for causing confusion when it launched in 2015.

The new software will also come built in to the new iPhone 7, which along with 
the larger 7 Plus will go on sale in the UK on Friday after being announced in 
San Francisco last week.

 * How to fix a broken iOS 10 update that’s bricked your iPhone or iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/fix-broken-ios-10-update-bricked-iphone-ipad-itunes>
 * iOS 10: the top 10 things you need to know about Apple’s new iPhone and 
iPad software 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/13/ios-10-apple-new-iphone-ipad> 