
Apple will give US users the ability to sign up as organ donors on their 
iPhones as part of its upcomingiOS 10 update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/apple-ios-10-emoji-siri-facial-recognition-iphone-ipad-homekit-watch-os-3>
.

The chief executive, Tim Cook, says he hopes the easy sign-up button in the 
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> app will help ease a 
longstanding donor shortage in the US.

He said that the problem hit home when Apple co-founder Steve Jobs endured an 
“excruciating” wait for a liver transplant in 2009. Jobsdied of pancreatic 
cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/oct/06/steve-jobs-obituary> 
in October 2011, aged 56.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> is adding the option to 
enroll in the US national donor registry by tapping a button within the 
iPhone’s Health app, which can be used to manage a variety of health and 
fitness data. The software will come to all US-based iPhones when the company 
updates its mobile operating system this autumn.

The move follows action by the US government 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/documents/White_House_Organ_Summit_Fact_Sheet_FINALv2.pdf>
 to attempt to reduce long waiting lists for organ transplants, in which 
someone is added to the list every 10 minutes and 22 people die while waiting 
for life-saving transplants every day.

One initiative will see greater automation in the donor and matching service, 
and increased connectivity with transplant centres, which it is hoped will 
speed up the matching process to get donor organs to more patients in less 
time. Almost $200m (£150m) has also been allocated for research into 
next-generation manufacturing techniques for tissue creation and repair, which 
could result in organ replacement.

Apple is not the only technology company that has pledged to aid in driving 
organ donor registration. Facebook, Google and Twitter have also pledged 
support to develop new tools and public advocacy campaigns.
 