
The new first minister of Northern Ireland, Arlene Foster, takes over  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/11/arlene-foster-becomes-northern-irelands-first-minister>
 amid a barrage of criticism. Seen as a possible new hope for an accommodating 
unionism, a new generation without the old surliness, she is now being accused 
by critics of having proven herself to be as stolid and chauvinistic as her 
predecessors. The issue that cast a shadow over her first day was her 
declaration that shewill not be attending centenary commemorations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/11/arlene-foster-easter-northern-ireland-first-minister-dup>
 for theEaster Rising <http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/easterrising/> in 
Dublin.

Arlene Foster: Easter Rising was attack on democracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/11/arlene-foster-easter-northern-ireland-first-minister-dup>
The 1916 rising was the start of the Irish war for independence, the demand 
that Ireland be allowed to leave the United Kingdom and stand alone as a 
republic. The leaders – Pádraig Pearse and James Connolly and 13 others who 
were executed by a British army firing squad after a week of fighting – are 
revered in Ireland. The argument of nationalists today is that if the Queen can 
salute the dead rebels as she did on herstate visit to Dublin in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/may/19/queen-ireland-visit-respect-adams>, 
then Foster should be able to find it in herself to acknowledge their sacrifice 
and their importance to Irish people.

Nationalists have made their moves to acknowledge Britishness. The Sinn Féin 
deputy first minister, Martin McGuinness, hasshaken hands with the Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jun/27/queen-martin-mcguinness-shake-hands>
 and Prince Charles. Republicans attend Remembrance Day celebrations. So 
unionism should reciprocate by honouring those who died for an Irish republic.

Foster says she can not honour the rising because it was an attack on the 
state she is loyal to, it undermined democracy and it gave succour to future 
generations of republicans who took up arms while similarly lacking a popular 
mandate. Whether or not she has a valid point, she does have a political 
problem. In four months’ time she will fight an assembly election against other 
unionist parties, which are growing stronger. Were she to be seen honouring the 
dead of 1916, her critics would say she was paying homage to fighters who 
attacked Britain, with German support, during the first world war, while other 
Irish men were dying in Flanders.

The rising was not just a revolt against Britain; it was a revolt against 
constitutional Irish nationalism

On the other hand, many in Ireland are refusing to face up to how problematic 
remembrance of the rising is, though some of the issues are now being played 
out in a drama series on Irish television. These issues include German 
collusion, lack of popular support, the cloying religiosity and sexism of some 
of the leaders, the absurd romantic presumption of a group of men to speak for 
Ireland and to demand allegiance from the population. Honouring those men is 
not equivalent to remembering British war dead; that is easier because many of 
those dead were Irish. They went to the front at the behest of theIrish 
Parliamentary party 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/easterrising/profiles/po15.shtml>, 
expecting a better deal for Ireland in return for that support.

The rising was, in fact, not just a revolt against Britain; it was a revolt 
against constitutional Irish nationalism, the larger strand of the nationalist 
tradition that always seeks progress towards Irish unity though parliamentary 
means. If constitutional nationalists such as the current leaders of modern 
Ireland and the SDLP inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> had more sense of their own 
history, they might step back from the celebrations themselves and stand more 
assertively for the success of democracy in Ireland and the failure of armed 
struggle to go anywhere but back into parliament.

Easter Rising 100 years on: share your photos and stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/easter-rising-100-years-on-share-your-photos-and-stories>
For militants – as the Provisional IRA <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> 
shows – have always ended up as constitutional nationalists, celebrating their 
warrior pasts while campaigning for votes. They like to honour dead rebels 
while denying the right to others now to do what they did and fight on for the 
republic. Foster is right to call them out on the inconsistency of their 
position.

Her critics today argue that her rejection of the invitation to join in 
celebration of 1916 implies that she would not celebrate other nations – the 
US, for instance – freeing themselves from Britain. But the parallel is flawed. 
The 1916 rebellion was the beginning, not the completion, of the Irish demand 
for independence. It ended in the establishment of parliamentary democracy in
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. If Foster rejected an 
invitation in 2021 to celebrate the centenary of the survival of democracy in a 
revolutionary era, that would indeed be unneighbourly.
 