
The man who brought a gun into a pizza restaurant to “self-investigate” a 
series of fake news stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/gunman-detained-at-comet-pizza-restaurant-was-self-investigating-fake-news-reports>
 was charged Monday with four offenses, including assault with a deadly weapon 
and carrying a pistol without a license.

The US attorney’s office for the District of Columbia also charged Edgar 
Welch, 28, of Durham, North Carolina with the unlawful discharge of a firearm 
and carrying a rifle or a shotgun outside a home or place of business. He is 
being detained until a preliminary hearing in DC superior court on Thursday.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffake-news-pizzeria-owner-calls-on-conspiracists-to-stop-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20news%20pizzeria%20owner%20calls%20on%20conspiracists%20to%20stop%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffake-news-pizzeria-owner-calls-on-conspiracists-to-stop-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20news%20pizzeria%20owner%20calls%20on%20conspiracists%20to%20stop%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffake-news-pizzeria-owner-calls-on-conspiracists-to-stop-video&media=>
Fake news pizzeria owner calls on conspiracists to stop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/fake-news-pizzeria-owner-calls-on-conspiracists-to-stop-video>
On Sunday afternoon, Welch walked into Comet Ping Pong, a popular pizza spot 
in the Chevy Chase neighborhood, wielding a shotgun and fired three shots, 
according to the charging documents. Comet has been part of a bizarre fake news 
conspiracy that drew unsubstantiated links between the Hillary Clinton campaign 
and a fictitious child sex ring, which the stories said were being run from 
secret tunnels beneath the restaurant.

Pizzagate is a lie. But what it says about our society is real | Ijeoma Oluo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/pizzagate-lie-what-it-says-about-society-real>
Police said that Welch had gone into Comet to “self-investigate” the 
restaurant. Welch told police he had “read online that the Comet restaurant was 
harboring child sex slaves and that he wanted to see for himself if they were 
there”, according to the charging document. He said he was armed to help rescue 
them. And police said he “surrendered peacefully when he found no evidence that 
underage children were being harbored in the restaurant”.

Welch is one of several people who have come to the area searching for the 
supposed tunnels in recent days. The difference is that he brought a gun that 
charging documents say he pointed at at least one police officer on Sunday, 
before he was led onto the street outside and arrested.
 