
Cornerhouse, Manchester

This venue is crucial to Manchester's cultural well-being. A lively programme 
of offbeat, alternative film is augmented by regularly "introduced" screenings, 
cast and crew Q&As and, for the hardcore, study-courses on German political 
cinema or Italian neo-realism. This month's highlights include a screening of 
The Skin I Live In (30 August), preceded by a critical introduction to Pedro 
Almodóvar's work by Dr Nuria Triana Toribio, senior lecturer in Spanish cinema 
at the University of Manchester. If that sounds too highbrow, head to 
Screenfields, Manchester's open-air summer cinema (£2,spinningfieldsonline.com 
<http://www.spinningfieldsonline.com>), which is showing Ghostbusters (18 
August) and Saturday Night Fever (25 August).
• 70 Oxford Street (0161-200 1500 cornerhouse.org <http://www.cornerhouse.org>
). Showroom, 15 Paternoster Row, Sheffield (0114-275 7727,
showroomworkstation.org.uk <http://www.showroomworkstation.org.uk>) 

The Star & Shadow Cinema, Newcastle

In a galaxy far, far away from the mainstream multiplex experience, the Star 
twinkles, a one-screen, 66-seater beacon of hope. Volunteer-run, it is both 
principled (tickets £5/£3.50; UK asylum-seekers free) and determined to offer a 
quirky, intelligent diet. Recent attractions have included a night of archive 
film exploring industry in the north-east, a season of vintage UK TV 
sci-fi/horror and, on 4 September, you can watch King Kong. The original, of 
course.

• Stepney Bank, Newcastle upon Tyne (0191-261 0066, starandshadow.org.uk 
<http://www.starandshadow.org.uk>)

The Electric, Birmingham

It may be Britain's oldest working cinema (established 1909), but the restored 
Electric should be a template for the future. Its mod cons include big leather 
sofas and waitress service in the auditoriums, where (praise be) you can have a 
drink while you watch the film. The programme mixes credible hits with the best 
indies, alongside festivals and late-night one-offs.
• 47-49 Station Street, Birmingham, (0121-643 7879, theelectric.co.uk 
<http://theelectric.co.uk>)

Various festivals, London
 A still from First Love, showing at the London Surf/Film Festival 
You want niche? We got it, as the London Surf/Film Festival, a celebration of 
"waveriding's most exciting creatives" debuts this autumn at Hammersmith's 
Riverside Studios (13-15 October). Before that, those looking for fresh 
stimulation may enjoy the ultra-local, highly eclectic Hackney Film Festival 
(15-18 September). Hurry, and you might just make the submissions deadline of 
12 August. The Portobello Film Festival (1-18 September), is a much larger 
platform for exciting new London film-makers, which this year uses the 
Portobello Pop-Up – a punky, non-profit digital microplex – as one of its 
venues.
• London Surf/Film Festival, Riverside Studios W6 (londonsurffilmfestival.com 
<http://londonsurffilmfestival.com>). Hackney Film Festival (
hackneyfilmfestival.com <http://www.hackneyfilmfestival.com>). Portobello Film 
Festival (portobellofilmfestival.com <http://www.portobellofilmfestival.com>). 
Portobello Pop-Up, 3 Acklam Road W10 (portobellopopup.com 
<http://www.portobellopopup.com>) 

Glasgow Film Theatre, Glasgow

August is a typically diverse month at Glasgow Film Theatre. The 
often-harrowing Play Poland season continues, while, for light relief, you can 
catch late-night screenings of Jackass 3D (12 August) and The Breakfast Club 
(26 August), then join the after-party at Sauchiehall Street's Nice N Sleazy. 
GFT's Glasgow Film Festival runs from 16-26 February 2012, with films screened 
in anything from caravans to swimming pools.
• 12 Rose Street (0141-332 6535, glasgowfilm.org <http://www.glasgowfilm.org>)

3rd Festival of British Cinema, Hay-on-Wye, Wales

This may be a small event – run by the local film society, and accommodating 
just 250 films across three screens from 23-25 September – but the organisers' 
enthusiasm and Hay's cultural allure mean that it attracts interesting guests. 
This year's include Patagonia director Marc Evans. There is a Welsh focus to 
the archive and silent film strands this year, while the "classics" schedule is 
themed around "maverick directors" such as Peter Greenaway.
• Various venues, entry £5 (filmfestivalhay.co.uk 
<http://www.filmfestivalhay.co.uk>)

Umit & Son, London

A reader's Been there tip-off (thank you, Tersha) first alerted Travel to Umit 
Mesut's remarkable shop. "Digital's alright, but it's not for me," says the man 
who, for more than 50 years, has been collecting, restoring and selling 
19th-century projectors to 1950s 3D film stock, to the delight of customers 
such as film-maker Terry Gilliam. "It's full of interesting films, posters, 
cameras and thousands of old features," says Tersha. "The owner will even come 
to your home to show a film."

• Private screening, £200. 35 Lower Clapton Road E5 (020-8985 1766)

Nomad, southern England
 Nomad cinema, southern England 
There is no shortage of movie-going novelty in London. But for those who feel 
that fancy-dress fandango Secret Cinema (secretcinema.org 
<http://www.secretcinema.org>), just isn't secret enough anymore, or fear 
seasickness at the Floating Cinema (floatingcinema.info 
<http://floatingcinema.info/>), then roving outdoor event Nomad may be just the 
ticket. The films shown are generally crowd-pleasers, old and new. You are 
unlikely to be challenged, cinematically. You can, however, take your own 
booze, snacks, chairs and blankets. August is a busy month, with dates across 
London and Kent and at Lulworth Castle, Dorset. Those craving something meatier 
than Mamma Mia!, should wait for Pan's Labyrinth in Brompton cemetery (8 
September).
• £8-£18.50 (whereisthenomad.com <http://www.whereisthenomad.com>)

The Cube, Bristol

A self-styled "microplex" which serves its own cola, the Cube has been 
resisting multiplex conformity since 1998. With screenings hosted by Bristol 
Animal Rights Collective, queer cinema club Beacons, Icons & Dykons, via 
late-night reruns of bizarre cult classics and edgy world cinema, you are very 
much not in your local Odeon. Bluescreen is a notable night where 
non-professional film-makers can get their work shown.
• Dove Street South (0117-907 4190, cubecinema.com <http://www.cubecinema.com>)

Queen of Hoxton, London

This popular venue has a rooftop cinema club this summer. DJ Lauren Laverne 
has curated an Italian-inspired series in conjunction with Italian liqueur 
Disaronno. Win a place at the opening night (11 August, showing Baz Luhrmann's 
Romeo + Juliet) by clicking Like on the Facebook page (
disaronnofacebook.com/filmseries <https://www.facebook.com/Disaronno>). Then 
there's Roman Holiday, Life is Beautiful and Bicycle Thieves on consecutive 
nights. Online tickets are sold out but get there early for tickets on the door 
(£9 including a cocktail).

• 1-5 Curtain Road, 020-422 0958, thequeenofhoxton.co.uk 
<http://www.thequeenofhoxton.co.uk>
 