
Towards the end of Black Friday, the film that forms the centrepiece of her 
show at the Whitney in New York, Sophia Al-Maria tells the story of the time 
she and her sister were riding the escalators in a mall in Doha. She notices a 
guy she took algebra with in high school a few steps ahead of her, hanging out 
with a group of his own friends. She doesn’t call out, because she knows he 
won’t recognise her. She is wearing her abaya, her hair covered, and the guy 
from algebra is a US serviceman on his day off. The classroom they sat in 
together is more than 7,000 miles away in the Pacific Northwest. Rather than 
shatter the glass wall that keeps her two lives separate, she simply carries on 
shopping.
 ‘I reserve the right to disavow everything I’ve ever said’ … Sophia Al Maria. 
Photograph: Aparna Jayakumar 
I meet the 32-year-old Qatari-American artist in a windowless room a few 
floors up from the exhibition space. This is her first solo show in the US, the 
high point so far of an artistic career that has encompassed science fiction, 
sculpture and film-making. (She has a day job as a screenwriter for TV, 
“because video art does not pay”.) Today Al-Maria is just off the plane from 
London, and speaks with the slightly stoned drawl of the jetlagged. “This may 
be the worst interview ever,” she warns me. But she is nothing if not used to 
air travel. Her upbringing involved “ping-ponging” between her mother’s home 
town in Washington state and her Bedouin father’s native Qatar. Unsurprisingly, 
she never quite felt she belonged in either place, an experience that forms the 
basis of her 2012 memoirThe Girl Who Fell to Earth 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13623828-the-girl-who-fell-to-earth>.


You might assume that it would involve tales of being catapulted from the 
liberal west into a land of traditional values and narrow horizons. Far from 
it. “I would go to the Gulf and feel that I was part of the world,” she tells 
me. “I would listen to pop music on the radio that I didn’t hear in the States, 
I would have access to technology, to video games, to pirated films, to Indian 
and Chinese and European stuff. I felt very much that that was where I wanted 
to be, and when I came back to the States, it was like the same TLC song being 
played on repeat.”


In the Gulf ​I'd have access to Indian, Chinese, European stuff. In the US, it 
was the same TLC song on repeat

It is that turbocharged, frenetic Middle East, where everyone is glued to 
their jawwal, or mobile phone, with which Al-Maria has become identified. If 
you read about her, you’ll find out that she coined the phrase “Gulf futurism” 
a tag that invokes the space-age towers of entrepôts like Dubai and their 
hyper-connected thobe-wearing inhabitants. But when she brings it up, it’s with 
an eye-roll. “I reserve the right to disavow every work and everything that 
I’ve ever said because oftentimes, even six months later, I’m like: that was 
stupid. That’s a little bit how I feel about that term, because it has been 
taken to mean some kind of aesthetic, when, in fact, what I was talking about 
was a sort of time travel.” In other words, the vertigo-inducing changes that 
have transformed the lives of family members who otherwise “still keep goats 
and still make cheese in an inside-out sack”. She talks of “people that I love 
being sucked into their devices”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fsophia-al-maria-video-artist-interview-islam-qatar-us-whitney-museum-black-friday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58bd94731a64720263891eea812b2f5d9ac76399%2F0_0_2048_1080%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Artist%20Sophia%20Al-Maria%3A%20'People%20hate%20Islam%2C%20but%20they're%20titillated%20by%20it%20too'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fsophia-al-maria-video-artist-interview-islam-qatar-us-whitney-museum-black-friday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Artist%20Sophia%20Al-Maria%3A%20%27People%20hate%20Islam%2C%20but%20they%27re%20titillated%20by%20it%20too%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fsophia-al-maria-video-artist-interview-islam-qatar-us-whitney-museum-black-friday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58bd94731a64720263891eea812b2f5d9ac76399%2F0_0_2048_1080%2F2048.jpg>
 Death by luxury … a still from the video Black Friday by Sophia Al Maria. 
Photograph: Courtesy of the artist 
Evil is born … not in the dark satanic mills of the 19th century but the 
bright fluorescent malls of the 21st

Indeed, despite her obvious affection for the Gulf, she’s well alive to its 
dystopian potential. For the rest of the summer, visitors to the Whitney will 
be greeted by a juddering, malevolent din emanating from a room just off the 
main lobby. These are the sounds ofBlack Friday 
<http://whitney.org/Exhibitions/SophiaAlMaria> and its companion piece, Litany, 
113 separate videos displayed on mobile devices strewn across a bed of sand at 
the foot of the main screen. Every so often the noise is interrupted by the 
voice of Sam Neill, who declares, among other things: “This is where the 
glamorous heart of evil is born. And reborn. Not in the dark satanic mills of 
the 19th century but the bright fluorescent malls of the 21st.” We see 
extraordinary distorted images of marble halls, mannequins lit with psychedelic 
colours, empty escalators running ad infinitum. It’s at once sumptuous and 
extremely disturbing.

“It’s a nightmare sermon,” Al-Maria explains. “Like a bad trip, basically.” 
Much of it was filmed using a drone, at a yet-to-open mall in Doha. A veiled 
woman wanders this vacant paradise, presumably after everyone else has been 
spirited away by the apocalypse. At the end, she lies prone on the beautiful 
polished floor, dead from luxury.


Much of the work was filmed with a drone in a yet-to-be-opened mall in Doha. 
'It's a nightmare sermon. A bad trip'

Insofar as religion and hijab crop up in Al-Maria’s work they’re relatively 
unobtrusive. The abaya is simply what women wear inQatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar>, and when she’s there, Al-Maria does 
too. There’s no polemic about the clash of civilisations – which isn’t to say 
that people’s ideas about how Islam relates to the west don’t get foisted on 
her work. For instance, she found herself at the centre of a media storm in New 
Zealand after her film For Your Eyes Only, which depicts a group of Qatari 
women getting ready for a wedding, was shown at a gallery near Wellington. “It 
was in a side-room where only women and young children were allowed to go, the 
same way that there would be that sort of safe space at a wedding in the Gulf,” 
she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fsophia-al-maria-video-artist-interview-islam-qatar-us-whitney-museum-black-friday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd914623b4f210cc948662fd9d28bfcdfd2bead83%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Artist%20Sophia%20Al-Maria%3A%20'People%20hate%20Islam%2C%20but%20they're%20titillated%20by%20it%20too'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fsophia-al-maria-video-artist-interview-islam-qatar-us-whitney-museum-black-friday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Artist%20Sophia%20Al-Maria%3A%20%27People%20hate%20Islam%2C%20but%20they%27re%20titillated%20by%20it%20too%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fsophia-al-maria-video-artist-interview-islam-qatar-us-whitney-museum-black-friday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd914623b4f210cc948662fd9d28bfcdfd2bead83%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 A still from Sophia Al-Maria’s video work Litany. Photograph: Courtesy of the 
artist 
But the exclusion of men from a taxpayer-funded gallery sparked a heated 
debate. The piece was labelled “inflammatory and provocative”. Al-Maria points 
out that there was no outcry whenMarina Abramović staged a talk from which men 
were excluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/30/meltdown-2012-marina-abramovic-interview>
 at London’s Meltdown festival in 2012. The difference, I point out, is Islam. 
Lots of people hate Islam. “They’re titillated, let’s face it,” she responds. 
“They hate it and they’re titillated. That’s the gross thing, the thing that 
must be defused.”


Women film-makers dominate Jarman award shortlist for 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/17/women-film-makers-dominate-jarman-award-shortlist-for-2016>
I ask her to elaborate, though she’s reluctant. “That’s a really big 
conversation to go into. How long have you got? I’m not sure that I want to 
step into that minefield right now. But I have lot to say about it. I’m sorry.”


Still, she furnishes me with an example. When The Girl Who Fell to Earth was 
being prepared for publication, she went to the designers with a kind of 
presentation to help show them what to avoid. “It was basically every 
ridiculous cover of a woman in a veil, Hijabs and Thongs, Hijabs and Snogging 
or whatever … it was giving them a sort of context in which to understand: 
don’t do this to me. Because this is not what this book is. It’s going to be on 
an airport shelf, great, but I don’t want someone to be attracted to it because 
they want to see what’s ‘behind the veil’.” Job done, she thought. Or not. 
“They took no heed, and the first cover I got back was a woman in an Afghani 
burqa, with a go-go boot sticking out.” She raises her hands in disbelief.


The cover ended up being designed by an artist friend, Chris Kyung: a map of 
the earth complete with Seattle’sSpace Needle 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/545a6022e4b097c67c03e51b/1231613> 
and the Sheraton Doha. It is eccentric, science-fictiony, much closer to her 
idiosyncratic sensibility. She tells me she “can’t be a spokesperson” or a 
“native informant”. “I don’t feel like I’m a native of anywhere, so, it just 
feels…” she shrugs. Al-Maria’s voice is undeniably all her own. What’s clear is 
that more and more people are now going to hear it.

 * Sophia Al-Maria is at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, until 
31 October <http://whitney.org/Exhibitions/SophiaAlMaria>  