
The Detroit home of civil rights activist Rosa Parks has been dismantled and 
moved across the Atlantic by a Berlin-based artist after it faced demolition in 
its original location.

The facade of the two-storey building, home to Parks in the 1950s and 60s, was 
shipped from the US toGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> last 
month, after having been donated by one of her relatives to Ryan Mendoza, an 
American artist based in the German capital.

Members of Parks’ family had in past years repeatedly failed to raise funds 
for the building’s preservation.

Rosa Parks: 60th anniversary of a historic day in Alabama – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2015/dec/01/rosa-parks-60th-anniversary-bus-seat-civil-rights-pictures>
Over the next three months Mendoza will try to reconstruct the building at his 
studio in Berlin’s Wedding district, after which it could tour galleries around
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in an attempt to raise 
awareness of its neglected existence in America.

“I hope either President Obama or his successor will be sensitive to this 
issue and catch word of the house that is held hostage across the world: a 
monument to Rosa Parks’ legacy that was purposely kidnapped in order for 
America to recognise what it has lost,” Mendoza told the Guardian.

The 44-year-old artist said he was evaluating offers from major institutions. 
“The Tate Modern might be a good place to discuss the state of American affairs 
with this house as its centrepiece, but I feel eventually the Rosa Parks’ house 
should be rebuilt on the lawn in front of the White House.”

Parks’ refusal to surrender her bus seat to a white person in December 1955 is 
one of the most famous moments in the history of the modern civil rights 
movement in America. Her ensuing arrest triggered the year-long Montgomery bus 
boycott, a successful protest campaign against Alabama’s racial segregation 
policies.

In 2012 Obama marked the anniversary of Parks’ protest with a picture of 
himself on the same seat inside the National City Lines bus number 2857, now on 
display at Detroit’s Henry Ford museum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fartist-transports-rosa-parks-former-detroit-home-to-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d11f0477fd6b5de62820bc128012caaee48f96%2F0_379_3260_1956%2F3260.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Artist%20transports%20Rosa%20Parks'%20former%20Detroit%20home%20to%20Germany&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fartist-transports-rosa-parks-former-detroit-home-to-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Artist%20transports%20Rosa%20Parks%27%20former%20Detroit%20home%20to%20Germany&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fartist-transports-rosa-parks-former-detroit-home-to-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d11f0477fd6b5de62820bc128012caaee48f96%2F0_379_3260_1956%2F3260.jpg>
 Rosa Parks’ Detroit home in 1955. Photograph: Rhea McCauley 
Parks moved into the modest three-bedroom house on South Deacon Street in 
Detroit’s south-west after fleeing Alabama because of the death threats she 
continued to receive after the end of the boycott. She remained in the city 
until her death in 2009. Though relatives say she considered her new home a 
refuge, sheremained vocal 
<https://www.loc.gov/collections/rosa-parks-papers/articles-and-essays/beyond-the-bus/>
 in her criticism of the city’s housing segregation practices and participated 
in the 1963 Detroit Walk to Freedom.

The house was later sold to a new owner, who was dispossessed after Detroit’s 
housing bubble burst around 2007-2008. Badly damaged by floods and with 
pipework missing after break-ins, the property was put on the city’s demolition 
list until one of its former inhabitants, Parks’ niece Rhea McCauley, bought 
the house back from the council for $500 (£390). When her parents bought the 
building in 1956, she said, they had paid $8,000.

Why I took a family's house from Detroit to Rotterdam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/feb/24/white-man-black-family-home-detroit-rotterdam>
McCauley approached Mendoza after hearing about a similar project the artist 
had organised in Detroit. “She loved the city, but I don’t think the city loved 
her very much back,” McCauley recently toldDetroit Free Press 
<http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/detroit/2016/09/25/artist-relatives-rosa-parks-celebrate-homes-preservation/91092520/>
. “This house should have been preserved here. But we live in a world where 
every other project takes precedence.”

A New Yorker who has lived and worked in Europe for over 20 years, Mendoza had 
gained attention in the city for a series of controversial projects. Earlier 
this year, he moved a family house from Detroit’s low-income 8 Mile Road area 
into a permanent exhibition at the Verbeke Foundation in Belgium. In another 
provocative project, Mendoza restyled two abandoned Detroit homes so that light 
shining through bullet holes at night displayed the names of Donald Trump and 
Hillary Clinton.

Mendoza’s work brings to mind that of the influential late US artist Mike 
Kelley, who in 2012 built afaithful mobile replica 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/17/arts/design/a-model-of-mike-kelleys-ex-home-as-art-in-detroit.html?_r=0>
 of his Detroit childhood home.

Mendoza said he wanted to “make the building into a work of art without 
violating the building as a document”.


While he described himself as an “imperfect candidate” for the project and 
said “it should be somebody in the black community doing this”, he argued that 
McCauley and he had had a simple choice between the building being preserved or 
demolished. The final remains of the house were pulled down at a ceremony 
attended by the local community, including the last surviving neighbour from 
Parks’ time.

McCauley said she hoped young people in Europe would look at the house and let 
it strengthen their spirit. “If a small little lady can fight for justice until 
the end of her life, what is wrong with the rest of us?”
 