
As an assistant fundraising manager in my small charity, I am called at least 
every other month into our board meeting to update our trustees on fundraising 
issues.

Fine. But then I have to sit and listen to a drawn-out debate that can last 
hours and that goes off on many tangents – time that could be better spent 
doing my job.

Keen to hear the sound of their own voice, or perhaps under pressure to say 
something … anything, I often find that some trustees, usually the ones with 
zero experience in fundraising, will pluck out an obscure idea that they think 
we simply must do because another charity is doing it. Even if that is a 
charity for a different cause in a different area.

Become a charity trustee – it changed my life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/nov/08/become-a-charity-trustee-it-changed-my-life>
It’s extra pressure and a waste of my time. I’ve worked for in the charity for 
just over five years, working my way up to a fulfilling role, with all the 
usual lure of a charity job. It has a buzz and I love seeing my hard work pay 
off. Of course, it has the same challenges that many small (and large) 
charities face: huge targets, not enough staff, etc. There are never enough 
hours in the day for fundraising.

When it comes to fundraising, I know my stuff. At least, I know more than some 
of our trustees, who often feel the need to speak out in meetings with 
suggestions about how we should do things differently, despite never having 
been a fundraiser – or perhaps having once organised a raffle. Always negative 
and rarely positive.

Trustees <https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/trustees> can 
offer insight and expertise. But when things are run inefficiently, they can be 
a hindrance not a help. I understand the role of a trustee, but there needs to 
be mutual respect. Let us get on with our jobs. This might mean senior 
management having to endure the often painfully long board meetings and 
reporting back to us (perhaps sticking up for us as well). There needs to be 
structure for a charity to work. And trustees need to know their strengths and 
input when they can add value, not add stress.

Charity fundraising: how do you ask for, and get, a million pounds?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jun/17/charity-fundraising-ask-for-a-million-pounds>
Being a fundraiser is stressful and I’m racked with guilt when I miss a 
target. The last thing we need is to be lectured by inexperienced trustees who 
have a random idea, particularly when we have to take time away from our job to 
listen to it.

When the role of a trustee at a charity is clear, it is beneficial for 
everybody. When the lines are blurred, it can be frustrating. I’m sure trustees 
have their own gripes with us fundraisers, but what sets us apart from other 
jobs is that we are doers. We don’t want to talk about fundraising, we want to 
get on and do it, and leave the politics to management.



Confessions of a charity professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/series/confessions-of-a-charity-professional>
 is our series on theGuardian Voluntary Sector Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> where charity workers 
tell it how it is. To pitch us an idea read our guidelineshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
 and email voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com.
 