
I quickly became fascinated by the video, playing it over and over again. It 
was the sound that got me - noisy, bland, impenetrable as it was. If not for an 
imminent deadline I might have spent hours trying to crack that enigmatic 
soundtrack, like a character inBrian de Palma’s Blow Out 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0082085/> or Francis Ford Coppola’s The 
Conversation <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0071360/>. As it was I played the 
clip at different volumes, through different speakers, but the brief dialogue 
between Prince Charles and Gerry Adams never got any clearer. The most you can 
catch is the deep intonation of Adams’s voice, but the words are lost.

Prince Charles and Gerry Adams share historic handshake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/19/prince-charles-and-gerry-adams-share-historic-handshake>
What would you say to a man who defended the murder of a beloved family member 
and who many republicans claim was on the IRA army council when itblew up Lord 
Louis Mountbatten’s boat in 1979 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/from-the-archive-blog/2015/may/19/mountbatten-lord-prince-charles-ira-1979>
? And what would you say to the prince who, as heir to the British throne, 
stands for everything Irish republicans fought against?

In the video they almost seem to drift into one another by accident 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/uk-news/2015/may/19/prince-charles-and-gerry-adams-share-historic-handshake>
, but obviously everything has been carefully planned, including the distance 
and angle of the camera, watching from a distance but giving them space – and 
privacy. Perhaps the only unplanned thing is the cup of tea resting on a saucer 
in Prince Charles’s hand.

The prince looks nervous and apprehensive. Adams looks keyed up. While Charles 
is fortified for an uncomfortable encounter, Adams is poised for it. He leans 
in and speaks his words immediately. A bland greeting? It does not look like 
one. It looks as if he is saying something emotional and deliberate. Charles in 
reply seems to say something that might be “terrible”.

Meanwhile they shake hands. And shake hands. And shake hands. As if their 
hands were bonded together by Superglue, the prince and the man who denies he 
was ever a terrorist simply cannot prise their hands apart. Their handshake 
goes on sawing up and down, an out of control physical gesture which neither 
knows how to stop. It might be the nervous, compensatory, baffled mechanical 
impulse of two people who really, really feel the awkwardness of their official 
encounter. And yet it also might be something more human – the desperate 
attempt to put all that cannot be said into a joining of hands that is a basic 
symbol of respect. After all the violence, how can this handshake ever be 
enough? Perhaps only if it goes on forever.

A bland greeting? It does not look like one. It looks as if he is saying 
something emotional and deliberate

Is it, as it appears, a weighty exchange? The prince looks mildly caught off 
his guard, surprised by what Adams said. Their gliding encounter, all 13 
seconds of it, ends with a formal introduction by Adams to the next guest to 
glad-hand. Suddenly, normal life resumes: another royal handshake, another 
official greeting.

But for a moment, as these two men meet, history hangs there like smoke. There 
is a terrible portentousness to it. We don’t often see such moments of 
symbolism in public life. The stakes are so low. When David Cameron stood by 
his defeated rivals at the VE Day commemoration, it was in the end just a 
meeting of a winner and two losers in an election that was peaceful and 
correct. But here is a reminder of how much bigger and darker politics can be. 
Gerry Adams andPrince Charles <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> 
are representatives of two sides that so recently fought a war on Irish and 
British soil. Death and bitterness are the shadows behind their civilised, 
suited encounter.

And yet it happened. A handshake, a few studied words, and all the appearance 
of a genuine emotional communication between these two unlike people.

The peace process goes on, with this strange, impossible meeting another 
milestone on a road to peace that we are in danger of taking for granted. Once 
the images were of soldiers in armoured cars and bomb-shattered pubs. Now we 
watch two men, both getting older, shaking hands, their words a murmured secret 
reconciliation. In all the bloody scenes of this unforgiving world, this was a 
teatime miracle.
 