
When Ashley Giles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> told his 
family on Christmas Day that he had one final present to share with them – 
namely that his return to Warwickshire had been finalised the day before and, 
after two years living out of a suitcase at Lancashire, he was coming home 
full-time – the reaction was not entirely one of universal excitement.

While his wife, Stine, and 16-year-old son, Anders, were delighted, his 
daughter Mathilde, 14, let out a small sigh: she thought he was about to tell 
them they were getting a dog. That one minor disappointment aside, it is fair 
to say the return of Giles to the club where he made his name first as a player 
and then head coach has gone down well in the West Midlands.

It represents a bold move by Warwickshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> too, both in the 
replacement of their director of cricket, Dougie Brown, after he had overseen 
the club’s Royal London Cup victory last summer, and in sticking it out through 
weeks of negotiations with Lancashire to get their man. At one stage it looked 
like it could result in a year-long spell of gardening leave for Giles, only 
for a deal to be brokered with an undisclosed but not insignificant 
compensation package.

Related: Eoin Morgan’s family ‘offended’ by criticism over his Bangladesh 
decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/eoin-morgan-family-offended-england-bangladesh-cricket>

Having ended a successful spell at Old Trafford that brought promotion and the 
NatWest T20 Blast title during his first season as director of cricket, before 
avoiding relegation the following summer, Giles now takes up the newly created 
role of sport director at Edgbaston in what is a much broader job than his two 
previous positions in that it will see him head all aspects of Warwickshire’s 
cricket, both men and women, plus the academy pathways, recruitment and sport 
science.

In terms of the first team, the former England spinner will work above the 
club’s new head coach, Jim Troughton, thus reuniting the pair that, as director 
of cricket and captain, delivered their last County Championship title in 2012. 
With Ian Bell going into his second season as club captain, and a side still 
packed full of senior players from that era, it feels like they are getting the 
band back together.

“It does feel like coming home,” said Giles, who left the club after that 
title win for a brief role as England’s limited-overs coach but remained living 
in nearby Droitwich Spa. “But I have to be careful with saying that because I 
enjoyed two really good years atLancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire>, some of my best in cricket, and 
I don’t want it to look like I simply shot off when a job came up near my house.

“But the personal aspect became a big one. Being away from home became very 
difficult in my second year at Lancashire. When I was home, I wasn’t with it, I 
was just vacant for 24 hours before coming back down to earth, by which time 
the suitcase was already packed and I was off again. This role was different 
and much broader, too. Had it been the same as before, it would not have been 
the right role.”

While he will don a tracksuit from time to time, Giles has stressed that the 
first team is now very much Troughton’s domain, with his former captain 
stepping up from a previous role as fielding coach under Brown and working 
alongside Bell.

The pair will oversee a squad that, despite the 50-over trophy, largely 
underperformed last summer given the resources at their disposal, having failed 
to get out of the group stage in Twenty20 and avoided relegation from Division 
One of the championship only through victory over Giles’s Lancashire in the 
final round.

With Jeetan Patel topping 60 wickets and Keith Barker finishing one short of 
that figure among the bowlers, the blame instead fell on a batting unit in 
which only Jonathan Trott averaged more than 40 out of the top six and Bell, in 
a season he hoped could propel him back into the England fold, scored only one 
century.

Troughton said: “Winning a trophy last year, we should have been cock-a-hoop 
but we weren’t happy. And batting was an area where guys didn’t achieve what 
they wanted to. For me, it’s about Ian Bell concentrating on scoring runs and 
looking after the team on the field. I will take all the other pressures off 
him to do that job.”

While the sparky Troughton is doing this, his new boss will take a long‑term 
view working on a Warwickshire production line whose last proper alumnus – from 
age-group cricket to a capped first-team player – remains Chris Woakes. For 
Giles, this in part means tapping into an area not exploited properly by the 
club previously.

He said: “We will have to tap into the Asian cricket network in Birmingham 
better. Asian cricket is a massive area that has failed to be tapped into, even 
during my previous time at the club. We need to get to grips with that.”
 