
This was taken at a refugee camp in Eisenstadt, Austria, on October 1956. It 
shows a Hungarian Gypsy family: a mother, a father and a son who is seven or 
eight. The violin is his. He was playing a popular Hungarian song: “Flower of 
my country / Your stem has been crushed / And my sorrow finds no relief / A 
storm has swept over my village home / Land that I love, farewell.”

They fled Hungary and the Russian army because of the discrimination they 
suffered after the uprising failed. Gypsies have always been targeted in 
Hungary and things were no different under Soviet rule. Had they not left they 
would have been executed. Nobody was allowed to leave, of course, but many 
managed to escape to Austria, staying in Red Cross camps or even schools. They 
had the look of people who had landed into nothing. Later, that look changed as 
they became full immigrants, although the emigrating was still against their 
will.

I wanted to capture the plight of those who had fought for more freedom in 
communist Hungary, especially the children. I felt an affinity with people who 
had lost their country, since I myself had been a refugee. My husband and I 
were in the communist resistance during the second world war, but when the 
Russians took over Hungary we did not agree with their approach. I agree with 
something people saidwhen the Red Army liberated us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/10/second-world-war-liberation-europe>
 from the Nazis: “We are going from one trash can into another.”

I was born in Budapest in 1913 – I’m 103 now – and we lived in a small town 
called Nagyvárad. The first world war broke out when I was one year old. My 
father was sent to fight in the Hungarian army with the Germans. He was 
captured by the Russians and went to a gulag for six years. So I had no memory 
of him for the first six years of my life.

My mother, thinking he was dead, got a new boyfriend who I didn’t like. When 
my father returned from Siberia, it was the happiest day of my life. I begged 
my mother, who had left Budapest to live in Vienna, to come back so that we 
could all be together again – which she did. You do what you have to do.

I grew up, married and my husband and I settled in Paris between the wars. His 
father was in Barcelona and, when we went to visit, the city made me think of 
the Bauhaus style, straight lines and everything. I was so impressed, I took 
tons of pictures and decided to study photography, eventually getting a job in 
the darkroom atMagnum <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/magnum>.

My husband returned east and we ended up divorced. I lived alone in western 
Europe as a kind of economic refugee with three children. Even though it was 
wartime, my most cherished memories are when they were little, learning how to 
walk or turn over on their backs. I wanted us to go on holiday together as a 
family, just like any other children would. The only way to do it, though, was 
to hitchhike everywhere, which was rather overconfident. But if I wasn’t so 
confident, I’d never have taken half the shots I did.
 Ata Kandó in Bergen, 2012. Photograph: Koos Breukel 
Ata Kandó’s CV

Born: 1913, Budapest.

Trained: Bortnyik Academy, Budapest.

Influences: Robert Capa <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/robert-capa>,
Henri Cartier-Bresson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/henricartierbresson>, Werner Bischof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jun/10/the-more-or-less-decisive-moments-magnum-photos>
,Robert Doisneau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/apr/14/robert-doisneau-google-doodle>
.

High point: “Travelling in the Amazon in the 1960s. The women there had never 
seen a white woman before.”

Low point: “My book about South America has never been published in English.”

Top tip: “As my mother would say, ‘Look with your eyes and not with your 
nose.’”

 * Ata Kandó: I Shall Use My Time 
<https://www.nederlandsfotomuseum.nl/en/exhibition/ata-kando-eng/> is at the 
Nederlands Fotomuseum.
 