
Australian cricketers on the verge of making it to national squads and the Big 
Bash League are being targeted by bookmakers via social media.Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia head of integrity Iain 
Roy confirmed that foreign bookmakers are targeting players via tools such as 
Twitter, Instagram and Facebook as they seek information on squads and playing 
conditions.

Roy has told News Corp Australia that approaches have been quite common this 
summer. “We’ve had a number of approaches made on social media to players 
already this season,” Roy said. “Twitter approaches asking for information 
about team selection, pitches and that sort of thing.”

The 2016 Rusties: Guardian Australia's alternative sporting awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/29/the-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards>
Rising young stars of the game are the main target, Roy revealed, but he would 
not elaborate on how many players had been targeted. Roy said cricketers in all 
forms of the game had been briefed not to reply to suspicious online approaches 
and report the behaviour to the game’s governing body.

“Australian cricket has a long-standing, proactive approach to sports 
integrity management,” a Cricket Australia spokesman said in a statement. “We 
are well aware of various methods that can be used to bring the integrity of 
the game into question, and combat these in a proactive way.”

While there’s been no specific evidence or links suggested to Australian 
cricket, no-one can afford to be complacent about these issues and we need to 
remain vigilant. Cricket Australia takes a zero-tolerance approach against 
anybody trying to bring the game’s credibility into disrepute. All players in 
Australia are required to complete an anti-corruption education session each 
season before they can compete in CA’s domestic competitions, including the 
BBL.”

“Players are also able to report any suspicions they have on a confidential 
basis and in the past there has been a strong Australian player culture to do 
so.”
 