
A new-look Australian side stopped the rot at Adelaide Oval, snapping a 
five-Test losing streak with a seven-wicket win over South Africa in the 
day-night clash.


Australia’s youngest Test XI since 1986 cruised to victory on day four. They 
rolled the Proteas for 250 in Sunday’s opening session then hauled in a target 
of 127 runs before the meal break.


Australia beat South Africa by seven wickets on day four of third Test – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/27/australia-v-south-africa-third-test-day-four-live>
David Warner and Usman Khawaja fell in the space of three balls during the 
19th over but there was no late twist in the absorbing dead rubber.


It is far too early to suggest Steve Smith’s team have banished the batting 
woes that led to lopsided losses in Perth and Hobart, but Australia fought hard 
throughout the pink-ball contest, especially Khawaja in a first-innings knock 
of 145 that spanned almost eight hours.

The result, fittingly secured when debutants Matt Renshaw and Peter Handscomb 
were at the crease, meant Australia avoided the nation’s first whitewash in a 
home Test series since federation.


Warner’s new opening partnership with Renshaw had a false start on day one, 
when Khawaja was forced to open because the vice-captain was off the field late 
in South Africa’s innings.


There was more drama on Sunday, when their 64-run stand ended with the 
needless run-out of Warner on 47.

Renshaw would be excused for feeling nervous when Faf du Plessis successfully 
reviewed an lbw shout in the same over, with Tabraiz Shamsi dismissing Khawaja 
for a second-ball duck.

But the 20-year-old, who only recently moved out of home in Brisbane and had 
played 12 first-class games prior to donning the baggy green, finished 34 not 
out from 137 balls.


The opener looked set to share a special moment with Smith, who admitted last 
week he didn’t know what Renshaw looked like prior to his call-up.


The skipper was out edging when Australia required a further two runs but it 
only delayed the inevitable, with Handscomb getting off the mark by stoking the 
winning run.


Debutants Renshaw, Handscomb and Nic Maddinson were added to the XI after 
Australia lost the three-Test series in an embarrassing innings-and-80-run 
defeat at Bellerive.


The selection panel, itself rejigged following chairman Rod Marsh’s sudden 
resignation, made five changes in total. “They’ve come in without any scars. 
It’s made a big difference,” former captain Ian Chappell observed on the Nine 
Network.

Shane Warne, sitting alongside Chappell, suggested the turnaround “could be 
the making of” Smith’s captaincy.


Spearhead Mitchell Starc put the second new ball to good use on Sunday, 
trapping Vernon Philander lbw and clean bowling Stephen Cook with a cracking 
inswinger.


Cook’s dismissal on 104 ended South Africa’s second innings, while Starc 
finished with figures of 4-80 in his most impressive performance of the series.
 