
When I set out to write thrillers set in a fantasy world, I had a pretty 
straightforward idea of what I was getting into. I hoped to create a fictional 
world that reflects and reimagines the early years of the Soviet Union – that 
has the same relationship to 20th-century history as, say, A Game of Thrones 
has to the Wars of the Roses – and to combine it with tight thriller plots to 
keep the reader hooked. But as I worked on the idea, I found that the ground 
I’d opened up was much more challenging, intriguing and complex than I’d first 
imagined.

Bringing two different genres – fantasy and thriller – together in a single 
work turned out to be more like colliding them, with the different story 
elements crashing into each other, pushing back at each other and travelling in 
opposite directions. On the one hand were totalitarianism, surveillance, 
political police, dissidents, informers, deception and a government that 
routinely murders citizens; and on the other were giants, sentient rain, 
walking wind and shapeshifting wolves – glimpses of strange otherness.

Radiant State by Peter Higgins review – an exceptional fantasy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/03/radiant-state-peter-higgins-review-fantasy>
I soon realised it wasn’t just the diverse story elements that were in 
constant creative tension, it was the genres themselves.Fantasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fantasy> and thriller are two distinctly 
different ways of thinking and imagining. They stretch and tear and illuminate 
each other, and I was constantly working to keep them in balance. Thriller 
wants to press on and keep the tension high, fantasy wants to linger and 
explore; thriller wants to end decisively, fantasy wants to go on expanding 
forever. But there was more to it than that, and I found myself reflecting a 
lot on the implications of the two ways of writing I was bringing together: how 
they were connected to the subject matter and how they were shaping it in 
deeper and more interesting ways than I had ever thought they would.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fwolfhound-century-peter-higgins-on-genre-mashups-fantasy-thriller-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82abe6e5c7d15b468c85b984bbc4ebd34b0e37fa%2F287_0_1713_2031%2F1713.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Author%20Peter%20Higgins%20on%20genre%20mashups%3A%20'fantasy%20wants%20to%20break%20thriller%20apart'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fwolfhound-century-peter-higgins-on-genre-mashups-fantasy-thriller-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Author%20Peter%20Higgins%20on%20genre%20mashups%3A%20%27fantasy%20wants%20to%20break%20thriller%20apart%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fwolfhound-century-peter-higgins-on-genre-mashups-fantasy-thriller-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82abe6e5c7d15b468c85b984bbc4ebd34b0e37fa%2F287_0_1713_2031%2F1713.jpg>
 Peter Higgins: ‘As a writer of thrillers, you have to follow the rules or it 
just doesn’t work. A fantasy story, though, can do anything it wants’ 
Photograph: PR 
Free imagination versus rules and control: that’s one way of conceiving the 
collision between thriller and fantasy. Thriller is about the logic of 
conventions: plot, believability, recognisable character types, mysteries that 
have hidden solutions, resolutions waiting to be uncovered. As a writer of 
thrillers, you have to follow the rules or it just doesn’t work. Fantasy is 
otherwise. A fantasy story, once it announces itself as such, can do anything 
it wants. It can say anything and go anywhere. Bring back the dead. Cure any 
sickness. Animate any inanimate thing and give it a voice. In fantasy, you can 
take any pleasure you like from anything you can think of. I found that fantasy 
wants to break thriller apart: it wants to split the carapace, disrupt the 
predetermined plot machine and crack open an inexhaustible well of narrative 
possibility. Refreshing and repurposing, fantasy unlocks the strangeness, 
plenitude and imaginative wealth inside the thriller world.

I discovered in this cracking-open an apparently endless capacity to absorb 
and transform fragments of Russianness. Not only the facts of Russian history – 
though the books are haunted by the ghosts and full of trails of the rise and 
fall of Joseph Stalin – but also traces of Russian folklore, landscape, 
propaganda, painting, writing and film all seeped into what I was writing and 
appeared there, changed, refracted and reimagined. I think this is partly 
because writing and art have long had a deeper, more intense relationship to 
fantasy in Russia than in the Anglophone world. Writers such as Pushkin, Gogol 
and Bulgakov have seen fantasy as a way of getting closer to the truth about 
their country than realism could (or dared).

But for me, above all, fantasy came to mean openness. Possibility. Permission. 
The freedom of inwardness and differentness, of thinking what you want and 
judging by your own internal yardstick. Becoming whatever you feel you are. And 
so, as I wrote the books, the thriller-versus-fantasy collision came to be more 
and more wrapped up with the theme of the book: the conflict between the 
oppressive, totalising state and the whole, fully living person. The 
surveillance state wants to crush its populace, to make them all frightened and 
all the same, to make their lives entirely public and not private at all. But 
the richness and fullness and inconsistency of individual human beings, in all 
the primal, illimitable and indefinable extent of our imaginations and desires 
and perceptions, just keeps on breaking through.

Extract from Radiant State by Peter Higgins

She came at last to the Stolypin Embankment: a row of globe lamps along the 
parapet, held up by bronze porpoises. Glistening cobbles under lamplight. 
Beyond the parapet, she felt more than saw the slow-moving Mir, sliding out 
into the Reach, barges and late water taxis still pushing against the black 
river …

And then it happened, as it sometimes did.

A tremble of movement crossed the black underside of the clouds, like wind 
across a pool, and the buildings of the night city prickled; the nap of the 
city rising, uneasy, anxious. Maroussia waited, listening. Nothing more came. 
Nothing changed.

The rain-freighted clouds settled into a new shape. And then, suddenly, the 
solidity of Mirgorod stone and iron broke open and slid away, vertiginously. 
The blackness and ripple of the water detached itself from the river and 
slipped upwards, filling the air, and everything changed. The night was thick 
with leaking possibilities. Soft evaporations. Fragments and intimations of 
other possible lives, drifting off the river and across the dirty pavements. 
Hopes, like moon-ghosts, leaking out of the streets.

More about the book

The imaginative grip upon his materials is delicate, subtle and unpredictable; 
and his remixes have a kind of metamorphic historical wit. The trilogy carries 
us through, more or less, the bohemian Soviet 1920s, the great patriotic war 
and the siege of Leningrad, and the cosmonaut-obsessed 50s and 60s. Except that 
they are compressed into a few years of story time, and the ordering of the 
phases given a deft kaleidoscope-shake, so that here Stalin’s terrorist youth 
(or a reflection of it) is happening at the same time as the purges, and the 
space programme is simultaneous with the collectivisation famine.Francis 
Spufford

•Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/03/radiant-state-peter-higgins-review-fantasy>
.

 * The Wolfhound Century trilogy (Wolfhound Century 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wolfhound-century-272837.html>; Truth and Fear
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/truth-and-fear-272589.html>; Radiant State 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/374979/>) is 
published by Gollancz and available at theGuardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wolfhound-century-272837.html>.  