
Models in bodypaint, anal beads, and smells associated with ritual 
hallucination: these are just some of the parts of a multisensory artwork by 
American artist Donna Huanca, arriving in London later this month.

Huanca will unveil Scar Cymbals 
<http://www.zabludowiczcollection.com/exhibitions/view/donna-huanca>, an 
ambitious project stretching across the former chapel building at Zabludowicz 
Collection. There’s a vibrating pedestal, a low labyrinth for walking-based 
meditation, and a multi-storey acrylic structure built into the apse. 
Body-stocking-clad performers patterned with paint, turmeric and clay will 
interact with the various structures during the three-month show: two of them 
each day, and 10 for special events.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fayahuasca-and-anal-beads-the-hallucinogenic-art-of-donna-huanca%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc0280fb3e78fce84bef4f3234a860dd3ee09d9c%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ayahuasca%20and%20anal%20beads%3A%20the%20hallucinogenic%20art%20of%20Donna%20Huanca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fayahuasca-and-anal-beads-the-hallucinogenic-art-of-donna-huanca%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ayahuasca%20and%20anal%20beads%3A%20the%20hallucinogenic%20art%20of%20Donna%20Huanca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fayahuasca-and-anal-beads-the-hallucinogenic-art-of-donna-huanca%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc0280fb3e78fce84bef4f3234a860dd3ee09d9c%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 A model poses in Donna Huanca’s Surrogate Painteen. Photograph: Adrian 
Parvulesco/groupshow.eu 
Born to Bolivian parents but raised in Chicago, Huanca’s early life was full 
of the disjunction and ritual that she has later drawn on in her work. “My 
parents were immigrants, they were always telling us that we’d move back, and 
we weren’t allowed to speak English at home,” she recalls. In summers the 
family would return to Bolivia and attend the Urkupiña festival, which fused 
Catholic and Andean traditions in music, dance and richly coloured costume. “It 
was complete chaos,” she enthuses. “None of it really made sense, but I enjoyed 
it, I was into the fantasy.” For Huanca, Urkupiña’s flurry of sounds, colours 
and performance came to represent a kind of ultimate artwork.

Moving between the two cultures became a wrench: “It was like I had two brains 
– I’d go through the festival and then return to a ‘normal’ life in Chicago.” 
Now 35 and living between Berlin and New York, Huanca still feels nomadic. 
“I’ve been thinking about mental spaces and where you feel comfortable: these 
are the places I try to make in my work.”

Huanca uses the term “models” as one might in a life-drawing class: “It’s not 
like aVanessa Beecroft 
<https://i-d.vice.com/en_gb/article/why-vanessa-beecroft-is-more-controversial-than-kanye>
 work where they’re off duty fashion models.” Instead she recruits 
collaborators among her friends and peers. The bond they feel as a group is 
something she cherishes, and she asks the models to write about their 
experience after each performance. “They have to go into a trancelike state. 
It’s difficult to be in any other state when you’re being gazed at that long. 
And you want to talk about it afterwards – it’s like going on a trip with 
someone.”

Subtle references to this state come from the aromas permeating the space, 
derived from Texas cedar and Palo Santo (a tree that grows in the Mexican 
desert), which are traditionally mixed with hallucinogenic ayahuasca and 
peyote, and burned as ceremonial incense. Desert rocks, meanwhile, inspire the 
tones and textures of the materials that Huanca uses to decorate her models’ 
bodies: close-up photos she’s made of them during performances resemble 
topographic studies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fayahuasca-and-anal-beads-the-hallucinogenic-art-of-donna-huanca%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff259cacdb42bc29e7392ee68622f7ddcd91ef7af%2F0_0_5179_3453%2F5179.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ayahuasca%20and%20anal%20beads%3A%20the%20hallucinogenic%20art%20of%20Donna%20Huanca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fayahuasca-and-anal-beads-the-hallucinogenic-art-of-donna-huanca%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ayahuasca%20and%20anal%20beads%3A%20the%20hallucinogenic%20art%20of%20Donna%20Huanca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fayahuasca-and-anal-beads-the-hallucinogenic-art-of-donna-huanca%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff259cacdb42bc29e7392ee68622f7ddcd91ef7af%2F0_0_5179_3453%2F5179.jpg>
 More works from Donna Huanca’s show Surrogate Painteen. Photograph: Adrian 
Parvulesco/groupshow.eu 
These photos will surround a motion-sensitive sound installation that will be 
activated by visitors as they thread their way between sheets of painted 
acrylic and sculptural forms dressed with leather and debris. Among these are 
used bodystockings, which look like reptile skin casts, and a string of black 
spheres the size of ping-pong balls. “Those are giant anal beads,” says Huanca, 
awestruck. “I feel like I learned so much going to fetish stores in Berlin. 
Those beads are huge – it’s like a form of torture.”

That counterpoint between pleasure and pain recalls her first-person 
experience of going through a long-duration performance, where “a torture 
element is transcended and rewarded in the end”. In 2013 Huanca engaged inRaw 
Material 
<http://lilithperformancestudio.com/?curatorial=lilith-performance-studio-at-malmo-konsthall-in-the-exhibition-24-spaces-a-cacophony>
, a six-week long residency inside a studio walled with two-way mirrors in 
Malmö’s Konsthalle. Under the gaze of visitors she couldn’t see, she went about 
her day-to-day life – art-making and all other activities – in full view during 
museum hours. Members of the public were invited in to collaborate with her, 
but only if they committed to stay for longer than 10 minutes. “It was about 
not knowing when someone is looking at you or what is expected of you,” she 
says. “Could I stand to be watched? What does it do to you?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fayahuasca-and-anal-beads-the-hallucinogenic-art-of-donna-huanca%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45d98d381235d34f5882b91770af4bd0ed1902f1%2F0_0_5250_3500%2F5250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ayahuasca%20and%20anal%20beads%3A%20the%20hallucinogenic%20art%20of%20Donna%20Huanca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fayahuasca-and-anal-beads-the-hallucinogenic-art-of-donna-huanca%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ayahuasca%20and%20anal%20beads%3A%20the%20hallucinogenic%20art%20of%20Donna%20Huanca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fayahuasca-and-anal-beads-the-hallucinogenic-art-of-donna-huanca%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45d98d381235d34f5882b91770af4bd0ed1902f1%2F0_0_5250_3500%2F5250.jpg>
 ‘A torture element is transcended and rewarded’... two models alongside a 
Huanca painting. Photograph: Adrian Parvulesco/groupshow.eu 
When she first started recruiting other performers, Huanca was drawn to more 
direct “avatars”: young women of around her height with long dark hair. But she 
doesn’t specify age or body type. Trans models will appear in her newest work 
in London, as well as a male model. “The trans woman’s movement has becoming a 
subject on everyone’s mind – I’m so interested in their vulnerabilities,” she 
explains. “They’re allies in helping us break down the patriarchal system 
because they know what it’s like on both sides.”

Withstanding the gaze of onlookers is by no means easy: in the past Huanca has 
had to remove a performer from a work when she realised that they weren’t 
coping. And the balance of power between models and onlookers shifts subtly 
country to country. The one constant? “There’s always some idiot man in every 
city that asks: how much do they cost?”

Scar Cymbals is at Zabludowicz Collection, London, 29 September – 18 December. 
Surrogate Painteen is at Peres Projects, Berlin, to 28 October.
 