
When the news broke that the British Academy of Film and Television Arts 
(Bafta)is setting a new diversity standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/14/bafta-changes-rules-to-increase-diversity-in-awards-and-membership>
, I was sceptical. From 2019, films will only be eligible to win the Bafta for 
outstanding British film or Outstanding debut by a British writer if they meet 
two of four criteria: movies must prove they have worked to improve diversity 
across characters and themes, senior roles and crew, industry training and 
progression, or appeal and be accessible to under-represented audiences. 
Alongside this criteria, Bafta has also changed the rules for admitting new 
members: people will no longer need to be recommended by two existing members 
to join.

I am one of the many film fans that finds the diversity debate tedious. The 
#OscarsSoWhite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/25/oscarssowhite-10-point-plan-hashtag-academy-awards-april-reign>
 hashtag has been rolling around Twitter for years, and every awards season 
finds actors and filmmakers on roundtables speaking about ways the industry 
needs to be more diverse. But, year on year, things just don’t change. Last 
January, after yet another all-white list of acting nominees, the Academy 
awards announced a “sweeping series of substantive changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/22/oscars-diversity-race-minority-members-academy-awards>
” that included “a goal to double the number of women and diverse members of 
the Academy by 2020”, but soon took great pains to reassure its older, white, 
male members thatany changes would not be at their expense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/academy-clarifies-oscar-rule-changes-following-diversity-row>
. I assumed the Bafta commitment would be just another vague gesture.

However, after fully reading the list of criteria and the statements from 
Bafta itself 
<http://deadline.com/2016/12/bafta-diversity-standards-film-awards-membership-1201870394/>
, I’ve got to admit that I’m impressed and cautiously optimistic for the future 
of British film. Diversity is such a tricky concept to attempt to quantify 
because it means so much, but it’s clear the Bafta team is looking beyond 
merely race; women, disabled and LGBT+ people, and those from lower 
socio-economic backgrounds will count towards achieving the diversity goals.

Bafta changes rules to increase diversity in awards and membership
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/14/bafta-changes-rules-to-increase-diversity-in-awards-and-membership>
Despite the fears of some, I don’t believe the criteria will force films to 
insert arbitrary black, female, disabled, working-class or LGBT+ characters in 
an attempt to qualify. I recognise that art is art, and I’m sure there are 
films being made where it really is necessary for everyone on screen to be 
white or straight. What I refuse to accept is that there aren’t more films that 
can have more diverse characters and themes than we currently have. In recent 
years, the film industry has been open togiving lead roles written for men to 
women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/oct/23/sex-change-why-male-roles-are-being-rewritten-for-women#img-1>
. Actors point out that nothing in the script implies the part needs to be 
male, and soJulia Roberts <https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliaroberts> took 
a man’s part inSecret in Their Eyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/28/secret-in-their-eyes-review-film-noir-remake-julia-roberts-chiwetel-ejiofor-nicole-kidman>
,Sandra Bullock <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sandra-bullock> fought for 
the lead inOur Brand Is Crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/our-brand-is-crisis-review-sandra-bullock-billy-bob-thornton>
 and, whenBrad Pitt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradpitt> left The Gray 
Man, it wasCharlize Theron who took his part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/charlize-theron-brad-pitt-role-in-the-gray-man>
. Women go for these roles simply because they’re often better than the parts 
that are written for female leads, and I wish for a time when their peers from 
all backgrounds can do the same. The new rules will hopefully force British 
filmmakers to consider if a character written as a straight, white, wealthy, 
able-bodied man really needs to stay that way.

That said, Bafta’s criteria explicitly gives filmmakers some leeway. You’re 
welcome to have an all-white film, for example, but then you need to commit to 
providing opportunities and having a diverse crew, or find ways for a wide 
range of people to see your movie. Perhaps these are the criteria that will 
make the biggest difference in the British film industry. According to the
British Film Institute 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/about-bfi/policy-strategy/diversity>, only 3% to 6% of 
the cast and crew behind the films we watch are from black and minority ethnic 
backgrounds. Forty-six per cent of women make up the film workforce, but only 
13.4% of UK films released were written by them, with the percentage of films 
directed by women even lower at 7.8%. The standard routes into the industry of 
unpaid internships and voluntary roles for “exposure” are deeply inaccessible 
for those from working-class backgrounds, LGBT+ people are rarely the ones to 
tell their own stories, and the numbers when it comes to representation of 
disabled people in the film workforce are particularly dismal at 0.3%.

Perhaps we are a long way from getting diversity in the film industry right, 
but Bafta’s commitment is a step in the right direction. The wide-reaching 
criteria acknowledges the way the film industry is connected: films reaching 
wider audiences can lead to a wider makeup of people entering the film 
industry, and diverse filmmakers and fewer barriers for the working class can 
lead to a more diverse cast and crew.

It is obvious Bafta’s move won’t be easy. Does a film need to be diverse 
across the board, or will all-white and able-bodied films with a mixed-gender 
cast and crew be enough, for example? I’m sure there will be a lot of kinks to 
work through as British film-makers find themselves defending the ways they 
have worked to improve diversity. The crucial point, however, is that now they 
will at least feel the need to try.
 