
Their chief food was roasted bread-fruit, yams, coconuts, baked pig, 
mammee-apples, tappa rolls and bananas, washed down with calabashes of poe-poe; 
but you never exactly knew whether there would be a real meal or just 
make-believe, it all depended upon Peter’s whim. He could eat, really eat, if 
it was part of a game, but he could not stodge just to feel stodgy, which is 
what most children like better than anything else; the next best thing being to 
talk about it.


Peter and Wendy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_and_Wendy>, by JM Barrie,

I grew up quite close to the beach. Not near enough to go every day – as an 
English friend who watched a lot of Home and Away always imagined – but near. 
Close enough that on sunny Saturday mornings we could pile into the car in our 
togs and T-shirts and be on the beach before the sun was at its highest point 
in the sky. After lunch in the Surf Club, we’d brush off our sandy feet and 
then fall asleep in the car on the way home.

For years, I was afraid of the sea. I was scared that the tall waves and rough 
surf would knock me over and drag me under. My parents persevered, encouraging 
me to dive through them and head past that line where they break on top you. 
Beyond this point, the surf is calm, and you can lie back and simply float. The 
fear vanished, and now I can happily spend hours in the sea.

But I live in London now. It’s been more than 18 months since I stood on a 
beach that was sandy, not pebbled. In June, my sister and I went to Kent. We 
sat on the beach with ice cream cones and strolled along the shore, but even my 
seven years here have not been enough for me to adequately acclimatise to the 
temperature of the water. We didn’t brave it – I ended up only walking in up to 
my calves, and Luce stayed out altogether. So it’s been a long time since I’ve 
been in the ocean. I miss it.

From this cold, grey island that I love so much, the tropical climate and 
foods on my other island home seem impossibly far away. I didn’t understand 
this when I first read Peter and Wendy. For the Darling children, growing up in 
Edwardian England, it would have been wholly unfamiliar – a new world entirely. 
To me, though Neverland was a new world of adventure, of pirates and of 
fairies, it felt familiar in some strange way: I could feel the sun, smell the 
sea, and see the banana trees.


I know, in my rational brain, that Neverland is nothing at all like Australia. 
But in the absence of a sandy beach, and with dark mornings rendering summer a 
mere memory, it’s a lovely place to dream about. And, really, there’s no better 
way to dream than with a cake. It’s a complete cheat, of course; the Darling 
children and the Lost Boys don’t really eat it in the story. There’s not much 
food cooked in Neverland at all – apart from a poisonous green cake that the 
pirates leave for the boys. This is much more appealing, and exactly what I’d 
like to make for those Lost Boys, if I had these ingredients in front of me – a 
proper tropical treat.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbanana-lime-and-coconut-cake-inspired-by-jm-barries-peter-and-wendy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff822e369c3c5d87007eb5ca82038e2aa366ca158%2F0_0_1669_1669%2F1669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Banana%2C%20lime%20and%20coconut%20cake%20inspired%20by%20JM%20Barrie's%20Peter%20and%20Wendy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbanana-lime-and-coconut-cake-inspired-by-jm-barries-peter-and-wendy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Banana%2C%20lime%20and%20coconut%20cake%20inspired%20by%20JM%20Barrie%27s%20Peter%20and%20Wendy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbanana-lime-and-coconut-cake-inspired-by-jm-barries-peter-and-wendy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff822e369c3c5d87007eb5ca82038e2aa366ca158%2F0_0_1669_1669%2F1669.jpg>
 Banana, coconut and lime cake 
Banana, lime and coconut cake


Serves 12

Ingredients
Bananas 
225g caster sugar
 75ml water
 375g peeled bananas
 20g butter
 1tsp vanilla extract 
2tsp cinnamon
Cake
 150g caster sugar
 190g butter
 3 eggs 
275g plain flour 
3tsp baking powder 
1/2tsp salt
Icing
 70g butter 
400g icing sugar
 Juice of two limes 
Decoration 
150g coconut chips

Equipment 
Large saucepan 
Wooden spoon
 Knife and chopping board
 Small saucepan
 Mixing bowl 
Whisk 
15cm loose-bottomed cake tin
 Electric hand whisk 
Cooling rack
 Spatula 
Bread knife
 Palette knife

1. Place the sugar and water for the bananas in the saucepan. Melt over a 
medium heat, until bubbling. Don’t stir while this is happening - you can swirl 
the pan occasionally if you need to. Allow the caramel to bubble away until it 
is a golden brown. Do keep an eye on it, as it will colour very quickly.

2. While the caramel is bubbling, chop the banana into 5mm thick rounds. Once 
the caramel is ready, turn the heat down to low, add the butter and stir with a 
wooden spoon (the mixture will bubble up, so be careful). Add the banana and 
stir again, then tip in the vanilla and cinnamon. Stir over a low heat for 
around five minutes, until the banana is soft, then remove from the heat and 
allow to cool.

3. Grease and line a 15cm round cake tin, and preheat the oven to 170C. Melt 
the butter for the cake in a small saucepan. Allow it to cool and then, in the 
mixing bowl, beat the butter with the sugar until smooth and light. Beat in the 
eggs, one at a time.

4. Sieve the flour, salt and baking powder together and fold into the mixture. 
Fold the cooled banana mixture in too. Pour the cake batter into the lined tin 
and transfer to the oven. Cook for an hour, or until a skewer inserted in the 
middle of the cake comes out clean. Cool in the tin for ten minutes, and then 
tip the cake out and cool on a wire rack until stone cold.

5. To make the icing, beat the butter until very light and almost white in 
colour. Fold half the icing sugar in with the spatula, just to prevent it going 
everywhere when you turn on the hand whisk. Beat it into the butter, then add 
the second half in stages. Add the lime juice and beat on a high speed for at 
least five minutes. The icing should be light and aerated.


6. Use the bread knife to slice the cake into three even layers - use a ruler 
if you’re fussy. If your cake has domed, you may want to even off the top a 
little.

7. Make a cross in the top of the icing, dividing it roughly into four. Spread 
one part over the bottom layer of the cake, then top with the second layer and 
another quarter of icing. Finally, place the last piece of cake on top. Spread 
large blobs of icing around the sides of the cake. With a wet palette knife, 
lightly smooth the icing out, spreading it over the side of the cake. Finish by 
decorating the top of the cake, spreading the remaining icing over the top and 
smoothing the joins at the sides.

8. Finally, decorate the cake with coconut chips. Take handfuls and press them 
gently into the sides. Add handfuls to the top of the cake too, and then stick 
individual chips into any gaps. Vacuum your floor (there will be coconut 
everywhere) and enjoy the cake.
 