
In spring 1996, a young teenage boy went to see a local nurse with 
embarrassing symptoms. He was a resident of Conyers, a quiet upper-middle-class 
town in a slice of all-American suburban Atlanta.Holly Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/07/holly-hunter-five-best-moments-the-piano-raising-arizona>
 grew up there. The nurse asked the boy about his sexual history. What he told 
her suggested widespread local promiscuity. More teens were brought in, more 
syphilis cases were diagnosed, and the lid was lifted on a year’s worth of 
drink- and drug-fuelled sex parties, held at the homes of oblivious, absent 
parents. Around 250 youngsters were involved, some aged just 12, some who had 
racked up as many as 100 sexual partners.

“I thought: ‘That’s just crazy, how did they end up like this?’” says Eva 
Husson, a 39-year-old French director. “On top of that, though, I could relate 
to being a really bored teenager in her hometown [Husson is from Le Havre, in 
Normandy]. I wanted to get out of there, I was doing drugs with my friends. And 
when I heard that story I thought: ‘We could have done that.’ But we didn’t. 
So, what happened? How do you go from being regular teenage kids, who are just 
bored, to that?”

The result of Husson’s curiosity is her feature debut Bang Gang (A Modern Love 
Story) <https://vimeo.com/153607454>, which uses a similar scenario to explore 
what it means to be a confused teenager, searching for genuine intimacy in the 
midst of mindless sex. Filmed in Biarritz, Husson restricts the action to about 
50 kids, focusing on a handful of them.

With cocky Alex’s (Finnegan Oldfield) parents away for the summer, a party 
turns into a game of spin the bottle, which turns into sex, which turns into 
more sex, and more sex, much of it documented on phone cameras. But although 
there is a lot of nudity in the film, the sex is something of a red herring – 
Bang Gang is a tender ode to adolescence, a dreamlike meditation that has 
nothing but respect for every kid in the picture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fbang-gang-film-teen-sexuality-eva-husson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4e015353dd7d7a3e925271fb6c86f1ac010110b%2F0_1175_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bang%20Gang%3A%20a%20modern%20love%20story%20about%20sex%2C%20teens%20and%20syphilis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fbang-gang-film-teen-sexuality-eva-husson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bang%20Gang%3A%20a%20modern%20love%20story%20about%20sex%2C%20teens%20and%20syphilis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fbang-gang-film-teen-sexuality-eva-husson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4e015353dd7d7a3e925271fb6c86f1ac010110b%2F0_1175_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
 Eva Husson: ‘I wish I had seen movies like this when I was a teenager, because 
it would have made me feel a bit more normal.’ Photograph: Julien Lienard/Getty 
Images 
Husson herself was a lost child. “Oh my god, I was so fucking lonely, I was 
the loneliest thing on Earth,” she says, over a drink in a cafe near her home 
in north-east Paris. She is part of the furniture here and thought it would be 
quiet, so apologises more than once for the banging eurotechno the staff have 
decided to pump out all afternoon. “I’m not embarrassed, I’m angry!” she laughs 
as the walls shake. “This is horrible music.”

She laughs a lot – a lot more than she used to. “I was extremely awkward, 
socially,” she continues. “As a kid, I just had no idea how to relate to 
people. No clue.” Work had brought her parents – both teachers – to Normandy, 
and Husson wanted to leave from the age of 12. “I didn’t really have friends 
until I was 15. I would just spend hours reading books and devouring TV. It 
started to get better when I started taking drugs.” In 1992, with a DJ 
boyfriend, Husson began partying, taking ecstasy at raves, spending summers on 
Ibizan nudist beaches, feeling “free about the world, drugs and a lot of stuff”.

All of this feeds into Bang Gang, which is about trying to fit in, to discover 
who you are and what you might want. “This movie is about groups of teenagers 
feeling so tight and so comfortable with one another, and I was always like: ‘I 
don’t know what that feels like,’” says Husson. “I was always the one trying to 
fit into a group that didn’t want me. I wish I had seen movies like this when I 
was a teenager because it would have made me feel a bit more normal. I was 
trying to go for that – to talk about these kids who are just not quite there 
yet, in their minds.”

'Movies about teenagers always end up as tragedies, their lives completely 
over, and it’s a lie.'
Eva Husson 
Bang Gang is what the kids call their carnal collective. The title, says 
Husson, is not meant to be provocative – and I wonder if it is less so in 
France, which has always seemed so sexually liberated. “I think teenagers fuck 
everywhere,” she says, dismissively. “I lived in Puerto Rico for two years and 
they had the highest rate in the world of underage pregnancies. Why? Because it 
was a very Catholic, repressive society where teenagers were not allowed to 
have sex, but that’s what teenagers do – and if they don’t have proper context 
regarding education, they just do it in the worst way possible. And, if I’m not 
mistaken, England is not far away in terms of underage pregnancies.”

Besides, Husson says, Bang Gang didn’t get a free ride in France. “We have a 
lot of people who are extremely conservative here. The movie’s certificate was 
attacked by a Catholic association in France.” Traditionalist group Promouvoir 
(or “Promote”), whogot Lars von Trier’s Antichrist banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/03/lars-von-trier-antichrist-banned-france-promouvoir>
, attempted to get Bang Gang rated 18. They failed, and it was passed as PG12. 
In the UK, though, it is 18, excluding a younger teen audience.

“Yes,” says Husson. “And 15- and 16-year-old French kids who watch the film 
actually send me a lot of messages on Facebook thanking me, saying: ‘Thank god 
someone is portraying our sexuality the way it’s happening.’ And I’m not saying 
all kids behave like that. But it does reflect some reality.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fbang-gang-film-teen-sexuality-eva-husson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b25daa703f96c2cf928d5841b3fa49972d04c27%2F574_0_2950_1771%2F2950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bang%20Gang%3A%20a%20modern%20love%20story%20about%20sex%2C%20teens%20and%20syphilis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fbang-gang-film-teen-sexuality-eva-husson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bang%20Gang%3A%20a%20modern%20love%20story%20about%20sex%2C%20teens%20and%20syphilis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fbang-gang-film-teen-sexuality-eva-husson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b25daa703f96c2cf928d5841b3fa49972d04c27%2F574_0_2950_1771%2F2950.jpg>
 Finnegan Oldfield and Marilyn Lima as Alex and George. 
Much of this appreciation may also be because Bang Gang avoids melodrama, 
forsaking formulaic resolutions for mature character development – it’s an 
affectionate, non-judgmental film. When one of the girls, George (Marilyn Lima, 
previously a non-actor who was cast after Husson saw photos of heron Tumblr 
<http://marilynlima.tumblr.com/post/59762575266>), becomes the subject of a 
public shaming, there is no big fallout, no heartache, as there might be in 
blunter films “usually written by a man,” says Husson).

Instead, George takes it on the chin. The humiliation doesn’t happen. “Because 
she refuses to be that girl. I really wanted her to act like that, because I’ve 
seen a lot of women behave like her and, for some reason, it’s just not 
represented in storytelling. I think it’s extremely important to give the other 
side of the story, which is that not every woman sees herself as a fucking 
victim all the time. It’s possible to refuse that representation of yourself. I 
really wanted to empower her.”

There has indeed been gratitude for the fact that Bang Gang, which is chiefly 
a female story, was written and directed by a woman. Husson left home at 17, 
moved to Paris and gained an master’s in English literature before achieving a 
master’s in fine arts at LA’s American Film Institute.

After that, she made short films and music videos 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n5cgzcjqOtE>, and has said it has taken her 
until now to get a feature off the ground because the industry doesn’t take 
female directors as seriously as men. Bang Gang, she says, “wouldn’t have been 
made by a guy”. Not in the same form, anyway.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fbang-gang-film-teen-sexuality-eva-husson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbedd3bc6c2e9e0d0ba081f70a83229bcd3b64159%2F243_0_1864_1119%2F1864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bang%20Gang%3A%20a%20modern%20love%20story%20about%20sex%2C%20teens%20and%20syphilis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fbang-gang-film-teen-sexuality-eva-husson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bang%20Gang%3A%20a%20modern%20love%20story%20about%20sex%2C%20teens%20and%20syphilis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fbang-gang-film-teen-sexuality-eva-husson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbedd3bc6c2e9e0d0ba081f70a83229bcd3b64159%2F243_0_1864_1119%2F1864.jpg>
 Marilyn Lima 
Her female actors told her they wouldn’t have done it for a male director, 
wary of the “potential voyeurism that a man could bring to a project like this. 
And I think even the guys – I gave them roles that they usually don’t get. 
Alex, yes, he’s a womaniser, but he’s also a lost kid. And he understands that 
at some point. It’s not all black and white, he’s not just the asshole.”

Bang Gang celebrates youth in its clumsy glory, mistakes and all. It’s a 
pretty, poetic film, with a literary heart;Carl Jung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/carl-jung> and Miguel de Cervantes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/miguelcervantes> are namechecked, betraying 
the young Husson’s bookish background. Ultimately, the film’s message is that 
you will find a way through.

“That was actually extremely important to me,” says Husson. “Movies about 
teenagers always end up as tragedies, their lives completely over, and it’s a 
fucking lie. When you’re 17, you will bounce back. Unless you’re dead. Life is 
hard on everybody, and shit happens. And it’s OK. That’s what people do in life 
– you bounce back. Not many people actually give up. And I think that’s what 
makes us human and beautiful.”

• Bang Gang is released in the UK on 17 June
 