
Why all the overnight agonising? Wasn’t it bleeding obvious that an epic Test 
match in Chittagong would come to its conclusion via two umpire reviews and the 
ball in the hands of Ben Stokes?

Well, no. But it transpires that Alastair Cook and his advisors came to a very 
satisfactory conclusion as they contemplated how they would prevent Bangladesh 
creating a bit of history. They opted for the pacemen and with Stokes grabbing 
the last two wickets – to finish the match with the startling figures of six 
for 46 – England won a compelling contest by 22 runs.

Alastair Cook rejoices in Ben Stokes, England’s ‘x-factor cricketer’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/alastair-cook-rejoices-in-ben-stokes-englands-x-factor-cricketer>
The overnight break in play was a boon for the tourists. It allowed them to 
regroup and refresh, while the Bangladesh trio, who could still influence 
proceedings, probably had too much time to contemplate their challenge. 
Moreover history favoured England in these circumstances. England have played 
just three Tests when their opponents went to bed needing less than 40 for 
victory with two or less wickets in hand. In 1925 in Adelaide and in 1982 at 
Melbourne they defeated Australia; in 1998 at Headingley they beat South Africa 
with the help of a few dodgy lbw decisions.

Here England’s win would be achieved via two lbw decisions that were not 
necessarily dodgy but were unusual. And both inevitably took place at Kumar 
Dharmasena’s end. How much will the Sri Lankan be looking forward to his next 
engagement in Dhaka on Friday, after eight out of his 15 decisions have been 
overturned here?

Cook opted for his pacemen from the start, which was the equivalent of 
sticking rather than twisting in blackjack.

Afterwards he explained how wanted to prolong the game because that gave more 
time to create chances. He was never going to mention that his faith in his 
spinners on a pitch where the turn has often been extravagant was not absolute.

So Stuart Broad was given the ball for the first over. There was a modest 
crowd, all of whom were huddling in the shade often out of sight, but never out 
of earshot. Three runs came from that first over from the bat of Sabbir Rahman, 
who looked inclined to trust his partner rather than launch an early 
extravagant attack.

Stokes decided to bounce Taijul Islam as soon as he got him on strike. He 
banged the ball into the pitch at a perfect angle at shoulder height. Taijul 
swished belatedly and the ball hit his glove only to pass agonisingly over the 
head of Jonny Bairstow and on to the boundary.

Bangladesh v England: five talking points from the first Test in Chittagong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/23/england-bangladesh-first-test-chittagong-talking-points>
Another Broad over yielded two runs. Was Cook beginning to contemplate a 
spinner, possibly with the second new ball? To his relief this conundrum 
vanished from his mind in the space of three deliveries of Stokes’s second over.

The first one brushed the pads of the left-handed Taijul and the ball scurried 
towards fine leg. The batsmen ran two; England opted to review. At first glance 
this may have seemed like desperation – since 80 overs had passed they now had 
two reviews available.

But the replay demonstrated how Taijul had made an exaggerated movement to the 
off-side; his was not a conventional leg-glance. Dharmasena, possibly fooled by 
the shot attempted by Taijul, declined to raise his finger but the dreaded 
three reds appeared on the screen and for the last time in the match Dharmasena 
crossed his arms in front of his chest and changed his decision.

Out came Shafiul Islam, who has a half century to his name against England. 
His first delivery was misdirected down the leg side and Bairstow, who, while 
being far from flawless, had responded doughtily to the challenge of keeping in 
very demanding conditions, prevented any byes.

The next ball was better directed. It thudded into Shafiul’s left pad. Up went 
the England team; up went Dharmasena’s finger, while the third umpire Ravi 
prepared for his last and 26th intervention of the match. The ball had struck 
the pad outside the line of off-stump, which provoked a green light, and it was 
then revealed that it was going to clip the top of off-stump, which triggered 
an orange light. However the umpires decided that Shafiul was not attempting to 
play a shot when the ball struck his pad. Hence Dharmasena could raise his 
finger again and the match was over.

England beat Bangladesh by 22 runs on final day of first Test – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/24/bangladesh-england-first-test-day-five-live-cricket>
Who can be sure of Shafiul’s intentions to play a shot? The TV pictures 
indicated that his bat was a long way from the ball; he jabbed it down 
posthumously as Stokes delivery darted inwards. This was a tough way to lose 
the match but it was a legitimate decision.

So England can head to Dhaka one up in the series. They do so cheerfully but 
they are a little more wary about expressing their relief that they had avoided 
their first defeat to Bangladesh in this form of the game.

Bangladesh, so spirited and so skilful, had come very close to a landmark 
victory. England have sweated buckets for the cause; their commitment 
throughout the five days has been unstinting, but this should not disguise 
obvious frailties, which could be ruthlessly exposed in India if there is no 
improvement. There are concerns about the first four, though there is the 
considerable consolation of knowing that Cook and Joe Root will surely make 
significant contributions along the way.

The same confidence is unlikely to extend to the spinning department. Cook was 
careful to offer his spin bowlers mild plaudits after the game, which is no 
surprise for that is what captains must do, but his decision-making tells 
another story. On a track designed for spinners Cook turned to his pacemen when 
the match was hovering in the balance on Sunday night; the key factor was that 
Cook knew he could trust them and on a Monday morning in Chittagong, when 
history was not made, his faith in them was repaid again.
 