
The street artist Banksy has painted a primary school playground wall and left 
a note that could cause havoc with the school’s code of discipline – “remember 
it’s always easier to get forgiveness than permission” – in gratitude for the 
honour of having one of the houses of the school inBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol> named after him.


The painting, of a scribbly school girl bowling an alarmingly realistic 
burning tyre along the 14ft wall, and the note left for the school caretaker, 
appeared overnight at Bridge Farm primary school, in the city where the 
anonymous artist’s meteoric career began.

Pest Control, his agents who authenticate his work, promptly confirmed to the 
Guardian that the work is genuine – despite their warning “because many Banksy 
pieces are created in an advanced state of intoxication the authentication 
process can be lengthy and challenging” – and that the school has framed the 
note. Unusually the mural includes a signature, but in the tricky world of real 
and fakeBanksy <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/banksy>, that is no 
guarantee of authenticity.

The pupils had written to Banksy before Easter, telling him that they had 
voted to rename one of their four school houses in his honour. He is in good 
company: the others are Cabot, after the 15th-century Italian explorer John 
Cabot, who mounted three voyages of exploration from Bristol; Brunel after the 
engineerIsambard Kingdom Brunel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2013/nov/06/brunel-hs2-debate-rail>
, who slung the famous suspension bridge over the city’s Avon Gorge; and
Blackbeard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2011/oct/27/blackbeard-cannon-wreck-pirate-ship-video>
 after the pirate said to have been born in Bristol.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fbanksy-leaves-mural-and-cheeky-note-in-bristol-school-as-thanks-for-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24302f638fa99ea5011933b99bac6edf59cbad47%2F0_134_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Banksy%20leaves%20mural%20and%20cheeky%20note%20in%20Bristol%20school%20as%20thanks%20for%20tribute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fbanksy-leaves-mural-and-cheeky-note-in-bristol-school-as-thanks-for-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Banksy%20leaves%20mural%20and%20cheeky%20note%20in%20Bristol%20school%20as%20thanks%20for%20tribute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fbanksy-leaves-mural-and-cheeky-note-in-bristol-school-as-thanks-for-tribute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24302f638fa99ea5011933b99bac6edf59cbad47%2F0_134_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Site manager Jason Brady holding a letter left by Banksy at Bridge Farm 
primary in Bristol after he painted a mural on the side of one of the 
classrooms. Photograph: Claire Hayhurst/PA 
Although many Banksy street pieces have been expensively peeled off their 
walls anddispatched to the auction room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/may/11/banksy-slave-labour-mural-row-sale>
, to the anguish of local people who regarded them as gifts to their community, 
the school’s headteacher Geoff Mason has confirmed that they have no plans to 
sell it, and regard it as “inspirational and aspirational” for the pupils.

The Banksy Job review – old street art spat makes tedious viewing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/19/banksy-job-review-tedious-viewing-tribeca-film-festival>
He will not be allowing the pupils to act on the artist’s suggestion that if 
they do not like the picture, they can add to it. The note to the school read: 
“Dear Bridge Farm, thanks for your letter and naming a house after me. Please 
have a picture. If you don’t like it, feel free to add stuff – I’m sure the 
teachers wont mind. Remember – it’s always easier to get forgiveness than 
permission. With love, Banksy.”

The anonymous artist’s career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/06/banksy-new-york-murals-law>
 began in Bristol, and his works now fetch huge prices at auction – Kissing 
Coppers, originally a mural in Brighton, sold in Miami for nearly $500,000 
(£345,000) in 2014. Several of his early works have been preserved on walls in 
Bristol, and are thought to add enormously to the value of properties – one 
dilapidated pub with a Banksy sold for twice the original estimate.


Last summer, he invited a collection of anarchic artists to create a spoof 
funfair,Dismaland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/20/banksy-dismaland-amusements-anarchism-weston-super-mare>
, in a derelict lido in Weston-super-Mare – which had people queueing for up to 
four hours to take in jokes about security paranoia, state repression, 
immigration and capitalism. The desolate installation, with staff ordered to 
look as sullen and wretched as possible, is believed to have added millions to 
the local economy.
 