
Surrey: the Big Picnic at Hampton Court Palace, 25-27 May

Head over to Hampton Court Palace over the long weekend, but don't forget your 
sandwiches and scotch eggs, as all ticket holders are invited to join a mass 
picnic in the grounds. Admittedly, the agenda doesn't sound particularly 
appetising – offering picnickers the chance to meet a blood-sucking leech and 
have a "smallpox makeover". But plenty of gruesome tales over lunch means kids 
will enjoy it far more than the usual riverside picnic. For those with more 
refined tastes, there's a Pimm's bar and cream teas, as well as a barbecue for 
those who forget their hampers.
• 0844 482 7777, hrp.org.uk 
<http://www.hrp.org.uk/HamptonCourtPalace/WhatsOn/Thebigpicnic>, adults £16.50, 
children free

Bristol: Upfest, 25-27 May
 An artist at work at last year's Upfest, Bristol's urban art festival. 
Photograph: Alamy 
It's hard to mention Bristol street art without mentioning a certain graffiti 
artist that comes from the area. But so much great street art has sprung from 
here, both before and after Banksy started stealing all the headlines. So much 
so that the city has a well-established urban paint festival, Upfest. Now in 
its sixth year, the event has an emphasis on live demonstrations, rather than 
just admiring local murals (which you can do anytime, solo or withBristol 
Street Art Tours <http://www.wherethewall.com/bristol-street-art-walking-tours>
). For one weekend only, the city is making way for 250 artists from across the 
world, who will take part in live painting and illustration battles, plus 
there's music across four stages and a variety of food stalls. Family 
activities include face-painting for younger kids and spray paint workshops for 
older ones.

Also in Bristol, from 24-26 May, is VegFestUK <http://bristol.vegfest.co.uk>, 
Britain's leading veggie festival, where aside from plenty of food, there'll be 
live music from performers not usually associated with healthy lifestyles, 
including Happy Mondays, Peter Hook and 808 State.
• Upfest <http://festival.upfest.co.uk/> at the Tobacco Factory 
<http://www.tobaccofactory.com> and throughout North Street, from 11am until 
8pm, free. VegFestUK atAmphitheatre and Waterfront Square 
<http://bristol.vegfest.co.uk/venue-and-location>. Ticket pricing is somewhat 
complicated, depending on the time and day (from £2 to £25) – check
bristol.vegfest.co.uk <http://bristol.vegfest.co.uk/ticket-information> for 
details

Cornwall: Superheroes Day at Crealy Great Adventure Park, 28 May

Pinning their superhero celebration to the release of a new Superman film 
(Christopher Nolan'sMan of Steel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2013/apr/17/man-of-steel-trailer-superman>
), Crealy Great Adventure Park is offering a loose but perfectly acceptable 
excuse for getting dressed up in tights. All ages are encouraged to get into 
the spirit of Tuesday's theme, but it's kids who'll receive half-price entry 
for dressing up as their favourite comic book character or cartoon character. 
Superman, Batman and Captain America will be appearing throughout the day. The 
park, near Newquay, also has 40-plus regular rides and attractions for three to 
13-year-olds, including a brand-new reptile house, Crocodile Corner, and 40,000 
sq ft of indoor play areas, which could come in very handy if the weather turns.
• Near Wadebridge, 01841 540 276, crealy.co.uk <http://www.crealy.co.uk/>, 
family of three £40.68, family of four £54.24 (online ticket prices)

Pembrokeshire: Oakwood Theme Park 

Oakwood Theme Park is celebrating another family favourite: Peter Pan. 
Neverland, their new £4m attraction, will be up and running in time for half 
term. Spread over three acres, it includes a pirate-themed log flume, a 
crocodile rollercoaster, Hook's House of Havoc soft play and a Sights of London 
taxi ride, featuring Big Ben, the Tower of London and Nelson's Column. Older 
visitors seeking a few more thrills shouldn't miss Megafobia, often said to be 
one of the world's best wooden rollercoasters.
• Oakwood Theme Park <http://www.oakwoodthemepark.co.uk>, Narberth. Adults 
£19, children £13, family of four £59 (online ticket prices)

West Sussex: Arundel Castle 25-27 May 
 Arundel Castle will be under siege this bank holiday. Photograph: C&J Willis 
Photography 
If you live in – or near – West Sussex, avoid doing battle with the usual 
bank-holiday traffic and stay closer to home to witness a fight of a different 
sort: Arundel Castle's three-day enactment of a battle between the Houses of 
Lancaster and York. Though such a siege never actually happened here, the idea 
is to give visitors a sense of life during the War of the Roses and how it 
would have felt for the castle to come under threat. Over 200 participants from 
the Raven Tor Living History Group will be dressed in replica outfits, plus 
they'll be medieval craft demonstrations and 14th-century armour to try on. 
Expect plenty of cannons and combat on the edge of the river Arun.
• arundelcastle.org <http://arundelcastle.org>, tickets £8, free for under 5s 

Plymouth: pirate weekend, 25-26 May 

Landlubbers are invited to get a taste of life as a pirate in Plymouth over 
the bank holiday weekend. Historical ship the Bessie Ellen will be berthed in 
Sutton Harbour, and visitors will have the chance to go on board to explore 
(free, from 10am to 4pm) with a costume competition judged daily at 3pm. 
There's also a treasure hunt through the area – download the map on
visitplymouth.co.uk 
<http://www.ivisitplymouth.co.uk/FileStorage/PirateWeekendTreasureMap.png> or 
pop into the Barbican-based tourist office. Plus there'll be sword-fighting 
demonstrations, a pirate-themed puppet show, face painting and craft workshops 
around the harbour and Barbican.
• Barbican and Sutton Harbour, from 10am to 4pm, free, visitplymouth.co.uk 
<http://www.visitplymouth.co.uk/events/pirate-weekend-p1365003>

Northumberland: Hadrian's Wall, 28 May-2 June
 Romans at Hadrian's Wall 
Enroll at Roman soldier school to mark 10 years since Hadrian's Wall Path was 
relaunched as a national trail. Maximus, the centurion, will be leading 
activities that include making paper Roman helmets, handling ancient artefacts, 
dressing up and taking part in a Roman drill. There are various other events 
along the wall, includingwalks 
<http://www.visithadrianswall.co.uk/whats-on/trail-anniversary-walk-segedunum-roman-fort-and-hadrians-way-p1177951>
 along the Cumbrian section.• Housesteads Roman Fort, near Bardon Mill, 
visithadrianswall.co.uk 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/daysout/events/childrens-roman-soldier-school-hrf-28-may/>
. Adults £6.20, children £5.60, English Heritage members free

Leeds: Food Festival, 24 May-9 June
 Leeds Loves Food festival. Photograph: David Lindsay 
You've got a window of more than two weeks to visit the Leeds Loves Food 
festival, as well a range of over 50 venues to choose from. There's pop-up 
dining and cocktails in the Trinity shopping centre, the chance to show off 
your baking skills duringthe Great Leeds Bake Off 
<http://leedsageukbakeoff.eventbrite.co.uk/#>, blind whisky tasting, a night 
food fair, and all manner of food stalls. Masterchef finalist Sara 
Danesin-Medio will also be giving a cooking demonstration and serving dinner to 
a lucky few at the Northern Ballet Dinner Club. The event culminates in the 
final weekend (7-9 June) with theYorkshire Food and Drink Show 
<http://www.visitleeds.co.uk/Leeds-Yorkshire-Food-and-Drink-Show/details/?dms=13&venue=2190133&feature=1023>
 in Millennium Square. Seeleeds-list.com 
<http://leeds-list.com/preview-leeds-loves-food-festival-2013/> for a 
mouth-watering look at the highlights.
• See visitleeds.co.uk 
<http://www.visitleeds.co.uk/things-to-do/LeedsFoodfestival.aspx> for many free 
events and some ticketed dinners

Portrush, Northern Ireland: raft race, 25-26 May 
 Portrush raft race, Northern Ireland Photograph: RNLI 
This local tradition is in its 32nd year, and around 80 homemade rafts are 
expected to fill the waterfront. Many are imaginative, lots are colourful, some 
are just plain silly, but all have the primary aim of staying afloat from the 
West Strand beach to Portrush harbour. Fortunately, the RNLI 
<http://rnli.org/Pages/Default.aspx> – who run the event – is on hand 
throughout, just in case. There's a festival atmosphere and no shortage of 
entertainment along the quay. There's a waiters' race, too, which takes place 
in the harbour on Sunday at 3pm and is also quite the spectacle, with lots of 
fancy dress and crowd participation.

• portrushraftrace.co.uk <http://www.portrushraftrace.co.uk/>, free 

Wiltshire: Sunrise festival, 30 May-2 June

The poor crowd at Sunrise festival didn't see much sun last year, when the 
British weatherturned the site into a mud bath 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/in-pictures-18607133>. This year, organisers vow to 
make it more watertight, having moved from their site on an organic farm in 
Somerset to Thoulston Park, Wiltshire. Said to be the most sustainable festival 
in the UK, it is powered entirely by renewable energy (including waste 
vegetable oil). There's even a solar-powered dance stage. Let's hope they have 
some sort of back-up, just in case. TheStorylands 
<http://www.sunrisefestivals.co.uk/storylands> area will keep the kids 
entertained, and there's music across 10 stages, with a line-up including Dub 
Pistols, Krafty Kuts and the Beat.
• sunrisefestivals.co.uk <>, adults £115, children £25, family tickets £255

London and beyond: Chelsea Fringe, 18 May-9 June

There must be something in the water, because Chelsea Fringe has certainly 
grown in its second year, now sprouting some 200 projects as offbeat 
alternatives to the Chelsea Flower Show. Moving far beyond SW3 and spreading 
right across the capital and beyond – includingBristol 
<http://www.chelseafringebristol.co.uk/>, Canterbury 
<http://www.chelseafringe.com/event/poetry-garden-at-canterbury-cathedral/> and 
evenVienna <http://www.chelseafringe.com/vienna-is-blumen-marvellous/>, the 
three-week event is already well underway. The botanical garden-inspiredgin bar 
<http://www.chelseafringe.com/event/the-gin-gardens-bombay-sapphire-botanical-experience/>
 sounds like a fine idea, but more child-friendly activities include atreasure 
hunt through Chiswick herb gardens <http://abundancelondon.com/>and a dog show 
at Inner Temple Garden 
<http://www.chelseafringe.com/event/its-a-dogs-life-in-the-garden/>. But the 
pick of the crop has to be the tie-in events with Battersea Power Station, 
primarily because it makes the perfect excuse for visiting itsnew pop-up park  
<http://www.batterseapowerstation.co.uk/visiting-the-park/>(open until 
September). 
• chelseafringe.com <http://www.chelseafringe.com> 
 