
The announcement that Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has appointed Stephen Bannon, 
the former head of far-right propaganda outlet Breitbart News, as his chief 
strategist is a layer cake of horrors.

On a personal level, Breitbart has long been an engine of anti-feminist 
harassment, and Bannon directly profits from the fragile male hunger for 
punishing disobedient women. I have been the subject of multiple Breitbart 
smears (which come, inevitably and by design, with a deluge of threats from 
sputtering Twitter eggs), as have most of the high-profile feminists I know, 
along with Black Lives Matter leaders, trans activists, rape victims, and even 
fellow conservatives who toe a more establishment line.

Bannon’s site was a home base for GamerGate, an interminable juggernaut of 
racist, misogynist, and transphobic abuse aimed at stanching diversity in video 
games, which eventually morphed into the youth wing of the Trump campaign. It 
is beyond unsettling to imagine a man who has not only attempted to ruin the 
lives of women I consider friends, but monetised that abuse, hissing in the ear 
of the President of the United States.

Steve Bannon: appointment of 'white nationalist' must be reversed, critics 
declare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
On a policy level, the Bannon appointment is potentially catastrophic. 
Breitbart peddles in disinformation, conspiracy theories and dog-whistles of 
every far-right stripe – headlines under Bannon’s tenure have included “Hoist 
it high and proud: The confederate flag proclaims a glorious heritage”, “Birth 
control makes women unattractive and crazy”, and “Clinton aide Huma Abedin 
‘most likely a Saudi spy.’” The Southern Poverty Law Centerwrote of Bannon 
<https://www.splcenter.org/hatewatch/2016/11/14/white-nationalists-rejoice-trumps-appointment-breitbarts-stephen-bannon>
: “He has insinuated that African-Americans are ‘naturally aggressive and 
violent’ and under his leadership, Breitbart’s publishing strategy turned to 
one that has made it the media arm of the racist Alternative-Right movement, 
publishing articles promoting popular white nationalist tropes such as ‘black 
on white crime’ and that ‘rape culture’ is inherent in Islam.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&media=>
Stephen Bannon and the alt-right in the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/stephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Breitbart’s writers and commentariat ecstatically cheered the destruction of 
Gawker Media at the hands of rightwing billionaire Peter Thiel, in case you 
were wondering where Bannon stands on freedom of the press. They are rabidly 
obsessed with the rise of “political correctness” on college campuses, claiming 
that activists are “policing speech” by demanding safety and respect. Breitbart 
was a major driver of the grossly distorted “Planned Parenthood sells baby 
parts” story, and ruthlessly hounded rape survivor and activist Emma Sulkowicz, 
showing a generation of young women what’s in store for them if they report 
their sexual assaults.

Anyone who has been paying attention to Breitbart’s metastasisation over the 
past half-decade shouldn’t be surprised by the nationwide proliferation of hate 
speech and vandalism since Trump’s victory: the website has long seemed 
determined to stoke the culture wars until they explode into some iteration of 
literal war. “Mike Pence wants 1957, and that would be a nightmare,” a friend 
pointed out today, “but I think Bannon wants 1939.”

White nationalist and neo-Nazi groups openly gloried in Bannon’s appointment, 
just as they – along with the Ku Klux Klan – celebrated Trump’s win all week. 
“Bannon is our man in the White House,” wrote one commenter at the neo-Nazi 
website Daily Stormer – which, according to the Southern Poverty Law Center, 
“claims to be the ‘#1 Alt-Right’ website”. Hey, you know who also claims to run 
the #1 Alt-Right website? Bannon,who once referred to Breitbart as the 
“platform for the alt-right”. 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/politics/trailguide/la-na-trailguide-updates-what-is-the-alt-right-a-refresher-1479169663-htmlstory.html>
 In their own “guide to the alt-right”, Breitbart acknowledges the neo-Nazis 
within their ranks. Meanwhile, Ken Blackwell, a member of Trump’s transition 
team, told the Wall Street Journal thatReince Priebus’s role as chief of staff 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/trump-picks-reince-priebus-to-be-chief-of-staff.html>
 will be to “make the trains run on time”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsteven-bannon-trump-chief-strategist-breitbart-white-house-dangerous%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1472b078d434ed2cf1b47655d4949ac12c413c67%2F0_309_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bannon%E2%80%99s%20unveiling%20as%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20chief%20strategist%20is%20a%20layer%20cake%20of%20horrors%20%7C%20Lindy%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsteven-bannon-trump-chief-strategist-breitbart-white-house-dangerous%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bannon%E2%80%99s%20unveiling%20as%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20chief%20strategist%20is%20a%20layer%20cake%20of%20horrors%20%7C%20Lindy%20West&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsteven-bannon-trump-chief-strategist-breitbart-white-house-dangerous%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1472b078d434ed2cf1b47655d4949ac12c413c67%2F0_309_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Trump with his new chief of staff, Reince Priebus. Photograph: Jim 
Watson/AFP/Getty Images 
You cannot make this up. The Trump cabinet’s affinity for fascist rhetoric and 
popularity among actual Nazis is not a coincidence, it is not subtle, and 
Bannon et al are not remotely attempting to hide it, which brings us to the 
third layer in this tower of terror: the servile pusillanimity of the American 
press. Initial coverage of Bannon’s appointment fell right in line with the 
cow-eyed credulity that’s busy normalising Trump’s bigotry. At Reuters, Bannon 
was a “conservative firebrand”, while the Associated Press dubbed him a 
“flame-thrower”. “Trump pits establishment against populism at the top of his 
White House team,” wrote the Washington Post.

Not a neo-Nazi darling or a white nationalist hero or a xenophobic 
propagandist – just a rascally maverick ready to shake up the GOP 
establishment! After hours of outcry from progressive readers, the mainstream 
press began to catch up, if tepidly –“Critics See Stephen Bannon, Trump’s Pick 
for Strategist, as Voice of Racism 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/15/us/politics/donald-trump-presidency.html?_r=0>
,” the New York Times intoned – but the precedent was clear. We will have to 
fight tooth and nail for every molecule of honesty – to call racism racism – 
for the next four years and probably beyond.

On Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/thelindywest?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author> 
today I wrote that I had taken five minutes to phone my senators and 
congressman, to urge them to kick up a fuss about Bannon’s appointment. Not 
because congress has any direct control over the president’s inner circle, but 
because I want my elected representatives to understand very clearly that this 
president elect does not have a mandate, and as a constituent I will not 
tolerate complacency in the face of white supremacy. I will keep calling, every 
day if necessary, for four years if necessary, to keep that awareness alive: if 
you do not fight this administration, you do not represent me, you are not 
doing your job, and you do not have my vote. That is how representative 
democracy works.

I was immediately beset by an avalanche of Trump fanatics trolling the 
#StopBannon hashtag. Bannon isn’t racist, they said. He’s not antisemitic. In 
fact, I’m the real racist, if you think about it. Many of their Twitter feeds 
were littered with racist memes and buzzwords. A self-professed “Trump zealot” 
e-mailed to let me know that “white” is “the new n-word”. In the news, a mayor 
in West Virginia was criticised for saying that a “joke” calling Michelle Obama 
an “ape in heels” had “made her day”. But she’s probably “not racist” either!

We are told that voting for racist policies is not a racist act. We are told 
that sexual assault is not a misogynist act

One defining aspect of alt-right white supremacy is that it vehemently denies 
its own existence. They’re “just trolling”. They’re just “defending free 
speech”. They’re just anti-establishment firebrands. We are told that voting 
for racist policies is not a racist act. We are told that sexual assault is not 
a misogynist act. That mocking the disabled is not ableist and vowing to deport 
Muslims and Mexican immigrants is not xenophobic. It’s a brazen denial of 
reality and the meaning of basic English words. This erosion of language is an 
authoritarian tactic designed to stifle dissent. If you cannot call something 
by its name, then how can you fight it?

Whether Bannon keeps his job as chief strategist or not, we – the vast, 
passionate populace that chose Hillary by a margin of millions of votes – have 
to keep calling him and this administration what they are: dangerous.
 