
Barack Obama used his last foreign tour as president to warn against the rise 
of divisive politics with the global ascent of what he described as coarse 
nationalism and tribalism, apparently referring to Donald Trump’s decision to 
appointStephen Bannon as his chief strategist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
.

In Athens, a city he repeatedly hailed as the birthplace of democracy, the 
outgoing leader spoke of the dangers posed by such politics with the stark 
reminder that not that long agoEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> had been turned into “a 
bloodbath” because of them.

House Republicans re-elect Paul Ryan as speaker – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/15/donald-trump-administration-obama-steve-bannon-live>
“I do believe, separate and apart from any particular election or movement, 
that we are going to have to guard against a rise in a crude sort of 
nationalism or ethnic identity or tribalism that is built around an us and a 
them,” he said. “We all know what happens when Europeans start dividing 
themselves and emphasise their differences. The 20th century was a bloodbath.”

Addressing reporters after talks with Alexis Tsipras, the Greek prime 
minister, Obama sought to distance himself from the diplomatic language he has 
employed since the election last week of his successor.

Rejecting the idea that he should feel any responsibility for the maverick 
businessman’s election, the two-term president said he would never apologise 
for policies that had improved people’s lives and seen their incomes grow.

“I will never apologise for saying that the future of humanity and the future 
of the world is going to be defined by what we have in common as opposed to 
those things that separate us and ultimately lead us into conflict,” he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fobama-trump-presidency-greece-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20wants%20to%20'facilitate%20a%20good%20transition'%20to%20Trump%20presidency%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fobama-trump-presidency-greece-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20wants%20to%20%27facilitate%20a%20good%20transition%27%20to%20Trump%20presidency%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fobama-trump-presidency-greece-video&media=>
Obama wants to ‘facilitate a good transition’ to Trump presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/obama-trump-presidency-greece-video>
Acknowledging the anger and fear reflected in Trump’s surprise win, he warned 
against a return to the forms of racism and bigotry that had divided Americans 
in years by gone. The politics of division could, he said, lead to countries 
such as the US not fulfilling their potential.

Donald Trump transition team in disarray as key adviser 'purged'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/donald-trump-transition-team-disarray-adviser-purge>
“In the United States, we know what happens when we start dividing ourselves 
along lines of race or religion or ethnicity. It’s dangerous,” he said in some 
of the strongest language he has used since Trump’s election.

 “Not just for the minority groups that are subjected to that kind of 
discrimination or, in some cases in the past, violence, but because we don’t 
then realise our potential as a country when we’re preventing blacks or Latinos 
or Asians or gays or women from full participation in the project of building 
American life.”

Obama noted that both the US presidential result and the bombshell decision of 
Britons to leave the EU were evidence of the shift towards populism born of 
growing concerns over globalisation, inequality, dislocation and the relentless 
rise of technology in everyday life.

“Globalisation combined with technology, combined with social media, constant 
information, have disrupted peoples’ lives, sometimes in very concrete ways,” 
he said, adding that the effect had been both economic and psychological. 
“There is no doubt that this has produced populist movements, both from the 
left and the right. Time will now tell whether the prescriptions that are being 
offered, whether Brexit, or with respect to the US elections, ends up actually 
satisfying those people.”


Obama, only the fourth president to visit Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/nov/20/helenasmith> in the nearly 200 
years since its foundation as a modern state, had hoped the trip would end on a 
high note as part of a farewell tour of close European allies.

Instead he spent a large part of his first day in Athens defending his 
administration’s tenure and emphasising that Washington’s special alliance with 
its Nato partners would not end overnight when Trump took over.
 