
In 2007, Barack Obama’s presidential campaign had to apply to MySpace’s owners 
to wrangle back control of his profile page from a supporter 
<http://www.forbes.com/2007/05/02/myspace-election-obama-tech-cx_rr_0502obama.html>
, Joe Anthony, who had amassed 160,000 friends by running it as a fan page. In 
hindsight, it was a defining moment in social media history – this digital real 
estate now had obvious value, and the professional classes were moving in to 
secure that.

It is a sign of how far we have come that, in 2016, all Obama’s MySpace 
content has long since been junked into the social media trash-compactor 
created when the company wiped the slates andrelaunched its offering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/us-news-blog/2013/jan/15/myspace-justin-timberlake-facebook-announcement>
 in 2013.

Now, with the value of all things social incontestable, the White House press 
team is grappling with the question of who gets control of what, as the first 
“social media president” gets ready for the first social media handover. Which 
is why Obama’s digital team recently published a comprehensivetransfer plan 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/10/31/digital-transition-how-presidential-transition-works-social-media-age>
. The key date is 20 January 2017. As the inauguration ceremony is proceeding, 
accounts will be wiped of the previous occupant’s content on every one of the 
president’s social platforms – which now extend to Snapchat,Flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/whitehouse/>, Tumblr 
<http://whitehouse.tumblr.com>, Pinterest <https://uk.pinterest.com/whitehouse/>
 and evenGoogle Plus <https://plus.google.com/+whitehouse>, the weirdo.

The 44th president of the USA will have his tweets moved over to a newly 
created @POTUS44. The @POTUS account itself has only been active for two years, 
replacing the more broad-brush @whitehouse. It will remain with the new 
president, Donald Trump, as will its companion accounts: @VP for Vice-President 
Mike Pence etc, while Joe Biden’s White House tweets will be archived under 
@VP44, and so on. Had Hillary Clinton put her back into it a bit more in 
Wisconsin and Pennsylvania, then the handle@FirstMOTUS 
<http://qz.com/827139/the-funniest-potus-tweets-of-barack-obamas-presidency/> 
would have been on-hand to replace @FLOTUS. What a touching world that would 
have been.

For each separate social media channel, the same basic procedure as Twitter 
will take place: Obama’s archives being shipped out to new accounts suffixed 
with either “44”, or prefixed with “Obama” – as in the Obama years’ forthcoming 
Instagram handle (instagram.com/ObamaWhiteHouse 
<https://www.instagram.com/ObamaWhiteHouse/>) and Facebook (
facebook.com/obamawhitehouse <https://www.facebook.com/obamawhitehouse/>).

Additionally, everything is to be preserved eternally by the National Archives 
and Records Administration (Nara), which holds electronic records going back as 
far as Ronald Reagan, and has sucked in an oceanic 500 terabytes into its 
Electronic Records Administration since 2008. While @POTUS44 will be 
administered by Nara, individuals will still have ownership over their personal 
accounts, and given that #44 has 78 million followers as @BarackObama and only 
11 million as @POTUS, he won’t have lost all that much.

It seems that part of the reason the @POTUS protocol was adopted so late was 
because of a prior occupancy. In fact, the first @POTUS was Steve D’Alimonte, a 
multimedia producer from Toronto whoclaimed the account from 2008 until 2011 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/05/first-tweet-potus>, when he 
realised using his real name would be easier for anyone trying to hire him. 
Twitter recycles dormant handles, so @POTUS finally returned to the ether.

In the UK, we have already had two changeovers in the social media age, but in 
keeping with the dry humility of a prime ministerial system, we don’t make such 
dramatic breaks. The@Number10gov 
<https://twitter.com/Number10gov?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 account that serves as the PM’s official online residence is presently 
footnoted with the bio info: “Tweets before 5pm, 13 July 2016 are from the 
previous prime minister.”

David Cameron is enough of a product of the iPhone age to have built up his 
personal and political accounts in parallel, with 1.6 million for@DavidCameron 
<https://twitter.com/David_Cameron?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 and @Number10gov’s 4.7 million.

For an earlier generation of leaders, though, the need to conserve these 
assets doesn’t seem to have occurred. In 2009, George Bush didn’t have Twitter, 
and he still doesn’t, though misunderestimators should note he has signed up to
Facebook <http://facebook.com/georgewbush>, where he is presently flogging a 
book of his oil paintings. After Gordon Brown left office in May 2010, he 
deployed the same Midas magic as in power, his@OfficeGSBrown 
<https://twitter.com/OfficeGSBrown?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 account is sitting at a healthy 40,000 followers, only 1.2 million fewer than
Towie <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-only-way-is-essex>’s Sam 
Faiers <https://twitter.com/SamanthaFaiers>.
 