
2.53am BST 02:53  <> 

Today in Campaign 2016
 Donald Trump speaks during a campaign stop in Tampa. Photograph: MIKE CARLSON 
/ Reuters/Reuters 
 * Move over, Ted Cruz: House speaker Paul Ryan will lend his star power to 
Donald Trump’s national convention, with a primetime speaking slot lined up for 
Tuesday night, Politicoreported 
<http://www.politico.com/tipsheets/playbook/2016/07/exclusive-ryan-to-speak-at-gop-convention-bernie-rallying-with-clinton-tuesday-trump-expands-communication-team-krones-retirement-gift-for-reid-bday-garrett-graff-corey-boles-215239>
. The speech will be 10 minutes long and will focus on the House Republican 
agenda. 
 * The Trump campaign has said Iowa senator Joni Ernst will also have a 
prime-time speaking slot next week.

 * Bernie Sanders has cleared the way for an endorsement of Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> tomorrow, and declared a 
successful end to his campaign to pull their party to the left during weekend 
negotiations over the Democratic policy platform. 
 * “We have made enormous strides,” said Sanders in a statement issued after a 
meeting in Orlando that swung the party in his direction on theminimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/22/federal-minimum-wage-rally-bernie-sanders-washington>
,climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/08/how-bernie-sanders-made-hillary-clinton-into-a-greener-candidate>
 andmarijuana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/01/bernie-sanders-marijuana-ban> 
though failed to make headway on fracking and trade. “Thanks to the millions of 
people across the country who got involved in the political process – many for 
the first time – we now have the most progressive platform in the history of 
the Democratic party,” he said.

 * As he mulls a running mate, Donald Trump is leaning toward someone with 
political as opposed to military experience and he expects to make his mind up 
in the “next three to four days,” hetold 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/07/11/donald-trump-will-make-his-mind-up-on-vp-pick-in-next-three-to-four-days/?postshare=351468249661034&tid=ss_tw>
 the Washington Post. 
While Trump was careful not to eliminate [retired Lt Gov Michael Flynn, it was 
clear that he believed picking someone “political” was the right move, meaning, 
presumably, that former Speaker Newt Gingrich, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence and New 
Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and one other political person are in his final four.

 * President Barack Obama called the assassination of five police officers in 
Dallas late last week as a “hate crime” against law enforcement,Politico reports
 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/obama-dallas-police-shooting-hate-225390#ixzz4E8rBd5xW>
. “One really striking thing the president said in his opening remarks was that 
the shooting in Dallas in many ways was strikingly parallel to the Dylann Roof 
shooting in Charleston in the sense that it was a hate crime,” Jim Pasco, 
executive director of the Fraternal Order of Police, told the outlet.
The comment “is quite a precedent from our standpoint,” said Pasco, who has 
been critical of the president’s relationship with law enforcement in the past. 
“At the end of the meeting I asked him to reiterate that publicly,” Pasco said.

 * Also, the entire US capital has become obsessed with Pokémon Go: Lynn 
Jenkins (@RepLynnJenkins) 
Things I have caught in my office: 1) Mice 2) This pic.twitter.com/YCGWiJcf5y 
<https://t.co/YCGWiJcf5y>
 <https://twitter.com/RepLynnJenkins/status/752615347501535232> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RepLynnJenkins/status/752615347501535232> Judy Chu 
(@RepJudyChu) 
Anyone else on #PokemonGO <https://twitter.com/hashtag/PokemonGO?src=hash>? 
I've found a#Squirtle <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Squirtle?src=hash> & a 
#Pikachu <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Pikachu?src=hash> in DC, but I'm still 
looking for a Republican willing to vote on#NoFlyNoBuy 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NoFlyNoBuy?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/RepJudyChu/status/752593913656012800> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RepJudyChu/status/752593913656012800> (((Jared Polis))) 
(@jaredpolis) 
Found an Exeggcute on the House Floor! Sorry, no pics allowed! #PokemonGO 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/PokemonGO?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/jaredpolis/status/752614033438670849> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jaredpolis/status/752614033438670849> 
Updated at 2.55am BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab%23block-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab%23block-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab%23block-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab%23block-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab%23block-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab%23block-57844c4ce4b0ea445f0fe4ab&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.23am BST 02:23  <> 

Ben Jacobs

In the ongoing political battle over LGBT rights, social conservatives bent 
but didn’t break as the Republican party drafted its 2016 platform.
 Republican National Committee chair Reince Priebus answers questions from the 
Associated Press. Photograph: J. Scott Applewhite/AP 
With the campaign of presumptive nominee Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> relatively unengaged in the 
platform process, Republican activists from across the country spent most of 
today hashing out their differences on gay marriage and other thorny social 
issues ranging from transgender bathroom access to Internet pornography.

In a cavernous downtown convention center, Republicans spent 12 hours first of 
their two-day marathon to determine the party’s policy manifesto for the coming 
election in small subcommittees and before a televised assembly of full 
committee of 112. The meetings were at times contentious but rarely 
adversarial. Instead of harsh rhetoric, rebukes were most often given with 
rolled eyes and an occasional sigh.

The proposed language in the platform, which called for a constitutional 
amendment to overturn the Supreme Court’s decision in Obergefell v. Hodges that 
overturned all state bans on same-sex marriage, represented a notable shift 
from past years. In 2012,the platform called 
<https://www.gop.com/platform/we-the-people/> for a constitutional amendment to 
legally define marriage as “the union of one man and one woman.”

Tony Perkins, a delegate from Louisiana and head of the Family Research 
Council, pushed back at the idea that the change in language represented a 
change in Republican policy. “The idea that the RNC is walking away from this 
is not correct, simply addressing the present realities of where the issue 
stands.” Perkins instead saw it as a Fabian retreat: “You don’t have the votes 
in the senate to pass marriage amendment defining marriage for the entire 
country . . . you have three quarters of states defining marriage and states 
are still ticked that 50 million votes were thrown out by five unelected 
judges.”

However, even that slightly softened language met a vocal effort from 
delegates seeking to strip any support for a constitutional amendment from same 
sex marriage from the platform and instead replace it with neutral language 
that “We encourage and welcome a thoughtful conversation among Republicans 
about meaning and importance of marriage.” Despite an emotional plea from 
Rachel Hoff, the first openly gay member of the RNC platform committee, the 
amendment appeared to receive the support of only about 20 of the committee’s 
112 members and falling short of the 28-vote threshold needed to potentially 
trigger minority report and a vote on the floor of the full convention next 
week.

Republican advocates for LGBT rights also tried unsuccessfully to modify 
language that called for children to be raised by a married mother and father 
to read stable loving home. This was thwarted. However, an amendment offered by 
Perkins to allow for conversion therapy slipped through subcommittee without 
opposition.
Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) 
About 20 of the 112 delegates on the Republican platform committee voted to 
remove support for same sex marriage ban from GOP platform
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/752645596159238144> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/752645596159238144> 
Republicans also softened proposed language on transgender access to 
bathrooms. Although the subcommittee on family issues added a provision stating 
“we support and encourage the common sense practice of protecting public safety 
and personal safety by limiting access to restrooms, locker rooms and other 
similar facilities,” it was later removed in a full committee hearing. In a 
motion offered by the subcommittee’s co-chair Patricia Longo of Connecticut, 
the language was described as duplicative and scrubbed without debate.

However, although the platform offered language saying that Obama’s executive 
order on the subject “illegal, ominous and ignores privacy issues.” It added 
“we salute the several states that have filed suit against it.” This didn’t 
address the concerns in the subcommittee that introduced the amendment, which 
Melody Potter of West Virginia emphasized was a safety issue and argued “we 
have to take a stand.” Instead, it represented a shift away from supporting 
affirmative legislation on the subject like North Carolina’s HB2 and instead 
opposition to the Obama executive order on the subject as overreach.

The platform also contained a provision calling Internet pornography “a public 
health crisis.” Mary Frances Forester, who introduced the amendment, told the 
Guardian “we know how big of a problem it is. It is an insidious epidemic and 
everyone knows that and that is not a controversy.” She hesitated though to 
predict whether a Trump administration would follow through on the pledge to 
crackdown on pornography. “I don’t think there are many of us that want to 
predict exactly how its going to come about,” said Forrester. “I think we all 
have open minds, we all are willing to be impressed but not sure if I’m ready 
to give you a definite answer.”

Delegates also pushed back against efforts towards medical marijuana and drug 
decriminalization. An proposed amendment to encourage states to legalize 
cannabis oil for medical reasons was rejected as one delegate, Noel Irvin 
Hentschel, linked marijuana use to mass killings. “All the mass killings that 
are taking place, they are young boys from divorced families and they are 
smoking marijuana.” Other opponents linked marijuana use to the heroin epidemic.

The platform committee will finish its work on the GOP’s proposed platform on 
Tuesday as it deals with potentially contentious proposals about trade and 
immigration.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4%23block-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4%23block-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4%23block-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4%23block-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4%23block-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4%23block-5784451ae4b0f36a6e1c56a4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.46am BST 01:46  <> 

Donald Trump is reportedly eyeing former House speaker Newt Gingrich for 
several potential roles in his hypothetical administration,Bloomberg reports 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-07-11/trump-eyeing-gingrich-for-national-security-position>
, including a role as a top national security adviser.

Although Gingrich has been talked about as a potential running mate, Bloomberg 
cited multiple campaign sources as saying that Gingrich was being considered 
for an unnamed national security role.

At a Trump campaign event in Cincinnati last week, Trump indicated that he’d 
be more than happy to have Gingrich join him in the White House in some 
capacity.

“Newt has been my friend for a long time,” Trump said. “And I’m not saying 
anything, and I’m not telling even Newt anything, but I can tell you, in one 
form or another, Newt Gingrich is going to be involved with our government - 
that I can tell you.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd%23block-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd%23block-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd%23block-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd%23block-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd%23block-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd%23block-57843cbae4b0630007c6b7dd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.30am BST 01:30  <> 

Leaked audio: Donald Trump said Hillary Clinton would 'make a good president'

Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump has stepped up his 
aggressive campaign against likely general election opponentHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, but when the former 
secretary of state was waging her own campaign against then-senator Barack 
Obama, Trump told a national radio audience that she would “make a good 
president.”
 Donald Trump speaks during a campaign stop in Tampa. Photograph: MIKE CARLSON 
/ Reuters/Reuters 
“With the Democratic presidential nomination far from decided, the candidates 
were jockeying a little bit recently talking about a dream ticket,” Trump said 
in March 2008 on his short-lived syndicated radio featurette Trumped!, the 
audio of which wasunearthed by the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-said-hillary-clinton-would-make-a-good-president-in-2008-1468281714>
. “Well, I know her,” Trump said of Clinton, “and she’d make a good president 
or a good vice president.”

Trump donated to Clinton’s campaign in 2008, although he has since disavowed 
his support as purely oriented towards facilitating favorable conditions for 
his businesses.

In addition to lauding Clinton, numerous other featurettes from Trumped! - 
each segment of which ran roughly sixty seconds long and aired between 2004 and 
2008 - discovered by the Wall Street Journal reveal problematic statements made 
about Saudi Arabia, guns in school classrooms and his own libido.

“Men in Saudi Arabia have the authority to divorce their wives without going 
to the courts. I guess that would also mean they don’t need prenuptial 
agreements,” Trump observed in 2008, discussing a story from Saudi Arabia in 
which a Saudi man filed to divorce his wife because she watched a male news 
anchor on television. “No courts, no judges - Saudi Arabia sounds like a very 
good place to get a divorce.”

In another segment from the same year, Trump declared that he was opposed to a 
proposal in West Virginia that would have allowed hunting-education classes in 
public schools. Calling the classes a “dangerous risk,” Trump said that “We 
hear way too many stories about school violence, so the thought of voluntarily 
putting guns in the classroom seems like a really bad plan.”

Trump has moved rightward on gun-control issues since running for president, 
suggesting at one point that a mass shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando 
could have been avoided if the patrons had been armed.

Trump, who once referenced the size of his genitals during a televised 
presidential debate, said on a segment in 2006 that reports that women 
disapproved of one-night stands “fooled me.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b%23block-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b%23block-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b%23block-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b%23block-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b%23block-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b%23block-578436ffe4b0f36a6e1c566b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.57am BST 00:57  <> 

Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump sat down with the 
Golf Channel for an wide-ranging interview, and in asneak preview obtained by 
Mediaite 
<http://www.mediaite.com/tv/trump-tells-golf-channels-david-feherty-he-may-or-may-not-use-a-prompter-at-convention/>
, host David Feherty questions Trump on whether he plans on using a 
teleprompter during his crowning address at the convention’s close.

“Everybody loves it in the stadium, but in terms of television, it probably 
doesn’t look as presidential,” Trump said. “There’s a time for both - I think 
there’s a time for both.”

“The big question is, with the RNC coming up, am I going to use a teleprompter 
or not? I don’t know if it’s ever been down without, essentially, a 
teleprompter,” Trump continued. He said that he’d “love” to give the address 
without one, but will likely make the decision roughly a week before the 
address itself.

The full interview will air on Monday, July 18th, at 9 pm EDT.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441%23block-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441%23block-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441%23block-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441%23block-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441%23block-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441%23block-5784302ae4b0ea445f0fe441&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.41am BST 00:41  <> 

Submitted: One of the many cringe-y political tweets about Pokémon Go:
Bill de Blasio (@BilldeBlasio) 
Sorry Pikachu, we've been busy catching criminals. ICYMI, NYC crime rates are 
at historic lows.#CrimeStats <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CrimeStats?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/hEZXlatNrp <https://t.co/hEZXlatNrp>
 <https://twitter.com/BilldeBlasio/status/752646855234912260> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BilldeBlasio/status/752646855234912260> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650%23block-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650%23block-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650%23block-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650%23block-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650%23block-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650%23block-57842e7ce4b0f36a6e1c5650&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.12am BST 00:12  <> 

Sabrina Siddiqui

Dozens of protesters staged a sit-in at Florida senator Marco Rubio’s Orlando 
office on Monday, demanding action on stricter gun laws and policies to protect 
LGBT individuals.
 Marco Rubio Photograph: Broadimage/REX/Shutterstock 
The demonstration comes nearly one month after a gay nightclub in the city was 
the target of the deadliest mass shooting in US history, with 49 people killed 
and 53 more injured. The organizers said the sit-in would continue for 49 
hours, one for each of the slain victims in the 12 June massacre.

It was after the Pulse nightclub shooting that Rubio, whose presidential 
campaign ended in March, first signaled he might reconsider his decision not to 
seek re-election to the Senate. The senator, who formally entered the race last 
month, has since drawn criticism from proponents of gun safety reforms and LGBT 
rights for his record on both issues.

Rubio remains opposed to marriage equality and has voted against measures in 
the past that would protect LGBT individuals from workplace discrimination. The 
senator is also a staunch supporter of the second amendment and last week 
celebrated an endorsement from the National Rifle Association toward his 
re-election campaign.

Rubio has routinely argued that new gun laws would do little to prevent 
America’s gun violence epidemic and voted against bills to expand background 
checks and bar those on the FBI’s terror watch list from purchasing firearms. 
The Orlando gunman, Omar Mateen, was not actively on a watch list but deemed 
self-radicalized by authorities and investigated by the FBI several years prior.

In the wake of the Orlando attack, Rubio voted for Republican-backed 
alternatives to delay firearm sales to those on the terror watch list and 
require the Justice Department to prove within 72 hours that there was probable 
cause to ban the purchase all together.

“Senator Rubio respects the views of others on these difficult issues, and he 
welcomes the continued input he is receiving from people across the political 
spectrum,” Alex Burgos, a spokesman for his Senate office, said in a statement 
on the protest.

“Senator Rubio and our office continue working around the clock on federal 
casework to assist victims’ families, survivors and their families, and we 
stand ready to continue assisting, including lending staff to the victim 
assistance center as we did for the last few weeks.”

“Over the past month, Senator Rubio has supported common sense compromises to 
make it easier to track individuals who have been on the terror watch list and 
later try to buy firearms, all while improving due process protections for law 
abiding Americans,” he added.

Protestors argued that Rubio’s steps were insufficient and vowed to press on 
even as police indicated they might face arrest if they refused to leave the 
building upon its closure. Their demonstration was reminiscent of a sit-in 
organized by House Democrats last month, in which lawmakers occupied the floor 
of the chamber for 26 hours in the pursuit of a vote on tougher gun 
restrictions.

The sit-in at Rubio’s office began at roughly 10 a.m. and has been dubbed as 
#SitInForThe49 on social media. In addition to LGBT rights and gun control, 
protesters also cited police brutality as a prime area of concern. Photos and 
videos from the event showed demonstrators singing “We Shall Overcome” and 
reading the names of the Orlando victims, whose names they also printed out and 
placed on the office floor along with red roses.

Patrick Murphy, the Florida congressman who is likely to be Rubio’s Democratic 
opponent in the Senate race, threw his support behind the effort.

“This kind of brave demonstration should inspire us all to pass meaningful 
legislation to prevent future tragedies,” Murphy said in a statement.

“Unfortunately, Marco Rubio has doubled down on his opposition to commonsense 
gun violence prevention efforts and has yet to acknowledge that this was a hate 
crime against the LGBT community. It’s clear that Floridians have had enough of 
Marco Rubio putting his political ambition above the people he is supposed to 
represent.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423%23block-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423%23block-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423%23block-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423%23block-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423%23block-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423%23block-57842784e4b0ea445f0fe423&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.06am BST 00:06  <> 

President Barack Obama: Shooting of Dallas police officers 'a hate crime'

President Barack Obama called the assassination of five police officers in 
Dallas late last week as a “hate crime” against law enforcement,Politico reports
 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/obama-dallas-police-shooting-hate-225390#ixzz4E8rBd5xW>
.

“One really striking thing the president said in his opening remarks was that 
the shooting in Dallas in many ways was strikingly parallel to the Dylann Roof 
shooting in Charleston in the sense that it was a hate crime,” Jim Pasco, 
executive director of the Fraternal Order of Police, told the outlet.


The comment “is quite a precedent from our standpoint,” said Pasco, who has 
been critical of the president’s relationship with law enforcement in the past. 
“At the end of the meeting I asked him to reiterate that publicly,” Pasco said.

Obama’s public remarks have been more staid. In Warsaw on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/09/barack-obama-dallas-shooting-police-violence>
, Obama said that while “there is sorrow, there is anger, there is confusion” 
about how the US will move forward, “there’s unity in recognizing that this is 
not how we want our communities to operate. This is not who we want to be as 
Americans, and that serves as the basis for us being able to move forward in a 
constructive and positive way.”

Updated at 12.07am BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629%23block-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629%23block-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629%23block-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629%23block-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629%23block-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629%23block-578424d2e4b0f36a6e1c5629&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.47pm BST 23:47  <> 

In an interview with Buzzfeed News 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/andrewkaczynski/jim-gilmore-blasts-never-trump-movement-says-gop-should-unif?utm_term=.ntxv5veAVN#.jhmbQbmBAM>
, former Virginia governor and oft-forgotten Republican presidential candidate 
Jim Gilmore said that the “Never Trump” movement within the Republican party is 
bad for the party, and that his goal is to “draw the party together.”

“I’ve not been supportive of Never Trump,” Gilmore said. “I think that we need 
to unify the Republican party. That’s very hard right now with the Never Trump 
movement. My goal is, Jim Gilmore’s goal is, to draw the party together.”

Asked whether Trump could prevail in the former governor’s home state, Gilmore 
was hazy.

“It’s too soon,” Gilmore said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417%23block-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417%23block-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417%23block-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417%23block-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417%23block-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417%23block-57842165e4b0ea445f0fe417&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.29pm BST 23:29  <> 

Earlier, former House speaker and current potential Republican running mate 
Newt Gingrich told the Associated Press that it wouldn’t be an “automatic yes” 
if he were extended an offer to serve as the Republican vice presidential 
nominee.
 Newt Gingrich greets Donald Trump. Photograph: Aaron P. Bernstein/Reuters 
When asked about that comment by NBC News’ Shaquille Brewster, Gingrich 
elaborated that he wouldn’t automatically accept the offer because he has a 
book coming out soon.

“Callista and I have a lot of things going on right now,” Gingrich said. “We 
each have a book coming out. We just released a movie on George Washington 
called First American, we have an exciting new project on women of the American 
revolution, so we’d want to stop and talk through exactly what he’d have in 
mind and, um, whether or not at a practical level we can make the transition.”

When asked what his “gut” was telling him, Gingrich responded: “I have no 
idea.”

Trump is expected to announce his choice by the end of the week.

Updated at 11.37pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609%23block-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609%23block-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609%23block-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609%23block-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609%23block-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609%23block-57841da6e4b0f36a6e1c5609&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.10pm BST 23:10  <> 

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is touting poll 
results from a survey has the presumptive presidential nominee winning 
Hispanics by 13%, winning 18% of Democrats and losing women by a mere 2%.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Great poll- Florida! Thank you! pic.twitter.com/4FuPpL5WOM 
<https://t.co/4FuPpL5WOM>
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/752618593196597248> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/752618593196597248> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed%23block-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed%23block-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed%23block-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed%23block-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%3A%20shooting%20of%20Dallas%20police%20officers%20'a%20hate%20crime'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed%23block-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-2016-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed%23block-578416d7e4b0f36a6e1c55ed&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close   Donald Trump speaks during a campaign stop in Tampa. Photograph: MIKE CARLSON 
/ Reuters/Reuters 
 * Move over, Ted Cruz: House speaker Paul Ryan will lend his star power to 
Donald Trump’s national convention, with a primetime speaking slot lined up for 
Tuesday night, Politicoreported 
<http://www.politico.com/tipsheets/playbook/2016/07/exclusive-ryan-to-speak-at-gop-convention-bernie-rallying-with-clinton-tuesday-trump-expands-communication-team-krones-retirement-gift-for-reid-bday-garrett-graff-corey-boles-215239>
. The speech will be 10 minutes long and will focus on the House Republican 
agenda. 
 * The Trump campaign has said Iowa senator Joni Ernst will also have a 
prime-time speaking slot next week.

 * Bernie Sanders has cleared the way for an endorsement of Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> tomorrow, and declared a 
successful end to his campaign to pull their party to the left during weekend 
negotiations over the Democratic policy platform. 
 * “We have made enormous strides,” said Sanders in a statement issued after a 
meeting in Orlando that swung the party in his direction on theminimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/22/federal-minimum-wage-rally-bernie-sanders-washington>
,climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/08/how-bernie-sanders-made-hillary-clinton-into-a-greener-candidate>
 andmarijuana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/01/bernie-sanders-marijuana-ban> 
though failed to make headway on fracking and trade. “Thanks to the millions of 
people across the country who got involved in the political process – many for 
the first time – we now have the most progressive platform in the history of 
the Democratic party,” he said.

 * As he mulls a running mate, Donald Trump is leaning toward someone with 
political as opposed to military experience and he expects to make his mind up 
in the “next three to four days,” hetold 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/07/11/donald-trump-will-make-his-mind-up-on-vp-pick-in-next-three-to-four-days/?postshare=351468249661034&tid=ss_tw>
 the Washington Post. 
While Trump was careful not to eliminate [retired Lt Gov Michael Flynn, it was 
clear that he believed picking someone “political” was the right move, meaning, 
presumably, that former Speaker Newt Gingrich, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence and New 
Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and one other political person are in his final four.

 * President Barack Obama called the assassination of five police officers in 
Dallas late last week as a “hate crime” against law enforcement,Politico reports
 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/obama-dallas-police-shooting-hate-225390#ixzz4E8rBd5xW>
. “One really striking thing the president said in his opening remarks was that 
the shooting in Dallas in many ways was strikingly parallel to the Dylann Roof 
shooting in Charleston in the sense that it was a hate crime,” Jim Pasco, 
executive director of the Fraternal Order of Police, told the outlet.
The comment “is quite a precedent from our standpoint,” said Pasco, who has 
been critical of the president’s relationship with law enforcement in the past. 
“At the end of the meeting I asked him to reiterate that publicly,” Pasco said.

 * Also, the entire US capital has become obsessed with Pokémon Go: Lynn 
Jenkins (@RepLynnJenkins) 
Things I have caught in my office: 1) Mice 2) This pic.twitter.com/YCGWiJcf5y 
<https://t.co/YCGWiJcf5y>
 <https://twitter.com/RepLynnJenkins/status/752615347501535232> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RepLynnJenkins/status/752615347501535232> Judy Chu 
(@RepJudyChu) 
Anyone else on #PokemonGO <https://twitter.com/hashtag/PokemonGO?src=hash>? 
I've found a#Squirtle <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Squirtle?src=hash> & a 
#Pikachu <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Pikachu?src=hash> in DC, but I'm still 
looking for a Republican willing to vote on#NoFlyNoBuy 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NoFlyNoBuy?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/RepJudyChu/status/752593913656012800> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RepJudyChu/status/752593913656012800> (((Jared Polis))) 
(@jaredpolis) 
Found an Exeggcute on the House Floor! Sorry, no pics allowed! #PokemonGO 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/PokemonGO?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/jaredpolis/status/752614033438670849> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jaredpolis/status/752614033438670849>  
In the ongoing political battle over LGBT rights, social conservatives bent 
but didn’t break as the Republican party drafted its 2016 platform.
 Republican National Committee chair Reince Priebus answers questions from the 
Associated Press. Photograph: J. Scott Applewhite/AP 
With the campaign of presumptive nominee Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> relatively unengaged in the 
platform process, Republican activists from across the country spent most of 
today hashing out their differences on gay marriage and other thorny social 
issues ranging from transgender bathroom access to Internet pornography.

In a cavernous downtown convention center, Republicans spent 12 hours first of 
their two-day marathon to determine the party’s policy manifesto for the coming 
election in small subcommittees and before a televised assembly of full 
committee of 112. The meetings were at times contentious but rarely 
adversarial. Instead of harsh rhetoric, rebukes were most often given with 
rolled eyes and an occasional sigh.

The proposed language in the platform, which called for a constitutional 
amendment to overturn the Supreme Court’s decision in Obergefell v. Hodges that 
overturned all state bans on same-sex marriage, represented a notable shift 
from past years. In 2012,the platform called 
<https://www.gop.com/platform/we-the-people/> for a constitutional amendment to 
legally define marriage as “the union of one man and one woman.”

Tony Perkins, a delegate from Louisiana and head of the Family Research 
Council, pushed back at the idea that the change in language represented a 
change in Republican policy. “The idea that the RNC is walking away from this 
is not correct, simply addressing the present realities of where the issue 
stands.” Perkins instead saw it as a Fabian retreat: “You don’t have the votes 
in the senate to pass marriage amendment defining marriage for the entire 
country . . . you have three quarters of states defining marriage and states 
are still ticked that 50 million votes were thrown out by five unelected 
judges.”

However, even that slightly softened language met a vocal effort from 
delegates seeking to strip any support for a constitutional amendment from same 
sex marriage from the platform and instead replace it with neutral language 
that “We encourage and welcome a thoughtful conversation among Republicans 
about meaning and importance of marriage.” Despite an emotional plea from 
Rachel Hoff, the first openly gay member of the RNC platform committee, the 
amendment appeared to receive the support of only about 20 of the committee’s 
112 members and falling short of the 28-vote threshold needed to potentially 
trigger minority report and a vote on the floor of the full convention next 
week.

Republican advocates for LGBT rights also tried unsuccessfully to modify 
language that called for children to be raised by a married mother and father 
to read stable loving home. This was thwarted. However, an amendment offered by 
Perkins to allow for conversion therapy slipped through subcommittee without 
opposition.
Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) 
About 20 of the 112 delegates on the Republican platform committee voted to 
remove support for same sex marriage ban from GOP platform
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/752645596159238144> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/752645596159238144> 
Republicans also softened proposed language on transgender access to 
bathrooms. Although the subcommittee on family issues added a provision stating 
“we support and encourage the common sense practice of protecting public safety 
and personal safety by limiting access to restrooms, locker rooms and other 
similar facilities,” it was later removed in a full committee hearing. In a 
motion offered by the subcommittee’s co-chair Patricia Longo of Connecticut, 
the language was described as duplicative and scrubbed without debate.

However, although the platform offered language saying that Obama’s executive 
order on the subject “illegal, ominous and ignores privacy issues.” It added 
“we salute the several states that have filed suit against it.” This didn’t 
address the concerns in the subcommittee that introduced the amendment, which 
Melody Potter of West Virginia emphasized was a safety issue and argued “we 
have to take a stand.” Instead, it represented a shift away from supporting 
affirmative legislation on the subject like North Carolina’s HB2 and instead 
opposition to the Obama executive order on the subject as overreach.

The platform also contained a provision calling Internet pornography “a public 
health crisis.” Mary Frances Forester, who introduced the amendment, told the 
Guardian “we know how big of a problem it is. It is an insidious epidemic and 
everyone knows that and that is not a controversy.” She hesitated though to 
predict whether a Trump administration would follow through on the pledge to 
crackdown on pornography. “I don’t think there are many of us that want to 
predict exactly how its going to come about,” said Forrester. “I think we all 
have open minds, we all are willing to be impressed but not sure if I’m ready 
to give you a definite answer.”

Delegates also pushed back against efforts towards medical marijuana and drug 
decriminalization. An proposed amendment to encourage states to legalize 
cannabis oil for medical reasons was rejected as one delegate, Noel Irvin 
Hentschel, linked marijuana use to mass killings. “All the mass killings that 
are taking place, they are young boys from divorced families and they are 
smoking marijuana.” Other opponents linked marijuana use to the heroin epidemic.

The platform committee will finish its work on the GOP’s proposed platform on 
Tuesday as it deals with potentially contentious proposals about trade and 
immigration.
 
Donald Trump is reportedly eyeing former House speaker Newt Gingrich for 
several potential roles in his hypothetical administration,Bloomberg reports 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-07-11/trump-eyeing-gingrich-for-national-security-position>
, including a role as a top national security adviser.

Although Gingrich has been talked about as a potential running mate, Bloomberg 
cited multiple campaign sources as saying that Gingrich was being considered 
for an unnamed national security role.

At a Trump campaign event in Cincinnati last week, Trump indicated that he’d 
be more than happy to have Gingrich join him in the White House in some 
capacity.

“Newt has been my friend for a long time,” Trump said. “And I’m not saying 
anything, and I’m not telling even Newt anything, but I can tell you, in one 
form or another, Newt Gingrich is going to be involved with our government - 
that I can tell you.”

 
Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump has stepped up his 
aggressive campaign against likely general election opponentHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, but when the former 
secretary of state was waging her own campaign against then-senator Barack 
Obama, Trump told a national radio audience that she would “make a good 
president.”
 Donald Trump speaks during a campaign stop in Tampa. Photograph: MIKE CARLSON 
/ Reuters/Reuters 
“With the Democratic presidential nomination far from decided, the candidates 
were jockeying a little bit recently talking about a dream ticket,” Trump said 
in March 2008 on his short-lived syndicated radio featurette Trumped!, the 
audio of which wasunearthed by the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-said-hillary-clinton-would-make-a-good-president-in-2008-1468281714>
. “Well, I know her,” Trump said of Clinton, “and she’d make a good president 
or a good vice president.”

Trump donated to Clinton’s campaign in 2008, although he has since disavowed 
his support as purely oriented towards facilitating favorable conditions for 
his businesses.

In addition to lauding Clinton, numerous other featurettes from Trumped! - 
each segment of which ran roughly sixty seconds long and aired between 2004 and 
2008 - discovered by the Wall Street Journal reveal problematic statements made 
about Saudi Arabia, guns in school classrooms and his own libido.

“Men in Saudi Arabia have the authority to divorce their wives without going 
to the courts. I guess that would also mean they don’t need prenuptial 
agreements,” Trump observed in 2008, discussing a story from Saudi Arabia in 
which a Saudi man filed to divorce his wife because she watched a male news 
anchor on television. “No courts, no judges - Saudi Arabia sounds like a very 
good place to get a divorce.”

In another segment from the same year, Trump declared that he was opposed to a 
proposal in West Virginia that would have allowed hunting-education classes in 
public schools. Calling the classes a “dangerous risk,” Trump said that “We 
hear way too many stories about school violence, so the thought of voluntarily 
putting guns in the classroom seems like a really bad plan.”

Trump has moved rightward on gun-control issues since running for president, 
suggesting at one point that a mass shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando 
could have been avoided if the patrons had been armed.

Trump, who once referenced the size of his genitals during a televised 
presidential debate, said on a segment in 2006 that reports that women 
disapproved of one-night stands “fooled me.”
 
Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump sat down with the 
Golf Channel for an wide-ranging interview, and in asneak preview obtained by 
Mediaite 
<http://www.mediaite.com/tv/trump-tells-golf-channels-david-feherty-he-may-or-may-not-use-a-prompter-at-convention/>
, host David Feherty questions Trump on whether he plans on using a 
teleprompter during his crowning address at the convention’s close.

“Everybody loves it in the stadium, but in terms of television, it probably 
doesn’t look as presidential,” Trump said. “There’s a time for both - I think 
there’s a time for both.”

“The big question is, with the RNC coming up, am I going to use a teleprompter 
or not? I don’t know if it’s ever been down without, essentially, a 
teleprompter,” Trump continued. He said that he’d “love” to give the address 
without one, but will likely make the decision roughly a week before the 
address itself.

The full interview will air on Monday, July 18th, at 9 pm EDT.
 
Submitted: One of the many cringe-y political tweets about Pokémon Go:
Bill de Blasio (@BilldeBlasio) 
Sorry Pikachu, we've been busy catching criminals. ICYMI, NYC crime rates are 
at historic lows.#CrimeStats <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CrimeStats?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/hEZXlatNrp <https://t.co/hEZXlatNrp>
 <https://twitter.com/BilldeBlasio/status/752646855234912260> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BilldeBlasio/status/752646855234912260>  
Dozens of protesters staged a sit-in at Florida senator Marco Rubio’s Orlando 
office on Monday, demanding action on stricter gun laws and policies to protect 
LGBT individuals.
 Marco Rubio Photograph: Broadimage/REX/Shutterstock 
The demonstration comes nearly one month after a gay nightclub in the city was 
the target of the deadliest mass shooting in US history, with 49 people killed 
and 53 more injured. The organizers said the sit-in would continue for 49 
hours, one for each of the slain victims in the 12 June massacre.

It was after the Pulse nightclub shooting that Rubio, whose presidential 
campaign ended in March, first signaled he might reconsider his decision not to 
seek re-election to the Senate. The senator, who formally entered the race last 
month, has since drawn criticism from proponents of gun safety reforms and LGBT 
rights for his record on both issues.

Rubio remains opposed to marriage equality and has voted against measures in 
the past that would protect LGBT individuals from workplace discrimination. The 
senator is also a staunch supporter of the second amendment and last week 
celebrated an endorsement from the National Rifle Association toward his 
re-election campaign.

Rubio has routinely argued that new gun laws would do little to prevent 
America’s gun violence epidemic and voted against bills to expand background 
checks and bar those on the FBI’s terror watch list from purchasing firearms. 
The Orlando gunman, Omar Mateen, was not actively on a watch list but deemed 
self-radicalized by authorities and investigated by the FBI several years prior.

In the wake of the Orlando attack, Rubio voted for Republican-backed 
alternatives to delay firearm sales to those on the terror watch list and 
require the Justice Department to prove within 72 hours that there was probable 
cause to ban the purchase all together.

“Senator Rubio respects the views of others on these difficult issues, and he 
welcomes the continued input he is receiving from people across the political 
spectrum,” Alex Burgos, a spokesman for his Senate office, said in a statement 
on the protest.

“Senator Rubio and our office continue working around the clock on federal 
casework to assist victims’ families, survivors and their families, and we 
stand ready to continue assisting, including lending staff to the victim 
assistance center as we did for the last few weeks.”

“Over the past month, Senator Rubio has supported common sense compromises to 
make it easier to track individuals who have been on the terror watch list and 
later try to buy firearms, all while improving due process protections for law 
abiding Americans,” he added.

Protestors argued that Rubio’s steps were insufficient and vowed to press on 
even as police indicated they might face arrest if they refused to leave the 
building upon its closure. Their demonstration was reminiscent of a sit-in 
organized by House Democrats last month, in which lawmakers occupied the floor 
of the chamber for 26 hours in the pursuit of a vote on tougher gun 
restrictions.

The sit-in at Rubio’s office began at roughly 10 a.m. and has been dubbed as 
#SitInForThe49 on social media. In addition to LGBT rights and gun control, 
protesters also cited police brutality as a prime area of concern. Photos and 
videos from the event showed demonstrators singing “We Shall Overcome” and 
reading the names of the Orlando victims, whose names they also printed out and 
placed on the office floor along with red roses.

Patrick Murphy, the Florida congressman who is likely to be Rubio’s Democratic 
opponent in the Senate race, threw his support behind the effort.

“This kind of brave demonstration should inspire us all to pass meaningful 
legislation to prevent future tragedies,” Murphy said in a statement.

“Unfortunately, Marco Rubio has doubled down on his opposition to commonsense 
gun violence prevention efforts and has yet to acknowledge that this was a hate 
crime against the LGBT community. It’s clear that Floridians have had enough of 
Marco Rubio putting his political ambition above the people he is supposed to 
represent.”
 
President Barack Obama called the assassination of five police officers in 
Dallas late last week as a “hate crime” against law enforcement,Politico reports
 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/obama-dallas-police-shooting-hate-225390#ixzz4E8rBd5xW>
.

“One really striking thing the president said in his opening remarks was that 
the shooting in Dallas in many ways was strikingly parallel to the Dylann Roof 
shooting in Charleston in the sense that it was a hate crime,” Jim Pasco, 
executive director of the Fraternal Order of Police, told the outlet.


The comment “is quite a precedent from our standpoint,” said Pasco, who has 
been critical of the president’s relationship with law enforcement in the past. 
“At the end of the meeting I asked him to reiterate that publicly,” Pasco said.

Obama’s public remarks have been more staid. In Warsaw on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/09/barack-obama-dallas-shooting-police-violence>
, Obama said that while “there is sorrow, there is anger, there is confusion” 
about how the US will move forward, “there’s unity in recognizing that this is 
not how we want our communities to operate. This is not who we want to be as 
Americans, and that serves as the basis for us being able to move forward in a 
constructive and positive way.”
 
In an interview with Buzzfeed News 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/andrewkaczynski/jim-gilmore-blasts-never-trump-movement-says-gop-should-unif?utm_term=.ntxv5veAVN#.jhmbQbmBAM>
, former Virginia governor and oft-forgotten Republican presidential candidate 
Jim Gilmore said that the “Never Trump” movement within the Republican party is 
bad for the party, and that his goal is to “draw the party together.”

“I’ve not been supportive of Never Trump,” Gilmore said. “I think that we need 
to unify the Republican party. That’s very hard right now with the Never Trump 
movement. My goal is, Jim Gilmore’s goal is, to draw the party together.”

Asked whether Trump could prevail in the former governor’s home state, Gilmore 
was hazy.

“It’s too soon,” Gilmore said.
 
Earlier, former House speaker and current potential Republican running mate 
Newt Gingrich told the Associated Press that it wouldn’t be an “automatic yes” 
if he were extended an offer to serve as the Republican vice presidential 
nominee.
 Newt Gingrich greets Donald Trump. Photograph: Aaron P. Bernstein/Reuters 
When asked about that comment by NBC News’ Shaquille Brewster, Gingrich 
elaborated that he wouldn’t automatically accept the offer because he has a 
book coming out soon.

“Callista and I have a lot of things going on right now,” Gingrich said. “We 
each have a book coming out. We just released a movie on George Washington 
called First American, we have an exciting new project on women of the American 
revolution, so we’d want to stop and talk through exactly what he’d have in 
mind and, um, whether or not at a practical level we can make the transition.”

When asked what his “gut” was telling him, Gingrich responded: “I have no 
idea.”

Trump is expected to announce his choice by the end of the week.
 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is touting poll 
results from a survey has the presumptive presidential nominee winning 
Hispanics by 13%, winning 18% of Democrats and losing women by a mere 2%.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Great poll- Florida! Thank you! pic.twitter.com/4FuPpL5WOM 
<https://t.co/4FuPpL5WOM>
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/752618593196597248> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/752618593196597248>  