
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has criticised 
the way the FBI revealed a new investigation of emails possibly linked to 
Hillary Clinton’s private server, a move that has rocked the US presidential 
election in its final stretch.

Opinion polls show the race between Clinton and Republican candidate Donald 
Trumptightening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/election-polls-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-october-surprise>
 since FBI director James Comey’sbombshell announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
 last Friday. One even gave Trump a one-point lead, though the Democrat remains 
the clear favourite.

Clinton's 'October surprise' helps Trump in polls – but will it affect 
election day?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/election-polls-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-october-surprise>
In his first public comments on the controversial decision, Obama told the 
online outletNowThisNews: <https://nowthisnews.com/> “I do think that there is 
a norm that when there are investigations, we don’t operate on innuendo. We 
don’t operate on incomplete information. We don’t operate on leaks. We operate 
based on concrete decisions that are made.

“When this was investigated thoroughly the last time, the conclusion of the FBI
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi>, the conclusion of the justice 
department, the conclusion of repeated congressional investigations was that 
she had made some mistakes but that there wasn’t anything there that was 
prosecutable.”

Comey said it was unclear whether the emails – reportedly found on the laptop 
of Clinton aide Huma Abedin’s estranged husband Anthony Weiner – are 
significant. His letter to Congress triggered a fiercebacklash from Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/29/fury-fbi-director-cryptic-letter-clinton-emails-response>
 and even some Republicans.

Obama said Clinton made an “honest mistake” by using a private email server as 
his secretary of state, something that was now “being blown up into just some 
crazy thing”. New voters hear “all that noise” and wonder whether they should 
be worried about Clinton’s conduct, he added, but he said he had absolute 
confidence in her.

Campaigning reached a new frenzy on Wednesday with less than a week until 
election day and early voting far in excess of the same stage in 2012. Trump 
was due to hold three rallies in Florida, the biggest prize, while Clinton was 
inFlorida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/dont-get-distracted-dont-get-diverted-hillary-clinton-pulls-out-all-the-stops-in-florida>
 andArizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/hillary-visits-arizona-in-unprecedented-show-of-bravado-for-democratic-nominee>
, traditionally a Republican bastion. Other surrogates of both candidates were 
spread through the battleground states that will determine who wins the White 
House.

Speaking in Miami, 
<https://www.c-span.org/video/?417864-1/donald-trump-campaigns-miami-florida> 
Trump repeated familiar attacks on the media, this time singling out reporter 
Katy Tur of NBC, naming her four times. “These people are among the most 
dishonest people I’ve ever met, spoken to, done business with,” the celebrity 
businessman said. “There has never been anywhere near the media dishonesty like 
we’ve seen in this election.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nevada's%20women%20stand%20divided%20over%20Trump%20and%20Clinton%20on%20eve%20of%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nevada%27s%20women%20stand%20divided%20over%20Trump%20and%20Clinton%20on%20eve%20of%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women&media=>
Nevada’s women stand divided over Trump and Clinton on eve of election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/03/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women>
Trump, wearing a white “make America great again” baseball cap and standing in 
front of a giant US flag, citeda New York Post column 
<http://nypost.com/2016/11/01/this-presidential-race-is-the-low-water-mark-of-american-journalism/>
 that described the election as “the low watermark of journalism”. He 
complained bitterly: “We’ll have a great story, we’ll give it out to the media, 
they’ll make it look as bad as possible.”

Trump also mocked the New York Times for a drop in its earnings 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/03/business/media/new-york-times-co-reports-an-advertising-drop-though-digital-results-grew.html>
 and insisted that his campaign was surging but not getting the coverage it 
deserves. “We have massive crowds. There’s something happening.”

Pointing to Tur, he continued: “They’re not reporting it. Katy, you’re not 
reporting it, Katy, but there’s something happening, Katy. There’s something 
happening, Katy.”

Trump has picked on Tur before. Last December he branded her “Little Katy”,  
<http://www.marieclaire.com/politics/a21997/donald-trump-katy-tur/>described 
her as a “third-rate reporter” and said she should be fired.

On Wednesday the crowd turned on Tur, according to Holly Bailey, national 
correspondent of YahooNews.She tweeted: 
<https://twitter.com/hollybdc?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 “Trump calls out @KatyTurNBC from the stage in the middle of a riff bashing 
media and now this guy behind me is just endlessly taunting her … ‘Do your job 
Katy! Report the truth Katy! Report what he says Katy!’”

Several journalists expressed support for Tur. Chris Cillizza 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=chris+cillizza+twitter&ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Esearch>
 of the Washington Post tweeted: “Bullying. And totally unacceptable for 
someone simply doing her job.”

During the rally Trump also made reference to two Iowa police officers 
ambushed and killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/des-moines-police-two-officers-shot-dead-ambush-style-attacks>
 hours earlier. “An attack on our police is an attack on all of us,” he said. 
“Law enforcement is the line separating civilisation from total chaos. You have 
to remember that.”

Talking more broadly about violence against police, he said: “What it is is a 
lack of respect for our nation. It’s a lack of respect for our leadership. To 
all the great men and women of law enforcement, I want you know, we’re with 
you, we support you and we will stand by you. We’re going to restore law, order 
and justice in America. Justice.”

The crowd chanted: “U-S-A! U-S-A! U-S-A!”

Clinton’s campaign cancelled a Des Moines rally with vice-presidential 
candidate Tim Kaine and former president Bill Clinton in the wake of the 
killings.

Trump was introduced by Reince Priebus, chair of the Republican National 
Committee,who has stuck by the party nominee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/28/reince-priebus-donald-trump-new-hires>
 as others have fallen away. “We know Donald Trump is not politically correct,” 
he said. “And look at Hillary Clinton, who lies with incredible grace and 
skill. She lies over and over and over again, over and over again.”

A week ago Clinton was cruising to victory. That still seems the most likely 
outcome, especially given the mathematics of the electoral college. But Comey’s 
announcement panicked some Democrats and gave Republicans renewed momentum. On 
Tuesdaya Washington Post/ABC poll 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/01/post-abc-tracking-poll-clinton-falls-behind-trump-in-enthusiasm-but-has-edge-in-early-voting/>
 showed Trump at 46% and Clinton at 45%. On Wednesday a CNN/ORC survey put 
Clinton at 49% and Trump at 47% among likely voters in Florida, while Clinton 
was four points up in Pennsylvania.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&media=>
How does the US electoral college work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/how-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
In a worrying sign for Clinton, early voting turnout for African American 
voters in swing states has fallen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/01/clinton-trump-polls-election-voter-turnout-suppression>
 from 2012. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/02/us/politics/black-turnout-falls-in-early-voting-boding-ill-for-hillary-clinton.html>
 In North Carolina, black turnout is down 16% from this point in 2012, while 
white turnout is up 15%. In Florida, black voters’ share of the early voting 
turnout is 15%, 10 points lower than it was in 2012.

Obama said in an interview on the Tom Joyner Morning Show, which is aimed at 
African Americans: “I’m going to be honest with you right now. The Latino vote 
is up. The overall vote is up. But the African American vote, right now, is not 
as solid as it needs to be.”

Obama has been more active on the trail that previous sitting presidents in a 
bid to protect his legacy.In Columbus, Ohio, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=66dxeDUCar4> on Tuesday night, he went further 
than before in tackling the question of whether Clinton is facing 
discrimination from some reluctant men. He said there was a reason why there 
has never been a female president in America’s 240-year history.

“And we have to ask ourselves, as men, because I hope my daughters are going 
to be able to be achieve anything they want to achieve,” Obama said. “And I 
know that my wife is not just my equal but my superior. And I want us – I want 
every man out there who’s voting – to kind of look inside yourself and ask 
yourself, if you’re having problems with this stuff, how much of it is that 
we’re just not used to it.”

He added: “So that you – when a guy’s ambitious and out in the public arena 
and working hard, well, that’s OK. But when a woman suddenly does the [same] – 
you’re like, why is she doing that? I’m just being honest. I want you to think 
about it because she is so much better qualified than the other guy. She has 
conducted herself so much better in public life than the other guy. Somehow 
this is hard to choose? It shouldn’t be!”

It is now all hands on deck for both candidates. Trump’s wife, Melania, will 
make her first solo appearance of the election in the Philadelphia suburbs on 
Thursday. The campaign said she will talk about the “kind of dedicated, strong 
and committed first lady” she would be. It will be her first address since the 
Republican national convention in July, where she delivered a speech was
partially plagiarised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/melania-trump-speech-republican-national-convention>
 from first lady Michelle Obama.
 