
Barack and Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> 
gave local trick-or-treaters an upgrade on Monday, treating kids to a rendition 
of Thriller while passing out candy at the White House.

Barack Obama tells Samantha Bee a 'spooky story': Trump is the president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/01/barack-obama-samantha-bee-halloween-episode-trump>
More than 4,000 people were expected to visit the White House for Halloween 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/halloween> this year, including 
students from 15 schools in the Washington metropolitan area. The president and 
the first lady danced along to Michael Jackson before handing out candy and 
baseball cards adorned with first dogs Bo and Sunny.

“We hope, parents, that on this day at least, you don’t have to pay attention 
to Michelle and healthy eating,” Obama told his guests.

The first lady agreed. “Candy for everybody,” she said, to cheers from kids in 
the audience.

Obama didn’t stop singing with Thriller; he crooned a few bars of Purple Rain 
after spotting a candy-seeker dressed as Prince.

When @barackobama sees your nephew dressed as Prince & starts singing Purple 
Rain! Yep, Best Halloween Ever!• #MWxDC #acreativedc #RIPPrince | 📽: my wife 
@dinthelife 😘 <https://www.instagram.com/p/BMPuzfvhp3X/>

A video posted by MASTERWILLIAMS™ (@masterwilliams) on Oct 31, 2016 at 4:30pm 
PDT

Also in attendance this year: Superman 
<https://twitter.com/WhiteHouse/status/793272062529839104> and a miniature 
President Obama <https://twitter.com/LibyaLiberty/status/793294974586646528>. 
Nothing, however, matched the moment last year when Obama spotted the adorable 
and topical costume of Pope Francis. The little girl delighted the president as 
she traversed in her own popemobile a few weeks after her inspiration visited 
the US in 2015.
The White House (@WhiteHouse) 
Top prize goes to Lil' Pope. #HappyHalloween 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/HappyHalloween?src=hash> https://t.co/WJo1nYUWup 
<https://t.co/WJo1nYUWup>
 <https://twitter.com/WhiteHouse/status/660215950692716544> October 30, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/WhiteHouse/status/660215950692716544>  