

Barack Obama sought Tuesday to reinvigorate his six-year-old call for the US 
to send humans to Mars by the 2030s, a missionNasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> has been slowly and quietly pursuing.

Prepared to die: why people are willing to risk their lives to visit Mars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/30/elon-musk-spacex-mars-mission-volunteers>
The White House was calling attention to government contracts awarded to six 
companies to build prototypes for “habitats” that could sustain human life in 
deep space. One such privately developed habitat – an inflatable room – is 
already attached to the International Space Station. Obama also said that 
within two years, private companies likeSpaceX 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/27/elon-musk-spacex-mars-colony>
 and Boeing will taxi astronauts to the space station with Nasa as a customer.

“These missions will teach us how humans can live far from Earth, something 
we’ll need for the long journey to Mars,” Obama wrote in anop-ed on CNN’s 
website 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/11/opinions/america-will-take-giant-leap-to-mars-barack-obama/>
. He said the ultimate goal was for humans eventually to stay on the red planet 
“for an extended time”.

Nasa officials and outside space experts said there was little new in whatthe 
White House is saying aboutMars <https://www.theguardian.com/science/mars>, 
something Nasa has taken to calling its “Journey To Mars”.

“There’s nothing big here at all, unless you haven’t been paying attention,” 
said the former George Washington University space policy chief John Logsdon. 
“It’s a refocusing of the fact that he set these goals and Nasa has been 
pursuing them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fobama-mars-mission-nasa-habitats-space-travel-2030%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5a7ff3f0032f7b9d09e072823a3194a62c947f1%2F80_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%20revives%20call%20to%20put%20humans%20on%20Mars%20by%20the%202030s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fobama-mars-mission-nasa-habitats-space-travel-2030%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%20revives%20call%20to%20put%20humans%20on%20Mars%20by%20the%202030s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fobama-mars-mission-nasa-habitats-space-travel-2030%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5a7ff3f0032f7b9d09e072823a3194a62c947f1%2F80_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 A Nasa-provided image depicts Nasa’s Journey to Mars. Photograph: wx104/AP 
Alan Ladwig, a former top Nasa official in the Obama and Clinton 
administrations, said he liked the intent, “but it’s a bit late in the term to 
shine a light on the humans-to-Mars exploration”.

The Guardian view on space exploration: the final frontier | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/the-guardian-view-on-space-exploration-the-final-frontier>
 The president planned to discuss the initiative further when he meets with 
scientists, engineers and academics at an innovation summit Thursday in 
Pittsburgh.

Obama first set a goal in 2010 to send humans to Mars by the 2030s, but the 
initiative has attracted little attention since then. Numerous Government 
Accountability Office reports have warned of the challenges in meeting that 
goal, most notable a lack of substantial US government funding.

Obama did not elaborate on what a Mars mission would cost or how the US would 
pay for it. But he said it would require years of patience, testing and 
education.

“The question is why and how does this support US national interests,” said 
Scott Pace, a Nasa associate administrator during the George W Bush 
administration and space policy chief at George Washington University. He said 
returning to the moon instead of going to Mars made more sense for both 
commerce and international cooperation.


 