
President Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has 
spoken out about fake news on Facebook and other media platforms, suggesting 
that it helped undermine the US political process.

Facebook staff mount secret push to tackle fake news, reports say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/14/facebook-fake-news-us-election-news-feed-algorithm>
“If we are not serious about facts and what’s true and what’s not, if we can’t 
discriminate between serious arguments and propaganda, then we have problems,” 
he said during apress conference in Germany 
<http://thehill.com/policy/technology/306595-obama-rails-against-fake-news>.

Since the surprise election of Donald Trump as president-elect, Facebook has 
battled accusations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
 that it has failed to stem the flow of misinformation on its network and that 
its business model leads to users becoming divided into polarized political 
echo chambers.

Obama said that we live in an age with “so much active misinformation” that is 
“packaged very well” and looks the same whether it’s onFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> or on TV.

“If everything seems to be the same and no distinctions are made, then we 
won’t know what to protect. We won’t know what to fight for. And we can lose so 
much of what we’ve gained in terms of the kind of democratic freedoms and 
market-based economies and prosperity that we’ve come to take for granted,”he 
said 
<https://mediamatters.org/video/2016/11/17/president-obama-theres-so-much-active-misinformation-looks-same-actual-information-when-its-facebook/214518>
.

These comments come after Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg rejected the “crazy 
idea” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-us-election-mark-zuckerberg-donald-trump>
 that fake news on the social network swayed voters in the US presidential 
election. That’s in spite of analysis by BuzzFeed that showed thatfake news on 
the site outperformed real news 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/viral-fake-election-news-outperformed-real-news-on-facebook>
 in the run-up to polling day.

Conspiracy theories and misinformation have flourished on Facebook thanks to a 
network of highly partisan media outlets with questionable editorial policies, 
including a website called theDenver Guardian peddling stories about Clinton 
murdering people 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/11/05/there-is-no-such-thing-as-the-denver-guardian/>
 and a cluster of pro-Trump sitesfounded by teenagers in Veles, Macedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/facebook-clickbait-political-news-sites-us-election-trump>
, motivated only by the advertising dollars they can accrue if enough people 
click on their links.

It’s not the first time that Obama has commented on the problem. At a 
Democratic party rally on 7 November, hedenounced 
<http://www.sfgate.com/technology/businessinsider/article/OBAMA-Fake-news-on-Facebook-is-creating-a-dust-10599422.php>
 the “crazy conspiracy theorizing” that spreads on Facebook, creating a “dust 
cloud of nonsense”.

The issue is not unique to Facebook. If you were to believe the top Google 
result for “final election results 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/14/googles-top-news-link-for-final-election-results-goes-to-a-fake-news-site-with-false-numbers/>
” on Monday, you’d think that Trump won the popular vote in the 2016 election. 
He did not.

The slip-up was widely reported on Monday, demonstrating that though Google’s 
algorithms are also susceptible to fake news, the company wants to be seen as
better at tackling it than Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
. “The goal of search is to provide the most relevant and useful results for 
our users,” a Google spokeswoman said. “In this case we clearly didn’t get it 
right, but we are continually working to improve our algorithms.”

Earlier this week both Google and Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> announced plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/15/facebook-google-fake-news-sites-ad-networks>
 to go after the revenue of fake news sites, kicking the hoaxers off their ad 
networks in an attempt to prevent misleading the public from being profitable. 
Although this reduces the financial incentive to generate fake news websites, 
it doesn’t tackle the distribution of such content on Facebook.

• This article was amended on 18 November 2016. An earlier version referred to 
a Republican rally where a Democratic party rally was meant.
 