
Barbara Skelton’s trail runs through a certain type of 20th century literary 
life like a vein of quartz. Here isEvelyn Waugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/evelynwaugh>, writing to Nancy Mitford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nancy-mitford> early in 1950 with a bumper 
selection of the latest Grub Street scuttlebutt: “G Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell> is dead, and Mrs Orwell 
presumably a rich widow. WillCyril [Connolly] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/01/cyril-connolly-writers-modern-enemies-of-promise>
 marry her? He is said to be consorting with Miss Skelton.” Nearly four decades 
later their mutual friendAnthony Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/mar/30/news.obituaries> was still 
filling his diaries with news of the journalists who had telephoned to inquire 
if Barbara was the model forA Dance to the Music of Time’s farouche, man-eating 
Pamela Flitton (“I replied with guarded affirmation”). The death ofLord 
Weidenfeld <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/20/lord-weidenfeld> 
earlier this year brought another little flurry of publicity for the woman once 
described as looking like “the youthful concubine of a legendary Mongol 
chieftain” along with lurid accounts of their brief yet tempestuous mid-1950s 
marriage.

But who was Barbara Skelton, and why should Waugh have gossiped about her, 
Powell finessed her into his novels and Weidenfeld schemed so craftily to 
displace her first husband, the literary critic-cum-editor Connolly, from the 
marital bed? Most of the answers can be found in her highly autobiographical 
first novel,A Young Girl’s Touch, published in 1956 at the height of the 
Weidenfeld/Connolly standoff, which tracks her erratic progress through the 
second world war. Skelton, who was born 100 years ago, features as “Melinda 
Paleface”, who is thought “far too young and pretty to live in London alone”. 
She is first seen working at the offices of a continental government in exile, 
where she devotes her mornings to “doing her face or making dates by telephone 
with all her friends and admirers” and her evenings to being entertained by 
them at a variety of expensive restaurants and back-street nightclubs.

An unabashed freeloader (“Someone was always there to take Melinda out to 
dinner”), equally in her element lunching at the Berkeley Hotel or attending 
blue movie screenings in Chelsea, her fatal attraction is ascribed to a trick 
of cupping her chin in her hands and staring abstractedly into the distance to 
create “an air of elusiveness that men found irresistible”. At the same time 
the deep wells of private unhappiness into which her boyfriends so regularly 
tumble make her captious and spiteful. Plus, as she frankly concedes, she has a 
habit of falling for men as unreliable as herself. Despatched to “Jubaland” (a 
thinly disguised Egypt) as a cipherine, she is taken up by the local potentate, 
King Yoyo (an even less thinly disguised King Farouk), who delights in 
thrashing her with a dressing-gown cord. “Nothing was ever as black as it 
seemed,” Melinda gamely reflects at the close of her tragi-comic picaresque. 
“The entire course of our life can change completely at a moment’s notice.”

At 17, bored by the routines expected of the rich man’s mistress, she took to 
model­ling

If A Young Girl’s Touch falls into the category of ingenue confession – one of 
those engaging books in which a stream of hair-raising events is recounted with 
a comparatively straight face – then by the time of its appearance Skelton had 
spent nearly two decades up to the neck in the kind of life it so carelessly 
describes. Her father was a regular army officer who had married an Edwardian 
chorus girl. There was Danish blood – the source of Barbara’s corn-haired good 
looks – a family connection to the playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan, and a 
germ of temperamental excess that led her at four to attempt to run her mother 
through with a carving knife and in her early teens to be expelled from her 
convent boarding school for forging a sheaf of love letters to herself signed 
“Fred”. At 17 a millionaire friend of her father set her up in a West End flat. 
Bored by the routines expected of the rich man’s mistress she took to modelling 
forSchiaparelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/24/elsa-schiaparelli-biography-meryle-secrest-review-lobsters-fizz-fashion>
 and Hartnell, pining for the bohemian life while acknowledging that whatever 
society she fell into would always fall short of her expectations of it. Like 
Melinda, “for years she had longed to get away and escape into the unreal world 
of London. Now that she had done so, happiness still seemed far out of reach.”

All this raises the question of milieu, the kind of world that Skelton 
inhabited in her twentysomething heyday. On one level, naturally, it is the 
sort of existence sketched out in the famous chapter in Thackeray’sVanity Fair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/23/william-thackeray-vanity-fair-100-best-novels>
 entitled “How to Live Well on Nothing a Year” in which a suit of finery or a 
three course dinner is all the more enticing for being subsidised by somebody 
else. It was also a world of stratospherically differentiated removes, in which 
the Ritz hotel and the rat-haunted bedsit, the flyblown country cottage and the 
out-of-season continental resort all play their part, and the next significant 
other is as likely to be a half-starved painter as a chequebook-wielding 
millionaire. What kept her from being apoule de luxe pure and simple, Powell 
thought, was an odd streak of seriousness, a half-buried intellectual twist 
that allowed her to combine a relish for causing trouble for its own sake with 
a genuine shyness, uncertainty and eagerness to learn.

They moved to a cottage on the Kentish heights, attended by a vengeful 
coatimundi, and fought ‘like kangaroos’

All these qualities contributed something to the most heartfelt relationship 
of her postwar life, her five-year marriage to Connolly. They were also 
responsible for most of its tensions. By this time, at any rate in the upper 
bohemian quadrant in which she moved, Skelton was famous, or perhaps only 
notorious, part of the tiny yet legendary demographic defined by the essayist 
Peter Quennell (with whom she had pursued a wartime affair) as “lost girls” – 
“adventurous young women who flitted about London, alighting briefly here and 
there and making the best of any random perch on which they happened to 
descend”. Their ranks included Orwell’s second wifeSonia Brownell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/may/19/georgeorwell.biography>, Janetta 
Parlade (then married to the journalist Robert Kee) and Connolly’s former 
girlfriend Lys Lubbock, and the associative net flung out to gather them in was 
usually a connection with Connolly’s 40s literary magazine, Horizon. Skelton 
herself had first come across Connolly while sharing a flat with Quennell 
upstairs from the Horizon offices.

Married at Elham registry office in October 1950, with a local policeman as 
the solitary witness, the Connollys moved to a cottage on the Kentish heights, 
attended by some guinea fowl, several geese and a vengeful coatimundi named 
Kupy, and fought, in Connolly’s words, “like kangaroos”. Friends offered 
horrified testimony to the adversarial depths they were capable of plumbing – 
Frances Partridge’s diary for January 1954 carries a bracing resume of a 
weekend house party in Wiltshire where Skelton sulked in her room, refused to 
come down to meals, asked to be called at seven on the Monday morning and then 
knocked herself out with sleeping tablets to the fury of her hosts. Skelton’s 
accounts of life at Oak Cottage, meanwhile, contain epic descriptions of her 
slothful and self-pitying husband lying for hours in the bath murmuring the 
words “Poor Cyril” to himself or telling her that he wishes she were dead.

Punctuated by outsize doses of husbandly melancholia and periodic crises in 
the pets department (“His Animal has been sacked from the zoo” Waugh reported 
to Nancy Mitford, “and sent home to Oak Cottage in disgrace”) the marriage 
limped on until early 1955, when Connolly became aware of his wife’s infidelity 
with Weidenfeld – apparently by walking on a whim through the front door of the 
latter’s house in Chester Square and finding them in flagrante. Matters were 
further complicated by the fact that Weidenfeld was at this point both his 
Skelton’s and her outraged husband’s publisher. Though represented as something 
very near to farce – a friend remembered the affair as a case of “people 
literally hiding in cupboards in hotels” – the swerve to Weidenfeld is a 
classic instance of Skelton’s fatalism, her tendency to take the worst possible 
option when every natural instinct counselled otherwise. Connolly, she 
acknowledged, was the love of her life; her marriage to Weidenfeld was in 
trouble from the honeymoon onwards, when her ex-husband was discovered to be 
lurking on the same Greek island; in the second set of divorce proceedings, 
Connolly was named as co-respondent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fbarbara-skelton-socialite-networker-dj-taylor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6895762bf889de75b4c0415570938ac4d148c887%2F26_227_3777_2266%2F3777.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbara%20Skelton%3A%20the%20socialite%20networker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fbarbara-skelton-socialite-networker-dj-taylor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbara%20Skelton%3A%20the%20socialite%20networker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fbarbara-skelton-socialite-networker-dj-taylor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6895762bf889de75b4c0415570938ac4d148c887%2F26_227_3777_2266%2F3777.jpg>
 Barbara Skelton in 1987. Photograph: Sue Adler for the Observer 
There was faint hope of a rapprochement, but by this stage Connolly was 
courting his last wife, Deirdre Craven, whom he married in 1959. Skelton took 
flight to New York, where she worked in a bookshop and as a dental assistant, 
had affairs with (among others) the dramatic critic Kenneth Tynan and the 
cartoonist Charles Addams and sent back a series of autobiographical short 
stories for Alan Ross – another of her ex-lovers – to publish in the London 
Magazine and eventually in book form asBorn Losers (1965). A second novel 
perished before the lawyers, as did a third marriage, to the millionaire 
physicist, Derek Jackson. A final relationship with the French writer Bernard 
Frank was marked by bouts of plate-throwing. In her mid-70s, with many of her 
friends dead and most of the remainder alienated by her two scarifying volumes 
of memoirs,Tears Before Bedtime (1987) and Weep No More (1989), she came back 
to England – the transit is vividly rendered in Jeremy Lewis’s memoirBattling 
with Barbara – and very soon after succumbed to an inoperable brain tumour.

Twenty years after her death, what remains of “Skeltie”? Literary friends 
occasionally complained that her books were marred by laziness, that age-old 
amateur reluctance to do justice to promising material. On the other hand it 
could be argued that this tendency to throw the words down any old how is what 
gives her fiction its kick, the breezy impressionism of the style made all the 
more compelling by the hint of darker things beneath. And for sustained, 
score-settling bitchiness the memoirs are in a class of their own, not least 
for their portrait of the sheet‑chewing Connolly, at one stage pictured lying 
in recumbent misery with the bedclothes seeming to spew out of his mouth like 
ectoplasm. Or there is her account of a grand party at which Skelton, furious 
that Connolly has been invited to sit next to Princess Margaret, cruises the 
room looking for people to insult (“we are interrupted by Orson Welles, so I 
try to be offensive to him but he doesn’t notice”).

If there is something rather impressive about Skelton’s complete disregard for 
what people might think of her – one of her most mystifying tricks as a 
memoirist is to spin out stories that unwittingly present her in a bad light – 
then there is no getting away from the deep-rooted vulnerability, the sense 
common to nearly every account of her that here is someone who not only makes 
life harder for herself, but who knows it as well. And while the merits of her 
books can be overplayed, she remains a classic example of the woman writer 
inhibited by the company she keeps – a genuine stylist who deserves to be taken 
out of the context of the world in which she was compelled to operate and given 
something never allowed her by the teeming horde of male associates – a life of 
her own.

• A Young Girl’s Touch, Tears Before Bedtime and Weep No More all by Barbara 
Skelton are available fromFaber Finds 
<https://www.faber.co.uk/author/barbara-skelton/>.
 