
The founder of the England cricket team supporters’ group the Barmy Army has 
urged fans not to make non-refundable travel arrangements for thetour of 
Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/03/england-cricket-winter-tour-bangladesh-india-selectors>
.

Andrew Strauss: England players who miss Bangladesh tour risk place in team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/andrew-strauss-england-players-miss-bangladesh-tour-risk-place-team>
England will play three one-day internationals and two Tests in Bangladesh 
from 7 October after the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board’s security adviser Reg 
Dickason ruled the trip could go ahead with appropriate security measures.

While the players can be easily monitored in a small group, though, the Barmy 
Army’s founder Paul Burnham has concerns about fans making their own 
arrangements and travelling separately from official tour groups.

“It’s difficult because the fans will arrive of their own nature as 
individuals,” he told BBC Radio 5 Live. “It’s clearly a lot easier with the 
players, who will be all together and moving around as a group.

“I do know a few people who have booked up already and have got their flights. 
We’re certainly going to try and get in contact with them and give them the 
information that we’ve got. At the moment we would advise anyone against 
purchasing non-refundable flights and accommodation.”

England are due to name their Test and ODI squads for the tour on 16 
September, with players including the captain Eoin Morgan still considering 
their participation. The ECB director Andrew Strausswarned on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/andrew-strauss-england-players-miss-bangladesh-tour-risk-place-team>
 that any player who opts out will be giving an opportunity to his replacement 
to “stake a claim” for a regular place in the side.

While Burnham pledged the Barmy Army will “travel and support whatever 11 
players are put out”, he accepts there is a heightened risk – the UK 
government’s foreign travel advice warns of the possibility of violent protests 
due to widespread strikes.

He said: “There’s countrywide strikes that they’re talking about on the 
website, and is it really essential travel for the fans to go over? It just 
feels like a lot stronger advice not to go than previously.”
 