
Barnett Newman is well worth $43.8m 
<http://www.nypost.com/p/news/local/million_for_this_1UU8ue4EhpQE75xkWCAFQO>. 
Great art is essentially priceless. The highest price paid by the most 
well-heeled collector is only a fraction of its true value.

And Newman is a great artist.

The price put on greatness at Sotheby's in New York this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/may/16/christies-sothebys-record-auction-sales>
, where works by Francis Bacon and Jeff Koons failed to sell but Newman soared, 
is the$43.8m paid for his Onement VI 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-05-15/barnett-newman-fetches-record-44-million-at-sotheby-s.html>
.

If you are going to buy a Newman, this is the kind of Newman you should buy: a 
powerful example of hisineffable style at its height of confidence and magic 
<http://antiquesandartireland.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/newman.jpg>.

A single white line divides a flat expanse of blue: it seems to rip open the 
universe, a crack in space and time. Versions of this vertical line appear 
again and again in Newman's paintings, sometimes alone as in his 1946 work
Moment in Tate Modern <http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/newman-moment-t05501>
, sometimes in a series of vertical parallels, like mappings of energy pulses 
or avant garde musical notation – witness his masterpieceVir Heroicus Sublimis 
which hangs in New York's Museum of Modern Art 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=79250>.

Standing in front of Vir Heroicus Sublimis – "man heroic and sublime" – you 
feel the excitement and audacity of the boldest of America's abstract 
expressionist painters.

After the second world war, as the US became a superpower, a new generation of 
artists made New York the centre of modern art, with a strange yet 
authoritative form of abstraction that was free from the influence of the 
still-living European modern masters.Abstract expressionism 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/theme.php?theme_id=10051> uses spacious 
surfaces, covering wall-scaled canvases with flowing expanses of colour that 
embrace the spectator.Jackson Pollock 
<http://www.nga.gov/feature/pollock/lm1024.jpg)> broke the ice for this new 
American painting, but Newman gave it the simplest, starkest formulation.

Meaning and dream collide hypnotically in his art. His vertical line, full of 
portent (but not "portentous", as sceptics might claim) speaks of creation, God 
– and thehuman urge to draw a line 
<http://www.bradshawfoundation.com/chauvet/gallery/5b.jpg>. Yet this primeval 
mark slices throughentrancing colour 
<http://uploads1.wikipaintings.org/images/barnett-newman/onement-iii-1949.jpg> 
that draws you in at a deep psychic level, irrationally, like falling into deep 
water.

Newman's universe is primitive, yet utterly modern. In Manhattan the grandeur 
ofVir Heroicus Sublimis 
<http://academics.smcvt.edu/gblasdel/art/Newman,%20VirHeroicusSublimis.jpg> 
mirrors the skyscrapers looming all around. He saw himself as a political 
artist and one of his most poignant works can be foundin front of the Rothko 
Chapel in Houston, Texas 
<http://m8.i.pbase.com/g6/90/46890/2/73517708.1huSLgki.jpg>. It is a massive 
sculpture calledBroken Obelisk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2008/oct/22/barnett-newman-obelisk>
; the line that connects Earth and heaven has been cut.

It stands in Houston as a monument to Martin Luther King 
<http://www.russellmoore.com/files/2013/01/martin-luther-king-jr.jpg>. Newman 
said he hoped it offered "a glimpse of the sublime". His art embodies the 
immense ambition of the US, its fault lines and tragedies. Yet it is more than 
American. It expresses the universal human impulse to find meaning in the void.

Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> like that is a bargain at 
any price.
 