
Kneading is a no-no. This is according to Richard Bertinet, award-winning 
baker andpastry chef <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/richard-bertinet>, who 
is teaching us how to make dough by a technique best described as slapping and 
folding.

The students on his introduction to bread-making at the Bertinet Kitchen are 
struggling with this unfamiliar approach when he offers a memorable tip. "Try a 
French bof! every time you do it," he urges, punctuating his dough-working with 
a series of classic shruggedmoues 
<http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moue>. He's right – as the room 
erupts in passable impressions of a grumpy Nicolas Sarkozy, so our dough-making 
turns a corner.

We're enrolled on a day course at this cookery school, in one of Bath's 
picturesque back lanes. Bertinet, a baker since childhood, extols the virtues 
of real bread, and vehemently condemns the sliced stuff, as he teaches us how 
to make tin loafs and baguettes, decoratively shaped fougasses and 
olive-flavoured breadsticks. Though places are pricey, we're grateful for them: 
since the school opened in 2005, its baking, pastry-making and other culinary 
courses have been regularly selling out months ahead.
 Baker, Richard Bertinet of The Bertinet Kitchen Photograph: Christopher 
Jones/Rex Features 
The Frenchman has brought a baking buzz to his adopted city. Bath now boasts 
two Bertinet bakeries – think sourdough loaves, almond croissants and 
abricotines, and excellent coffee in cafe-cum-patisserie settings – the most 
recent being in the Vaults development beside the railway station.

Not that this is entirely new. The Bath bun 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bath_bun> and the Bath Oliver 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bath_Oliver> biscuit testify to the fact that 
this spa city has been known for baking as well as bathing for centuries. In 
fact, since the arrival, in the 1680s, of another French baker, Huguenot 
refugee Solange Luyon, whose brioche-like buns would become a delicacy of 
Georgian England.

At her home, now anglicised as Sally Lunn's House (4 North Parade, 01225 
461634,sallylunns.co.uk <http://www.sallylunns.co.uk/>), there's a basement 
museum – 30p to non-patrons – where Sally's original oven can be seen. The 
attendant tells me that the recipe for the Sally Lunn bun, uncovered in the 
house in the 1930s, is kept under lock and key with the deeds of the property.
 Plaque on the former home of Sally Lunn. Photograph: Stuart Clarke/Rex 
Features 
Takeaway boxed buns, now made in nearby Corsham, are available here (£1.60 
each) though they're best enjoyed in one of the several old-fashioned tea rooms 
reached off a rickety set of stairs.

My waitress, a young Frenchwoman called Marie, talks me through the form: so 
big are Sally Lunn's buns – readers may forgive the 'Allo 'Allo!-style innuendo 
– that half of one constitutes a full serving. I can have mine toasted or 
plain, with savoury toppings such as roast beef or smoked salmon, or sweet ones 
including cinnamon butter, lemon curd or clotted cream. I can have it any 
number of ways. By the end of my visit I may be no closer to knowing the recipe 
but can't help feeling that the real secret lies in the bun's several 
identities; this is a multitasking bun, which doubles, among other things, as 
bap, scone, tea cake and open sandwich.

Nor is it just the bakers who have given Bath – twinned with Aix-en-Provence – 
its French accent. Lord Nelson, a frequent visitor in his time, would surely 
blanch at the news thatQueen Square, Bath's most elegant open space, has been 
recast as a boules terrain. There is no more impressive setting for the game 
anywhere in England than this Regency-era square, with its dedicated gravel 
pistes, which host wine-fuelled league matches and impromptu games through the 
summer.
 Brasserie Blanc, Bath 
The square – which is fronted by Brasserie Blanc (in the Francis hotel, 6-11 
Queen Square, 01225 303860,brasserieblanc.com 
<http://www.brasserieblanc.com/french-restaurant/locations/bath.php>), one of 
Bath's many bistros – also has an annual French food market.Casanis (4 Savile 
Row, 01225 780055, casanis.co.uk <http://www.casanis.co.uk/>), a Provençal 
bistro near the cookery school, hosts Bastille Day events, and on summer 
weekends there are "brocantes" – stylish French country junk and antique sales 
– inAlice Park (alicepark.co.uk <http://www.alicepark.co.uk/?page_id=3>).

Our day at the cookery school ends with a magnificent lunch. Naturally, we eat 
what we have baked: there's a flamiche aux poireaux (leek tart) and a rosemary 
focaccia, and even our misshaped fougasses are greedily devoured, along with a 
range of delicious pâtés, rillettes and salads, and plenty of French wine. We 
leave laden with still-warm loaves, feeling more inspired than the grumpy 
shrugs that some of us are still practising might suggest.
• The Bertinet Kitchen (12 St Andrew's Terrace, 01225 445531, 
thebertinetkitchen.com <http://www.thebertinetkitchen.com/>). Adult courses 
start from £132, kids' courses from £35
 