
Telltale Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> has always been 
an ambitious studio. It started making episodic adventure games back in 2007 
with the Sam & Max titles, but later graduated to big movie tie-ins Jurassic 
Park and Back to the Future. It’s breakthrough though was Walking Dead, a 
dialogue-based thriller with just as much dramatic punch as the frantic and 
emotional zombie comic series. Since then it has managed to convert both RPG 
shooter Borderlands and building sim Minecraft into unlikely adventure hits, 
appeasing two highly invested fanbases.

But Batman: A Telltale Series may be its most audacious project yet. For a 
start, it follows countless adaptations of DC’s defining hero, from Ocean’s 
1986 action adventure, to the likes of LegoBatman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman>, Injustice and, of course, the 
hugely acclaimed Arkham trilogy. It’s quite a legacy to live up to.

However, most of those focused heavily on the super hero, very few showcased 
the man behind the mask: Bruce Wayne. Telltale’s Batman title is doing just 
that. The series, which will eventually contain five episodes, will see players 
spending half the time playing as the costumed hero and the other half as the 
billionaire behind the cowl.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbatman-a-telltale-series-a-very-new-take-on-the-dark-knight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7ac533229cc8c53b95c1a299137ecb6e43aa312%2F0_0_882_529%2F882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batman%3A%20A%20Telltale%20Series%20%E2%80%93%20a%20very%20new%20take%20on%20the%20Dark%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbatman-a-telltale-series-a-very-new-take-on-the-dark-knight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batman%3A%20A%20Telltale%20Series%20%E2%80%93%20a%20very%20new%20take%20on%20the%20Dark%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbatman-a-telltale-series-a-very-new-take-on-the-dark-knight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7ac533229cc8c53b95c1a299137ecb6e43aa312%2F0_0_882_529%2F882.jpg>
 Batman Telltale Photograph: Telltale Games 
This makes sense when you consider Telltale’s dialogue-focused approach to 
gameplay. Batman is not a chatty guy, after all, delivering mostly short quips 
in his signature growl. Wayne, on the other hand, provides the human interest 
that the studio has always focused on. Later in the game you’ll apparently be 
able to choose whether to handle various situations as Bruce or his alter ego, 
but the opening 30 minutes are a much more tightly directed. Here, you switch 
between playing as Batman as he fights to stop a bank robbery at City Hall and 
watching Bruce Wayne get patched up by Alfred after a particularly hard night 
on the cowl.

The Batman segments feature Telltale’s signature mix of QTE and dialogue 
events, with the analogue stick used to fire a grappling hook and deal the 
heaviest hits while face buttons are for crashing through windows and 
pummelling enemies. As you fight, a Batarang-shaped power bar fills up at the 
bottom of the screen, allowing you to execute a beautifully brutal – and 
context sensitive ­– “finish the fight” move when the Bat is ready.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbatman-a-telltale-series-a-very-new-take-on-the-dark-knight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ea34035d19c9eb79deda86754397e034bb901ec%2F102_0_869_521%2F869.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batman%3A%20A%20Telltale%20Series%20%E2%80%93%20a%20very%20new%20take%20on%20the%20Dark%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbatman-a-telltale-series-a-very-new-take-on-the-dark-knight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batman%3A%20A%20Telltale%20Series%20%E2%80%93%20a%20very%20new%20take%20on%20the%20Dark%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbatman-a-telltale-series-a-very-new-take-on-the-dark-knight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ea34035d19c9eb79deda86754397e034bb901ec%2F102_0_869_521%2F869.jpg>
 Batman Telltale Photograph: Telltale Games 
Although players may just be following a series of button or analogue stick 
prompts, the combat still offers the suspense and impressive non-lethal action 
you’d expect from Batman, even if it is more wooden than the fluid combat found 
in the Arkham series. There are some dialogue options to be had in the Batman 
sections too. Here, the Bat comes face to face with his old nemesis Catwoman 
and communicates with long-time ally, Commissioner Jim Gordon.

Batman: A Telltale Series will feature a menagerie of familiar friends and 
foes, but the developer warns that they might not quite play the roles or 
behave in the way fans will expect. This is ultimately a game set in its own 
fictional world; one not tied to anything we’ve seen before in movies, TV 
series, comics or games. Telltale says it wants to tread new ground with this 
series and not just by telling the tale of the man behind the mask.

It’s obvious, then, that the real intrigue of this series is with Bruce Wayne. 
In this opening segment, our youthful hero is holding a fundraiser for a 
pre-Two Face Harvey Dent. The pair are working on transforming Arkham Asylum 
into an institution that can actually help its inmates – rather than just 
providing a grim yet easily escapable hellhole. As ever, an assortment of 
dialogue options veer you down different paths, each changing the course of 
your game – and your character. Do you portray Wayne as a billionaire playboy, 
or as a victim – the grieving orphan bitter at the world?

Players don’t have to commit straightaway – there’s the option to remain a 
little more reserved, watching how events play out before adopting a role that 
suits. In this opening section alone you’ll have to choose whether to publicly 
support Harvey; what to use as campaign slogan; whether or not to work with the 
press (AKA Vicky Vale); and how to deal with the sudden appearance of crime 
boss Carmine Falcone. Cue plenty of “Harvey will remember that” notifications. 
Although many will think Batman has the hardest job, being its Wayne that faces 
the difficult choices and harsh realities.

Throughout, the choices you make will affect the way Bruce Wayne carries 
himself, the way he speaks and behaves, and ultimately how he is perceived. All 
of which will have a dramatic event on how life as Batman unfolds. It’s a much 
more cerebral take on the near-mythic hero.

In this sense, it looks like Batman: A Telltale Series will deliver one of the 
most original Dark Knight stories, drawing a little from the lore but 
ultimately making its own mark on the franchise. By focusing on Bruce Wayne the 
person rather than simply the conflicted rich guy behind the mask, this may 
well be the freshest take on Batman since Dark Knight Returns.

Episode One of Batman: A Telltale Series is coming to home consoles, PC, Mac, 
iOS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> and Android this summer. 
Specific platform details will come at a later date.
 