
For all its clarity, novelty and wit, there was perhaps something foolhardy in 
Podemos’s decision to model its last election manifesto on theIkea catalogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/podemos-manifesto-ikea-catalogue-flat-pack-policies>
.

The symbolism was not hard to fathom: here, cooed the pages showing candidates 
at home, was a bright, straightforward, modern party; an explosion of youthful 
colour along the musty, dark-wood corridors of traditional Spanish politics.

Spain braces itself for unwanted gift on Christmas Day: a third election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/25/spain-mariano-rajoy-third-general-election-christmas-day>
On the eve of the election in June – Spain’s second in six months – Podemos 
had every reason to cheerful. Bolstered by the decision to run on a joint 
ticket with United Left (IU), a leftwing coalition that includes the Communist 
party of Spain, things were looking overwhelmingly positive. Experts and polls 
alike predicted that the new alliance, UnidosPodemos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/podemos>, would consolidate the phenomenal 
gains made by the grassroots social movement in the December vote and achieve 
its dream of replacing the Spanish Socialist party (PSOE) as the pre-eminent 
voice of the left.

Until the first exit polls came in on the evening of Sunday 26 June, the 
sorpasso (overtaking) was taken for granted. A few hours later, though, it 
seemed that in true flatpack fashion someone had mislaid the instructions, 
snapped the dowels and lost a few vital screws. Unidos Podemos failed to make 
gains and lost more than a million votes. No party achieved a majority and 
Spain, not for the first time, found itselfwithout a government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/spanish-elections-exit-polls-show-deadlock-likely-to-continue>
.

Since then, the question for Podemos supporters has been simple: why had the 
blisteringly successful force that erupted from popular discontent over 
austerity and corruption to threaten four decades of two-party rule suddenly 
fallen short? A few obvious answers suggested themselves. Perhaps the UK’s 
Brexit vote, three days before, had sent voters scurrying back into the 
familiar arms of the PSOE and the conservative People’s party (PP); perhaps the 
attempts by the Podemos party leader,Pablo Iglesias 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pablo-iglesias>, to reach out to the 
centre ground by diluting the revolutionary rhetoric had confused and alienated 
people.

Whatever the reason, the party’s poor performance led to weeks of 
introspection that have further revealed the ideological tensions at its core. 
Most visible has been the rivalry between Iglesias and Podemos’s policy chief 
and number two, Iñigo Errejón. If Errejón has pushed for a more pragmatic 
approach to the PSOE, with a view to sharing power after December’s election, 
then Iglesias has gone out of his way to antagonise the Socialists, once 
memorably reminding parliament of the anti-Eta death squads that operated under 
the government of former PSOE leader Felipe González.

Now the growing tensions are coming to a head in Madrid, where competing 
factions are vying for control of Podemos’s birthplace and its future. On one 
side is Tania Sánchez, a former IU MP, who, along with Madrid councillor Rita 
Maestre, hopes to make the local party a more “friendly, female and 
decentralised” outfit.

Opposite them are the Iglesias loyalists, such as the party’s general 
secretary in the capital, Luis Alegre, who has long had a troubled relationship 
with the Errejónista faction.

To complicate things further, Sánchez, who is standing to be the party’s new 
leader in Madrid, is a former girlfriend of Iglesias, while Maestre used to go 
out with Errejón. In an attempt to head off the inevitable innuendo, both women 
put out a statement: “We are not girlfriends or ex-girlfriends, we are human 
beings who make our own decisions. We don’t need a man to help us or lead us … 
We’re protagonists who defend a Podemos for everyone.”

Iglesias responded coolly, saying he was convinced there would be “far better 
candidates”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fpodemos-under-pressure-spain-political-deadlock-continues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53a5196b496b71caf62b153829cd0f59a6e020fa%2F281_0_3038_3798%2F3038.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battle%20for%20the%20heart%20and%20soul%20of%20Podemos%20as%20Spain%E2%80%99s%20political%20deadlock%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fpodemos-under-pressure-spain-political-deadlock-continues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battle%20for%20the%20heart%20and%20soul%20of%20Podemos%20as%20Spain%E2%80%99s%20political%20deadlock%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fpodemos-under-pressure-spain-political-deadlock-continues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53a5196b496b71caf62b153829cd0f59a6e020fa%2F281_0_3038_3798%2F3038.jpg>
 Councillor Rita Maestre speaks at a political event in Madrid last June. 
Photograph: Eduardo Parra/Getty Images 
“There’s no division between Iglesias and Errejón when it comes to objectives, 
but there is one when it comes to means and strategies,” says the sociologist 
and commentator Jorge Galindo.

“Iglesias has forged an alliance with the anti-capitalist movements because he 
thinks about a strategy involving a Leninist assault by the proletarian 
vanguard.

Errejón, on the other hand, who’s more of a populist in the Latin American 
sense – Ecuador, Bolivia – has a much closer alliance with the policy-oriented 
group: first you deliver and do things for the people, then you create 
dominance.”

Though it may object to the religious image, Podemos is indeed a broad church 
or, as Galindo puts it, “a half-formed political animal, a coalition of pretty 
varied interests that’s kept together by electoral success and by the drive to 
occupy new space”.

Antonio Barroso, an analyst at the political risk advisory firm Teneo 
Intelligence, sees the internal divisions as a sign that the party is coming of 
age politically. “It was like a virgin party when it emerged, formed ofcírculos 
[working groups] to represent the people. At the end of the day it’s just 
becoming a classic party with its internal quarrels.”

In one way, says Barroso, Podemos is now little different to the PSOE. The 
Socialist leader, Pedro Sánchez, is facing growing calls from within the party 
to reverse his long-held refusal to end Spain’s nine-month political impasse by 
allowing the country’s acting prime minister,Mariano Rajoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mariano-rajoy>, to form a minority 
government led by his People’s party.

Podemos has shaken up the debate and shaken up parliament. The question now 
is: where does it go from here?
Antonio Barroso, political analyst 
Rajoy, whose recent bids to break the deadlock have been thwarted by his 
opponents, has few such internal problems. As well as benefiting from a more 
hierarchical structure, the PP was also the only party to increase its seat 
count in June, taking 14 more seats than in December and finishing first, 
albeit well short of an absolute majority.

With third elections now looming in December, the pressure is on the other 
parties to rescueSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> from an 
unwelcome Christmas present. With the PP holding firm and the Socialists 
starting to squirm, it is up to Podemos to show that it can regain the unity 
and momentum that it lost on 26 June.

“They didn’t live up to expectations, and that’s true. But to go from zero to 
69 seats in one election is insane by Spanish standards,” says Barroso. “They 
have shaken up the debate and they have shaken up parliament. The question now 
is: where does it go from here? Does it become another party in parliament that 
will continue growing or does it become a marginal force?”
 