
One day eleven years ago I swallowed fear, stuck my neck into the noose of 
fate and swore I would swim or drown. I was 25 years old and had never held a 
job, never strayed far from my mother’s protection, never stopped depending on 
her for feeding money, pocket money, any money. Yet I ignored her entreaties to 
endure my final year in university, and after gathering up my beloved books and 
2Pac CDs, I jumped into unknown waters to make my way as a writer.

Every revolution ends the instant it begins. Mine ended up in Lagos. It began 
as a son’s rebellion against his mother’s devotion, and today, with three books 
to my name, I see what I’ve achieved in all these years of revolt is to refocus 
my gaze on the actual bully, that stomping boot in which I’ve lived like a foot 
for thirty-six years. My country,Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>.

* * *

Before the day I left my mother’s house forever, I had lived happily enough in 
the rustic city of Ibadan, where I was studying agriculture at Nigeria’s oldest 
university. Two prominent figures of modern literature,Chinua Achebe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chinuaachebe> and Wole Soyinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wolesoyinka>, had studied there along with 
many other Nigerian thinkers. Thus I assumed the university’s illustrious 
alumni were evidence of a grand tradition. At the time of my matriculation, in 
1997, I had begun scribbling scraps of stories in secret, and even though I 
didn’t yet dare to call myself a writer I was already doing what every nascent 
artist does, seeking a tradition to either align with or rage against.

I found nothing there for me. No friends with similar tastes in books. No 
literary journals by either students or faculty. No public book readings I ever 
heard of. No freedom to explore the shelves of the outdated library. No writing 
workshops, reading clubs, or tattooed barwomen with nicknames like Head Woolf 
with whom I might have debated my oblivious penchant for male writers. One 
thing there was plenty of was angry young people in secret fraternities and 
student unions, but these coteries were focused on bloodletting and partying 
and politicking rather than literature. After seven years in that wasteland – 
my studies were meant to last five, but for the incessant academic strikes and 
school shutdowns – the only knowledge I gained about writing was that mine was 
not a transitory phase.

All my life I had read alone; no one had exchanged books with me or 
recommended writers to me.

Before 2003 – the year I attended a book reading for the first time, which was 
organized in Ibadan by the local chapter of ANA, the Association of Nigerian 
Authors – I had no idea there was any such thing as a writing community in 
Nigeria. All my life I had read alone; no one had exchanged books with me or 
recommended writers to me. I was appointed library prefect in my final year of 
secondary school, but that public school, like all the others, had no library 
worth the name. For many years I only read whatever I found at home: my 
mother’s romance and detective and cowboy novels, and the motley books my 
absent father had left behind. Even the few books I borrowed from friends’ 
houses (and sometimes stole, like ER Braithwaite’sTo Sir, With Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
 – sorry, Remi) usually belonged to their parents.

Thus many of my favorite books were serendipitous sightings in used books 
stalls, the only places I could afford on my pocket money. My early years in 
Ibadan are still some of my fondest memories mainly because of the British 
Council library, a Borgesian labyrinth to my awestruck eyes, which became a 
veritable garden of forking paths for a teenager who had grown accustomed to 
never having enough books. It was a catastrophic day when the library shut down 
a few weeks after I chanced upon and was transported by Tolstoy’sWar and Peace 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-and-peace-13.html>.

* * *

In search of a new home after abandoning my mother’s, I went to the Niger 
Delta, finally settling in Imiringi, a farming village about three hours’ drive 
from my birthplace. My peripatetic father had perched there for some months in 
an apartment that was paid up for a year, and I eased happily into his fully 
furnished, book-stocked, vacated space. I was 16 when I had moved with my 
family to Ibadan from Port Harcourt, the city in the Niger Delta where I was 
born and where my milk teeth are buried. Ibadan was where I began seeking 
myself through writing, but it was in Port Harcourt I first lost myself in 
books.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbe-careless-with-your-wishes-a-igoni-barrett-on-the-writing-life-in-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f11ae6de98045850dac5b74f4b3393bfb727c2c%2F0_0_1488_959%2F1488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Be%20careless%20with%20your%20wishes%3A%20A%20Igoni%20Barrett%20on%20the%20writing%20life%20in%20Nigeria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbe-careless-with-your-wishes-a-igoni-barrett-on-the-writing-life-in-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Be%20careless%20with%20your%20wishes%3A%20A%20Igoni%20Barrett%20on%20the%20writing%20life%20in%20Nigeria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbe-careless-with-your-wishes-a-igoni-barrett-on-the-writing-life-in-nigeria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f11ae6de98045850dac5b74f4b3393bfb727c2c%2F0_0_1488_959%2F1488.jpg>
 A Nigerian girl carrying greens walks past a row of oil pipes running through 
her neighborhood in Port Harcourt, in an archive image. Photograph: David 
Guttenfelder/AP 
The question of home resolved, all I needed was a plan. I settled quickly on 
one: to farm and write. I would sow the earth by day and reap the imagination 
at night. I would feed myself by the work of my hands, employing the knowledge 
I had acquired at university. While my pigs grew fat in sleep and my catfish 
chased the moon across the pond’s surface, while my yams did their secret 
growing at night, I would write for myself until I found an audience. I was 
young, healthy, unafraid of hard work, and responsible to no one but myself. 
Unlike my mother, I had no offspring to provide for, nor plans for a spouse, 
though a lover would be welcome, but then again, ever since I realized in my 
adolescence that God was a fictional character in a rambling tendentious book, 
I had been just fine with jerking off.

I made friends whose mothers’ kitchens I can still describe, as well as 
friends who shared drinks and orgasms with me

Back in 2001, my mother was the first person to ask me why did I write. My 
response was mumbled gibberish because I had no answer ready, though I could 
also hear in her tone that nothing I said would placate her. These days, 
whenever I’m asked that question, I do my utmost to give a different answer 
every time. I write because I can, because you read, because we die, because I 
must. I was 11 when I first experienced the must-write feeling, though it 
lasted only as long as it took me to realize my poems were childish. About two 
years later, in 1993, I got the itch again, and spent three straight days 
writing a play whose main characters, blond hair and all, were 
Nigerian-accented aliens from a Georgette Heyer universe. After that second 
failure, I decided to become an aeronautical engineer. Anything was easier than 
writing. And for anyone who has read enough to recognize how bad their writing 
is, nothing is harder than writing. Except not writing. Thus I wasted many 
years suppressing the urge to write, until, one day, just like that, I left my 
mother’s house to become a farmer.

About my plan in Imiringi: I knew farming was no sweat, it was writing that 
would require effort. Growing food from the soil and raising animals for 
slaughter would be a task easily done, but finding words for the images in my 
mind, oh boy, that was backbreaking labor.

I was both right and wrong. Farming, too, was hard. Not the farm work itself, 
which I never got to do. Because I never found the money to lease farmland, 
never got the loan I had applied to the state government for. I spent almost 
two years dreaming of pigs and catfish and yams, my farming spiel growing 
wilder the surer I became of failure. I discovered the true value of money, 
which can only be known when you have none. I grew my hair into locks, rather 
than pay barbers, and ate everything that anyone offered, including iguana 
(fishy-tasting), porcupine (gamy), some astringent fruit whose name I never 
learnt, and even a strange-looking fish—which the locals considered taboo—with 
a doglike dentition and appendages like breasts on its belly. I made friends 
whose mothers’ kitchens I can still describe, as well as friends who shared 
drinks and spliffs and orgasms with me.

No experience in life is wasted, especially when you’re writing

About my stay in Imiringi: No experience in life is wasted, especially when 
you’re writing. I was writing in Imiringi when my short story won an 
international competition that led to the publication of my first book from 
which I got the funds to launch an online literary journal that caught the 
attention of a Lagos-based publisher who offered me the job that ended my plan 
of farming in Imiringi. And so, one day, just like that, I set aside my writing 
to become an editor.

* * *

I arrived in Lagos in March 2007. From my earliest days in this seaside city 
of Cs—congested, cacophonous, chaotic, cosmopolitan, captivating, etc.—I was 
flung into a community of writers, editors, publishers, and booksellers. I met 
people whose work I had read, whose work I wanted to read, and whose 
conversations I noted down so others might someday read them as fiction. I met 
publishers who invested money in work other than that of friends and relatives, 
and editors who craved anonymity even as they poured their heart and skill into 
their jobs. There were book readings at Quintessence and Jazzhole, spoken-word 
poetry and drama performances at Bogobiri and Terrakulture, writing workshops 
by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie and Adewale Maja-Pearce, art exhibitions at Bisi 
Silva’s Centre for Contemporary Art, literary festivals like the long-lasting 
LABAF; and everywhere I looked, in writer’s homes or at their favorite drinking 
spots, there were books being talked about and exchanged and recommended. I had 
finally found in Lagos what I went seeking at university: a self-sustaining 
tradition of creativity and enterprise.

In the midst of writers who acknowledge your own writing, self-denial begins 
to seem like self-deception

It was in Imiringi I began calling myself a writer, but I didn’t believe it 
until I got to Lagos. In the midst of writers who acknowledge your own writing, 
self-denial begins to seem like self-deception. And so when the novelist Eghosa 
Imasuen—who now runs Kachifo, the publishing company I used to work for and 
whose Farafina imprint published the local editions of my last two books—told 
me all those years ago that he admired my writing, I thanked him. When the 
Ugandan short-story writer Doreen Baingana, on one of her several trips to 
Nigeria for writing residencies and to teach workshops, announced to the 
audience at her book reading that my second story collection was this and that, 
I believed her. When the poet Toni Kan—who recently signed an endorsement deal 
with Samsung to have his name on billboards across Lagos promoting the latest 
Galaxy phone—bought me beers because he enjoyed my novel, I drank up. When the 
Kenyan author Binyavanga Wainaina bought my first story collection in Lagos in 
2010 and came looking for me to sign it, I grinned with pleasure. And when in 
the same year the British journalist Michela Wrong, after she returned to 
London from her book tour in Nigeria that included an appearance at a monthly 
reading series I had just then started in Lagos, wrote me an email offering to 
introduce me to her literary agents, I stared at my laptop screen in disbelief.

* * *

Two years was all it took. Two years of working in publishing. Two years of 
hardly writing. Two years of editing a magazine that was first a bi-monthly, 
then a quarterly, and still never sold out its 1000 print run in a city of 
nearly twenty million people. Two confounding years of reading accounting data 
that showed how American, British, and even South African publishers sold more 
copies of Nigerian writers’ books than local publishers could manage for the 
same titles. Two humbling years of watching as other Nigerian writers, many of 
whom lived abroad, signed bigger book deals, expanded their audience, and made 
good money from doing exactly what they wanted. Two long sweaty years of 
spending three to five hours in Lagos traffic every weekday on my way to and 
from work. That’s what it took for me to rebel.
 Photograph: Guardian 
In June 2009 I resigned from my editing job to strike out as a full-time 
writer. I knew now that farming was a pipedream, that living in a village also 
required money, and that I would never support myself from selling my books in 
Nigeria. I also knew that a community is only as useful as what the individual 
wants from it. From my family, my mother, I had wanted the freedom to find 
myself. From my nation, Nigeria, I wanted basic infrastructure, competent 
educational systems, and legislated respect for the most vulnerable in society, 
everything that every citizen deserves. But from the writing community I had 
found in Lagos, all I wanted at that point in my life was a pot of money and to 
be left alone.

Be careless with your wishes, they never become horses. Mine took more than a 
year to materialize as a writing residency. My first trip outside Nigeria for 
my first-ever residency, a real pot of shillings as well as a beach house in 
Mombasa for three solitary months, all of which came through Binyavanga 
Wainaina and the book I’d signed for him in Lagos. I got my wish, and I rode it 
all the way to Kenya and back, writing and living exactly as I wanted.

Five years later, I’m still here, neck in noose, fear in my belly, and 
swimming with all my might. Home is wherever I write, and Lagos, for now, is 
the place I’ve dug my teeth into.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 * A Igoni Barrett was born in Port Harcourt, Nigeria, and lives in Lagos. He 
is a winner of the 2005 BBC World Service short story competition, the 
recipient of a Chinua Achebe Center Fellowship, a Norman Mailer Center 
Fellowship, and a Rockefeller Foundation Bellagio Center Residency. His short 
story collection,Love is Power, or Something Like That 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/16059650-love-is-power-or-something-like-that>
, was published in 2013. In 2014 he was named on the Africa39 list of 
sub-Saharan African writers under 40. His first novel, entitledBlackass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/14/blackass-by-a-igoni-barrett-review-cocktail-kafka-comedy>
, isout in the UK 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306207/s/blackass/> 
and will be published in the US in March 2016.
 