
China has said it will not accept a ruling against it in a key international 
legal case over strategic reefs and atolls that Beijing claims would give it 
control over disputed waters of theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>.

The judgment by an international tribunal in The Hague came down 
overwhelmingly in favour of claims by thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> and is likely to increase 
global diplomatic pressure on Beijing to scale back military expansion in the 
area. By depriving certain outcrops of territorial-generating status, the 
ruling from the permanent court of arbitration effectively punches holes in 
China’s all-encompassing “nine-dash” line that stretches deep into the South 
China Sea.
South China Sea atom 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=south_china_sea>
The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, said China’s “territorial sovereignty and 
marine rights” in the seas would not be affected by the ruling, which declared 
large areas of the sea to be neutral international waters or the exclusive 
economic zones of other countries. He insistedChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> was still “committed to resolving 
disputes” with its neighbours.

Chinese state media reacted angrily to the verdict. Xinhua, the country’s 
official news agency, hit out at what it described as an “ill-founded” ruling 
that was “naturally null and void”. The Communist party mouthpiece newspaper 
the People’s Daily said inan editorial 
<http://rmrbimg2.people.cn/data/rmrbwap/2016/07/12/cms_1745920168805376.html> 
that the tribunal had ignored “basic truths” and “trampled” on international 
laws and norms.

“The Chinese government and the Chinese people firmly oppose [the ruling] and 
will neither acknowledge it nor accept it,” it added.

The Philippine foreign affairs secretary, Perfecto Yasay Jr, said the country 
welcomed the ruling and called for “restraint and sobriety”. The US State 
Department called on both parties to comply with their obligations, according 
to a statement from spokesman John Kirby.

The ruling makes grim reading for Beijing and contains a series of criticisms 
of China’s actions and claims. The tribunal declared that “although Chinese 
navigators and fishermen, as well as those of other states, had historically 
made use of the islands in the South China Sea, there was no evidence that 
China had historically exercised exclusive control over the waters or their 
resources.

“The tribunal concluded that there was no legal basis for China to claim 
historic rights to resources within the sea areas falling within the ‘nine-dash 
line’.”

South China Sea claims map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/china/giv-12515qHy1vJJNRel4/>
None of the fiercely disputed Spratly Islands, the UN body found, were 
“capable of generating extended maritime zones … [and] having found that none 
of the features claimed by China was capable of generating an exclusive 
economic zone, the tribunal found that it could — without delimiting a boundary 
— declare that certain sea areas are within the exclusive economic zone of the 
Philippines, because those areas are not overlapped by any possible entitlement 
of China.”


The tribunal found that China had violated the Philippines’ sovereign rights 
in its exclusive economic zone by interfering with Philippine fishing and 
petroleum exploration, constructing artificial islands and failing to prevent 
Chinese fishermen from fishing in the zone. At Scarborough Shoal, where it said 
fishermen from the Philippines and China had traditional fishing rights, it 
said China had restricted these rights. It added that China had created a 
serious risk of collision when its patrol boats had physically obstructed 
Philippine fishing vessels.

South China Sea dispute: what you need to know about The Hague court ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/jul/12/south-china-sea-dispute-what-you-need-to-know-about-the-hague-court-ruling>
The tribunal also condemned China’s land reclamation projects and its 
construction of artificial islands at seven features in the Spratly Islands, 
concluding that it had caused “severe harm to the coral reef environment and 
violated its obligation to preserve and protect fragile ecosystems and the 
habitat of depleted, threatened, or endangered species”.

Land reclamation “was incompatible with the obligations on a state during 
dispute resolution proceedings”, it added, since it involved causing 
“irreparable harm to the marine environment”, building a “large artificial 
island in the Philippines’ exclusive economic zone”, and destroying “evidence 
of the natural condition of features in the South China Sea that formed part of 
the parties’ dispute”.


Paul Reichler, of the law firm Foley Hoag LLP, who who coordinated the 
Philippines’ legal team, said: “The tribunal’s ruling not only benefits the 
Philippines, it also benefits other states bordering the South China Sea like 
Indonesia, Malaysia and Vietnam. If China’s nine-dash line is invalid as to the 
Philippines, it is equally invalid to those states and, indeed, the rest of the 
international community.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fphilippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc770f0ce36254d8eb8a41c8802ce69f78daedfd7%2F100_0_2064_1238%2F2064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beijing%20rejects%20tribunal's%20ruling%20in%20South%20China%20Sea%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fphilippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beijing%20rejects%20tribunal%27s%20ruling%20in%20South%20China%20Sea%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fphilippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc770f0ce36254d8eb8a41c8802ce69f78daedfd7%2F100_0_2064_1238%2F2064.jpg>
 Image from a US Navy surveillance aircraft purportedly shows Chinese dredging 
vessels in the waters around Mischief reef in the disputed Spratly islands. 
Photograph: HANDOUT/Reuters 
Beijing claims 90% of the South China Sea, a maritime region believed to hold 
a wealth of untapped oil and gas reserves and through which roughly $4.5tn of 
ship-borne trade passes every year. Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan also 
contest China’s claims to islands and reef systems closer to their territory 
than Beijing’s.

China says it follows a historical precedent set by the “nine-dash line” that 
Beijing drew in 1947 following the surrender of Japan. The line has been 
included in subsequent maps issued under Communist rule.

Sporadic violence between Chinese vessels and those of south-east Asia 
militaries have broken out in recent decades and the verdict, the first 
international legal decision on the issue, could have unpredictable 
consequences.

Ashley Townshend, a scholar at the University of Sydney’s United States 
Studies Centre, said the tribunal’s decision to disqualify China’s “nine-dash” 
claim on the basis of historic rights was “a huge setback for Beijing”. China 
had stirred up so much nationalism over the South China Sea issue that it would 
now have to respond in some way.

'We won't have to live in fear anymore' : readers on the South China Sea ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/13/readers-on-the-south-china-philippines-sea-ruling>
“In terms of China’s domestic politics [the ruling] is unacceptable to the 
regime and unfortunately the regime will perceive that the Chinese people view 
that as unacceptable,” Townshend predicted.

“So there will be huge pressures on Beijing to respond, to save face, to 
demonstrate with more than just words that it doesn’t abide by and doesn’t 
credit the ruling with any legal validity and will not adhere to it and will 
defend its ‘sovereign space’ in the South China Sea.”

Townshend said he did not expect Beijing to lash out militarily but believed 
further military drills in the South China Sea were possible as well as the 
establishment of an air defence identification zone somewhere over the region.

Xu Liping, a pro-Beijing scholar from China’s National Institute of 
International Strategy, told the Guardian he believed the ruling was “biased 
and unfair”, “absolutely terrible” and “a joke”.


The nationalistic Global Times tabloid attacked the ruling in an English 
language editorial on Tuesday night 
<http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/993855.shtml?utm_content=buffer182b0&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
 as “more radical and shameless than many people had ever expected”, saying it 
had “brazenly violated China’s territorial sovereignty and maritime rights.”

The newspaper, which is controlled by the Communist party and sometimes 
reflects its thinking, also warned of a military escalation. “If the US and 
Japan use [the ruling] to pile military and political pressure on Beijing, 
Chinese people will firmly support our government to launch a tit-for-tat 
counterpunch,” it said. “We trust Chinese law enforcement and military forces 
have been well-prepared.”

The case at the permanent court of arbitration in The Hague, the UN-appointed 
tribunal that adjudicates in international disputes over maritime territory, 
has been running since 2013. Philippe Sands QC, who represented the Philippines 
in the hearing, said: “This is the most significant international legal case 
for almost the past 20 years since the Pinochet judgment.”


The judgment does not allocate any of the outcrops or islands to rival 
countries but instead indicates which maritime features are capable under 
international law of generating territorial rights over surrounding seas.

Last year, US officials claimed the Chinese had built up an extra 800 hectares 
(2,000 acres) on their occupied outposts across the South China Sea over the 
previous 18 months. The main focus of activity has been on Mischief Reef, where 
satellite images reveal the island is growing bigger, and is surrounded by 
fleets of dredgers and tankers.

China has previously stated that it “will neither accept nor participate in 
the arbitration unilaterally initiated by the Philippines”. The tribunal ruled, 
however, that China’s refusal to participate did not deprive the court of 
jurisdiction.


 