
Lauren Jauregui 
<https://twitter.com/LaurenJauregui?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, one fifth of US girl supergroupFifth Harmony 
<http://www.allmusic.com/artist/fifth-harmony-mn0003145706>, followed me on 
Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/rubytandoh?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 the other day, and I screamed. OK, so she follows 12.7K accounts, including 
someone called Briann whose profile picture is a bin.

But still, this was a big deal for me, and not only because I worship Fifth 
Harmony with a passion second only to my love forOne Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> (RIP, 1D). The real reason I 
got excited was that Jauregui had just publishedan open letter to Donald Trump 
voters on the Billboard music site 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/pop/7581388/fifth-harmony-lauren-jauregui-open-letter-donald-trump-voters>
, revealing that she was a “proud” bisexual, denouncing the racism of the 
president-elect’s campaign and expressing pride in her Cuban heritage.

Jauregui’s not the only one. A YouGov survey published last year 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2015/08/16/half-young-not-heterosexual/> found that 
49% of young people in the UK identify as something other than exclusively 
heterosexual. Bisexuals, and those who fall anywhere other than 100% gay or 
straight on the Kinsey scale, are on the up. Young people are coming out – not 
just privately, but loudly and unapologetically. Earlier this year, 18-year-old 
actorAmandla Stenberg came out as bisexual 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/amandla-stenberg-bisexual-black-identity> 
during a Teen Vogue Snapchat. Even Disney stars are at it, includingBella Thorne
 <http://www.cbsnews.com/news/bella-thorne-comes-out-as-bisexual/> and Rowan 
Blanchard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/04/same-sex-relationships-gender-fluid-queer-kristen-stewart>
, who found fame on TV showsShake It Up <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1661326/> 
andGirl Meets World <http://disneychannel.disney.co.uk/girl-meets-world>, 
respectively.

Anyone who is monosexual (attracted only to one gender, whether gay or 
heterosexual) might find all the attendant fanfare hard to fathom. Why all the 
fuss, when bisexuality appears to have moved to the mainstream? Well, aside 
from the not insignificant context of “anti-PC” Trumpism and the rise of the 
far right across Europe, which threatens many basic liberties, bisexual people 
experience daily prejudice and misunderstanding.

The stereotypes about being greedy, promiscuous or fickle may be hackneyed, 
but they’re still potent. I remember updating my ownMyspace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/myspace> page to bisexual some time 
circa 2007 (I’m pretty sure I also added aSufjan Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/sufjanstevens> song in honour of the moment: 
we’re talking peak teen angst here). But I changed it back within a week, 
because I’d gathered somewhere, probably fromHollyoaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/hollyoaks>, that bisexuality was 
basically about being horny. Saying I was bisexual suddenly looked like an 
admission of guilt.

Then there’s the “gal pal” phenomenon, whereby two famous women who are 
clearly together will be coyly applauded by the tabloids for their beautiful 
friendship and closeness (God forbid anyone should mention queerness). Before 
she came out, a photograph of Jauregui kissing another woman was leaked byPerez 
Hilton on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/PerezHilton?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
; what looked pretty serious to me was downgraded to “girls having fun”.

Meanwhile, there’s been much online coverage of “celesbians” such as Annie 
Clark (aka musicianSt Vincent <https://www.theguardian.com/music/st-vincent>), 
who once told Rolling Stone magazine she believes “in gender fluidity and 
sexual fluidity. I don’t really identify as anything.” Other popular 
“celesbians” include the actorKristen Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-stewart> (who has consistently 
refused to categorise her sexuality) and the modelCara Delevingne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/cara-delevingne>. What do these three 
women have in common? a) they either are, or have dated, Clark; and b) not one 
of them has called herself a lesbian.

Bisexuals get used to the question, “But what are you really?” It is presumed 
that you are either a straight woman experimenting, or a gay man in denial. 
(You can’t help but notice that, either way, all roads lead to men: a bisexual 
man really wants to be with a man, and so does a bisexual woman, apparently.) 
Among the communities of queer women I’ve walked in, bisexuality is all too 
often taken seriously only once you’ve got some hot young Jen hanging off your 
arm.

It was this kind of response that limited me in so many ways when I came out. 
I felt an effervescent magic inside me when I imagined a life dating girls, but 
I thought it meant I had to fully renounce the years I had spent dating 
terrible guys withCharles Bukowski <http://bukowski.net/> collections and 
acoustic guitars (though they probably were best renounced, to be honest). I 
thought I needed to be an Official Lesbian, and was horribly nervous about 
letting anyone know that I didn’t have gold star credentials – that is to say, 
that I had slept with men and so wasn’t “pure”, that most obnoxious of queer 
adjectives.

Right now, I’m with a woman, but I could be with any gender. I know now that I 
am not tainted by my previous relationships with men, nor by my present lusting 
overZayn <https://www.theguardian.com/music/zayn-malik>. I am not living half a 
life, or having half the sex I want to have. I am everything I want to be: 
boyfriend, girlfriend,Harry Styles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/harry-styles> impersonator, slick butch 
chick, androgynous queen.
 