
Every so often, as an anaesthetist, you know the patient may not wake up and 
that you will be the last person they ever speak to. This operation may be 
their last chance at survival but it may also be the very instrument which ends 
their life. Something has ruptured. They may be bleeding. You don’t know if you 
can “turn off the tap”. The patient may be frail but you must at least give 
them the chance.

Getting them through the operation can be the easy part but the body has 
suffered enough and simply does not have the reserve to deal with the trauma. 
They remain sedated as the feeling of a breathing tube and the nature of being 
a patient in intensive care would be as unpleasant as the operation itself. You 
keep them alive but only under the immense power of an arsenal of drugs 
reserved for these circumstances. You keep them alive with the hope they may 
pull through, but occasionally only so their loved ones can be by their side at 
the moment of passing.

Barriers may unintentionally fall and their true feelings are revealed, 
possibly followed by a knowing laugh

A patient’s last words can be deeply profound, even prophetic of their own 
mortality. They can be completely ignorant of their condition through delirium 
or dementia. Vital organs only take minutes to become irreversibly damaged. 
They need oxygen, they need blood and the body’s systems are failing, often 
before your eyes. Sudden confusion, unconsciousness, abnormal breathing, all 
signs of impending shutdown. You have to take over, you have to replace that 
which has failed. A tube to deliver life-sustaining oxygen, fluids or blood to 
replenish what was lost, and anaesthesia to rest a frantic brain and spare the 
memory of any suffering.

Those who you can talk to you reassure. You tell them everything will be done 
to wake them and that there will be no pain, they will not suffer. They 
understand. Reassurance is easy, a few simple words spoken honestly and calmly. 
You gauge the mood and ask them about who is waiting for them when they awaken. 
How long have you been married? What kind of dog do you have? Find the right 
path to follow and they will lead you down a road of conversation which lasts 
until the point of unconsciousness. Barriers may unintentionally fall and their 
true feelings are revealed, possibly followed by a knowing laugh. They know 
their secrets are safe.

Revelations range from patients, previously brave-faced, who confess their 
terror at the prospect of never waking, to those who divulge a sense of 
abandonment of life. They have suffered enough and want this sleep to guide 
them gently to death. One patient admitted to having enjoyed a cheeky slug of 
whisky a friend had smuggled to him just before coming to theatre. People share 
a joke and a smile. The release of a smile is echoed in the slowing heart rate 
only associated with feeling calm and relaxed. The beeping machine that 
monitors their heart becomes a metronome of their emotion.

The secret surgeon's diary: 'The anaesthetist thinks the patient may die on 
the table'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/04/the-secret-surgeons-diary-the-anaesthetist-thinks-the-patient-may-die-on-the-table>
I remember one man who was brought to theatre for an emergency operation. He 
was dying but nobody knew when. The cancer had spread and was now blocking his 
gut. He knew the operation might kill him but wanted to take the chance that he 
may survive long enough to leave hospital to organise his affairs and be with 
his loved ones at the end. His mood struck us all. He was dying yet had a smile 
on his face and was quick to share a joke. No one said “see you afterwards” as 
we most often do, we just invited him to think of somewhere he would rather be. 
He smiled again – “anywhere but here” – and laughed. He never spoke again. He 
passed away under anaesthesia the following day with his family by his side.

Only in the hours or days following the event does the poignancy hit you. You 
start to reflect on not only the words themselves but the underlying emotions 
the patient was experiencing. There is a sadness, especially when speaking to a 
patient’s loved ones, but the opportunity to reflect provides a chance to learn 
and question your own practice. Your normal bedside manner was aimed at 
inducing calm before the anaesthesia itself. Did it work? Did you quell the 
fear in any way? Could anything have been said differently or not at all?

A person’s last words can be a defining moment. You speak to families and you 
tell them there was a smile, even a giggle. The fact that this was their last 
conscious, communicated thought will hold in the memory of anyone who cared for 
them. “Yep, that sounds like him!” Another smile. A seemingly impossible moment 
of happiness.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 