
Ben Carson backed Republican presidential frontrunner Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> on Friday, lending his former 
rival a high-profile endorsement just days before the consequential 15 March 
primaries.

“I’ve come to know Donald Trump,” the retired neurosurgeon said during a press 
conference at Trump’s Mar-a-Lago estate in West Palm Beach. “He is actually a 
very intelligent man who cares deeply about America.”

Carson, who suspended his own presidential campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/04/ben-carson-ends-republican-presidential-campaign>
 earlier this month, said it was time for Republicans to rally around Trump’s 
candidacy while blaming the establishment for seeking to “thwart the will of 
the people”.

“I want the voice of the people to be heard,” he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Pathological%20and%20lacking%20faith'%3A%20Trump%10%E2%80%99s%20many%20attacks%20on%20Carson%20before%20endorsement%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Pathological%20and%20lacking%20faith%27%3A%20Trump%10%E2%80%99s%20many%20attacks%20on%20Carson%20before%20endorsement%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement&media=>
A look back at Donald Trump’s most cutting insults about Ben Carson, 
pre-endorsement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/11/donald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement>
News of Carson’s endorsement, first reported just before Thursday night’s 
Republican presidential debate in Miami, came as a surprise given the heated 
and deeply personal feud between the two candidates during the course of the 
election. As Carson gained ground in Iowa late last year, Trump at one point
likened him to a child molester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/13/donald-trump-ben-carson-pathological-temper-child-molesting>
.

“We buried the hatchet – that was political stuff,” Carson told reporters at 
the announcement. “We move on.”

Trump, taking the podium after Carson, acknowledged he had only attacked his 
former opponent “after his poll numbers went up”.

“It’s politics – he understands,” Trump said.

Carson added that he had come to know a different side of Trump, describing 
the brash real estate mogul as someone who “considers things carefully”.

“There are two different Donald Trumps: the one you see on stage and the one 
who’s very cerebral,” Carson said.

Trump responded in kind, referring to Carson as “a special, special person” 
while agreeing with his premise that “perhaps there are two Donald Trumps”.

However, moments later, Trump said: “I don’t think there are two Donald 
Trumps.”

The union of the two candidates comes as Trump continues his march toward the 
Republican nomination. Carson’s widespread support among evangelicals would 
probably further boost the billionaire, who has already performed well among 
the critical Republican primary voting bloc.

Trump’s main opponent, Texas senator Ted Cruz, has also aggressively courted 
southern evangelicals and placed them at the center of his own strategy to 
clinch his party’s nomination. Cruz was nonetheless unlikely to gain Carson’s 
support following a controversy on the night of the Iowa caucuses in which Cruz 
campaign staffers spread rumors that Carson was planning to exit the race.

How a contested convention could allow Republicans to snatch Trump's crown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/republican-party-contested-convention-trump-cruz-rubio-delegates>
It remained unclear what role Carson would play in Trump’s campaign, but the 
frontrunner suggested it would be significant and the two had discussed 
education policy.

“It was so right on,” he said. “It was so good. I said Ben, congratulations, 
you just have to get involved with us on education … Ben is going to get very 
much involved in that, and he’s going to get involved in healthcare where he’s 
an expert.”

“Ben is going to have a big, big part. Maybe Ben doesn’t even know this yet,” 
Trump said.
 