
The Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson on Sunday upended a widely 
accepted narrative of the hunt forOsama bin Laden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen> that followed the 11 
September 2001 attacks, suggesting US ally Saudi Arabia cultivated secret ties 
with the terrorist leader and knew where he was after the attacks.

Jeb Bush: Trump's 9/11 comments prove he's an 'actor' in candidate's clothes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/18/jeb-bush-donald-trump-911-blame-george-bush>
The comments, made in an interview on ABC News, seemed to implicate the 
erstwhile US ally in Bin Laden’s success at evading US attempts to kill or 
capture him for a decade after 9/11.

Carson’s remarks came as the 2001 attacks returned to the headlines, as a spat 
between two other candidates,Jeb Bush and Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/18/jeb-bush-donald-trump-911-blame-george-bush>
, continued over remarks Trump made about Bush’s brother, President George W 
Bush, and culpability for the hijacking of the planes that crashed in New York, 
Washington and a field in Pennsylvania.

At the second Republican presidential debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2015/sep/16/republican-presidential-debate-cnn>
, in California last month, Carson said that if George W Bush had announced a 
plan to end reliance on Persian Gulf oil “within five to 10 years ... moderate 
Arab states” spurred by the threat of the loss of a key market “would have 
turned over Osama bin Laden and anybody else you wanted on a silver platter in 
two weeks”.

Pressed by ABC News host George Stephanopoulos on Sunday, Carson stood by the 
assertion.

“I think [moderate Arab states] would have been concerned, and if we were 
serious about it ... I think that would have trumped any loyalty they had to 
Osama bin Laden,” Carson said.

Stephanopoulos said: “But they didn’t have any loyalty to him. The Saudis 
kicked him out. He was their enemy.”

Carson responded: “Well, you may not think they had any loyalty to him. But I 
believe otherwise.”

Asked how the Saudis or allies would have located Bin Laden in his remote 
refuge in the tribal areas of Afghanistan and Pakistan, Carson said: “I think 
they would have known where he was.

“There were indications, for example, during the Clinton administration that 
we knew where he was … If we could tell where he was, I’m certain they knew 
where he was.

“My point is, we have other ways that we could have done things. I personally 
don’t believe that invading Iraq was an existential threat to us. I don’t 
believe that Saddam Hussein was an existential threat to us. It’s a very 
different situation right now.”

Stephanopoulos said: “But sir, I wasn’t asking about invading Iraq. I was 
asking about invading Afghanistan, which had been harboring Osama bin Laden.”

“Well, I was primarily talking about Iraq,” said Carson. “I wasn’t 
particularly interested in going into Afghanistan, but I do think that we 
should have taken aggressive action.”


Carson has been faulted before for peddling parallel and borderline 
conspiratorial versions of global security history. Politifact conferred a “
Pants on Fire 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2015/oct/09/ben-carson/ben-carson-says-mahmoud-abbas-ali-khamenei-vladimi/>
” rating to a claim he made earlier this month on TV that the Palestinian 
leader Mahmoud Abbas, Ayatollah Khamenei of Iran and Russian president Vladimir 
Putin knew each other in 1968 in Moscow.

The exchange about Bin Laden was part of a wide-ranging interview in which 
Stephanopoulos questioned the candidate about his proposals on healthcare and 
education, about banking reform and about the upcoming showdown in Congress 
over a vote to raise a limit on debt the government may hold.

Most economists have warned of a potential ratings downgrade for US debt if 
Congress fails to raise the limit and a default results. Carson said he would 
consent to raising the debt limit this year but then would look for ways to cut 
spending by government agencies across the board.

Ted Cruz says conservatives' 'volcanic rage' fires rise of Trump – and him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/18/ted-cruz-volcanic-rage-conservatives-donald-trump>
Asked to reply to an attack by Trump, on whom Carson appears to be gaining 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/2016-national-gop-primary> in 
polls, that he did not have enough negotiating experience to be president, 
Carson replied that he did.

“I’ve had lots of experience doing a whole host of things, negotiating with 
all kinds of people in order to get things accomplished,” Carson said.

As examples of major negotiations he had led, Carson cited his work steering 
the Johns Hopkins pediatric neurosurgery program to national prominence, and 
setting up his charity for students, theCarson Scholars Fund 
<http://carsonscholars.org/>.

Carson was asked if he thought it would be more difficult in a general 
election to face off against Hillary Clinton, Joe Biden or Bernie Sanders.

“I personally don’t think anyone will be very tough, because it’s going to be 
such a clear-cut election,” he said. “I think it’s going to be crystal clear, 
and the people will make a decision.”
 