
When Donald Trump blasted to the top of the presidential polls in July, it 
became clear 2016 would be a very unusual election cycle forRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> trying to nominate someone to 
win back the White House.


Ben Carson's house: a homage to himself – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2015/nov/07/ben-carson-house-homage-to-himself-in-pictures>
Then things got stranger. Trump fell out of first 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/2016_republican_presidential_nomination-3823.html>
 place, nudged aside by a candidate who is his temperamental opposite but 
resembles the mogul in one crucial aspect: Dr Ben Carson, a soft-spoken retired 
pediatric neurosurgeon, has zero background in politics.

So far, the voters love him for it. Carson’s favorability rating among 
Republicans, at 74%, towers over the field. His devout Christianity has made 
him a darling among evangelicals, who count for about a third of caucus 
participants in Iowa, the first state to vote. And in the last quarter the 
Carson campaign reported contributions of $20m, more than any of his rivals.

Carson now faces a key test, with the Republican candidates convening on 
Tuesday in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, for their fourth presidential debate. Leading 
in the polls, Carson will be under new pressure to convince voters he belongs 
there. A solid outing could bring him closer to an Iowa victory and give him 
real momentum.

But does Ben Carson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson> really 
belong there?
Interactive: how Carson has risen in the polls 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/11/2015-11-carson-polls/> 
He is more than an American success story, brilliant brain surgeon and 
bestselling author of 10 Christian-themed books. He has also coined some of the 
most outlandish statements ever uttered on the national stage, a purveyor of 
bizarre conspiracy theories and a provocateur who compares abortion to slavery 
and same-sex marriage to pedophilia.

This week, Carson restated his belief that the pyramids were built by the 
biblical Joseph to store grain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/05/ben-carson-egyptian-pyramids-were-grain-stores-not-pharoahs-tombs>
, and not by Egyptians to entomb their kings. Hebelieves 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2015/oct/09/ben-carson/ben-carson-says-mahmoud-abbas-ali-khamenei-vladimi/>
 that Vladimir Putin, Ali Khamenei and Mahmoud Abbas attended school together 
in Moscow in 1968. Hebelieves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/09/ben-carson-claims-jewish-people-might-have-stopped-holocaust-if-they-had-guns>
 that Jews with firearms might have been able to stop the Holocaust,that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/08/ben-carson-sandy-hook-newtown-oregon-school-shooting>
 he personally could stop a mass shooting,that 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/09/ben-carson-creationism-six-days> 
the Earth was created in six daysand that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/18/ben-carson-saudi-arabia-osama-bin-laden-whereabouts>
 Osama bin Laden enjoyed Saudi protection after 9/11.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fben-carson-stands-by-belief-that-pyramids-were-built-by-biblical-figure-joseph-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%20stands%20by%20belief%20that%20pyramids%20were%20built%20by%20biblical%20figure%20Joseph%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fben-carson-stands-by-belief-that-pyramids-were-built-by-biblical-figure-joseph-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%20stands%20by%20belief%20that%20pyramids%20were%20built%20by%20biblical%20figure%20Joseph%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fben-carson-stands-by-belief-that-pyramids-were-built-by-biblical-figure-joseph-video&media=>
Ben Carson stands by belief that pyramids were built by biblical figure Joseph 
– video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/06/ben-carson-stands-by-belief-that-pyramids-were-built-by-biblical-figure-joseph-video>
Democrats and social liberals recoil, but his unpredictability – and at times 
an inexplicable callousness – has also alarmed Republican party headquarters.


The “political class” – a top Carson phrase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2015/may/04/carly-fiorina-ben-carlson-presidential-candidates-live-updates#block-55478bdbe4b0fc4f1b18c1b6>
 – fears him, he says, because he threatens to interrupt business as usual.

The problem with blowback against Ben Carson? 'People take him too literally'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/09/ben-carson-controversial-comments-islam-gun-control-holocaust>
The Carson conundrum is not fully captured by a list of his eccentric beliefs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/oct/09/ben-carson-six-controversial-views-video>
, however. He also confounds the traditional demographics of US politics, in 
which national African American political figures are meant to be Democrats. 
Not only is Carson a Republican – he is a strong conservative on both social 
and economic issues,opposing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/27/ben-carson-donald-trump-national-poll-abortion-republicans>
 abortion including in cases of rape and incest, andframing 
<http://www.gainesvilletimes.com/archives/112726/> welfare programs as a scheme 
to breed dependence and win votes.


He has visited the riot zones of Ferguson and Baltimore but offered little 
compassion for black urban poor populations who feel oppressed by mostly white 
police forces.

Even Carson’s core appeal as a Christian evangelical is complicated by the 
fact that he is a lifelong adherent to a relatively small sect, the Seventh-Day 
Adventist church, whose celebration of the sabbath on Saturday instead of 
Sunday and denial of the doctrine of hell havedrawn accusations of heresy 
<http://www.baptisttwentyone.com/2015/04/concerns-about-dr-ben-carsons-invitation-to-the-sbc-pastors-conference/>
 from other mainstream Christian groups.

The Adventists’ credo was shaped by the “Great Disappointment” of October 
1844, when the second coming notably failed to come to fruition as hoped. For 
Carson, rocked on Friday by an admission that he hadinvented a story about 
being offered a full scholarship to West Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/06/ben-carson-campaign-lies-west-point-admission-memoir>
 military academy, the challenge is to avoid a similar epithet being attached 
to his political career.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe474bf63de83febbe3a92b411afea8afe62f41a0%2F0_184_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe474bf63de83febbe3a92b411afea8afe62f41a0%2F0_184_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Dr Ben Carson, then director of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins, holds 
a model of the heads of conjoined twins, in 2004. Photograph: Chris Gardner/AP 
In Baltimore, where Carson was a top pediatric neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins 
hospital for 30 years, he seems to inspire both reverence and unease.

Quantae Johnson was just four years old when he met the doctor, after being 
caught in the crossfire of a gunfight between rival gangs on a summer night in 
1991.

“I was sitting in the house with my grandmother, because the neighbors were 
saying, ‘Tell the kids to go in the house because it’s about to get wild out 
here’,” Johnson, 28, said this week on the stoop of the home where he lives 
with his mother in east Baltimore. “I went in the house and jumped in my 
grandmother’s lap.”


Then the firing started.

“The bullet went through a wooden cross inside a window. It cut through that 
wooden cross, slowed it down a little, before it impacted my head, going 
through my brain.”


Johnson’s grandmother picked him up and started running, headed for the 
emergency room at Johns Hopkins hospital, two blocks away.

“My head was gushing. My grandma was running me to the hospital.”

Carson, who in some years performed more than 500 pediatric brain surgeries, 
received the patient. The bullet had not touched any of the lobes controlling 
speech or movement. Less than two days later, the boy was joking with doctors 
and could name all four Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. He became known as Little 
Miracle Man. Today, Johnson said, he suffers from occasional seizures, but 
otherwise has no residual impairments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea5eb1c5d92b5da777a0b4c0df803bd7a96c6509%2F0_111_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea5eb1c5d92b5da777a0b4c0df803bd7a96c6509%2F0_111_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Quantae Johnson. Photograph: Tom McCarthy for the Guardian 
Johnson supports Carson’s presidential bid.

“I believe he would put the right people in positions, who he perceives were 
good enough, and that would work out,” Johnson said. “He’s a very inspirational 
person to look up to.”

Johnson said gun violence in Baltimore had only grown worse since he was shot 
in the head, and that the city needed more jobs. He said that his own access to 
medical care “could be better” and that he had stopped taking an anti-seizure 
medication because the side-effects interrupted his work as a home improvement 
contractor.

But Johnson had faith in Carson’s ability to address the problems of hard-hit 
communities, he said, because that’s where Carson comes from. The surgeon’s 
mother, Sonya Carson, was one of 24 children who was forced into marriage as a 
teenager and who left her husband after discovering he had a second family. She 
raised Carson and a brother in poverty in Detroit and then in Boston, working 
multiple jobs and requiring her sons to read two books a week although she 
herself was nearly illiterate.

“It seems we don’t have too many people who know about the adversity, and 
about coming from the bottom row, and seeing it all the way through, and having 
a vision of a better world, a better outcome,” Johnson said. “And I believe he 
has that in his mind.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0af67609287385d01cf0a1438f3786db46f3183c%2F0_59_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0af67609287385d01cf0a1438f3786db46f3183c%2F0_59_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Ben Carson with his wife Candy in 2014. Photograph: Ron Sachs/Corbis 
While Sonya Carson worked hard to avoid what she considered the dangers of 
government assistance, she occasionally relied on food stamps and other 
programs to raise Ben and his older brother, Curtis. Carson’s subsequent 
opposition to welfare programs has left him open to accusations of 
insensitivity at least, or worse, hypocrisy.

He rebuts the charge in his latest bestseller, A More Perfect Union. “Of 
course, the progressives will ignore the facts and claim that I am advocating 
eliminating all governmental safety nets,” he writes. “They will say now that I 
have ‘made it’, I want to pull up the ladder and keep others from benefiting. 
This kind of nonsense is typical of the scare tactics they use to maintain 
support for their failed policies …”

Carson has called for more support of private charities, and runs a highly 
successful one, theCarson Scholars Fund 
<http://carsonscholars.org/about-csf/our-impact/>, which started in 1996 and 
now awards more than 500 students annually with $1,000 in college tuition. The 
fund also finances the construction of “Ben Carson reading rooms” for children.

What is indisputable is that Carson has, as he puts it, “made it”, having 
accrued a fortune from book sales, motivational speeches, positions on the 
boards of corporations including Kellogg’s and Costco.

In 2001, Carson and his wife, Lacena “Candy” Carson, placed a substantial 
share of that wealth in real estate, buying a 48-acre property outside of 
Baltimore in rural Maryland, thatboasted 
<http://www.baltimoremagazine.net/2009/2/1/dr.-ben-carson-tells-his-life-story> 
Georgian décor, interior corinthian columns with gold-leaf capitals, a palace 
staircase, eight bedrooms and 12 bathrooms. His mother Sonya lived in the home 
with the couple and their three sons; the family now mainly resides in Florida.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1572b65d16bde48d8cc552c8c9741f0fd5921616%2F0_324_4926_2956%2F4926.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1572b65d16bde48d8cc552c8c9741f0fd5921616%2F0_324_4926_2956%2F4926.jpg>
 Also on display in the hallway is a painting of Carson with Jesus.Click here 
for a full gallery 
<http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2015/nov/07/ben-carson-house-homage-to-himself-in-pictures>
. Photograph: Mark Makela 
Numerous 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/10/ivanka-trump-donald-trump-2016-213248>
profiles 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/04/magazine/donald-trump-is-not-going-anywhere.html?_r=0>
 of Trump in the last four months have noted his “me-wall”, his in-office 
shrine to himself. In Carson’s Maryland home, the “me-wall” was a 
“me-basement”, the walls covered with plaques. Upstairs, Carson’s Presidential 
Medal of Freedom, the nation’s highest civilian honor, had pride of place near 
the front door. A painting of Carson in a surgeon’s coat hung over a mantle 
where a misspelled Bible verse was engraved. On another wall was a painting of 
Carson with Jesus Christ – his hand on Carson’s shoulder.

Carson believes in God. But he also believes in himself. One of Carson’s 
defining moments as a brain surgeon was his decision to attempt a 
hemispherectomy, the removal of half the brain, to treat a child who suffered 
from hundreds of chronic seizures a day.

It had been decades since the procedure had been attempted. The consensus of 
peers said it was dangerous and ineffective. Carson decided to investigate for 
himself, reading deeply and consulting with colleagues – and then he decided to 
try it. He rehabilitated the procedure, ultimately salvaging dozens of lives.

Repeatedly in his career, Carson excelled by ignoring others’ advice about 
what was possible and what was impossible. He distrusted reputed “expertise” 
and found his own way, often brilliantly. So it is that when confronted on the 
campaign trail by an issue he hasn’t thought deeply about, such as one aspect 
of the US policy on Cuba, whichstumped him 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/politics-government/elections-2016/article42974889.html#storylink=cpy>
 last week, he does not register discomfort.

“I have to admit that I don’t know a great deal about that,” he said, “and I 
don’t really like to comment until I’ve had a chance to study the issue from 
both sides.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08d252146d29d0ddf146b08277e8b598bc9c50d8%2F0_84_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20inside%20the%20worldview%20of%20a%20political%20conundrum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-carson-profile-republican-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08d252146d29d0ddf146b08277e8b598bc9c50d8%2F0_84_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Ben Carson alongside Donald Trump at the CNBC Republican presidential debate 
last month in Colorado. Photograph: CNBC/Getty Images 
On Wednesday night inside the United in Christ Seventh-day Adventist (SDA) 
church, within walking distance of Johns Hopkins hospital Pastor Gary Adams and 
two church elders, Greg Manning and Parris Mitchell, sat talking about Ben 
Carson and the challenges that confront members of congregations like theirs.

While the congregation has been shrinking in recent years, United in Christ is 
a linchpin for the community offering free food on Wednesday afternoons. That 
night’s prayer service drew only about a dozen worshippers, however.

They heard a sermon about end times and the need to support those in prison, 
nursing homes and broken homes. They gave voice to their own prayers, asking 
God to work his will in a daughter’s troubled marriage and asking protection 
for “the children and grandbabies”. When the prayer meeting was through, 
everyone hugged everyone.

“The Seventh Day Adventist church does not support or endorse any politician 
or political party,” said Mitchell afterward. “We don’t endorse anybody.”

Carson had never visited the church, but he was well known, even beloved in 
the area, Adams said, for his work as a doctor and his charitable efforts. But 
the three men expressed reservations about Carson’s social views, and his hard 
line on social welfare programs.

“[Carson] shouldn’t forget where he came from,” said Adams. “How he came up. 
He should have a better understanding about people’s struggles.”

In Baltimore City, those struggles include excessive use of force by police, 
poverty, a lack of jobs, anger and frustration. Thirty-five percent of children 
in the county live in poverty, and the unemployment rate for black men ages 
20-24 is 37%, according to thelatest US census data 
<http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/24/24510.html>

“I would say that 80 to 90% of the people we baptize into this church are poor 
people,” Adams said. “And we know that because we have a Lift the Burden fund, 
and people get into situations where they need financial help, so most of the 
people we baptize are poor people. And if they cut all of those programs out” – 
he shook his head – “Oh my goodness. My goodness.”

The three men said the community needs opportunity, attention and help. 

“You hear it all the time, these individuals, they come in and they talk 
about, they’re going to ‘downsize the government’,” said Mitchell. “If you 
downsize the government, you cripple too many communities.”

“As far as what Dr Carson has done with the Carson scholarships, and his 
medical profession, it’s admirable, his record speaks for itself,” Manning 
said. “That’s why people love him, that’s why people respect him. But as far as 
politics, I can’t really say that people follow him for his political views.”

Adams summarized his view with a line in an email.

“I am disturbed by some of his comments that he has made,” he wrote. “As a 
physician he was great. As a politician, I have no faith in his ability to run 
the country.”

Ben Carson’s CV at a glance

Name: Benjamin Solomon “Ben” Carson

Age: 64. Born 18 September 1951, in Detroit, Michigan

Education: BS in psychology, Yale University, 1973; MD, University of 
Michigan, 1977; residency in neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins hospital

Career: At age 33 became chief of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins 
hospital, and the youngest-ever head of department.

Led team of 70 to separate twins conjoined at the head in the first-ever 
surgery of its kind.

Pioneered life-saving brain surgery techniques including hemispherectomies to 
treat seizure patients.

Achievements: Presidential Medal of Freedom, nation’s highest civilian honor, 
awarded by George W Bush in 2008


Gifted Hands, the bestselling memoir of his journey from an impoverished 
childhood to the pinnacle of professional success, adapted for 2009 movie 
starring Cuba Gooding Jr.

Famous for: Trashing Barack Obama’s healthcare law to the president’s face at 
the 2013 national prayer breakfast

Key Quote: “My own personal theory is that Joseph built the pyramids in order 
to store grain.”
 