
Though Ben Carson was repeatedly mocked by the media – incidents like his 
confused debate entrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/07/ben-carson-delayed-entrance-new-hampshire-republican-debate-saint-anselm-college>
 made it all too easy – the retired neurosurgeon did have the support of many 
Republicans. Just before he dropped out of the race,polling averages 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/2016_republican_presidential_nomination-3823.html>
 put Carson at 9% – slightly ahead of John Kasich and less than 10 percentage 
points behind Marco Rubio. So does Carson’s endorsement of Donald Trump count 
for more than those of theseven 
<http://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016-endorsement-primary/> other 
politicians who have already done the same?

Ben Carson endorses former rival Donald Trump ahead of Florida primary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/ben-carson-endorses-donald-trump-florida-primary>
You might not recognize everyone on Trump’s list of political endorsements. 
Here are the names so far:

 * Representative Scott DesJarlais

 * Representative Tom Marino

 * Senator Jeff Sessions

 * Governor Paul R LePage

 * Governor Chris Christie

 * Representative Duncan D Hunter

 * Representative Chris Collins 
Those titles could matter. FiveThirtyEight assigns points 
<http://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016-endorsement-primary/> to endorsements 
based on an individual’s role in office, using a scoring system that may have 
been a good historical predictor of success, but may make less sense in this 
election where political experience seems to count for so little and
anti-establishment spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/07/bernie-sanders-donald-trump-rallies-new-hampshire>
 is running so high. According to their model, an endorsement from a 
representative means 1 point, from a senator 5 points and from a governor 10 
points. The numbers aren’t looking great for Trump – the seven politicians who 
have backed him so far mean a total score of 29, the lowest on the table. Marco 
Rubio currently has 67 endorsements, which together create a total score of 
168, while Cruz has 49 points.

You may have noticed that the list of seven white men who have endorsed Donald 
Trump so far doesn’t include Sarah Palin, whoannounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jan/21/sarah-palin-donald-trump-endorsement-video>
 her support for the billionaire’s bid for presidency in January. That’s 
because, as a former governor of Alaska, Palin scores no points in the 
FiveThirtyEight league tables. But perhaps she holds sway among Republican 
voters.

Since Palin’s retirement from mainstream politics, polls have continued to ask 
US respondents about their attitudes towards her. Since 2008, positive 
sentiment towards Palin hasplummeted 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/the-receding-of-sarah-palin-in-one-chart/> 
but overall, more Republicans report a favorable opinion of her than an 
unfavorable one. InAugust 2013 
<https://www.monmouth.edu/assets/0/32212254770/32212254991/32212254992/32212254994/32212254995/40802189893/a0ea44c65f6f49fca5c5cf62a9e51cb1.pdf>
, Monmouth University found that Palin’s net favorability among Republicans was 
still at a relatively healthy +27 percentage points (among all voters though, 
her net favorability was -35 percentage points – numbers that are strikingly
similar 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/sarah-palin-endorses-donald-trump-for-president/>
 to those for Trump).

Are the numbers reliable? Palin probably thinks so. In February, when polls 
revealed that Trump was leading the Republican race, Palincommented 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/267791-palin-polls-are-usually-only-good-for-strippers>
:

Usually, I say polls are only good for strippers and cross-country skiers, but 
in this case, I do think that the polls are accurate and are reflecting that 
the American people, the electorate ... we’re looking for something different.

More recent numbers are available for other individuals who have endorsed 
Trump. So far this year,10 polls 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/chris-christie-favorable-rating> 
have asked whether respondents have a favorable opinion of Chris Christie – all 
of them have found a negative overall response. On average, Christie’s net 
favorability is -18 percentage points.

Ben Carson fares slightly better. On average, polls show Carson’s net 
favorability at -9 percentage points (don’t forget that still means that on 
average, 36% of Republicans have a positive attitude towards Carson). If 
history is any guide, those numbers could change. From March to December last 
year, Carson was consistently showing positive net favorability in polls – 
hardly surprising given that he was insecond place 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/2016_republican_presidential_nomination-3823.html>
 in the Republican race, behind Trump.

His support may have fallen and he might not hold political office, but Carson 
is still an asset to Trump. Last month, Public Policy Pollingdescribed 
<http://www.publicpolicypolling.com/main/2016/02/trump-leads-rubio-even-head-to-head-in-florida.html#more>
 Carson as “the most broadly popular Republican” based on net favorability of 
the candidates that were then left in the race. Perhaps divisive Trump (who was 
considered favorable by 64% of Republicans and unfavorable by 27%) could even 
learn a thing or two from Ben Carson.

 