
From replacing Kumar Sangakkara to scoring a match-winning century, Ben 
McDermott’sBig Bash League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> 
season has been nothing short of surreal. The 22-year-old stole the show in 
just his second match for the Hobart Hurricanes, hitting 114 off 52 balls to 
help his side to a remarkable win over the Melbourne Renegades on Thursday 
night.

Chasing a record 223 to win at Etihad Stadium, the Hurricanes looked to have 
little chance after losing two early wickets. Enter McDermott, whose blistering 
knock – the second-highest score in BBL history – set up the Hurricanes to pull 
off the unlikeliest of victories and keep their season alive.

Related: One-day cricket the victim of the mid-summer sporting pile-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/one-day-cricket-the-victim-of-the-mid-summer-sporting-pile-up>

Speaking after the match, the son of former Australian Test paceman Craig 
McDermott didn’t hesitate to label it his best ever innings. “Certainly by a 
long way,” McDermott said. “I’ve never got a hundred in Twenty20 cricket. To do 
it on the big stage was awesome.”

McDermott, who joined the Hurricanes after stints with the Renegades and the 
Brisbane Heat, said he had felt under pressure early in his innings before some 
calming words from veteran George Bailey helped everything to click. But it was 
nothing compared to the pressure of replacing out-of-form Sri Lankan great 
Sangakkara against the Sydney Thunder earlier in the week.

“I was listed to bat six for the last game and ended up going up to three just 
before we went out,” McDermott said. “It was a little bit more pressure once I 
found out I was batting three and actually taking Kumar’s position in the side.”

While the win over the Renegades is a huge morale-booster for the Hurricanes, 
they’re far from certain of making the finals with three wins to their name and 
one game remaining. The equation is likely to be clear by the time they face 
the Perth Scorchers on January 21 after an unusual week-long break.

“It is a big break. It’s been congested a little bit so far but it’s OK” 
McDermott said. “We get a bit more time to reassess and debrief this game and 
try and do it again next game.”



 