
Carson gets the nod as housing secretary

Donald Trump’s transition team announced today that former presidential 
candidateBen Carson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson> had been 
nominated as housing secretary. “Ben shares my optimism about the future of our 
country and is part of ensuring that this is a presidency representing all 
Americans,” the president-elect said. Carson had previously removed himself 
from the running for a cabinet position after his spokesperson said that he did 
not feel qualified to run a federal agency.

Ben Carson nominated for housing secretary in Trump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/ben-carson-housing-secretary-nomination-trump-administration>

Dakota Access pipeline to seek ‘alternate routes’

The Army Corps of Engineers announced on Sunday that it would re-route a 
controversial pipeline that would run through North Dakota. The decision marks 
a victory for the Standing Rock Sioux tribe and protesters who have been camped 
out for months in a campaign to stop the pipeline. The Army Corps of Engineers, 
a federal agency within the Department of Defense, released a statement on 
Sunday announcing it would seek “alternate routes”. Protesters at the 
encampments were jubilant about the decision, as fireworks were let off into 
the night. “The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and all of Indian Country will be 
forever grateful to the Obama administration for this historic decision,” 
tribal chairman Dave Archambault said in a statement. However, some cautioned 
that an appeal was still possible and the incoming Trump administration could 
try to overturn the decision. “The victory at Standing Rock could mark a 
turning point,”Bill McKibben writes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/standing-rock-victory-turning-point>
.

Standing Rock: US denies key permit for Dakota Access pipeline, in win for 
tribe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dakota%20Access%20pipeline%20protesters%20celebrate%20after%20permit%20denied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dakota%20Access%20pipeline%20protesters%20celebrate%20after%20permit%20denied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video&media=>
Dakota Access pipeline protesters celebrate after permit denied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/05/dakota-access-pipeline-protesters-celebrate-after-permit-denied-video>
Trump aides: of course he knows about ‘one China’ policy

Aides and surrogates of President-elect Donald Trump were in damage control 
mode on Sunday as they attempted to calm nerves over a rift with China due to 
Trump’s unprecedented call with Taiwan’s president. Trump’s call was the first 
from a president or president-elect since 1979, when America adopted its 
so-called one-China policy. Vice-president elect Mike Pence downplayed the 
incident on several television shows on Sunday, while senior aide Kellyanne 
Conway told Fox that Trump was well aware of the one-China policy. On Sunday, 
Trump railed against China on Twitter: “Did China ask us if it was OK to 
devalue their currency (making it hard for our companies to compete), heavily 
tax our products going into their country (the US doesn’t tax them) or to build 
a massive military complex in the middle of the South China Sea?”he tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/805538149157969924>. “I don’t think 
so!”

Donald Trump rails against China as team runs damage control over Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/trump-foreign-policy-faces-scrutiny-as-team-defends-taiwan-phone-call>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20dismisses%20Trump%20call%20with%20Taiwan%20as%20%E2%80%98small%20trick%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20dismisses%20Trump%20call%20with%20Taiwan%20as%20%E2%80%98small%20trick%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video&media=>
China dismisses Trump call with Taiwan as ‘small trick’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/03/china-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video>
Gore calls on Obama and Clinton to take on Trump

Al Gore, the former presidential candidate turned leading environmentalist, 
called on Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton to join the fight against Trump on 
climate change, while predicting an unprecedented backlash from 
environmentalists. Trump is widely considered a climate change denier, and he 
has pledged to withdraw the US from the Paris climate accord and reverse 
Obama’s clean power plan, among others. Gore hopes that Trump would reverse a 
lot of his campaign promises on climate change.

Al Gore: climate change threat leaves ‘no time to despair’ over Trump victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/al-gore-climate-change-threat-leaves-no-time-to-despair-over-trump-victory>


Death toll rises in Oakland fire

The death toll of a warehouse fire in Oakland was raised to 33 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/oakland-ghost-ship-warehouse-fire-deaths-24>
 on Sunday, as criminal investigators joined the inquiry into one of the worst 
disasters in the city’s history. Mayor Libby Schaaf said it was far too early 
to know how the unauthorized party being held at the warehouse led to the fire. 
Sgt Ray Kelly of the Alameda County sheriff’s office said that 33 people had 
been killed and there were a significant number of people still missing. The 
deceased were mostly in their 20s and 30s, with some teenagers and foreign 
nationals. Artists and advocates have said that the deadlyfire was a product of 
the housing crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/oakland-warehouse-fire-ghost-ship-housing-crisis>
.


Death toll from Oakland ‘Ghost Ship’ warehouse fire rises to 33 killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/oakland-ghost-ship-warehouse-fire-deaths-24>

Japan’s PM to join Obama at Pearl Harbor

Shinzo Abe will become the first Japanese leader to visit Pearl Harbor this 
month, the site of a surprise attack in 1941 which led the US to join the 
second world war and expanded the conflict into the Pacific. Abe will meet with 
Obama for talks in Hawaii on 26-27 December, when the two will visit Pearl 
Harbor. The trip comes after Obama’s visit to Hiroshima, the site where the US 
dropped the world’s first atomic bomb, in May.

Japan PM to visit Pearl Harbor with Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/japan-pm-shinzo-abe-to-visit-pearl-harbor-with-barack-obama>

Italian referendum defeat forces PM out

Matteo Renzi will resign as Italy’s prime minister after he was defeated in a 
referendum on constitutional changes, a victory for the country’s 
anti-establishment right wing, and one which plunges the eurozone’s 
third-largest economy into chaos. “My experience in government ends here … I 
did all I could to bring this to victory,” Renzi said in a concession speech. 
“If you fight for an idea, you cannot lose.” Renzi’s proposal to make sweeping 
changes to the country’s constitution and parliamentary system was resoundingly 
defeated with 59.1% voting against, with a high turnout of 65% of eligible 
voters. The populist Five Star Movement and the xenophobic Northern League 
campaigned against the reforms, and the results marks a victory for them. 
Elsewhere,Austria voted to reject its far-right candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
, Norbert Hofer, in the presidential election.

Italian PM Matteo Renzi resigns after referendum defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/matteo-renzis-future-in-the-balance-amid-high-turnout-in-italy-referendum>

Westbrook closes in on Jordan’s triple-double record

NBA star Russell Westbrook has accomplished something no one else has besides 
Michael Jordan: five consecutive triple-doubles, a first since Jordan had seven 
straight in 1989. Westbrook had 28 points, 17 rebounds and 12 assists on Sunday 
night, and the Oklahoma City Thunder beat the New Orleans Pelicans 101-92. It 
was his 10th triple-double of the season and the 47th of his career.

Russell Westbrook gets fifth successive triple-double: ‘I just like to win’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/04/russell-westbrook-triple-double-oklahoma-city-thunder-nba>

In case you missed it...

Tim Roth spoke to the Guardian about the rise of “fascism” in the US, saying 
he had predicted a Trump victory. The actor, who plays a serial killer in the 
new BBC drama Rillington Place, said: “If you neglect the working class for so 
fucking long they will rebel against you. There was a dire need to stop a rise 
of fascism in America and we didn’t take it seriously enough.”

Tim Roth: ‘If you neglect the working class for so long, they will rebel 
against you’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/04/tim-roth-if-you-neglect-working-class-for-so-long-they-will-rebel-against-you>
 