
Egypt’s pyramids were built by the biblical Joseph to store grain and were 
not, as archaeologists believe, tombs for pharaohs, Republican presidential 
hopefulBen Carson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson> has said.


Your choices for president: an android, a creationist neurosurgeon or a 
postcoital cat | Frankie Boyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2015/nov/03/frontrunners-for-president-frankie-boyle>
The retired neurosurgeon, who is seeking his party’s nomination for the White 
House, made these remarks in a 1998 address at Andrews University, a Michigan 
school associated with the Seventh-day Adventist Church, to which he belongs, 
in a videoposted on Buzzfeed 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/natemcdermott/ben-carson-egyptian-pyramids-built-for-grain-storage-not-by>
 on Wednesday.

The church is a conservative evangelical Christian one.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fben-carson-egyptian-pyramids-built-to-store-grain-1998-video-footage&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446715547368%2FKP_590448_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20Egyptian%20pyramids%20built%20to%20store%20grain%20%E2%80%93%201998%20video%20footage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fben-carson-egyptian-pyramids-built-to-store-grain-1998-video-footage>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20Egyptian%20pyramids%20built%20to%20store%20grain%20%E2%80%93%201998%20video%20footage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fben-carson-egyptian-pyramids-built-to-store-grain-1998-video-footage&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446715547368%2FKP_590448_crop_640x480.jpg>
In this 1998 speech, Ben Carson says the pyramids in Egypt were built to store 
grain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/05/ben-carson-egyptian-pyramids-built-to-store-grain-1998-video-footage>
“My own personal theory is that Joseph built the pyramids to store grain,” 
Carson – who last weekovertook Republican rival Donald Trump for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/27/ben-carson-donald-trump-national-poll-abortion-republicans>
 in a national poll – told graduates in his address.

“Now all the archeologists think that they were made for the pharaohs’ graves. 
But, you know, it would have to be something awfully big if you stop and think 
about it.

“And I don’t think it’d just disappear over the course of time to store that 
much grain.”

Asked on Wednesday if he still held these views, Carson told CBS News 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/ben-carsons-unusual-theory-about-pyramids/>: “It’s 
still my belief, yes.”

Fact check: Ben Carson's claim that the pyramids were used to store grain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/05/fact-check-ben-carson-claim-pyramids-store-grain>
Speaking to MSNBC’s Morning Joe on Thursday, rival Republican Trump said: 
“He’s informed me about the pyramids. I think I’ll have to put that in my 
repertoire about Ben. That was a strange deal.”

In his 1998 address, Carson said: “And when you look at the way that the 
pyramids are made, with many chambers that are hermetically sealed, they’d have 
to be that way for various reasons.

“And various of scientists have said, ‘Well, you know there were alien beings 
that came down and they have special knowledge and that’s how, you know, it 
doesn’t require an alien being when God is with you’.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fben-carson-six-controversial-views-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20six%20controversial%20views%20from%20the%20good%20doctor%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fben-carson-six-controversial-views-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20six%20controversial%20views%20from%20the%20good%20doctor%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fben-carson-six-controversial-views-video&media=>
Six controversial views from the good doctor. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/oct/09/ben-carson-six-controversial-views-video>
Egypt's 4,600-year-old pyramid of Zoser: a history of cities in 50 buildings, 
day 1
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/egypt-pyramid-zoser-history-cities-50-buildings>
In the old testament book of Genesis, Joseph, one of the 12 sons of Jacob, was 
said to have “stored up grain in great abundance like the sand of the sea, 
until he stopped measuring it, for it was beyond measure”.

After seven years of plenty, the story in Genesis says, Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> suffered seven years of famine, 
during which Joseph was able to feed the people with the grain he had stored.

Carson has spoken often about his faith, saying recently of his critics: “They 
say, ‘Carson, you know, how can you be a surgeon, a neurosurgeon, and believe 
that God created the Earth, and not believe in evolution, which is the basis of 
all knowledge and all science?’ …

“But I do believe God created us, and I did just fine … And in fact, the more 
you know about God, and the deeper your relationship with God, I think the more 
intricate becomes your knowledge of the way things work, including the human 
body.”

Agence France-Presse contributed to this report.
 