
Another thrilling game, another victory and England are in the semi-finals of 
the World Twenty20.If the women defeat Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/england-charlotte-edwards-pakistan-world-t20>
 on Sunday then they are certain to join them in the last four. The strong 
likelihood is that both teams will be in Delhi on Wednesday, playing New 
Zealand and Australia respectively, an unprecedented occasion for English 
cricket.

England hold off Sri Lanka fightback to reach World T20 semi-finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/england-sri-lanka-world-t20-match-report>
On Saturday night Eoin Morgan’s team defeated Sri Lanka by 10 runs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/england-sri-lanka-world-t20-match-report>
 in a thrilling climax. Jos Buttler’s quickfire 66, allied to some spirited 
out-cricket, gave England the edge despite a wonderfully defiant innings from 
the Sri Lanka captain, Angelo Mathews, who was hobbling by the end after 
cracking an unbeaten 73. At one point Sri Lanka had descended to 15 for four in 
their pursuit of 172 but Mathews countered so effectively that victory was not 
certain for England until the final ball of the match.

Morgan was understandably delighted by the most complete performance England 
have managed in the tournament. Until Saturday they have excelled in only one 
discipline per match but here they were impressive with bat and ball and in the 
field.

“This gives us a great deal of confidence,” said the captain. “In our three 
wins we’ve had to show an immense amount of character, chasing down 230 against 
the South Africans; then against Afghanistan we put our backs against the wall 
early and had to fight hard. Today was completely different in the way we were 
ahead of the game by having them four down early. Then Angelo [Mathews] got 
them back into the game. So it asked different questions of us. They were right 
in the game until the end so Ben Stokes’s last over was as crucial as it gets.”

By then Sri Lanka needed 14 runs to tie the game so there was still plenty 
that could go wrong. “But Stokesy has done it before – against Australia last 
year and a couple of time since. The character they showed today was 
brilliant,” said a grateful captain.

Yorkshire members reject Geoffrey Boycott’s bid to rejoin board
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/yorkshire-reject-geoffrey-boycott-cricket>
There were many highlights beyond the contributions of Buttler and Stokes: a 
bright innings from Jason Roy, a brilliant diving catch by Joe Root, early 
wickets for David Willey and some timely yorkers from Chris Jordan on a day 
when England’s pacemen outshone the spinners, who were ruthlessly assaulted by 
Mathews.

“This was a significant improvement on the Afghanistan game,” said Morgan. 
“It’s nice to see us build from strength to strength.” Whether this improvement 
is sufficient to proceed to the final will be revealed on Wednesday. At least 
England will be familiar with the conditions by now, which should be an 
advantage. The semi-final will be their third consecutive match here.

No doubt Morgan will be on hand to deliver some handy hints to Charlotte 
Edwards and her team if necessary.
 