
England have the chance to win the ODI series and insure against any 
possibility of losingthe not desperately coveted Super Series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/18/andrew-strauss-super-series-relevant-england-sri-lanka-pakistan>
 at Trent Bridge on Tuesday.

It is a floodlit match and therefore Eoin Morgan may be tempted to bat first 
if he wins the toss for the first time this series, even though Englandhave 
enjoyed two victories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/24/pakistan-first-odi-england-mark-wood-liam-plunkett-chris-woakes>
 when they have cantered past their target when batting second without having 
to break sweat or chew nails. On the evidence to date the punters at Trent 
Bridge will welcome England batting first in the hope of a bit of swashbuckling 
from the batsmen. There has not been much of that so far.

Pakistan have struggled to set targets: neither their 260 at Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/24/england-v-pakistan-first-odi-live>
 northeir 251 at Lord’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/27/england-v-pakistan-second-odi-live>
 was sufficiently challenging. As a result the entertainment value has not been 
much greater than a second repeat of Emmerdale. One-day cricket requires 
uncertainty about the outcome to be compelling.

The England camp cannot be concerned about the mundane nature of the two 
games. They have done their job with great efficiency and their pace bowlers 
have imposed themselves on a flaky Pakistan line-up. It has been a rare sight 
to witness two Englishmen propelling the ball in excess of 90mph, which hasbeen 
the case when Mark Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/25/mark-wood-says-he-is-consistently-quicker-as-he-strives-to-make-up-for-lost-time>
 andLiam Plunkett have been in action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/liam-plunkett-fastest-bowler-england-yorkshire>
. Meanwhile,Chris Woakes, now a veteran of 50 ODIs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/chris-woakes-england-pakistan-edgbaston-third-test>
, has not been far behind them in pace while a little ahead in terms of 
accuracy.

Pakistan post old-style ODI total after being snared by England’s speed trap | 
Vic Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/24/pakistan-first-odi-england-mark-wood-liam-plunkett-chris-woakes>
England are likely to keep this trio together at least until the series is 
won, but in Nottingham they can be augmented byBen Stokes, who is now fit to 
bowl and eager to do so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/28/ben-stokes-fit-ready-bowl-england-third-odi-pakistan-trent-bridge>
. It was both unsurprising and endearing to hear how Stokes reacted to playing 
as a specialist batsman in the first two games. “It was so boring in the 
field,” he declared. Temperamentally Stokes is a natural all-rounder and Morgan 
will have to be at his most obstinate to prevent him from grabbing the ball and 
marking out his run.

Nor is there likely to be any change in England’s batting line-up. There is 
always one man in any team under pressure after a barren spell. Recently, that 
man has been Morgan – indeed a run drought seems to be part and parcel of 
accepting the one-day captaincy, but his workmanlike 68 at Lord’s means the 
mantel of the overdue batsman has now passed to Alex Hales.

Yorkshire coach Jason Gillespie to stand down at the end of the season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/29/yorkshire-coach-jason-gillespie-stand-down-end-season>
There have been signs of unease with the opener in the second half of the 
summer. The most obvious was him striding into thethird umpire’s room soon 
after his dismissal in the Oval Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/alex-hales-regret-outburst-tv-umpire-england-pakistan>
.

Recently, there has been a dearth of runs whatever the colour of the ball 
heading in his direction – though his stock is much higher in white-ball 
cricket. His observation that pulling out of the Bangladesh tour would risk 
sacrificing his Test place also hints that his poor form is preying on his 
mind. Hales could do with some runs on his home ground.

However, these are pinpricks beside the problems facing a Pakistan side 
currently ranked No9 in the world. Imad Wasim, who must have the chance of 
being the first Pakistan cricketer nurtured in Wales – he was born in Swansea – 
is suitably exasperated: “With the talent we’ve got I don’t think it’s a No9 
team. I believe we can come back”. Those outside the Pakistan camp are not so 
sure.
 