
Bernie Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> has 
acknowledged that Donald Trump managed to become US president by tapping into 
the anti-establishment anger of “a declining middle class” but said he will 
continue to challenge him.

As thousands of people crowded into streets in major cities to protest against 
Trump’s victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/anti-donald-trump-protests-new-york-chicago-san-francisco>
, Sanders, who defied expectations by running a close race against Hillary 
Clinton for the Democratic nomination, said he was prepared to work with the 
president-elect to help working families.

Donald Trump to meet Barack Obama at the White House – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-barack-obama-white-house-us-election-live-updates>
But the self-styled “democratic socialist” said he would “vigorously oppose” 
the “sexist, xenophobic and anti-environment policies” that featured 
prominently in Trump’s campaign.

Sanders, the senator from Vermont, reluctantly backed Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/28/bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton-new-hampshire-rally>
 in her doomed bid for the presidency after a hard-fought Democratic campaign 
in which the two repeatedly clashed as he portrayed her as a member of a 
discredited elite.

Many commentators attributed Sanders’s popularity, particularly among young 
people, to anger at the establishment after the financial crash of 2008.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
In his post-election statement Sanders noted that Trump also harnessed that 
resentment.

The statement said: “Donald Trump tapped into the anger of a declining middle 
class that is sick and tired of establishment economics, establishment politics 
and the establishment media.”

Sanders added: “People are tired of working longer hours for lower wages, of 
seeing decent paying jobs go to China and other low-wage countries, of 
billionaires not paying any federal income taxes and of not being able to 
afford a college education for their kids – all while the rich become very much 
richer.”

It concluded: “To the degree that Mr Trump is serious about pursuing policies 
that improve the lives of working families in this country, I and other 
progressives are prepared to work with him.

“To the degree that he pursues racist, sexist, xenophobic and anti-environment 
policies, we will vigorously oppose him.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fprotesters-new-york-chicago-washington-cities-streets-saying-donald-trump-is-not-their-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Protests%20across%20US%20after%20Donald%20Trump%20elected%20president%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fprotesters-new-york-chicago-washington-cities-streets-saying-donald-trump-is-not-their-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Protests%20across%20US%20after%20Donald%20Trump%20elected%20president%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fprotesters-new-york-chicago-washington-cities-streets-saying-donald-trump-is-not-their-president-video&media=>
Protests across US after Donald Trump elected president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/protesters-new-york-chicago-washington-cities-streets-saying-donald-trump-is-not-their-president-video>
As US voters and international leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-presidency-global-reactions-trade-deals>
 began tocome to terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/trump-victory-obama-clinton-unity>
 with aRepublican White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-policy-immigration-agenda-healthcare>
 led by the former reality television star, people opposed to Trump held 
peaceful rallies on Wednesday against the racism, sexism and xenophobia that 
they say the president-elect has made mainstream.

Demonstrations were held in cities including New York City, Chicago, San 
Francisco, Oakland, Philadelphia and Seattle.

As night fell in midtown Manhattan, people took over Sixth Avenue 
<https://twitter.com/feministabulous/status/796515927017881601> and marched by 
Trump Tower, carrying signs that read “Not my president”, “She got more votes 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/huge-protest-over-donald-trump-in-new-york-city-2016-11?utm_source=feedburner&amp%3Butm_medium=referral&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+businessinsider+%28Business+Insider%29>
” and “Hands off my pussy”, a reference to a leaked recording where Trump
bragged that he could sexually assault women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 because of his fame. A number of arrests were made.


Protesters who had marched all the way from Union Square – some 35 blocks 
downtown – continued past Trump Tower, with a crowd congregating in front of 
the president-elect’s building.

“Fuck your tower! Fuck your wall!” people chanted at Trump Tower’s 
brass-escutcheoned facade, as scores of NYPD officers manned barricades, behind 
which stood eight Department of Sanitation trucks filled with dirt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-harnessed-anti-establishment-anger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc26dbeffbaaac6be9836986254a0a1229703d5d3%2F0_218_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%3A%20Donald%20Trump%20harnessed%20anti-establishment%20anger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-harnessed-anti-establishment-anger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%3A%20Donald%20Trump%20harnessed%20anti-establishment%20anger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-harnessed-anti-establishment-anger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc26dbeffbaaac6be9836986254a0a1229703d5d3%2F0_218_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Protesters gather near Trump Tower during a march against the president-elect 
in Manhattan on Wednesday. Photograph: Eduardo Munoz/Reuters 
Thousands also took to the streets in Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago>, a Democratic city that 
overwhelmingly supported Clinton according to initial polls.


Gathering for what activists called an “emergency Trump protest”, 
demonstrators virtually shut down the city during rush hour traffic as they 
shouted: “Trump is not my president.”

Several larger demonstrations throughout the day were led by high school and 
college students, including a massivewalkout at a high school 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-protest-trump-20161109-story.html> 
in Berkeley, California.

Protests also launched in Pennsylvania, Arizona, Oregon and other states in 
regions throughout the US. By evening on the west coast large rallies began to 
emerge inSeattle <https://twitter.com/Ansel/status/796537000287354880> and 
Oakland <https://twitter.com/OccupyOakland/status/796526812876578817>, 
organised under the hashtag#NotMyPresident 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NotMyPresident?src=hash>.

Newspaper front pages cover aftermath of Trump's victory – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/nov/10/newspaper-front-pages-cover-aftermath-of-trumps-victory-in-pictures>
Sanders’s reaction to Trump’s victory echoes many on the left who have been 
alarmed by Trump’s extremist statements, but share the apparent rage of his 
supporters against the elite.


In Britain, the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said: “Trump’s election is an 
unmistakable rejection of a political establishment 
<https://twitter.com/jeremycorbyn/status/796296490717237248> and an economic 
system that simply isn’t working for most people. It is one that has delivered 
escalating inequality and stagnating or falling living standards for the 
majority, both in the US and Britain.”


He added: “This is a rejection of a failed economic consensus and a governing 
elite that has been seen not to have listened. And the public anger that has 
propelledDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> to 
office has been reflected in political upheavals across the world.”

The president-elect is due to meet Barack Obama at the Oval Office in 
Washington at 11am ET (4pm GMT) on Thursday, for discussions about a smooth 
transition of power.
 