
President-elect Donald Trump drew a rebuke from former Democratic presidential 
candidateBernie Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> on 
Saturday, after attempting to put pressure on another company planning a move 
from Indiana to Mexico.

Everything you need to know about Trump and the Indiana Carrier factory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-carrier-factory-indiana-jobs-tax-breaks>
In a post to Twitter on Friday night 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/804884532671430658> – shortly after 
messages defendinghis phone conversation with the president of Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-taiwan-tsai-ing-wen-phone-call-foreign-policy>
 which prompteda diplomatic complaint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/china-donald-trumps-taiwan-phone-call-complaint-us>
 from China – Trump said: “Rexnord of Indiana is moving to Mexico and rather 
viciously firing all of its 300 workers. This is happening all over our 
country. No more!”

 Rexnord, an industrial supplier based in Milwaukee, announced plans in 
October to move a bearing plant and its 300 jobs from Indianapolis to Mexico, 
employees told the Indianapolis Star at the time. Company representatives on 
Saturday did not respond to a request for comment.

 The Republican, who takes office on 20 January, warned on Thursday of 
consequences for companies that move jobs out of the US but did not specify 
what they would be.

 Trump claimed credit for a deal in which Indiana state officials agreed to 
give United Technologies $7m worth of tax breaks to encourage the companyto 
keep around 1,000 jobs at its Carrier unit in Indianapolis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-carrier-factory-indiana-jobs-tax-breaks>
, instead of hiring in Mexico.

 The air conditioner maker will still send an estimated 1,300 jobs south of 
the border.

 Critics, including some Republicans, said making such agreements with 
individual companies amounted to corporate welfare and was not an effective way 
of keeping or generating US jobs.

 Sanders, who criticized US trade policy in his race against Hillary Clinton 
for the Democratic presidential nomination, said Trump’s deal with Carrier set 
a “very dangerous precedent” of having taxpayers subsidize multibillion dollar 
corporations to “beg them” to keep jobs in the country.

Critics say Trump's call with Taiwan may alter decades of foreign policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-taiwan-tsai-ing-wen-phone-call-foreign-policy>
 On Saturday, he challenged Trump over his Rexnord tweet.

 “What are you going to do, @realDonaldTrump? Stand up for working people or 
give the company a massive tax break?”Sanders tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/SenSanders/status/805116208311922689>.

 Sanders supports tougher policies on corporations for outsourcing. During the 
presidential campaign, Trump said his administration would put a 35% import 
tariff on goods made by American manufacturers that moved jobs offshore.

He frequently pilloried Carrier for planning to move production to Mexico as 
he appealed to blue-collar voters in the midwest, including inIndiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/indiana>, whose governor, Mike Pence, is 
the vice-president-elect.

 It is unclear what steps would have to be taken by federal authorities before 
Trump could retaliate against individual companies shifting jobs abroad.
 