
On a gorgeous fall day, surrounded by changing trees, a group of Bernie 
Sanders’ most ardent supporters held a political bonfire for the doomed 
Trans-Pacific Partnership outside the US Capitol building.

“RIP TPP!” the group chanted at the rally, organized by National Nurses United.

Trump – along with Sanders and eventually Hillary Clinton – was a forceful 
opponent of the trade deal during the campaign. Trump’s electoral victory is an 
effective death knell for the trade deal and has handed progressives’ their 
first major achievement since the election left the Democratic party in 
shambles and searching for a leader.

Nina Turner, former Ohio state senator and a vocal Sanders’ surrogate, teased 
the crowd before the senator’s arrival: “I’m still feelin’ a little somethin’, 
somethin’ … Some like it hot baby. ”

“I’m feelin’ the Bern!” someone shouted back. 

In the distance, a small commotion erupted as a shock of white hair bobbed 
towards the stage, setting off a wave of raucous cheering.

The famously grumpy senator barreled through the crowd, flanked by aides and a 
crush of reporters who struggled to keep pace. Representative Rosa DeLauro of 
Connecticut, who spoke at the rally, attempted to embrace Sanders, but he 
didn’t slow his stride and nearly dragged her with him.

Sanders swept to the stage to wild cheers. Two young women waved a banner with 
his first name written bold letters. Attendees sported his campaign T-shirts, 
buttons and stickers. The revolution, it seemed, had reached Capitol Hill.

Bernie Sanders would have beaten Donald Trump? Not so fast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/bernie-sanders-donald-trump-election>
“I’m not here to blame anybody, criticize anybody, but facts are facts,” 
Sanders said, his voice building as he spoke. “When you lose the White House to 
the least popular candidate in the history of America, when you lose the 
Senate, when you lose the House and when two-thirds of governors in this 
country are Republican, it is time for a new direction for the Democratic 
party!”

The crowd cheered and applauded, melting into a familiar chant: Bernie! 
Bernie! Bernie!

“No – no, no. It’s not Bernie,” the senator said, waving his finger in 
protest. “I appreciate your love and it’s mutual … but if there’s any message I 
have today it is not Bernie, it is all of us today.”

It’s been a whirlwind week for the self-styled “democratic socialist”. 

Since the election, Sanders has been a frequent face on cable news. He swept 
through New York earlier this week to promote his new book, Our Revolution. In 
many ways, Sanders has emerged from the party’s devastating loss as the face of 
the party’s future.

On Wednesday, the Senate minority leader, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, 
rolled out the party’s new leadership team. In a testament to his growing 
influence within the party since challenging Clinton for the presidential 
nomination, Sanders joined the Democratic leadership team as chairman of 
outreach.

That a lifelong independent is playing a key role in rebuilding the Democratic 
party is a sign of just how strangeWashington DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-dc> has been since the American 
people elected Donald Trump as president.

The businessman won the election by managing to sway disaffected white 
working-class voters in rust belt states, many of which Sanders won in the 
primary. Sanders has said that Trump effectively tapped into the 
anti-establishment anger that he harnessed in his bid for the Democratic 
nomination.

Moumita Ahmed, 26, who volunteered for the Sanders campaign in New York, said 
she had no doubt that the senator would have won had he been the Democratic 
party’s choice. But Ahmed, who wore a red shirt with Sanders’ face and the 
text: “Hindsight is 2020”, is not looking backward.

“Right now is the time for everyone to unite and not necessarily ponder 
what-ifs but what can we do moving forward to ensure that what happened in the 
primary never happens again,” she said. “We tried the establishment. That 
didn’t work. Now more than ever we need a strong left.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbernie-sanders-rally-democrats-capitol-hill-trans-pacific-partnership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b626bf80a1fb26a5dbdad7b9a54a353480a1319%2F0_284_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%20rallies%20supporters%20with%20call%20for%20new%20direction%20in%20Democratic%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbernie-sanders-rally-democrats-capitol-hill-trans-pacific-partnership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%20rallies%20supporters%20with%20call%20for%20new%20direction%20in%20Democratic%20party&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbernie-sanders-rally-democrats-capitol-hill-trans-pacific-partnership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b626bf80a1fb26a5dbdad7b9a54a353480a1319%2F0_284_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Senator Bernie Sanders speaks during a rally on Capitol Hill. Photograph: Mark 
Wilson/Getty Images 
Over the course of the last week, Sanders has aggressively inserted himself 
into the brewing ideological battle over the party’s future. The Vermont 
Senator, along with a number of progressive lawmakers, has endorsed 
Representative Keith Ellison, a liberal organizer from Minnesota, for chair of 
the Democratic National Committee.

He is also urging the party to work with a Trump administration on issues of 
trade, infrastructure and pay equity, but has vowed to vehemently oppose 
bigotry, racism and xenophobia, which featured prominently in the Republican’s 
campaign.

Sanders has joined more than 120 Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> in demanding Trump rescind the 
appointment of Stephen Bannon, the white nationalist media executive, who the 
president-elect recently named chief White House strategist.

“I think that the president-elect has got to understand that many of the 
things that he said during the campaign, the ideas that he brought forth are 
terribly offensive, and frightening to millions and millions of people,” 
Sanders said on Fox News Radio on Thursday.

The Democratic party lost its soul. It's time to win it back | Robert Reich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/democratic-party-dnc-leadership-trump-clinton-sanders>
“This is a man who was the leader of the so-called “birther movement” trying 
to undermine the legitimacy of our first African American president. And I 
think he has to say to the American people, ‘you know what, I’m sorry. I said 
things that I should not have said. We are one country, we have got serious 
problems, and we’ve got to go forward together.”

At the rally, Sanders sounded a note of unity, imploring union members, 
immigrants, climate activists, criminal reform advocates and more to join the 
fight for equality in the Trump era.

“When we stand together, Donald Trump, nobody – nobody – is going to stop us.” 
Sanders said. “Let us go forward together!”

Sanders exited the stage and a mass of supporters lunged forward to try to 
capture a photo of the senator striding back to the Capitol. Revolution by the 
Beatles played softly in the background.
 