
It has been a week since Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> won the majority of electoral 
college votes and became president-elect of the US (and a week since he lost 
the popular vote to Hillary Clinton). It has been a week of endless questions 
and limited answers – how? why? And, perhaps most important of all: what now?

More specifically, some have wondered whether Donald Trump would have been 
defeated if he had faced a different Democratic candidate:Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders>. On Wednesday, CNN 
journalist Wolf Blitzer asked Jane Sanders, wife of the former candidate for 
the Democratic nomination, if her husband would have had a better chance of 
beating Trump than Clinton. “Absolutely,” she replied, “but it doesn’t matter 
now.”

There’s mixed evidence for that certainty. 

In the primaries, Sanders gained more votes than Clinton in Wisconsin and 
Michigan. Those are important states. Wisconsin, a formerly Democratic state, 
was narrowly won by Trump in the presidential election on Tuesday. In Michigan, 
the race was even closer, with Trump winning by just 11,837 votes (which 
represents 0.25% of all votes cast there). If Clinton had won just 109,000 more 
votes in those states (plus Pennsylvania where she also narrowly lost), we 
would be calling her, and not Trump, president-elect.

But that is a big “if” for a number of reasons. Perhaps Sanders would have won 
Wisconsin and Michigan but lost Nevada, Colorado, Minnesota and New Hampshire – 
states that were only narrowly won by the Democratic party in the presidential 
election. It’s true that Sanders won all of those states except Nevada in the 
primary season but there’s a much larger caveat here: voting behavior in the 
primaries is different to voting behavior in the presidential election.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-on-us-election-this-is-what-i-think-went-wrong-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%20on%20US%20election%3A%20'This%20is%20what%20I%20think%20went%20wrong'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-on-us-election-this-is-what-i-think-went-wrong-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%20on%20US%20election%3A%20%27This%20is%20what%20I%20think%20went%20wrong%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-on-us-election-this-is-what-i-think-went-wrong-video&media=>
Bernie Sanders on US election: ‘This is what I think went wrong’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/bernie-sanders-on-us-election-this-is-what-i-think-went-wrong-video>
If we can’t rely on primary vote counts to gauge Sanders chances, we’re not 
left with much else besides polling – adeeply flawed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/polls-wrong-donald-trump-election>
 analytical tool. Nevertheless, it’s understandable why one of those polls is 
now beingwidely circulated 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/2016-election-poll-bernie-sanders-trump_us_58260f7ee4b0c4b63b0c6928>
. It found that in a race between Sanders and Trump,Sanders would have won 
<http://big.assets.huffingtonpost.com/Gravis_Sanders_Election_Poll.pdf> with 
56% of the vote. The national poll, which spoke to 1,600 registered voters two 
days before the general election was conducted by Gravis Marketing.

Even more than most polls, that one is deeply flawed because it asks 
individuals to consider an alternate reality where Sanders was a nominee. 
Considering completely hypothetical and consequence-free choices encourages 
some unrealistic answers in surveys – otherwise27% of US adults 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/would-you-waterboard-a-suspected-terrorist-easy-answers-to-difficult-questions/>
 would waterboard someone suspected of terrorism.

Slightly better then is polling which regularly asks a far less hypothetical 
question: “Do you have a favorable opinion of candidate X?”. The answers to 
that question are crucial in understanding why 2016 was no ordinary election 
year: Clinton and Trump were two of themost unpopular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/04/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-general-election-analysis>
 candidates US voters have ever been told to choose between. That dislike 
seemed to endureright up to the end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/polls-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-unpopularity>
 of election season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bba2bca63350fe0ccc564ea29401adb54d0a239%2F0_0_1500_948%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%20would%20have%20beaten%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20Not%20so%20fast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%20would%20have%20beaten%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20Not%20so%20fast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bba2bca63350fe0ccc564ea29401adb54d0a239%2F0_0_1500_948%2F1500.jpg>
 Donald Trump’s (lack of) favorability. Photograph: Huffington Post  <> Facebook
 
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15a92a6a4769d9cedc549967fc2c3c8f2049a51c%2F0_0_1500_948%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%20would%20have%20beaten%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20Not%20so%20fast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%20would%20have%20beaten%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20Not%20so%20fast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15a92a6a4769d9cedc549967fc2c3c8f2049a51c%2F0_0_1500_948%2F1500.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton’s (lack of) favorability. Photograph: Huffington Post 
The story for Bernie Sanders though looks very different (the strength of that 
feeling might explain why, in Vermont, Sanders’ home state and one he has 
served as Senator since 2007, 18,183 voters decided to write his name into 
their ballot as their presidential choice):
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe072096cdba8f80b2cbf42417de37edf751146ff%2F0_0_1500_948%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%20would%20have%20beaten%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20Not%20so%20fast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%20would%20have%20beaten%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20Not%20so%20fast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-donald-trump-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe072096cdba8f80b2cbf42417de37edf751146ff%2F0_0_1500_948%2F1500.jpg>
 Bernie Sanders’ favorability. Photograph: Huffington Post 
More accurate perhaps is polling that asks about broader attitudes rather than 
people (if we had more such polling in the lead up to the election, perhaps the 
campaigns would have been more focused on policies).

One such attitude seems important in this election: trust in government is at a
historic low 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/11/23/6-key-takeaways-about-how-americans-view-their-government/>
 according to research by Pew Research Center and 81% of likely voters said 
that federal government was corrupt according to a survey by Rasmussen Reports 
in February. (It should be noted that trust in mass media is at ahistoric low 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/195542/americans-trust-mass-media-sinks-new-low.aspx>
 too).


Although Bernie Sanders has 34 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/reality-check/2016/apr/22/trump-clinton-sanders-cruz-experience-fact-check>
 of political experience under his belt and Donald Trump has zero years, both 
candidates campaigned as outsiders and used anti-corruption rhetoric regularly 
in their speeches. That’s potentially important for votes because more 
Americans identify as Independent today than at any time in the last few 
decades. In 2015,Gallup 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/188096/democratic-republican-identification-near-historical-lows.aspx>
 found 42% of US adults said they were independent, compared to 29% who said 
they were Democrat and 26% who said they were Republican.

There is one major drawback to all of these numbers though: they were 
collected before Donald Trump won a US presidential election – in the face of 
even the most trustedpredictions 
<http://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016-election-forecast/>. Everything is 
different now, and if Sanders were to test the numbers by competing against 
Trump in 2020, he will probably be doing so in a very different set of 
circumstances.

• This article was amended on 16 November 2016. An earlier version said 
Sanders had won several named states in the primary season except Colorado. He 
won those states except Nevada. In addition, the question put to Jane Sanders 
by Wolf Blitzer was clarified.
 