
Betsy DeVos hearing prompts fears for campus sexual assault protections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/betsy-devos-hearing-prompts-fears-for-campus-sexual-assault-protections>
Guns might belong in schools due to the threat posed by grizzly bears, Betsy 
DeVos, Donald Trump’s nominee to head the Department of Education, told 
senators on Tuesday.

DeVos, a billionaire and Republican mega-donor, made the comments in response 
to a question from Chris Murphy, a senator from Connecticut who has led a push 
for stricter gun laws. Murphy, a Democrat, asked DeVos if she believed guns 
“have any place in or around schools?”

“I think that’s best left for locales and states to decide,” DeVos responded.

When pressed for a more definitive answer, Trump’s pick for education 
secretary cited a school in Wyoming surrounded by fences to protect children 
from grizzly bears.

“I think probably there, I would imagine that there’s probably a gun in the 
school to protect from potential grizzlies,” DeVos said.

The response drew some laughter in the room, where DeVos was testifying before 
the Senate health, education, labor and pensions (Help) committee. The phrase 
“potential grizzlies” also emerged as a trending topic on Twitter.

Murphy previously represented the district where the 2012 mass shooting at 
Sandy Hook elementary school sparked a nationwide debate over America’s gun 
laws. He has spent his first term as senator from Connecticut aggressively 
advocating for reforms to curb gun violence.

During the hearing, Murphy also asked DeVos if she would back a proposal upon 
which Trump campaigned to ban gun-free school zones.

“I will support with the president-elect does,” DeVos said.

“If the question is around gun violence and the results of that, please know 
that my heart bleeds and is broken for those families that have lost any 
individual due to gun violence.”

Murphy later expressed his frustration on Twitter, stating: “Tonight 
#BetsyDeVos would not oppose putting guns in our schools. I was shaken to the 
core by her answer. So should every American parent.”
Chris Murphy (@ChrisMurphyCT) 
Tonight #BetsyDeVos <https://twitter.com/hashtag/BetsyDeVos?src=hash> would 
not oppose putting guns in our schools. I was shaken to the core by her answer. 
So should every American parent.
 <https://twitter.com/ChrisMurphyCT/status/821554409314390016> January 18, 2017
 <https://twitter.com/ChrisMurphyCT/status/821554409314390016> 
Betsy DeVos confirmation hearing for education secretary: the key points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/betsy-devos-confirmation-hearing-live-key-points>
DeVos is likely to be confirmed due to Senate rules requiring only a simple 
majority of 51 votes for cabinet appointees. She has uniform support among 
Republicans, from both grassroots conservatives and establishment figures such 
as Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney.

But Democrats have sought to raise alarms around her support for expanding 
charter schools and school vouchers, which critics argue undermine public 
education due to lack of regulation and accountability.

Ethics watchdogs have also raised questions over potential conflicts of 
interest, as DeVos and her family have made political contributions amounting 
to millions of dollars toward Super Pacs and Republican candidates – 
particularly in favor of school choice.
 