
It’s mid-afternoon in Clock Tower Square in the Bhutanese capital, Thimphu. 
Prayer flags flutter in the breeze against an ice-blue sky, mountain peaks melt 
into the horizon and the crowd, complete with crimson-clad monks, jostles for 
space on the stone steps. As the sound of hip-hop fills the air, dance troupes 
with names like Urban Boomers and Half Dead Guys take to the stage. Bhutan’s 
first-ever street dance battle is under way and it’s serious stuff.

It may not be the first thing you’d expect in this remote Himalayan kingdom – 
a mystical Buddhist nation that famously measures gross national happiness 
instead of GDP – but the show is part of the brand new Annual Bhutan 
International Festival. A 10-day programme of art, music, film and food, held 
for the first time in February, it’s all about collaboration between nations 
and across genres. London choreographer Jade Shaw has been working with local 
youngsters, who had previously relied on YouTube to learn dance moves, weaving 
in messages about leadership and respect along the way. It’s a triumph. 
Rapturous laughter and applause erupt from the audience, most of whom have 
never seen anything like this.
 Bhutan map 
Landlocked between giants India and China, tiny Bhutan is one of the most 
intriguing countries in the world. Tourism was not permitted until 1974 (it 
remains tightly controlled) and the country’s ancient culture thrives almost 
intact. The street dance session is held on the birthday of much-loved King 
Wangchuck and the crowd – the men all wearing agho, a tunic with big white 
sleeves, the women in colourful ankle-lengthkira dresses – have already enjoyed 
a morning of traditional celebrations, with masked dances, strong-man races and 
archery competitions in the town’s stadium.

But with the arrival of the internet (television was only allowed in 1999), a 
curious young population (60% of the country is under 25) is dipping its toe 
into the world outside.

“Bhutan hasn’t been open very long,” says festival co-founder Thinley Palden 
Dorji. “We’ve protected our culture, but change is inevitable. The influence of 
the world is there: it’s now a question of how we engage with it. The festival 
aims to give the youth a platform to express themselves, learn from 
international artists and share ideas.”

In a world saturated with festivals, this one is set apart by more than its 
unusual, beautiful location. It’s the first project from EdenLAB, a new 
creative touring initiative from Cornwall’s Eden Project. More than 100 
international artists, performers and thinkers have been brought in to work 
alongside 200 local artists, with the aim of creating a lasting legacy, 
providing funding for the arts and setting up ongoing workshops and long-term 
relationships. Smaller events are planned throughout the year to maintain the 
momentum. And with Queen Jetsun Pema on board as patron, it has had a very big 
Bhutanese thumbs-up.

“The vision is for a world-class festival that’s unique in its focus on 
collaboration and community,” says co-director Ginny Galloway. “It’s about 
youth and legacy and the fusion of a culture that’s so intact with that of the 
modern world.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426854412588%2Fed5ee4cc-1003-4d66-96e4-eb4aa275b89b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426854412588%2Fed5ee4cc-1003-4d66-96e4-eb4aa275b89b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Costumed monks from Majuli, India, perform a traditional dance at the 
festival. Photograph: Lisa Russell 
February is low season for tourism, so boosting visitor numbers and injecting 
cash into the economy is part of the plan, too. And though lacking the colours 
of spring or the lushness of the late summer, it’s is a time of crisp, days and 
freezing, star-filled nights – and the king’s birthday and Buddhist new year 
celebrations are the same week.

Arriving in Bhutan was an adventure in itself. The flight into Paro airport 
skims the Himalayas: all faces were glued to the windows for a glimpse of 
Everest. Then it was an hour’s winding drive past paddy fields and lost-in-time 
villages to the capital.

It doesn’t take long to get the lie of the land in Thimphu, population 
100,000. The Wang Chhu river skirts its western edge and, on a hilltop, a 
51-metre-high gilded Buddha, one of the largest in the world, overlooks the 
city. This is the only capital in the world with no traffic lights: 
white-gloved police direct traffic from a prettily painted stand in the main 
roundabout. There’s an almost medieval feel about the old centre, with its 
wooden-shuttered buildings; the vibe is remarkably laid-back and the people 
gentle.

It’s a short walk between festival venues, and Coronation Park, by the river, 
is the site of most of the art programme. I watch sculptors from Cornwall 
crafting a huge snow leopard and a horse out of bamboo and paper; artists from 
VAST Bhutan, the country’s only contemporary arts centre painting people’s 
portraits; and potters from South Africa swapping techniques with local artists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426854802485%2F5c4f070a-b1d1-4772-8b0f-0c7460f5bc40-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426854802485%2F5c4f070a-b1d1-4772-8b0f-0c7460f5bc40-1020x612.jpeg>
 Jade Shaw Street Dance at the festival. Photograph: Jigme Noko Dorji 
Most intriguing perhaps is Dance Spectroscopy, an art-meets-science affair 
which makes invisible particles in the atmosphere around you visible on a big 
screen, and creates a soundscape as you move. A group of children giggle and 
play, fascinated by the shapes and music. In a dome tent next door, British 
sonic artist Mileece has crafted a musical Eden, where plants play tunes when 
touched.

For those made peckish by all that art, Clock Tower Square is full of food 
stalls offering Bhutanese regional specialities (buckwheat pancakes from Haa in 
the west, yak skin stew from northern Gasa,jomja rice patties from Paro). Los 
Angeles chefs Roxana Jullapat and Daniel Mattern are here too, learning about 
Bhutanese fare and running workshops for local chefs.

As the days unfold, a constant stream of talent takes to the stage – monks 
from Majuli, in the Indian state of Assam, perform a mesmerising dance, then 
Bhutanese rock band Flying Kik scream out Rage Against the Machine covers. 
Other surprises are the beatboxers – MC Xander and Bellatrix from the UK, and 
Chesney Snow from the US, and rapping from BBC4 Poetry Slam champion Dizraeli.

As darkness and the temperature falls, the action moves to Mojo Park, a bar 
and music venue where visitors might catch musicians from the Harvard-Radcliffe 
Orchestra jamming with Bhutanese guitarists and beatboxers – or Indian pop star 
Lucky Ali and Mercury-nominated UK indie folk artist Nick Mulvey treating fans 
to an intimate gig before their stadium turn. Later, night owls head toVivacity 
<https://www.facebook.com/clubvivacity>, a nearby club with guest DJs each 
night. In such an intimate setting it feels like one big party. There’s a 
constant buzz in the air – the Bhutanese hosts and artists excited to have the 
festival in town, visitors simply excited to be here.

Another thing that’s different from your average festival is that everyone 
stays in hotels. My base is the brand new Le Meridien, the biggest in Thimphu 
with 78 rooms, and a major festival sponsor. It’s here that the film events 
take place (Woodstock Film Festival is an adviser) and there are TEDx and TEDx 
Youth talks to coincide with the festival. Inspiring speakers muse, 
appropriately, on the theme of happiness, and eloquent Bhutanese children tell 
of the reality of life here – with, as everywhere, problems of drugs, 
depression and suicide.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426855664772%2F874ead8e-70a0-468f-a497-dbb030f8158f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426855664772%2F874ead8e-70a0-468f-a497-dbb030f8158f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In Thimphu, an enormous Buddha overlooks the capital. Photograph: John 
Hendicott 
Screenings and workshops are led by artists ranging from Grammy-nominated 
musicianDuncan Bridgeman of 1 Giant Leap  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/apr/20/popandrock13>and double Sundance 
winnerOndi Timoner (whose documentary on Russell Brand has just debuted at SXSW)
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/09/russell-brand-documentary-to-open-sxsw>
, to Bhutanese actor and director Loday Chophel. Ideas are exchanged, practical 
advice given and plans hatched for films to be made by locals for screening 
next year..

I sign up for a workshop with Argentinian photographer Sebastian Suki 
Belaustegui, and we venture out to a village to practise portraits. Just 20 
minutes from the city, we’re in a world of wood-and-mud farmhouses with oxen 
ploughing the fields. We’re invited in to a home where a new year blessing is 
taking place. The candlelit shrine room (there’s one in every house) is full of 
chanting monks and we’re offered puffed rice with sweet milk as a blessing.


From Thimphu it’s possible to take excursions to key sites, but the 
“low-volume, high-value” approach means tourists have to use a tour operator, 
and packages require a minimum spend of $200 a day ($250 in high season). These 
have to be paid for before a visa is granted. For those used to independent 
touring, this can feel restrictive and pricey, but it does cover all 
accommodation, food and transport.

As the festival draws to a close, I take a trip with British company Mountain 
Kingdoms, which has been operating here since 1986. Bhutan is a mecca for 
trekkers looking for mountain hikes and remote camping, but I opt for a gentler 
trip, combining day walks with comfortable hotels.

It’s a spectacular winding drive north to Punakha, over the 3,000-metre 
Dochula pass, which is crowned with 108 stupas in memory of Bhutanese soldiers 
killed fighting Indian insurgents in 2003. The sky is cloudless and the views 
across the eastern Himalayas include Gangkhar Puensum, the highest peak in 
Bhutan at 7,570 metres, and a candidate for world’s highest unclimbed mountain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426787171480%2Fcf9dc1bd-a128-4cc1-a48d-09025fe14d17-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426787171480%2Fcf9dc1bd-a128-4cc1-a48d-09025fe14d17-2060x1236.jpeg>
 At the festival, sculptors from Cornwall created this snow leopard and horse 
out of bamboo and paper Photograph: Sue Hill 
On the other side, much-needed work to widen the road sporadically stops our 
journey. Locals make the most of the queues by selling us tea andmomos 
(dumplings), and there are also stalls selling apples and tough little blocks 
of dried yak’s cheese. I watch a man repeatedly prostrating himself and rising 
again, moving slowly along the side of the road. “He’s earning spiritual merit 
– it might take him a month to reach Punakha,” says Yeshi, my guide.

At the confluence of the milky Pho Chhu and Mo Chhu (Mother and Father) rivers 
stands Punakha Dzong, a white-walled, red-roofed fortress and monastery. In its 
courtyard, rehearsals for a festival of a different kind are under way – the 
Punakha Drubchen is a dramatic recreation of a 17th-century battle against the 
Tibetan army. Inside the temple, masked men in full-skirted costumes dance to 
hypnotic chanting. We wander the intricately painted rooms, then picnic on the 
riverbank under the jacaranda trees, tucking into rice andema datshi or chilli 
cheese (chillies are used as a vegetable in Bhutan, andema datshi is the 
national dish).

The Bhutanese calendar is full of celebrations marrying religion and myth. The 
country’s history is intertwined with magical, fairytale-like tales of 
reincarnated rulers and lama-saints fighting the demons who opposed the spread 
of Buddhism. Perhaps the most curious of the saints is 15th-century Drukpa 
Kunley, the “Divine Madman”, a revered womaniser and drinker. As you trek to 
the monastery devoted to him, Chimi Lhakahy, it’s hard not to notice the giant 
penises painted on the walls of houses in his honour – a symbol of fertility 
and protection from evil. Those looking to conceive come here to be blessed, 
and an album inside holds photos and thank-you letters from across the world.

Days pass in a blur of beautiful scenery and hikes to remote and romantic 
sights, with plenty legend, history and happiness from Yeshi. King Wangchuk, 
the fifth king, is known as K5 and seems to be universally loved by his people. 
“Of course we’re happy: we have a benevolent king,” says Yeshi, listing K5’s 
good deeds.

Bhutan takes conservation seriously, plastic bags are banned, 65% of the land 
is forested and large swathes are protected. We walk through pristine woodland 
to a convent called Kila Gompa: the route is lined with rhododendrons come 
spring, but snow and ice crunch underfoot today. Clinging to the mountainside, 
it is home to 45 shaven-headed nuns who happily offer us butter tea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426855941610%2Fa66c193d-180d-4469-8291-d0af36f5819f-1020x680.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bhutan%20hosts%20its%20first%20international%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbhutan-thimphu-first-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426855941610%2Fa66c193d-180d-4469-8291-d0af36f5819f-1020x680.jpeg>
 Taktsang Palphug, or ‘tigers’ nest’ monastery, on the cliffside of the upper 
Paro valley. Photograph: John Hendicott 
The Haa Valley, bordering Tibet in the north-west, didn’t open to tourists 
until 2002. Yaks graze in fields, and it feels like we’ve stepped back in time 
once more as we arrive at Lechuna Heritage Lodge – a 100-year-old farmhouse 
where I’m the only guest. The owner’s nephew cooks me dinner and I fall asleep 
as snow starts falling outside.

On my last day, I hike to perhaps the most-photographed site in Bhutan – 
Taktsang monastery, or Tiger’s Nest, on a cliff 900 metres above Paro valley. 
Legend has it that Indian guru Padmasambhava flew here from Tibet on the back 
of a tiger. I, however, climb for two hours through ancient forest splashed 
with colourful prayer flags, but it’s worth every step.

I feel I have hardly scratched the surface of this land of happiness, 
benevolent royals, jaw-dropping beauty and magical saints. A visit at any time 
is an extraordinary experience. A visit during the International Festival adds 
another dimension: a glimpse of an ancient realm’s first steps towards engaging 
with a more complicated world.

• The trip was provided by Bhutan International Festival (bhif.org 
<http://bhif.org/>) and Mountain Kingdoms (mountainking-doms.com 
<http://www.mountainkingdoms.com/>). The next festival will be in February 
2016, dates TBC. Most events are free. A 16-dayGentle Walking Bhutan trip with 
Mountain Kingdoms costs from £3,225pp with flights and all meals. Tailormade 
options available
 