
Unheralded D’Arcy Short has put Northern Territory cricket on the map with a 
blazing BBL debut for the Hobart Hurricanes at the SCG. The Katherine-born 
left-hander blasted 61 off just 29 balls to help lead the Hurricanes to a 
comprehensive 60-run win over the Sydney Sixers on Friday night.

Proving much more dangerous to the Sixers than the now-banned black bat of 
Sydney Thunder star Andre Russell, Short threatened to post the fastest 
half-century by an Australian in BBL history. After racing to 47 off just 16 
deliveries, a boundary off the next ball would have broken the record shared by 
Tim Ludeman and Chris Lynn.

Nic Maddinson deserves to retain Boxing Day Test spot, says Mitchell Starc
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/nic-maddinson-deserves-to-retain-boxing-day-test-spot-says-mitchell-starc>
Instead, he had to survive a stumping scare before eventually reaching 50 from 
21 balls. No bowler was spared as Short smashed 19 runs off Ben Dwarshuis’s 
first over, then Joe Mennie for 20 off the next. Short was finally caught in 
the deep, but not before putting on 81 in barely eight overs with fellow opener 
Tim Paine to set up the Hurricanes’ big total of 200-6.

Hailing from the same tiny town as Cadel Evans and Leisel Jones, Short’s only 
red-faced moment came when he later dropped a sitter near the boundary. But he 
quickly atoned with a classy caught and bowled to dismiss Johan Botha the very 
next over to break the Sixers’ biggest partnership and leave the hosts reeling 
at 105-5 in the 13th over.

Short’s fireworks came just a month after he made his Sheffield Shield debut 
for Western Australia after the 26-year-old heeded advice from Warriors coach 
Justin Langer to shed weight and whip himself into necessary shape for 
first-class cricket. Now he’s a personal trainer and smashing fours and sixes 
instead of quarter pounders.

“It was amazing from D’Arcy. He’s real explosive and a great package to 
watch,” Paine said. Paine played a strong support role and his 63 off 45 balls 
equalled the Hurricanes’ highest individual score at the SCG, set by the great 
Ricky Ponting four years ago.

If Short was the Hurricanes’ hero, Stuart Broad (0-35) was undoubtedly the 
villain. England’s Ashes destroyer was roundly jeered when unleashed, then 
cheered after sending down a wide with his first delivery in the BBL. But Broad 
at least slowed the Sixers’ scoring rate and took a nice catch to dismiss 
opener Jordan Silk before being belted for 31 runs from his next two overs and 
removed from the attack.

But with Moises Henriques out for a golden duck, Brad Haddin (10) also going 
cheaply and explosive opener Jason Roy stumped for 40 off 22, the Sixers – at 
65-4 – were always in danger of running out of batsmen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbig-bash-debutant-darcy-short-blasts-hurricanes-past-sydney-sixers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fbb718c7f83563ecf6f89bd39f709cd54513bdf%2F0_68_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20Bash%20debutant%20D'Arcy%20Short%20blasts%20Hurricanes%20past%20Sydney%20Sixers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbig-bash-debutant-darcy-short-blasts-hurricanes-past-sydney-sixers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20Bash%20debutant%20D%27Arcy%20Short%20blasts%20Hurricanes%20past%20Sydney%20Sixers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbig-bash-debutant-darcy-short-blasts-hurricanes-past-sydney-sixers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fbb718c7f83563ecf6f89bd39f709cd54513bdf%2F0_68_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Mitchell Johnson starred on his first outing for Perth Scorchers, claiming 
3-33. Photograph: Paul Kane/Getty Images 
In Friday’s other game, former England Test star Ian Bell made the most of an 
early Christmas gift and Mitchell Johnson starred with the ball to help power 
the Perth Scorchers to a crushing 48-run win over the Adelaide Strikers at the 
Waca ground.

Bell made the Strikers pay for dropping him first ball, scoring 61 off 42 
balls to lift the Scorchers to a formidable 197-7 in front of 20,430 fans. In 
reply, Adelaide crumbled to 15-3 after four overs before finishing at 149-9. 
Johnson finished with 3-33 in his long-awaited BBL debut, snaring the key 
wickets of Kieron Pollard and Brad Hodge (56 off 33 balls). Fellow paceman 
David Willey was the pick of the bowlers with 2-15 off four overs

Bell and Johnson had a scary moment when they collided in the field while 
attempting to catch a skied ball. Luckily, neither player was hurt in the 
incident, although the catch went begging. Bell, who overcame a muscle strain 
in his arm to play, was dropped first ball at mid-wicket by Jake Weatherald. 
Had Weatherald held onto the easy catch, the Scorchers would have been in early 
trouble at 7-2.

Instead, Bell turned the match Perth’s way with a composed display in his 
maiden BBL outing. Mitch Marsh, who was dropped on 14 by Kieron Pollard on the 
rope, chipped in with 31 off 19 balls in an important cameo. And Ashton Turner 
(44 not out off 19 balls) provided the late fireworks, cracking two fours and 
four sixes in a blistering knock.

The Strikers needed to make a strong start to have a legitimate chance of 
chasing down the victory total. Instead, their top order crumbled. Ben Dunk was 
caught at mid-wicket for a duck in David Willey’s first over. Travis Head made 
just 13 before feathering Jhye Richardson behind. And when Johnson snared the 
prized scalp of Pollard in his first over, the Strikers were in disarray at 
4-52 in the eighth over.

Hodge tried his best to right the ship. But his innings was brought to an end 
in the 13th over when he was clean bowled by a perfectly-executed Johnson 
slower ball. Kane Richardson scored 45 off 28 balls down the order in a lost 
cause.

The Scorchers are the most successful franchise in BBL history, having won two 
titles and reached the finals every season. But amazingly, this was the first 
time in six attempts they had won their opening match of a season. Adelaide are 
0-2 heading into Saturday’s home clash with the Sydney Sixers.

“You can’t afford to drop those catches in professional games,” Hodge said of 
Bell’s lifeline. “It’s too hard to get wickets of good players, and Ian Bell’s 
a good player and he punished us. We’ve just got to sharpen up.”

Johnson said he enjoyed his first outing for the Scorchers. “I was pretty 
nervous,” Johnson said. “I got here and started to annoy the boys when I first 
arrived. I was talking a lot and harassing the guys. That was just a bit of 
nervous energy. Once I got out here and started bowling, it was good.”
 