
With the Big Bash League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> 
kicking off with tonight’s Sydney derby between the Thunder and Sixers, we cast 
an eye over the teams for the 2016-17 instalment of the limited overs 
competition.

Sydney Thunder

Stand-in captain Ben Rohrer claims the Sydney Thunder will continue to thrive 
in their role as an underrated Big Bash League franchise. Perennial stragglers 
through the first four tournaments, Thunder pulled off a drought-breaking BBL 
title win last season.

They open their defence at a sold out Spotless Stadium against the visiting 
Sydney Sixers, but some betting agencies only have the champions among the 
middle-ranked contenders. “It’s always good to go in as underdogs and try and 
prove people wrong and I think we did that really well last year,” said Rohrer, 
who will lead the Thunder against the Sixers in the absence of Shane Watson, 
who won’t play until after Christmas due to a calf injury.

“I’m sure the Sixers are going to be super confident to beat us again tomorrow 
night like they have been for five BBLs now. They think that they get two easy 
games a year against us and we’re looking to show them again that they don’t.”

Australia get home as Pakistan fall just short in thrilling finale to first 
Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/australia-get-home-as-pakistan-fall-just-short-in-thrilling-finale-to-first-test>
Rohrer was looking forward to utilising the extreme pace of Pat Cummins and 
West Indian Andre Russell. Thunder are expected to have a contingency plan in 
place if any ban is placed on Russell after he allegedly didn’t notify drug 
bodies of his whereabouts on at least three occasions over a 12-month span. 
“It’s obviously something that is there in the background that might take 
effect later in the tournament,” Rohrer said.

Sydney Thunder squad: Shane Watson (c), Fawad Ahmed, Aiden Blizzard, Patrick 
Cummins, Jake Doran, Ryan Gibson, Chris Green, Chris Hartley, Usman Khawaja, 
Nathan McAndrew, Alister McDermott, Clint McKay, Eoin Morgan, Arjun Nair, 
Kurtis Patterson, Ben Rohrer, Andre Russell, Gurinder Sandhu

Sydney Sixers

Dead last in their previous campaign, the only way is up for the Sydney 
Sixers, who will be coached by Greg Shipperd and captained by Moises Henriques 
this time around. The key ins are Englishmen Sam Billings and Jason Roy, who 
replace Michael Lumb and Ed Cowan in key batting slots.

Henriques said two derby wins would enhance his side’s chances of winning the 
competition, but gave no indication he thought Thunder were easybeats or bitter 
enemies. “If we don’t win the comp, I’d love to see them win the comp, “ 
Henriques said.

Henriques was confident English imports Roy andBillings would give the Sixers 
extra hitting power, even without proven opener Michael Lumb in the early 
stages of the tournament, and also possibly Nic Maddinson. Henriques has 
recovered from a side strain, but won’t bowl in the Sixers’ early matches. Sean 
Abbott and Stephen O’Keefe have also been named in the Sixers squad for 
Tuesday’s game after injuries kept them out of various recent state matches.

When big-hitting Billings pulls on the magenta shirt, he will do so with a 
point to prove ahead of next year’s Ashes tour. Having represented his country 
at England ODI and Twenty20 level, the 25-year-old right-hander has ambitions 
to play Test cricket.

A handy wicketkeeper who is expected to share the gloves with Brad Haddin 
during the Big Bash League, he’s spreading himself far and wide. He sees a 
correlation between his stints in the Indian Premier League and Pakistan Super 
League and being selected on the upcoming limited overs tour of India.

“Being picked in the ODIs in India after Christmas - playing in the IPL and 
Pakistan has definitely helped me develop my game against a spinning ball,” 
Billings said in the tournament lead-up. “You play against the best players in 
the world, adapt to every condition and that’s what I’ll be looking to do.”

The big carrot dangling in front of Billings is next summer’s Ashes tour of 
Australia and he wants to prove himself in our conditions. Billings was a late 
call up to the Sixers squad after Johan Botha received his Australian 
citizenship, opening up an international spot. He made his international debut 
in an ODI against New Zealand last year and has racked up six ODI and seven 
T20I appearances since.

“You don’t pick and choose, wherever it is, you get that call, you’re on the 
plane,” Billings said. “That’s where I am. Who knows, maybe even an Ashes trip 
as well. I want to play four-day cricket and five-day cricket. That’s my aim, 
not just being pigeon-holed as a number five or six slogger.”

Sydney Sixers squad: Moises Henriques (c), Sean Abbott, Doug Bollinger, 
Jackson Bird, Johan Botha, Ryan Carters, Ben Dwarshuis, Brad Haddin, Josh 
Hazlewood, Daniel Hughes, Michael Lumb, Nathan Lyon, Nic Maddinson, Joe Mennie, 
Stephen O’Keefe, Jason Roy, Jordan Silk, Mitchell Starc
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ab2b3ea90d23acad2a3c1fdddac70af5ea8ae6b%2F0_324_2553_1716%2F2553.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20Bash%20League%20preview%3A%20all%20the%20ins%20and%20outs%20for%20the%202016-17%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20Bash%20League%20preview%3A%20all%20the%20ins%20and%20outs%20for%20the%202016-17%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ab2b3ea90d23acad2a3c1fdddac70af5ea8ae6b%2F0_324_2553_1716%2F2553.jpg>
 The Sydney Sixers might be without Nic Maddinson for a decent chunk of their 
Big Bash League campaign. Photograph: Craig Golding/AAP 
Perth Scorchers

He’s terrorised batsmen all over the world, but Mitchell Johnson will feel 
like the new kid on the block when the sixth edition of the Big Bash League 
tees off this summer.


Johnson has been a fixture on the international scene for the best part of a 
decade. But amazingly, he has never played a single BBL match, despite having 
been on the books of Brisbane Heat and Perth Scorchers in previous seasons. 
That will all change this summer when he lines up for the Scorchers in what’s 
shaping up to be another cracker of a BBL campaign.

Brad Hogg’s defection to the Renegades left a bitter taste in the mouth of 
Scorchers coach Justin Langer, and the 29 December showdown between the two 
teams at Etihad Stadium looms as an intriguing affair.

Injuries to pace duo Nathan Coulter-Nile (back) and Jason Behrendorff 
(fractured leg) are major blows. But with Adam Voges, Mitch Marsh, and Shaun 
Marsh currently out of the Test picture and available for BBL duties, Perth’s 
batting line-up looks strong and they’ll look to continue as one of the success 
stories of the competition, having played in every finals series since the 
competition’s inception and four of the five grand finals.

Perth Scorchers squad: Adam Voges (c), Ashton Agar, Cameron Bancroft, Jason 
Behrendorff, Ian Bell, Hilton Cartwright, Nathan Coulter-Nile, Mitchell 
Johnson, Michael Klinger, Mitchell Marsh, Shaun Marsh, James Muirhead, Joel 
Paris, Jhye Richardson, Ashton Turner, Andrew Tye, Sam Whiteman, David Willey

Adelaide Strikers

The Strikers were third in the competition with seven wins and two losses last 
year, and have lost only Mahela Jayawardene of their key contributors in that 
campaign. Former Australian paceman Jason Gillespie takes the coaching reigns 
and his old national team-mate Brad Hodge will captain the side.

West Indies blaster Kieron Pollard was ruled out of last summer’s BBL with a 
knee injury. But the 29-year-old is back in action and ready to repay the faith 
of the Strikers, who have also added England’s Chris Jordan and 
wickekeeper-batsman Ben Dunk to their squad. Both will add bite to this side.


Travis Head’s six-hitting heroics carried the Strikers to the BBL semi-final 
last season and he looms as an important player again. After starring for 
Australia in their ODI series against New Zealand, the 22-year-old is now 
hoping to earn a baggy green for February’s tour of India. Another strong BBL 
campaign should boost his chances.


Adelaide Strikers squad: Brad Hodge (c), Wes Agar, Alex Carey, Jonathon Dean, 
Ben Dunk, Travis Head, Jon Holland, Chris Jordan, Ben Laughlin, Jake Lehmann, 
Tim Ludeman, Michael Neser, Kieron Pollard, Kane Richardson, Craig Simmons, 
Kelvin Smith, Billy Stanlake, Jake Weatherald
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7307fe5c986faa7f6b5639d29475c4a14d2f2237%2F0_0_3000_2182%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20Bash%20League%20preview%3A%20all%20the%20ins%20and%20outs%20for%20the%202016-17%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20Bash%20League%20preview%3A%20all%20the%20ins%20and%20outs%20for%20the%202016-17%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7307fe5c986faa7f6b5639d29475c4a14d2f2237%2F0_0_3000_2182%2F3000.jpg>
 Evergreen veteran Brad Hodge will captain Adelaide Strikers in 2016-17. 
Photograph: Bradley Kanaris/Getty Images 
Brisbane Heat

Brisbane Heat coach Daniel Vettori believes the return of his former Kiwi Test 
teammate Brendon McCullum can help take the franchise back to the Big Bash 
League finals for the first time since 2013.


Having recovered from back surgery in February and after missing all of last 
season’s tournament due to international duties, McCullum will captain the Heat 
in their BBL opener away to the Adelaide Strikers on Wednesday night.


“The guys are pretty excited to have him around. He’s one of the premier 
cricketers around the world, not only with his batting but his leadership,” 
Vettori said on Monday.

The Heat finished sixth with three wins and five loss in 2015-16, and have 
added Alex Ross and McCullum to their list in place of James Hopes and West 
Indian batsman Lendl Simmons.

Brisbane Heat squad: Brendon McCullum (c), Samuel Badree, Joe Burns, Ben 
Cutting, Alex Doolan, Andrew Fekete, Luke Feldman, Jason Floros, Sam Heazlett, 
Marnus Labuschagne, Josh Lalor, Chris Lynn, James Peirson, Nathan Reardon, Alex 
Ross, Mark Steketee, Mitchell Swepson, Jack Wildermuth

Hobart Hurricanes

Former Sri Lankan captain Kumar Sangakkara might find himself opening the 
batting for the Hobart Hurricanes as he returns to prove his value in the Big 
Bash. Fresh from victory in the Bangladesh Premier League (BPL), there’s a 
chance the 39-year-old will climb the Hobart order for the coming season.

With former opener Ben Dunk traded to the Adelaide Strikers, there’s a spot 
available and Sangakkara, who failed to record any hefty scores batting down 
the order in his maiden BBL tournament, could be a perfect fit. “I’ve batted at 
No3 in the Carribean Premier League, opened in the BPL and then a few batting 
order shuffles come the finals and I was batting at No.5,” Sangakkara told 
reporters last week.

Retired from international cricket, Sangakkara hopes his recent outings on the 
punishing Bangladeshi wickets will serve as good preparation for the Australian 
T20 competition. “The wickets in Bangladesh are not the easiest to score runs 
on - of course, less bounce - and here, the bounce and pace would probably mean 
a better time for batsmen,” he said.

The Hurricanes’ new international signing, England Test bowler Stuart Broad, 
will join his purple teammates in Sydney for their season opener and Sangakkara 
says the paceman will bring a huge amount of experience. “If Broady does well, 
I’m sure England might look at him for the future in white-ball cricket,” he 
said.

Broad hasn’t played an ODI since February, and his last T20 international came 
back in 2014. The 30-year-old has a point to prove, and the Hurricanes are set 
to reap the rewards if Broad finds his groove.

The Hurricanes embarked on a a pre-season tour to Queensland in preparation 
for their competition opener on December 23 against the Sydney Sixers, and will 
hope for a far better showing than their 7th-place finish last year.


Hobart Hurricanes squad: Tim Paine (capt), Dan Christian, Cameron Boyce, 
George Bailey, James Bazley, Hamish Kingston, Ben McDermott, Dom Michael, Simon 
Milenko, Sam Rainbird, Jake Reed, Clive Rose, Kumar Sangakkara, Stuart Broad, 
D’Arcy Short, Shaun Tait, Beau Webster, Jon Wells.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8979cb07786c8739d57c18d790c7cececacb1d0a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20Bash%20League%20preview%3A%20all%20the%20ins%20and%20outs%20for%20the%202016-17%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20Bash%20League%20preview%3A%20all%20the%20ins%20and%20outs%20for%20the%202016-17%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8979cb07786c8739d57c18d790c7cececacb1d0a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Tim Paine will lead the Hobart Hurricanes in this season’s Big Bash League. 
Photograph: Quinn Rooney/Getty Images 
Melbourne Stars

The Melbourne Stars will be without John Hastings this BBL season, with the 
experienced paceman suffering a serious knee injury in the tournament’s 
build-up. Hastings limped off Bellerive Oval on the second day of Victoria’s 
Sheffield Shield draw with Tasmania and won’t be sighted in the Stars’ campaign.

He failed to return to play and Stars coach Stephen Fleming said the burly 
quick appears to have a patella tendon injury, making him a long-shot for the 
2016-17 BBL campaign. It’s been a frustrating summer for the 31-year-old.

The one-Test player was left out of Australia’s recent one-day series against 
New Zealand after a late start to the domestic season due to a broken finger. 
He played only one-day cup clash for the Bushrangers in October before pulling 
up lame in his second Sheffield Shield outing. He was one of Australia’s best 
bowlers in this year’s ODI series against Sri Lanka before also playing in the 
five-match whitewash loss to South Africa.

The Stars begin their BBL season on Boxing Day against the Hurricanes in 
Hobart. The rivalry between them and the Melbourne Renegades was one of the 
highlights last season. Over 80,000 turned out to see the cross-town rivals 
slug it out last January, and a similar crowd could be on offer when they lock 
horns again at the MCG on New Year’s day.

The Stars, boasting the likes of Kevin Pietersen, David Hussey, James 
Faulkner, and Glenn Maxwell, will start as one of the title favourites this 
summer.

Melbourne Stars squad: David Hussey (c), Michael Beer, Scott Boland, James 
Faulkner, Seb Gotch, Evan Gulbis, Peter Handscomb, Sam Harper, John Hastings, 
Ben Hilfenhaus, Glenn Maxwell, Kevin Pietersen, Rob Quiney, Marcus Stoinis, Tom 
Triffitt, Daniel Worrall, Luke Wright, Adam Zampa
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd905548c562a998f8c35548a1c739ac7c2114b6%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20Bash%20League%20preview%3A%20all%20the%20ins%20and%20outs%20for%20the%202016-17%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20Bash%20League%20preview%3A%20all%20the%20ins%20and%20outs%20for%20the%202016-17%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fbig-bash-league-preview-all-the-ins-and-outs-for-the-2016-17-tournament%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd905548c562a998f8c35548a1c739ac7c2114b6%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 The Melbourne derby will again draw one of the most passionate and vocal Big 
Bash crowds. Photograph: Darrian Traynor/Getty Images 
Melbourne Renegades

The Stars’ cross-town rivals are also expected to fair well, despite losing 
West Indies superstar Chris Gayle. Covering for the loss of their controversial 
opening batsmen is in-form Victorian opener Marcus Harris, with spinners Brad 
Hogg and Sunil Narine and paceman James Pattinson completing a healthy list of 
ins.

The Renegades were disappointed with their fifth placing last year and coach 
Andrew McDonald should generally have a full squad to choose from, with little 
threat of his players being called off for international duty, save for Matthew 
Wade and Peter Siddle.

Pattinson has plenty to prove. Like Pat Cummins, he was poised for a 
long-anticipated return to Australia’s Test side next summer after a spell on 
the sidelines. Pattinson hasn’t represented his country since February’s tour 
of New Zealand and the explosive quick will be desperate to prove his fitness.

Melbourne Renegades squad: Aaron Finch (c), Tom Beaton, Dwayne Bravo, Tom 
Cooper, Xavier Doherty, Callum Ferguson, Marcus Harris, Brad Hogg, Sunil 
Narine, Peter Nevill, James Pattinson, Nathan Rimmington, Peter Siddle, Chris 
Tremain, Matthew Wade, Matthew Short, Cameron White, Nick Winter
 