
London bridge is falling down

It was the Kevlar-coated vanity project that could survive missiles of common 
sense fired from every direction. But theGarden Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2016/jun/16/garden-bridge-london-blackfriars-trees-allies-and-morrison>
’s aura of invincibility looks as if it might finally be wearing off.


UK transport secretary Chris Grayling is to decide this week whether to extend 
the £15m central government guarantee for the £175m project, currently due to 
expire in September, and he is understood to be considering every option. With 
capital spending coming under increasing scrutiny since the EU referendum, 
murmurs from Whitehall suggest that former mayor of London Boris Johnson is now 
the“lone voice” <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-36891304> in the cabinet 
in support of the project.

HS2 and the garden bridge are vanity projects – it's not too late to scrap 
both | Catherine Bennett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/23/boris-johnson-george-osborne-follies-thames-garden-bridge-hs2>
His mayoral successor, Sadiq Khan, meanwhile, is clearly keen to find an 
expedient way out. A reluctant supporter of the bridge, based on the odd logic 
that it would cost more to cancel it, Khansuspended preparatory construction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/london-mayor-sadiq-khan-blocks-extra-funds-garden-bridge>
 work in early July over fears that it would require more public money.

Before construction has even begun, the Garden Bridge Trust has somehow burned 
through more than half of the £60m of public funds earmarked for the project, 
and it still has a funding gap of roughly £32m. There’s little confidence that 
the bridge boosters have any idea how to fill this gap, let alone how to 
generate the income needed to cover the estimated £3m annual operating costs.

An independent report on the project’s business plan, published by Dan 
Anderson of the tourism consultancy Fourth Street, concluded it would have been 
“unlikely to pass muster for even a small grant from one of the traditional 
Lottery funds”. It was so flawed,Anderson told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/21/london-garden-bridge-may-need-taxpayer-bailout-once-built-report-says>
, he believed the trust was going forward on the assumption that the taxpayer 
would bail it out if necessary.

Such is the unease surrounding how this costly “tiara” for the Thames got so 
far, it is now subject to four official inquiries. TheNational Audit Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/national-audit-office-investigates-london-garden-bridge-grant-boris-johnson>
 has launched an investigation into the £30m given by the Department for 
Transport, Transport for London has appointedErnst & Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/14/sadiq-khan-thames-garden-bridge-boris-johnson-mayor-london>
 to carry out an audit of its £30m, Sadiq Khan is scrutinising the procurement 
process and the Charity Commission has opened an “operational compliance 
<http://www.civilsociety.co.uk/finance/news/content/22067/charity_commission_looking_into_complaints_at_garden_bridge_trust>
” case into how on earth the trust is managing to spend all the money so 
quickly.

Whether the saga will grind on, or the £37m be written off in a puff of 
green-tinged smoke, the Garden Bridge will stand as the disastrous epitaph of 
an Ozymandian mayor who left the capital strewn with the wreckage of his own 
self-promotion, a city littered with forlorn relics of his botched backroom 
deals.


The empty dangleway
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F117cee8155fccc1e9d8b1b1cd2e85bba9908b75e%2F0_0_5241_3145%2F5241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bikes%2C%20buses%20and%20bridges%3A%20Boris%20Johnson%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20design%20blunders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bikes%2C%20buses%20and%20bridges%3A%20Boris%20Johnson%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20design%20blunders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F117cee8155fccc1e9d8b1b1cd2e85bba9908b75e%2F0_0_5241_3145%2F5241.jpg>
 Stairway to nowhere … the Emirates Air Line, also known as the Thames cable 
car. Photograph: Image Broker/Rex Shutterstock 
The first in a grand series of Boris Johnson’s novelty infrastructure projects 
that didn’t quite go according to plan, theThames cable car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/shortcuts/2013/feb/18/emirates-air-line-cable-car-london>
 was to be a “stunning addition to London’s transport network” – a vital link 
that would also be a thrilling attraction, with its £25m price tag paid for 
entirely by private sponsorship. Costs ballooned to £60m, £24m of which was 
picked up by the taxpayer, while the sponsor, Emirates airline, had its name 
tattooed on the tube map in perpetuity. Only after the dangleway was erected, 
and its Jestsons’-style cabins were slung across the river in the manner of a 
1960s Expo park, did anyone realise there wasn’t actually much demand to travel 
between the Greenwich Peninsula and the Royal Docks. Just two years after it 
opened, it didn’t havea single regular user 
<http://londonist.com/2015/12/cable-car-still-has-no-regular-users>.

The sauna on wheels
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb2c7593cda4a6a1c6ebe556ea3d403aa4020b09%2F72_120_3833_2299%2F3833.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bikes%2C%20buses%20and%20bridges%3A%20Boris%20Johnson%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20design%20blunders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bikes%2C%20buses%20and%20bridges%3A%20Boris%20Johnson%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20design%20blunders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb2c7593cda4a6a1c6ebe556ea3d403aa4020b09%2F72_120_3833_2299%2F3833.jpg>
 Mobile sweatbox … Boris Johnson launching London’s Routemaster bus in 2011. 
Photograph: Jonathan Hordle/Rex Shutterstock 
As temperatures soared to 33.5C (92F) in parts of the UK last week, the true 
horror ofThomas Heatherwick’s mobile sweatbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/23/boris-johnson-george-osborne-follies-thames-garden-bridge-hs2>
 was revealed, forcing customers to flee for fear of suffocating. The project 
that most encapsulates Johnson’s mayoralty, the New Routemaster was to 
represent a triumphant return to the glory days of London transport with a 
nostalgic design that would bring back conductors and a “hop on, hop off” back 
door, as well as be more fuel efficient – with all costs “borne by the 
industry”. In reality, Transport for London (TfL) footed the £11m development 
bill, while the finished buscost twice as much 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/03/new-routemaster-old-london-bus-boris-johnson>
 as a regular double-decker. They lack openable windows, suffer from dodgy air 
conditioning, and have proved just as polluting as the old buses, while the 
promised second conductor was too expensive to implement, so the back door 
remains mostly closed.


Branded biking 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc9f8ea62f662c74e954ee156d4647f31a38330b%2F28_252_2802_3502%2F2802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bikes%2C%20buses%20and%20bridges%3A%20Boris%20Johnson%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20design%20blunders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bikes%2C%20buses%20and%20bridges%3A%20Boris%20Johnson%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20design%20blunders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc9f8ea62f662c74e954ee156d4647f31a38330b%2F28_252_2802_3502%2F2802.jpg>
 Weeeee … Boris Johnson as mayor of London in 2012. Photograph: Julian 
Makey/Rex Features 
Although the cycle hire scheme was the plan of his predecessor Ken 
Livingstone, “Boris bikes” proved to have a better ring to it than “Ken’s 
cycles”. Once again, the project was intended to be rolled out“at no cost to 
the taxpayer” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/10/barclays-set-to-ditch-boris-bike-sponsorship>
: in return for mountains of cash, Barclays bank would be allowed to transform 
London’s streets into an endless blue billboard with its branded “cycle 
superhighways”. In fact, the sponsorship deal, now handed over to Santander,
covers a fraction of the running costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/11/barclays-boris-bike-sponsorship-bad-deal-london>
, leaving TfL with an £11m annual bill (the equivalent scheme in Parismakes 
£12m a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/27/london-boris-bikes-painted-red-santander-sponsorship-deal>
for the city).

The colossus of Stratford

Fearing that a “flat-pack” stadium set in the post-industrial wilds of the 
East End might not have quite the glamour needed for the global televised 
spectacle of the Olympic Games, Johnson hatched a plan. “We decided we needed 
something extra,”he said 
<http://www.domusweb.it/en/op-ed/2011/11/09/untangling-the-orbit.html>. 
“Something to arouse the curiosity and wonder of Londoners and visitors.”

Into Orbit: my dizzying drop down the world's biggest slide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/23/carsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride>
The result, allegedly spawned from a chance meeting in the cloakrooms at 
Davos, was the ArcelorMittal Orbit,a knotted tangle of steel by Anish Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/may/06/olympics-orbit-anish-kapoor>
 that looms above the park as a monument to metal magnate Lakshmi Mittal, then 
the country’s richest man. Following the recurring theme, this privately 
sponsored “gift” has cost Londoners £10,000 a week to maintain. It was recently 
adorned with a£3m slide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/23/carsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride>
 in the hope of recouping costs, finally giving this grotesque white elephant a 
function of sorts.


A compromised Olympic-scape 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aa4252023099ae2f9b8acdbf251bf8adfcea345%2F350_165_4515_2709%2F4515.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bikes%2C%20buses%20and%20bridges%3A%20Boris%20Johnson%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20design%20blunders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bikes%2C%20buses%20and%20bridges%3A%20Boris%20Johnson%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20design%20blunders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fbikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aa4252023099ae2f9b8acdbf251bf8adfcea345%2F350_165_4515_2709%2F4515.jpg>
 Olympic hopeful … aerial view of Stratford and Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park. 
Photograph: Loop Images/UIG via Getty Images 
A glory hard-won by his predecessor, Johnson nonetheless basked in the success 
of the 2012 Games, declaring himself chair of the London Legacy Development 
Corporation and taking credit for the miraculous regeneration of the entire 
Lower Lea Valley. Yet, under Johnson, the promised legacy plan took on a very 
different character. The pledge of 10,000 new homes mysteriouslydwindled to 
6,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/davehillblog/2015/jul/23/london-olympic-legacy-three-years-on-2012-games>
 in the park. The athletes’ village, builtat a cost of £1.1bn 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/olympics/8697749/London-2012-Olympics-Athletes-village-sold-to-investment-arm-of-Qatari-ruling-family.html>
, was sold for abouthalf that price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/aug/12/olympic-village-qatari-ruling-family>
 to Qatar. The promise of 50% affordable homes, with sites set aside for 
community-led housing projects,also evaporated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/jul/08/whats-happened-to-affordable-housing-on-londons-olympic-park>
: plots have instead been sold to the usual volume house builders, with 
affordable levels reaching a maximum of 30%.


A plague of tacky towers

Drab, featureless and phallocratic is how Johnson described the rash of 27 
tall buildings 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/no-one-wants-ken%E2%80%99s-%E2%80%9Cphallocratic%E2%80%9D-towers-says-johnson/3100761.article>
 that Ken Livingstone had waved through, a pox that was fast threatening to 
turn London into “Dubai-on-Thames”. His solution? If you can’t beat ’em, join 
’em. At the end of his tenure, there area further 436 towers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/09/london-changing-skyline-tall-buildings-planned>
 in the pipeline, scattered indiscriminately from Bermondsey to Battersea and 
beyond. Slammed by former City planning chief and tower cheerleader Peter Rees 
as “piles of safe-deposit boxes”, they are of an architectural quality that
plumbs the depths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/25/planners-must-take-back-control-of-london>
 of even the most venal speculative developers’ pattern books. One silver 
lining of the Brexit doom-cloud: many of them may now be halted.

Unaffordable housing

Growing pains: how will London house 1.5 million more people by 2030?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2016/feb/05/growing-london-more-people-2030-town-planning-development>
Johnson boasts that he built more affordable homes in his two terms than 
Livingstone ever managed – a statistic that conveniently ignores that the 
definition of “affordable” was utterly transformed during his tenure. 
Previously linked to local incomes, it now means anything up to 80% of market 
rate – by no means affordable to the majority of Londoners. Westminster council 
warned Johnson the new policy would require council tenants in a three-bedroom 
home in the borough to havean annual income of £109,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2014/feb/03/affordable-housing-meaning-rent-social-housing>
, while noting half its social rented households receive an income of less than 
£12,000 a year. Johnson also abandoned Livingstone’s 50% affordable target, 
allowing developers to hide behind theirconfidential viability assessments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/25/london-developers-viability-planning-affordable-social-housing-regeneration-oliver-wainwright>
 to justify levels as low as 10%.

Abuse of the planning system

The mayor has the power to “call in” major schemes deemed to be of “strategic 
importance” to London and overturn decisions made by the local planning 
authority. Of the 14 schemes Johnson called in, 13 were decided in favour of 
the developer, betraying a hunger to bolster his figures no matter what the 
cost to the local area. Almost two-thirds of developments breached the mayor’s 
own density guidelines. From Convoys Wharf to Mount Pleasant, Johnson ended up 
using his powers toactively prevent councils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/jan/29/boris-johnsons-abuse-of-planning-power-is-an-assault-on-democracy>
 from providing low-rented housing where there was urgent local need for it, 
while setting a dangerous precedent for bypassing the democratic planning 
process. The result: a city where developers call the tune.
 