
Silicon Valley venture capitalist and billionaire Vinod Khosla, who has been 
engaged in a legal battle over public access to a beloved surfing beach that 
sits on his land, issuing two state agencies 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/2016/10/16/peninsula-martins-beach-owner-sues-state-panels-county/?utm_medium=Social&utm_campaign=Echobox&utm_source=Twitter&utm_term=Autofeed>
 accusing them of using “coercion and harassment” to take away his private 
property rights – an allegation one campaign group describes as “absurd”.

Khosla, who has a net worth of $1.55bn, co-founded the technology company Sun 
Microsystems and now runs the venture capital firm Khosla Ventures. In 2008, he 
bought a 53-acre section of Martins Beach near Half Moon Bay, about 30 miles 
south ofSan Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco>.

In California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, all beaches 
are open to the public up to the “mean high tide line”, broadly defined as the 
portion of the beach where the sand is wet.

To honor this, the previous owners of the land had given members of the public 
access to the beach via a private road, charging a fee for parking. It was a 
popular spot for fishing, picnicking and surfing.

Silicon Valley billionaire demands $30m to restore access to former public 
beach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/23/vinod-khosla-martins-beach-silicon-valley-billionaire-public-access-beach>
When Khosla took over the property, he initially continued to allow public 
access, but in 2010 he closed the gate and painted over the billboard welcoming 
people to the beach. This prompted multiple lawsuits from campaign groups 
seeking continued access to Martins Beach and the introduction ofnew state 
legislation 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/2014/10/28/governor-signs-martins-beach-legislation-sb-968-calls-for-negotiations-to-begin-with-silicon-valley-billionaire-to-restore-public-access-to-the-beach-2/>
.

Khosla’s lawyers have now filed a suit 
<http://publicfiles.surfrider.org/martins/gov.uscourts.cand.303618.1.0.pdf> 
against the California coastal commission, state lands commission and San Mateo 
County, claiming that state and local officials have unfairly and irrationally 
targeted Khosla to force him to either keep the beach road open year-round for 
a small entrance fee or apply for a permit to close the beach.

Filed on 30 September, the complaint 
<http://publicfiles.surfrider.org/martins/gov.uscourts.cand.303618.1.0.pdf> 
argues that both commissions and San Mateo County have engaged “in an 
intentional course of conduct to harass, coerce and single out” the owners of 
the land and “frustrate their legitimate private property rights for purely 
personal and political reasons”. Such conduct violates Khosla’s constitutional 
rights, the complaint states.

Khosla’s lawyers point out that the Deeney family, which owned the property 
from the 1900s to 2008, was not subject to the same scrutiny. It was the Deeney 
family who installed a fence, locked gate and “no trespassing” signs, and they 
would lock the gate to close the road to the beach “any time they felt like it”.

“It was routinely closed for private events and in the winter. They did not 
apply for a permit and were never told by any public official or entity that a 
permit was required,” said Khosla’s attorney, Dori Yob, in a statement.

“However, when the subsequent owner continued these practices they were met 
with threats and harassment in an attempt to coerce them to forfeit their 
private property rights and allow public access to the property on terms of the 
County and Coastal Commission’s choosing,” she added.

Yob also said there had been “extensive misreporting” in the media about the 
case, including the assertion, first made in theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/24/business/tech-mogul-asks-for-30-million-to-reopen-martins-beach.html?module=WatchingPortal&region=c-column-middle-span-region&pgType=Homepage&action=click&mediaId=thumb_square&state=standard&contentPlacement=1&version=internal&contentCollection=www.nytimes.com&contentId=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.nytimes.com%2F2016%2F02%2F24%2Fbusiness%2Ftech-mogul-asks-for-30-million-to-reopen-martins-beach.html&eventName=Watching-article-click&_r=1>
, that Khosla offered to sell access rights to the beach for $30m. “There was 
never an offer to sell,” she said.

Yob points out that the Deeney family sold the property because it was 
unprofitable and that the state had an opportunity to buy it but decided not 
to. “Now it wants for free what they did not want to pay for,” Yob said.

The Surfrider Foundation, a group that has campaigned to restore public access 
to the beach, disagrees with Yob’s interpretation of events.

“To allege unfair treatment is absurd,” said the foundation’s legal director, 
Angela Howe, ina statement 
<http://www.surfrider.org/coastal-blog/entry/khosla-comes-out-swinging-new-lawsuit-filed-against-ccc-slc-and-county-by-m>
. “Khosla is merely being asked by the county, state lands commission and 
coastal commission to follow the law and honor the beach access rights of 
California citizens.”

“I don’t know how state agencies could harass and coerce such a powerful man,” 
she added in a phone interview. “It’s almost laughable.”

The Deeneys wanted people to enjoy the beach and worked with local officials 
to make that possible, she said. Khosla is being treated differently than the 
Deeney family because he acted very differently – with “total disregard” for 
the public’s right to access and enjoy the beach.

“Martins Beach is part of the fabric of the community of Half Moon Bay and has 
been open for generations to the public,” said Howe.

“As San Francisco is becoming gentrified, you are getting a lot of money from 
Silicon Valley <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> taking 
away public resources. This makes it especially offensive to the everyman.”
 