
Few will be surprised to learn that Björk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/12/bjork-interview-vulnicura-breakup-punk-iceland-revolution>
 admits she can be something of a control freak when it comes to her musical 
output.

“When I make my music I am a bit of a tyrant – it is my world and people 
follow my vision,” she says with a giggle. “But with the visuals it’s more of a 
collaboration.”

It is visuals, mainly, that have brought Björk to Somerset House. Her new 
exhibition, which opens on Thursday at the London venue, presents the visual 
universe she has created, primarily through 360-degree virtual reality videos, 
to accompanyVulnicura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/22/bjork-vulnicura-review-breakup-album>
, her most raw and emotionally exposed album yet.

Björk: Vulnicura review – a sucker punch of a breakup album
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/22/bjork-vulnicura-review-breakup-album>
Speaking at the launch of the show, the eccentric singer appeared not in 
person but on screen in the form of an ethereal avatar, created for the video 
for the album track Family, which is among those to debut at Somerset House.

The Icelandic performer has long embraced the possibilities presented by new 
technology, andBjörk Digital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/04/bjork-digital-review-singers-past-present-and-future-unveiled-in-vivid-technicolour>
 showcases how she has used it to enhance her creative expression. While it is 
still a work in progress, Björk is on her way to creating the first VR album 
with Vulnicura, filming a different 360-degree video for each track, each using 
a different director.

“I see myself as someone who builds bridges between the human things we do 
every day, and technology,” she says. “So when the laptop came, it meant I 
didn’t need a studio any more. I hate them anyway – they don’t have windows and 
they are really expensive – but now I can write my music wherever.


“For a woman, I think it is really empowering because I don’t need the whole 
patriarchy of the studio and that whole universe to make my music. Instead of 
doing a small proportion of it myself, I could go all the way up to doing 90% 
of it myself.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbjork-build-bridges-technology-somerset-house-london-virtual-reality-vulnicura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03c2af76f7309cc70958b64e98f6bf19f9dcbe1d%2F0_38_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bj%C3%B6rk%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20build%20bridges%20between%20tech%20and%20the%20human%20things%20we%20do%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbjork-build-bridges-technology-somerset-house-london-virtual-reality-vulnicura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bj%C3%B6rk%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20build%20bridges%20between%20tech%20and%20the%20human%20things%20we%20do%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbjork-build-bridges-technology-somerset-house-london-virtual-reality-vulnicura%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03c2af76f7309cc70958b64e98f6bf19f9dcbe1d%2F0_38_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Performing a DJ set at Björk Digital in Tokyo in June. Photograph: Santiago 
Felipe/Getty Images 
In a departure from her previous album Biophilia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/06/bjork-biophilia-cd-review>, 
which was recorded on an island over three years and only released when the 
whole vision of the album was complete, Björk describes the expanding visual 
universe of Vulnicura as driven by “experimentation and improvisation”.

This was partly due to what she describes as “the urgency of the topic” – she 
wrote the album in response to her heartbreak at the demise of her relationship 
with her longterm partnerMatthew Barney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/14/matthew-barney-cremaster-cycle-art-film>
 – but also because the album was leaked before it was complete. Instead of 
panicking, she says she and her team “surrendered, decided to release all of it 
and just improvise as we went along”.

Björk: 'It’s no coincidence that the porn industry has embraced virtual 
reality'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/03/bjork-its-no-coincidence-that-the-porn-industry-has-embraced-virtual-reality>
“The visual side of Vulnicura has been a very slow plan … I think emotionally 
it really works becauseheartbreak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2005/mar/31/thisweekssciencequestions> is 
the oldest human story of all, so it could take this experimentation,” she 
says. “Each song has a different format and a different director. I think that 
helps because the story is mainly just me moaning, and the instrumentation is 
always the same, just strings and beats. So to get different points of view 
with different directors and different technology … I think it suits the 
project really well.”

Björk Digital has already been to Tokyo and Sydney and will travel to four 
other cities. In each new location,Björk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bjork> will add new songs to the show until 
the VR album is complete.

The exhibition opens with a screening of the video for Black Lake, which was 
originally commissioned bythe Museum of Modern Art in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/moma>, and is presented across two 
vast screens and with stereo surround sound. The footage, filmed on the black 
volcanic rocks of Iceland, is supposed to capture the claustrophobia and 
darkness that Björk felt when she wrote the song in the middle of the night, 
suffering from jetlag and feeling like she had hit rock bottom.

The singer says: “There is something about the drama in Vulnicura that I am 
almost embarrassed about because it is so over the top.” But she feels that the 
theatrical, immersive nature ofvirtual reality video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/27/virtual-reality-venice-film-festival>
, watched in 360 degrees through a headset, suited the drama of the album.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbjork-build-bridges-technology-somerset-house-london-virtual-reality-vulnicura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3815cce4d6ab258ef496d850039b0b29e8c19b3%2F0_118_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bj%C3%B6rk%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20build%20bridges%20between%20tech%20and%20the%20human%20things%20we%20do%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbjork-build-bridges-technology-somerset-house-london-virtual-reality-vulnicura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bj%C3%B6rk%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20build%20bridges%20between%20tech%20and%20the%20human%20things%20we%20do%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fbjork-build-bridges-technology-somerset-house-london-virtual-reality-vulnicura%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3815cce4d6ab258ef496d850039b0b29e8c19b3%2F0_118_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Visitors experience Björk Digital at Somerset House. Photograph: Santiago 
Felipe/Getty Images 
Other VR videos on show at Somerset House include Mouth Mantra – which puts 
the viewer inside the mouth of Björk as she sings – as well as Stonemilker and 
Atom Dance.

Also on interactive display is the pioneering app that Björk created to 
accompany Biophilia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/12/bjork-biophilia-first-app-museum-of-modern-art-new-york>
, which includes song lyrics and programs to compose with custom-made digital 
instruments. The app has since been used in Icelandic and Scandinavian schools 
to teach music to children and Björk envisages that Biophilia will eventually 
be realised as a physical house that will contain the instruments she created 
specially for the album.

The only problem with VR for Björk has been the fact that most people still do 
not have access to the technology, which was a key motivation in her displaying 
the work in Somerset House and other art galleries around the world.

“We understood that we needed a home for all the video apps until people have 
those headsets at home,” she says. “So this exhibition is almost like bridge 
building while the technology is growing.”
 