
The founder of the world’s most infamous private security company believes the 
National Security Agency is overstepping its authorities and that he could have 
prevented the death of a US ambassador last year in Benghazi.

"I believe there is significant overreach by the NSA in how it monitors 
American citizens," said Erik Prince, the founder of Blackwater, the security 
contractor that became synonymous with counter-terrorism excess after its 
operatives killed 17 Iraqis and wounded 20 more at a traffic roundabout in 
Baghdad in 2007.

Speaking at Philadelphia's free library on Friday morning to about 100 people 
to promote his new memoir, Prince accused the American left of hypocrisy over 
the surveillance revelations published by the Guardian, the Washington Post and 
others based on leaks from Edward Snowden. 

Had James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, misled the Senate 
about the scope of domestic surveillance under the Bush administration, "people 
would be screaming for impeachment," Prince said, in response to a question 
from the Guardian.

Prince, a former US navy Seal and CIA partner, made headlines earlier this 
week bytelling the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/11/19/blackwater-founder-erik-prince-war-on-terror-has-become-too-big.html>
’s Eli Lake that the so-called 'war on terror' had gone too far, threatening 
Americans’ freedom as much as it provided American security.

"Let's stop trading freedom for the illusion of security," Prince said on 
Friday. When citizens tell the government "we trust you, keep collecting" their 
data, Prince said, "that liberty erodes even more."

For all Blackwater's notoriety – its killing of civilians in Nisour Square and 
in Afghanistan; its multiple front companies; its intimacy with the CIA – 
Prince said the company, which used to protect US diplomats in warzones, could 
have made a difference in last year's attack on the US consulate in Benghazi.

"I'm confident if we had been on the job in Benghazi, Ambassador Stevens would 
still be alive," Prince said. No US diplomats, Prince pointed out, died under 
Blackwater's protection. "They depended on basically a local militia, a company 
that hired local Libyans – unvetted, untrained – and even ill-equipped," Prince 
said. 

Prince said that the consulate took fire from "a very, very professional 
mortar team, which I believe to be Iranian Quds Force, an Iranian 
special-operations team. To get on target with three or four mortar rounds in 
an area … you don't do that. That takes some skill." No investigation of 
Benghazi has made that accusation.

While Prince said he would not grant an interview on Friday, he did respond to 
a question about his recent whereabouts. Despite decamping for the United Arab 
Emirates in 2010 after Blackwater's fall from official favor, Prince said he 
now splits his time between the US and the UAE, a situation he said he began 
"in time for school," as his children are now educated in the United States.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2013%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-founder-erik-prince-benghazi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F11%2F22%2F1385144333276%2Fc3d111d5-8a68-41e2-8ae5-e12450a1056d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blackwater%20founder%3A%20my%20company%20could%20have%20prevented%20Benghazi%20deaths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2013%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-founder-erik-prince-benghazi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blackwater%20founder%3A%20my%20company%20could%20have%20prevented%20Benghazi%20deaths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2013%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblackwater-founder-erik-prince-benghazi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F11%2F22%2F1385144333276%2Fc3d111d5-8a68-41e2-8ae5-e12450a1056d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Blackwater guards were accused of killing 17 Iraqis in Baghdad in 2007. 
Photograph: Ali Yussef/AFP/Getty Images 
By any accounting, Prince’s life has been picaresque. Scion of a Michigan 
family that made a fortune from auto parts and had influence in the Republican 
party, Prince was a navy Seal before founding Blackwater, initially a training 
center in North Carolina for military and law enforcement. The years after 9/11 
turned Blackwater into a cash cow – all through government contracting. Through 
contracts to protect diplomats in Iraq andAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, as well as military deals, the 
company parlayed a $737,000 relationship with the federal government in 2001 to 
$593.6m in contracting by 2006. 

It also became mired in controversy. Blackwater contractors in Iraq, 
subsequent statements to various courts asserted, held cocaine-fueled parties  
<http://www.rawstory.com/rs/2010/09/23/rampant-drug-random-gunfire-blackwater/>
and made extensive use of steroids. One contractor in Afghanistan, working for 
a Blackwater shell company called Paravant, signed for more than 200 AK-47s 
from a US military depot by giving the name Eric Cartman, a character from 
South Park. Between 2005 and 2007, Blackwater contractors in Iraq were involved 
in an average of 1.4 shooting incidents per week, according to statistics 
compiled by a House committee. After Nisour Square, Blackwater was the subject 
of myriad investigations, prosecutions and damages lawsuits. 

But Blackwater was also a cutout entity for the CIA, providing intelligence 
operatives with a logistics and transportation operation, even assistance with 
drone strikes in Pakistan. Former top CIA officials such as Cofer Black and 
Robert Richer ran Blackwater’s in-house intelligence arm. The relationship was 
outed by leaks to the press in 2010 that said the agency hired Blackwater to 
aid in an assassination program that ostensibly never matured. An embittered 
Prince publicly asserted, in a glowing Vanity Fair profile, that the agency 
threw him “under the bus”. 

That began Prince’s self-imposed exile. He sold his company, already rebranded 
Xe, to a group of investors who renamed it Academi. Then Prince took the 
extraordinary step of fleeing the US for the UAE, where, he told Men’s Journal, 
he would work in the “energy sector” – not to mention make it “harder for the 
jackals to get my money.”

Quickly, Prince appeared to get back to his old business. The New York Times 
reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/15/world/middleeast/15prince.html?pagewanted=all>
 that Prince inserted himself into a venture to provide paid auxiliaries to 
combat Somali insurgents and pirates; and that a new Prince company, R2, was 
equipping the UAE government with a private army.

In Philadelphia, Prince sidestepped talk of any new security contracting, 
describing his new venture, the Abu Dhabi-based Frontier Resource Group, as a 
"traditional private equity fund" focused on Africa.

"We invest in energy, mining, agriculture, and logistics opportunity 
throughout Africa," Prince said. 

"We're very excited about Africa – it can be the breadbasket of the world. 
There's an enormous amount of economic development being done there, and 
Africa's really waking up to the opportunities, and we're on the leading edge 
out there trying to make it happen."

Calm throughout the hour-long talk, Prince defended Blackwater's legacy, even 
on Nisour Square. He suggested that Blackwater contractors might not have been 
responsible for all of the 17 deaths that day, claiming that "some were killed 
by AK-47" gunfire, "not a US weapon." The AK-47 is not an American-made weapon, 
nor is it in US military use, but Blackwater/Paravant guards have taken them in 
Afghanistan, according to a Senate investigation in 2010.

"Anytime innocent civilians are killed, it's a tragedy," Prince said, but 
defended his guards' performance that day in 2007. "Sometimes motorists do 
irrational things."

Outside the library, a group of protesters, including one in a death's head 
mask, called Prince a war criminal.

"I understand the need for discourse," said Aine Fox, one of the 
demonstrators. But Fox, who lives in Philadelphia, said it was "very 
disappointing that the Free Library chose to give a war criminal a forum to 
talk about business when his business is death."
 