
Sometime last fall, I received an email from a Harvard colleague inviting me 
to join a reading group of Ta-Nehisi Coates’sBetween the World and Me. “I just 
had an image this morning of a room full of white people discussing the book,” 
she wrote, before clarifying in the next line: “I certainly don’t mean to say, 
‘come explain what it’s like to be black to us.’” But of course, in some way, 
that is precisely what she meant.

Amid protests against racialized police violence and debates over the limits 
of free speech on increasingly diverse college campuses, a good many (often, 
white) progressives have been left scratching their heads. What explains the 
current upswell of black Americans’ frustration, just eight years after the 
election of the nation’s first black president? Black intellectuals like 
Coates—perceived to be authentic interpreters of the black experience—have been 
recruited to make sense of the disillusionment. That Coates is both black and a 
native son of Baltimore’s restless inner city only heightens his authenticity 
in the eyes of a white liberal public searching for answers. But even I—the 
suburban-raised son of two black physicians—carry a certain racial 
authenticity, one seemingly much desired in predominantly white academic spaces.

Where does this belief in, and demand for, racially authentic explanations of 
black life come from? Far from unique to this contemporary moment, the notion 
of a racially authentic interpretation of blackness has been a mainstay of 
American understandings of the role of black intellectuals for more than a 
century. In his bookOn the Corner, Daniel Matlin considers how Kenneth Clark, a 
psychologist, Amiri Baraka, a writer, and Romare Bearden, an artist, variously 
navigated their designations as “indigenous interpreters” for white audiences 
in the 1960s. Placing these figures in conversation illuminates the costs and 
benefits of racial authenticity in the production of knowledge about black 
America and, ultimately, in the struggle to alter the course of American racial 
inequality.

The 1960s marked a turning point in the position of black intellectuals with 
respect to white progressives, Matlin argues. The migration of African 
Americans from the South to major cities in the North and Midwest in the 
mid-20th century resulted in a massive geographic—and symbolic—relocation of 
black America. The terms “ghetto” and “urban” came to signify a population that 
had, for successive generations, been exploited and contained in the rural 
South. But migrants’ lofty expectations of northern prosperity were tempered by 
the realities of dilapidated housing, a declining manufacturing sector, and 
more modern, less strident forms of racism. The cities grew restless. Various 
white audiences looked to black intellectuals—whom Matlin describes as racial 
“insiders” with “experiential knowledge”—to make sense of the emerging black 
ghettos and the attendant appeal of the Black Power movement’s politics of 
racial separatism.

On the Corner opens during the Harlem riot of 1964. During a racist 
altercation between a white man and several young black students on Manhattan’s 
Upper East Side, James Powell, a black boy, was shot dead by Thomas Gilligan, a 
white police officer. Protests lasted several days. As the summer progressed, 
similar protests against police brutality engulfed cities from Philadelphia to 
Rochester. To many observers, the perils of the northern black ghettos were 
fast eclipsing the promises of the southern civil rights movement, which had 
dominated media coverage in the preceding decade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fblack-intellectuals-white-audiences-searching-for-tales-of-authentic-blackness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e33cf826ae8f2e6328f138f6ee856d1819ce37%2F0_0_3875_2584%2F3875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20intellectuals%2C%20white%20audiences%3A%20searching%20for%20tales%20of%20authentic%20blackness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fblack-intellectuals-white-audiences-searching-for-tales-of-authentic-blackness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20intellectuals%2C%20white%20audiences%3A%20searching%20for%20tales%20of%20authentic%20blackness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fblack-intellectuals-white-audiences-searching-for-tales-of-authentic-blackness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e33cf826ae8f2e6328f138f6ee856d1819ce37%2F0_0_3875_2584%2F3875.jpg>
 Malcolm X, pictured in Harlem in 1964. Photograph: Louis Draper 
It was “amid the riots” that cultural arbiters such as newspaper editors, 
theatre producers, and policymakers sought out black intellectuals to interpret 
“black urban life to the white American public.” For these cultural arbiters, 
the racial identity of black intellectuals—in addition to their intellect and 
disciplinary training—was fundamental to the legitimacy of their claims about 
and solutions to black urban crises. “The logic of racial authenticity,” Matlin 
writes, “stipulates both that black intellectuals have a particular 
responsibility torepresent, in both senses of that word, ‘their’ people, and 
that, as racial insiders, they are uniquely capable of doing so.”

As much as it has been imposed by white audiences, the logic of racial 
authenticity has been articulated by black publics and intellectuals as well. 
Intellectuals as disparate as Du Bois and Baraka argued that blacks possessed 
not only intimate understandings of blackness but also the moral authority to 
speak first on the social problems facing black ghettos. In the 1960s white 
liberals imbibed these dual claims, fostering a veritable marketplace for the 
“pronouncements of those believed to possess both intimate knowledge of black 
life and the ability to articulate that knowledge to a broad white public.” 
This marketplace boosted the careers of many black intellectuals of the time. 
Black scholars, writers, and artists were invited to the White House and 
regularly asked to provide their perspective on myriad black urban crises, 
large and small, in the form of interviews, essays, art exhibitions, and social 
science research.

But there were costs, too. Matlin reveals how Baraka, Bearden, and Clark each 
experienced ambivalence, at one point or another, toward their roles as 
indigenous interpreters. The story of Kenneth Clark paints the clearest 
portrait of what it meant for black intellectuals to feel “cornered” by the 
logic of racial authenticity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fblack-intellectuals-white-audiences-searching-for-tales-of-authentic-blackness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead0f0bceca644ef4a986bebd72492553a3b20b5%2F0_0_3049_4535%2F3049.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20intellectuals%2C%20white%20audiences%3A%20searching%20for%20tales%20of%20authentic%20blackness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fblack-intellectuals-white-audiences-searching-for-tales-of-authentic-blackness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20intellectuals%2C%20white%20audiences%3A%20searching%20for%20tales%20of%20authentic%20blackness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fblack-intellectuals-white-audiences-searching-for-tales-of-authentic-blackness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead0f0bceca644ef4a986bebd72492553a3b20b5%2F0_0_3049_4535%2F3049.jpg>
 Psychologist and educator Dr Kenneth Clark in 1979. Photograph: Deborah 
Feingold/Getty Images 
Throughout his career, Clark would maintain that interpreting for white 
audiences was critical to social change. The psychologist who, with his 
colleague and wife Mamie Clark, provided social science evidence undergirding 
the Supreme Court’s assertion inBrown v. Board of Education that segregation 
was damaging to the psyche of black children, Clark witnessed firsthand the 
impact his scholarship could have on social policy. In his 1965 bookDark Ghetto
, Clark sought to “lay ‘thetruth of the ghetto’ before the white American 
public and to explain the meaning of the riots to white liberals perplexed and 
disturbed by this violent turn.” Social change, he believed, would come about 
only by appealing to the compassion of the “ruling white majority” through the 
dramatisation of the “injustices of segregation and poverty.” While other black 
intellectuals, such as Ralph Ellison, criticised Clark for pathologising the 
black ghetto, Clark found such an accounting to be not only accurate but also 
practical in the struggle for white sympathy.

But Clark would later grow disillusioned. The Johnson administration’s War on 
Poverty ultimately failed black ghettos, and local politicians chose to treat 
urban unrest as a crime problem requiring police suppression rather than as a 
social problem requiring welfare state intervention. Clark came to view white 
elites as unwilling to enact needed social reform. At the same time, he began 
to wrestle with his intellectual identity, struggling to define himself outside 
white audiences’ expectations. When elected in 1969 to serve as the first black 
president of the American Psychological Association, Clark felt pressure to 
give a presidential address that spoke to general, as opposed to only black, 
psychological and social processes. The resulting address—which advocated for 
the use of psycho-technological drugs among political leaders to inhibit their 
potential to abuse power—proved disastrous. Clark would later lament that his 
address failed not necessarily because his ideas were anathema but, at least in 
part, because his colleagues expected him to speak only on issues of race or 
civil rights—the intellectual domain “reserved for blacks.”



Since the 1960s, the logic of racial authenticity in the production of 
knowledge has blossomed both within and beyond the confines of black 
intellectual practice—with contradictory consequences. On the one hand, the 
belief in an authentic black form of knowledge has fostered inclusion. 
Workplaces recruit minority employees with the understanding that diverse 
perspectives are good for the bottom line, and the most rigorous white 
academics have come to interrogate the potential limitations and biases of 
their whiteness, particularly when documenting the conditions of the black 
urban poor. On the other hand, the belief in authentic black knowledge has also 
been the foundation on which new justifications for the exclusion of people of 
colour have been built. Since the late 1970s, for example, affirmative action 
has become justified as a compelling state interest not because people of 
colour face unique disadvantages or because integration is an absolute good, 
but because minorities are understood to have inimitable perspectives to 
contribute—but only in certain contexts. Minorities’ experiential knowledge has 
thus come to be valued only when such knowledge enlightens white audiences. 
Thus, in oral arguments in the latest affirmative action court case, the Chief 
Justice of the United States Supreme Courtcan legitimately ponder 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/12/09/459099492/supreme-court-revisits-affirmative-action-in-higher-education>
: “What unique perspective does a minority student bring to a physics class?”

It is disheartening how familiar the 1964 police killing of James Powell in 
Harlem appears to us today

For his part, Coates, one of today’s most recognized black intellectuals, has 
expressed skepticism about writing for the enlightenment of white audiences. 
Duringa public conversation in New York 
<http://www.colorlines.com/articles/ta-nehisi-coates-talks-white-readers-offers-black-literature-primer-0>
 this past October, he remarked that he never “set out to accumulate a mass of 
white fans,” going on to observe that when black intellectuals have sought to 
interpret for white audiences, they have often, seeking not to offend, done so 
in a way that obfuscates more than clarifies their understanding of racial 
injustice. Coates’s sentiment echoes that of a new generation of unapologetic 
black activists and intellectuals who, with their impenitent positioning of 
white supremacy as the root cause of racial inequalities, have garnered the 
attention, and resentment, of great numbers of whites. As history reveals, 
sympathetic attention does not always translate into policy. Even when it does, 
long-term social change can be elusive. It is disheartening how familiar the 
1964 police killing of James Powell in Harlem appears to us today, in 2016, as 
images of police brutality dominate our daily newsfeeds.

Why the whiteness of the American media is everyone's problem | Howard W French
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/13/why-the-whiteness-of-the-american-media-is-everyones-problem>
For more than a century, black intellectuals from various disciplinary 
backgrounds and political positions have articulated their insights on racial 
injustices. Some have played their role as indigenous interpreters faithfully 
and with an unfailing optimism, while others have grown wary of bearing 
witness, of explaining the array of emotions and events—from tragedy and rage 
to humor and brilliance—that constitute the black American experience. Matlin 
writes that depicting oppressed people “in a manner that both witnesses the 
extent and consequences of their suffering and simultaneously recognizes their 
dignity, resourcefulness, and agency remains an intractable problem for social 
scientists, artists, and historians.” But the representation of black 
subordination—no matter how carefully constructed—must also find a receptive 
audience. So much black intellectual energy has been expended on convincing 
white audiences simply to care about the exploitation of the black poor and the 
alienation of the black middle classes. The receptivity of particular white 
audiences has fluctuated over time, and with it—in tandem, arguably—various 
indicators of racial inequality. Perhaps just as pressing, then, as 
interpreting blackness for white audiences is interpreting the causes and 
consequences of white attention for the rest of us.

This piece has been edited for brevity. To read in full, head to Public Books. 
<http://www.publicbooks.org/nonfiction/black-intellectuals-and-white-audiences>

*****

Matthew Clair is a PhD candidate in sociology at Harvard University. His 
research focuses on racial and socioeconomic inequality, crime and punishment, 
and the production of knowledge and art.
 