
January is a depressing time for many. The weather's awful, you get less 
daylight than a stunted dandelion and your body is struggling to cope with the 
withdrawal of thedepression-alleviating calorific foods 
<http://www.overtheline.net/pub/health/depression/carbo.htm>, such as chocolate 
<http://www.ausfoodnews.com.au/2009/02/24/chocolate-has-anti-depressant-qualities-study.html>
, of the hedonistic festive period. January is one long post-Christmas hangover.

So there are many reasons why someone may feel particularly "down" during 
January. Butevery year <http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6847012/>, much of the 
media becomefixated 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/features/3635353/Smile-Youre-not-the-only-one-in-a-bad-mood.html>
 on aspecific day 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-430389/Blue-Monday-The-unhappiest-day-year.html>
 – the third Monday in January – asthe most depressing of the year. It has 
become known as Blue Monday.

This silly claim comes from a ludicrous equation 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue_Monday_%28date%29> that calculates "debt", 
"motivation", "weather", "need to take action" and other arbitrary variables 
that are impossible to quantify and largely incompatible.

True clinical depression (as opposed to a post-Christmas slump) is a far more 
complex condition <http://www.mental-health-today.com/dep/dsm.htm> that is 
affected bymany factors <http://web4health.info/de/bipolar-dep-trigger.htm>, 
chronic and temporary, internal and external. What is extremely unlikely (i.e. 
impossible) is that there is a reliable set of external factors that cause 
depression in an entire population at the same time every year.

But that doesn't stop the equation from popping up every year. Its creator, Dr 
Cliff Arnall, devised itfor a travel firm 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2006/dec/16/badscience.uknews>. He has since 
admitted 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/7006564/Ignore-most-depressing-day-of-year-says-Blue-Monday-psychologist.html>
 that it is meaningless (without actually saying it's wrong).

Dr Arnall is usually described as a Cardiff University psychologist. To be a 
Cardiff University psychologist you usually have to be employed/publish 
research fromCardiff School of Psychology <http://psych.cf.ac.uk/>, hence I can 
claim to be one 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.07010.x/full>. Dr 
Arnall briefly taught somepsychology-related evening classes 
<http://www.nopills.demon.co.uk/> at the university's adult education centre 
<http://www.cardiff.ac.uk/learn/>. Apparently, this makes him a Cardiff 
University psychologist. Using that logic, I'm an Asda manager because I once 
made one of their staff fetch me a discount chicken.

I believe strongly that pseudoscience (like this equation) regularly presented 
as genuine science in the mainstream media harms the public understanding of 
science and psychology. It's also disrespectful to those who suffer from 
genuine depression, suggesting that it is temporary, minor and experienced by 
everyone, rather than what may be a chronic and incapacitating condition. 
People with clinical depression often face an uphill struggle being taken 
seriously, especially as "depression" is such a general term.

But the actual reasons for my grudge against Dr Arnall are far pettier. As a 
Cardiff-based neuroscience doctor who teaches psychiatry and performs stand-up 
comedy (not simultaneously) I'm often contacted by well-meaning media types for 
my "take" on the Blue Monday story.

Back when I was more naive, I agreed to do so, with disastrous consequences.

First came an interview with a local paper. My attempts to explain in detail 
the fundamental issues of depression (and the laws of reality) that meant the 
equation was nonsense didn't survive the editing process. The finished article 
implied that I believed it was all true but "cheer up, here's some jokes from 
the last three crackers I pulled."

They wanted a photograph, which proved to be an undignified affair 
<http://twitpic.com/84wx1c>. There I was with a photographer in Cardiff Bay, 
splashing in puddles wearing a black jacket, scarf and cowboy hat. This led to 
rumours that I was suffering from a breakdown and also that I was the new 
Doctor Who.

This technically counted as my first published article. That same photo is now 
also used by the paper if I do anything newsworthy, which, as a result, I try 
to avoid.

You'd think I would have learned my lesson, but the next year I did the same 
thing for ITN news, thinking I could put the record straight. My interview was 
filmed only hours before it was broadcast, so I was confident my point of view 
would come across, demonstrating my naivety regarding the speed of modern 
editing techniques. Once again, they adjusted my explanation to fit the 
predetermined narrative. Humiliation, but with audio this time.

As a result, this comes up every year and I have to go through it all again. 
Every attempt to "clear my name" fails like the last. A colleague recently 
asked "isn't it time for Dean's annual humiliation?" I've since vowed to 
promote proper science wherever possible to counteract the damage I've done by 
inadvertently lending my limited authority to this pseudoscientific nonsense.

But every year I dread it all coming back up: the very public loss of my 
scientific credibility. The experience is so degrading and the memories so 
embarrassing that it's gotten to the point where, for me, the third Monday in 
January really is the most depressing day of the year.

• Dr Dean Burnett supervises and lectures for the new MSc psychiatry distance 
learning course for Cardiff University 
<http://courses.cf.ac.uk/postgraduate/course/detail/1197.html>. He promotes 
science through comedy, vialive performances 
<http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/thesword/2010/10/hey-osborne-leave-our-geeks-al.html>
,blogging <http://sciencedigestive.blogspot.com/> and Twitter 
<http://twitter.com/garwboy>
 