
A business partner of the former Barclays boss Bob Diamond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bob-diamond>, who is reportedly Africa’s 
youngest billionaire, is facing a high court battle in London over alleged 
offshore assets he is accused of hiding from his estranged wife.


Ashish Thakkar, 34, claimed he was worth less than £500,000 in an attempt to 
defend himself from a multimillion-pound settlement claim from Meera Manek, a 
travel and food writer.

She claims Thakkar has concealed assets in the British Virgin Islands. But he 
told a high court hearing on Wednesday that the beneficiaries of the Mara 
Group, his IT, banking and property empire, were his mother and sister.

His barrister told the court his assets were valued at £445,432.

Manek has contested this and Mr Justice Moor ruled there should be a full 
trial to assess the truth of the competing claims.

The high court on Tuesday heard of the “remarkable” story of Thakkar, whose 
family fled the Rwanda genocide in 1994 and resettled inUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>.

His family were evacuated to Hôtel des Mille Collines, which is featured in 
the filmHotel Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,4267,1424463,00.html>
.


 His parents had lost everything in the 1970s when they became Asian refugees 
of Idi Amin’s Uganda, and started again in Leicester where Thakkar was born.

When they were financially secure they sold up and moved to Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>, a year before the genocide took 
place.

It is this refugee past that Thakkar says drove him to drop out of school and 
become an entrepreneur selling computer parts. Twenty years after starting his 
business in a shopping mall in Kampala, Uganda’s capital, his company now 
employs more than 11,000 people across 25 countries.

According to his skeleton argument, Thakkar’s “passion is to be a driving 
force for positive and economic change inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and not to make money for himself”.

 He is also chairman of the United Nations Foundation global entrepreneurs 
council 
<http://www.unfoundation.org/who-we-are/experts/global-entrepreneurs-council/?referrer=https://www.google.co.uk/?referrer=http://www.unfoundation.org/who-we-are/experts/global-entrepreneurs-council/>
 and founded theMara Foundation <http://www.mara-foundation.org/> in 2009, 
which serves as an online mentorship portal for young African entrepreneurs. 
Three years ago he was appointed to the advisory board of technology company 
Dell.

In 2013, he also became the first African to be named in Fortune magazine’s 
annual 40 under 40 list 
<http://venturesafrica.com/young-billionaire-ashish-j-thakkar-first-african-make-fortune-40-40/>
, with total assets said to be in excess of $1bn and employees across 21 
African countries.
In her skeleton argument, Manek claimed Thakkar was being dishonest and that 
documents showed a Panamanian foundation was formerly at the helm of the Mara 
Group structure, a structure of which he was the primary beneficiary. She was a 
secondary beneficiary, it was claimed.

The foundation was dissolved shortly after she issued divorce proceedings in 
summer 2014, according to her argument in court.

Moor said he “could not take as truth” any of the assertions on either side 
and ruled there should be a full hearing in which both parties should give 
evidence next February.

“Trust structures, particularly offshore foundations, bearer shares and the 
like are notoriously difficult issues for the family court,” he said.

One of the businesses he set up is Atlas Mara, which he recently started with 
Diamond, court papers showed.

Manek, who was educated at the University of Warwick and whose work has been 
published in the Daily Telegraph and Conde Nast Traveller, was married to 
Thakkar for just under four and a half years.
 