
Bombardier <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bombardier> has announced it 
will cut another 7,500 jobs worldwide, raising fears for its British aerospace 
and rail workforce.

It is the second wave of job cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/17/bombardier-7000-job-losses-worldwide>
 announced by the Canadian manufacturer in a year, meaning it will shrink its 
workforce by about 20% in two years.

The multinational did not give full details of where the jobs would be lost 
other than 2,000 redundancies in Canada, while confirming that two-thirds of 
the total would be in Bombardier Transportation, the division that builds and 
maintains trains and track systems.

However, it is thought that the group’s Belfast operations are the most 
vulnerable to further cuts among its UK units. Bombardier employs 5,000 
aerospace workers inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and has 3,400 rail staff in 
the UK, about half of whom are employed in a manufacturing plant in Derby.

The Bombardier UK factory - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2014/feb/06/the-bombardier-uk-crossrail-factory-in-pictures>
As part of the first wave of global job cuts, the firm announced in February 
thatjust over 1,000 jobs would go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/17/bombardier-7000-job-losses-worldwide>
 over the next two years in Belfast, where the group makes the wings for its C 
Series passenger jet.

A spokeswoman for Bombardier in Belfast said: “Following the update today by 
Bombardier Inc ... we will be evaluating the impact on ourBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> operations and will communicate with 
our employees when that is completed. We are not in a position to elaborate 
further at this time.”

Bombardier said in September that it would be reducing production of the C 
Series, which has struggled to sell against the commercial jet duopoly of 
Boeing and Airbus.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbombardier-cuts-7500-jobs-fears-for-british-workforce-derby-belfast-crossrail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5207d1ede3940f2e778cd4611146a115985a0a%2F0_237_4103_2463%2F4103.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bombardier%20to%20cut%207%2C500%20%20jobs%2C%20raising%20fears%20for%20British%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbombardier-cuts-7500-jobs-fears-for-british-workforce-derby-belfast-crossrail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bombardier%20to%20cut%207%2C500%20%20jobs%2C%20raising%20fears%20for%20British%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbombardier-cuts-7500-jobs-fears-for-british-workforce-derby-belfast-crossrail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5207d1ede3940f2e778cd4611146a115985a0a%2F0_237_4103_2463%2F4103.jpg>
 Alain Bellemare, chief executive of Bombardier, said the cuts would ‘ensure we 
have the right cost structure, workforce and organisation to compete and win in 
the future’. Photograph: Eric Piermont/AFP/Getty 
Alain Bellemare, chief executive officer of Bombardier, said the latest round 
of cuts across the group would “ensure we have the right cost structure, 
workforce and organisation to compete and win in the future”.

He told Reuters: “We understand these are difficult decisions ... but in the 
end what we are going to be left with is a leaner, stronger organisation.” It 
expects to reduce costs by $300m (£245m) annually through the cuts.

The job security of Bombardier Transportation workers in the UK, particularly 
at Derby, has been improved by the recentconfirmation of a contract to build 
665 carriages for the Greater Anglia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/bombardiers-derby-factory-wins-east-anglia-trains-deal-abellio>
 franchise, as well as orders to build new London Overground trains. The Derby 
plant is currentlyconstructing trains for London’s Crossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/06/bombardier-uk-crossrail-trains-contract-derby>
, which has been named the Elizabeth line.

Bombardier is also bidding to build new trains for the London Underground, and 
expects to be in contention for HS2’s high-speed trains to be delivered by 2026.

The RMT trade union said it was seeking firm assurances from Bombardier over 
the future of theDerby <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/derby> plant’s workers.
 