
What do war journalism and surfing have in common? On the face of it, not 
much: surfing is a frivolous pastime and war reporting a humanitarian endeavour 
to shine a light on violent conflict in ways that put the observer’s life on 
the line. However, the parallels between the two haunt journalist William 
Finnegan’sBarbarian Days: A Surfing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/surfing> 
Life, his acclaimed memoir about 50 years spent chasing the best waves on the 
planet. Nowhere are these parallels more explicit than in the aftermath of a 
brutal surf session on Madeira, where Finnegan is almost killed by a wave, “a 
hideous, boiling, two-story wall of whitewater,” that momentarily sucks the 
deep ocean dry before crashing down upon him. Shaken by his proximity to death, 
he asks his wife Caroline why she “didn’t get angry about all the stupid risky 
things I did,” like “war reporting” and “surfing.”

Barbarian Days: A Surfing Life by William Finnegan review – one hell of a ride…
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/19/barbarian-days-a-surfing-life-william-finnegan-review>
If Barbarian Days eschews delving into this parallel, it is perhaps because 
for a reporter to dwell on personal emotions amidst the pervasive human 
suffering he witnesses would be obscene. By contrast, the subject of a life 
spent surfing the iconic waves of the planet, such as Honolua, Tavarua, Kirra, 
Ocean Beach, and Jardim, gives Finnegan a canvas for the array of emotions 
elicited by encounters with violence—perhaps because surfing entails immersion 
in natural beauty. These emotions include discovery, fear, and “a dopamine rush 
that was both familiar and rare, that required nerve and experience.” There is 
hardship, deprivation, physical drubbing, injuries, and “near-drowning.”

Finnegan also experiences the awe inspired by majestic waves. Here he is on 
Tavarua, in Fiji, riding the last wave of the day:

 The wave felt like a test of faith, or a test of sanity, or an enormous, 
undeserved gift. The laws of physics appeared to have been relaxed. A hollow 
wave was roaring off into deeper water. Not possible. It felt like a runaway 
train, an eruption of magical realism, with that ocean-bottom light and the 
lacy white canopy.

Such encounters with beauty are most intense in Barbarian Days at what 
Finnegan calls “the fear line.” Throughout the memoir, magical waves become, in 
an instant, mortally dangerous, as in Finnegan’s close brush on Madeira. When 
the surfer crosses the fear-line, the absurdity or even madness of the surfer’s 
practice is palpable.

William Finnegan: 'I was reluctant to come out of the closet as a surfer'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/06/william-finnegan-new-yorker-surfing-memoir>
Finnegan has organised Barbarian Days as a chronicle of his initiation into 
surfing, which he consistently links to a friend or companion who becomes his 
subject, and who leads him from the waves into surrounding social scenes. 
Finnegan discovers the “siren song” of surfing, for example, as young teen in
Hawaii <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hawaii>, together with school 
friend Roddy Kaulukukui, who helps him navigate the racial tensions amonghaoles 
–white non-Hawaiians – and Hawaiians vividly depicted in the first chapter of 
his memoir. Finnegan’s anthropological focus then shifts from land society to 
surfers’ camaraderie, portraying an inwardly focused, male society held 
together by bonds of friendship, local knowledge, and aggression. This 
fraternity shares a code of silence, the source of which Finnegan is reticent 
to explain — his own capitulation to its authority.

Finnegan’s memoir stands out among the slim literature on surfing for the 
glimpses it offers into bonds among men who organize their lives around tide, 
wind, swell, and the treacherous topographies of the coast. Some of these 
attachments are affectionate, such as Finnegan’s friendship with Roddy. Or, 
later in life, living in New York, with the dancer John Selya, whom he portrays 
running off to perform in Twyla Tharp’sMovin’ Out after a morning charging 
harsh surf in an ice storm off Long Beach. Other bonds are more ambivalent; 
notably, Finnegan’s relation to the oncologist Mark Renneker, known locally as 
Doc, who leads the daredevil surfers at San Francisco’s brutal Ocean Beach. The 
subject of Renneker and the Ocean Beach surfers was, indeed, Finnegan’s first 
foray into surfing anthropology, in the form of a 1992New Yorker article titled 
“Playing Doc’s Games.” Renneker, Finnegan recalls, “hated it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fbonds-of-the-sea-exploring-the-magnetic-world-of-surfing-in-barbarian-days%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb41256bbb736f5fefd62fd5587ad44184a0ddc7%2F0_84_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bonds%20of%20the%20sea%3A%20exploring%20the%20magnetic%20world%20of%20surfing%20in%20Barbarian%20Days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fbonds-of-the-sea-exploring-the-magnetic-world-of-surfing-in-barbarian-days%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bonds%20of%20the%20sea%3A%20exploring%20the%20magnetic%20world%20of%20surfing%20in%20Barbarian%20Days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fbonds-of-the-sea-exploring-the-magnetic-world-of-surfing-in-barbarian-days%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb41256bbb736f5fefd62fd5587ad44184a0ddc7%2F0_84_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Italo Ferreira flies through the air after pulling out of a wave as Kelly 
Slater paddles past during the 2015 World Surf League Fiji Pro at Cloudbreak 
off Tavarua island, Fiji. Photograph: Kirstin Scholtz / WSL HANDOUT/EPA 
Finnegan’s willingness to expose outsiders to surf fraternities places his 
book in a lineage of classics about what seaman and author Joseph Conrad called 
“the bonds of the sea.” Finnegan’s barbarians take their place next to Richard 
Henry Dana’s comrades before the mast, Mark Twain’s riverboat pilots, and the 
myriad seamen contending with storms and human error in the tales of Conrad. 
Finnegan is the first to insert surfing into this bookshelf of seafaring 
literature, and he does so as an anthropologist and coastal oceanographer, 
possessed with a fine literary sensibility. Notably, while he describes the 
ocean with a surfer’s technical jargon, he imbues surfing practices with 
emotions, making them accessible even to the non-surfing reader who may not 
grasp the import of specific details.

Such an ability to bring outsiders inside technical knowledge is one for which 
sea writers have long been famed. We do not need to understand the intricacies 
of sailing to recognise that the young captain has dangerously taken his ship 
too close to land at the end of Conrad’s “The Secret Sharer,” when the 
captain’s mate exclaims: “She will never weather, and you are too close now to 
stay. She’ll drift ashore before she’s round. Oh my God!” Similarly, we do not 
need to know what it means to be “trapped in the impact zone” on a “10-foot 
west set,” “taking each wave on the head, ditching my board, diving deep, 
getting cruelly rumbled,” to understand Finnegan’s submission to the ocean one 
evening on Oahu.

Finnegan calls this submission at Sunset a “baptism.” Religion permeates his 
descriptions of surfing, from the time when the “junior atheist” learns of the 
power of the gods in pre-Western Hawaii toBarbarian Days’s final scene. 
Refusing theology, this memoir is nonetheless steeped in its figures of speech: 
“baptism,” “the test of faith,” “hands raised in prayer,” and so on.

Finnegan is not the first to identify the religious quality in surfing. The 
sport’s Hawaiian roots as a spiritual practice of harmony with nature are 
regularly contrasted to the western quest for nature’s domination in writing on 
surfing. Finnegan, however, refuses this romanticism. The deity presiding over 
Finnegan’s vision is the Hawaiian fire goddess Pele, whose demands for 
sacrifice and “jealous and violent” nature reflect the cruelty of the ocean. 
Finnegan’s sense that he can only explain the thrall of surfing as a harsh 
mysticism is reaffirmed in the memoir’s final scene, set at the evocatively 
named Cloudbreak in Fiji —reputed to be among the most challenging waves in the 
world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/22/surfing-new-wave-william-finnegan-pulitzer-prize>
. The session begins with a figuratively sacrificial moment, when Finnegan 
falls badly and hits his head, bleeding from the throat. The local boatman, a 
“square-shouldered goofyfoot [someone who surfs with his left foot on the back 
of the board] named Inia Nakalevu,” steps forward to help him take waves 
safely, accompanying his guidance with a catechism — of some sort — on the 
sublime altar of the reef.

“Do you know God, Bill?” Inia asks, as he selects waves for Finnegan, in 
conditions so dangerous that a wipe-out might result in death. “Do you know God 
loves you?” “Not really,” the avowedly atheistic Finnegan answers, refusing 
“the dark-skinned evangelist’s” faith, even as he owes his preservation to 
Inia’s exquisite local knowledge. A marvelous athlete, “Inia … had it bad,” 
Finnegan comments, adding addiction to the mix.

Pulitzer winner William Finnegan 'didn't want to be stereotyped as a dumb 
surfer'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/02/william-finnegan-pulitzer-prize-barbarian-days-surfing-memoir>
What is surfing? We are left with no affirmation, only Finnegan’s longing that 
“this” would not end, and the waves that “kept pouring through, shining and 
mysterious, filling the air with an austere exaltation.”

*****

 * Henri Borius lives in San Francisco, where he surfs Ocean Beach. 
 * Margaret Cohen teaches literature at Stanford University, and surfs Santa 
Cruz.  