
The Garden of Earthly Delights by Hieronymus Bosch is a wonder of art. By that 
I don’t just mean it is one of the world’s greatest paintings. It is also 
something we wonder at, astonished, like a rare relic in a cabinet of bizarre 
curiosities. What is happening in this outrageous display of unfettered 
imagination and what can it possibly mean?

Last year, the 500th anniversary of the death of Bosch was marked by a 
thrilling exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/11/hieronymus-bosch-review-a-heavenly-host-of-delights-on-the-road-to-hell>
 of his paintings and drawings in his home town Den Bosch, in the southern 
Netherlands. Yet one masterpiece was missing. The Garden of Earthly Delights 
does not travel from Madrid, where it hangs in the Prado museum. A book of the 
Prado’s own Bosch quincentenarypublished this month by Thames and Hudson 
<http://www.thamesandhudson.com/Bosch/9780500970799> makes up for that absence. 
It explores the latest discoveries and theories about Bosch’s most stupendous 
work with accurate colour images of many of its hypnotic details and infrared 
images of the three wooden panels that make up this religious – or 
pseudo-religious – painting.
 The full triptych of The Garden of Earthly Delights. Photograph: Museo del 
Prado 
The Garden of Earthly Delights is a triptych that can be folded open. When 
closed 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Garden_of_Earthly_Delights#/media/File%3AHieronymus_Bosch_-_The_Garden_of_Earthly_Delights_-_The_exterior_(shutters).jpg>
, it shows a monochrome painting of the creation of the world, with God looking 
down on a flat landscape sealed inside a giant bubble. Open the tall side 
panels on their hinges and you are confronted by a world – or rather three 
worlds – of lurid colour and hallucinatory invention. In the left panel, God 
introduces Eve to Adam in the Garden of Eden. In the one on the right, Bosch 
imagines all the sufferings and monstrosities of hell, including a bird-headed 
creature eating a naked man, a pig dressed as a nun and a hollowed out giant 
with trees for limbs and an inn inside his pale egg-like torso.

The most hypnotic and perplexing scene, however, is the huge central panel, 
which depicts a dreamlike landscape of carnal bliss where people cavort naked, 
consume giant strawberries, explore pink flesh palaces and ride barebacked on 
fantastic creatures. What on earth is going on?
 A detail from the ‘hell’ panel of The Garden of Earthly Delights. Photograph: 
Museo del Prado 
The Garden of Earthly Delights is popular because we can see surreal images of 
our own, modern existence in it. Since the 1960s, it has been hailed as a 
psychedelic romp. Those giant strawberries are like free narcotics ata music 
festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/28/glastonbury-festival-art-masterpiece-hieronymus-bosch-garden-earthly-delights>
. What strikes us when we look at it is the sheer joyous excess and mad 
profusion of this painter’s mind. Was he some kind of heretic, speculating on 
an alternative lifestyle of free love and fruity fun with no thought of 
tomorrow?

No such luck, say the authors of the Thames & Hudson book Bosch. They see this 
mysterious painter as a grimly conservative medieval Christian for whom earthly 
life is a spectacle of folly and sin with only one destination for those who 
succumb to its temptations: the horror show that is hell. The seductions of 
gargantuan fruit and nudity are false, argues this volume of state-of-the-art 
scholarship, for Bosch is an artist warning of the punishments awaiting all who 
indulge themselves. This is a long way from20th-century interpretations 
<http://www.alchemywebsite.com/bosch/Interpretation_Fraenger.html> that tried 
to connect him with heretical movements and subversive ideas.

The chances of The Garden of Earthly Delights being a heretical vision of 
freedom have got a lot smaller in the light of the discovery in the 1960s that 
it was painted for the princely House of Nassau. This is not a secret attack on 
orthodox religion but a work that pleased the establishment. In the 16th 
century, it was seized by the Spanish monarchy and taken to Madrid, where it 
was revered as a gloomy picture of the consequences of sin. And yet …

One fact made very clear by this book offers another way to consider The 
Garden of Earthly Delights. It is a very simple fact: the painting’s date. The 
latest evidence, from scientific dating of the wooden panels to visual 
connections with other works of art, establishes that it was created between 
about 1490 and 1505.

That puts it at the heart of the Renaissance, when new ideas were changing 
Europe. Was Bosch totally immune to those ideas? Was he completely unaware of 
the printing press, the discovery of the Americas and the swirl of new 
knowledge and curiosity sweeping Europe?

Related: Art researchers uncover 'lost' Hieronymus Bosch – and sausage link 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/01/hieronymus-bosch-lost-sausage-painting>

Knowing this, look again at The Garden of Earthly Delights. It is painted as 
three superbly convincing perspective landscapes, not unlikeLeonardo da Vinci’s 
contemporary works 
<https://www.google.com/culturalinstitute/beta/asset/RQFL5tibYCPGOg?utm_source=google&utm_medium=kp&hl=en-GB>
. Another Leonardo-like touch is the spiralling host of birds rising from a 
rocky mountain in Paradise. Just like Da Vinci, Bosch has watched birds 
carefully. He is curious about nature. This curiosity fills his precise, 
detailed painting. Architecture that seems to be modelled on human organs 
suggests interests in anatomy, exotic worlds, even science fiction; the giant 
fruits suggest legends of opulent places far away. Most of all, if this was 
painted in the later 1490s or early 1500s, the ecstatic nudes may be inspired 
by images of “naked peoples” brought back by early travellers to the Americas.

There is a curiosity, a freedom of thought, an appetite for discovery in this 
painting that still makes us see ourselves in it. Bosch painted the modern 
world before it existed. This Renaissance visionary imagines boundless New 
Worlds. His masterpiece is a prophecy of us.
 