
The stage is set for Nathan Lyon to redeem himself at the Boxing Day Test, 
Australian captainSteve Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steve-smith> 
says.

Lyon was embraced by the Gabba faithful as a cult hero during the first Test 
against Pakistan but delivered another lacklustre bowling performance, 
finishing with figures of 0-31 and 2-108.

David Warner brands Smith criticism 'bizarre' ahead of Boxing Day Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/warner-brands-smith-criticism-bizarre-bnoxing-day-test>
The offspinner has been unable to find his best form for most of the year, 
including Australia’s disastrous tour of Sri Lanka, and was almost dropped in 
favour of uncapped quick Chadd Sayers for the Brisbane Test.

Smith’s apparent reluctance to throw Lyon the ball in Brisbane also raised 
eyebrows, especially with a tour of India on the horizon.

In a match where frontline quicks Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazlewood each 
bowled 56 overs, Lyon finished with just 40 to his name at one of his favourite 
grounds and was criticised for not bowling more aggressively.

Asked whether Lyon was likely to bowl more often in Melbourne, Smith gave no 
assurances.

But he said the conditions at the MCG should be ripe for Lyon to return to his 
best, with the 29-year-old to benefit from a return to the red ball and what’s 
expected to be a spin-friendly pitch.

“When there is a bit of grass here, the ball can take a little bit of spin so 
we’ll have to sum that up and see how we go,” Smith said on Sunday.

“Nathan’s working hard on his bowling.

“I thought during the last game, he bowled some good spells and some spells 
that weren’t as good. He’s working hard, and he bowled well here last year, so 
hopefully we can see some more of the same.”

Matthew Wade’s encouraging cries of “nice, Garry” from behind the stumps when 
Lyon bowled in Brisbane caught fire on social media and are likely to be 
celebrated just as loudly at the MCG.

With speculation Australia could look to left-arm spinner Steve O’Keefe for 
February’s tour of India, Smith said he had spent time with Lyon working on how 
to manage conditions on the subcontinent after his struggles in Sri Lanka.

“I think it’s completely different to the way you bowl here in Australia 
(where) you’ve got to try and do people in the air and with your flight because 
there’s usually not too much off the wicket,” he said.

“In India, I think you can fire it in a bit quicker and hit the same spot and 
get those natural variations.

“He has been working on it and I’m sure he’s going to continue to improve the 
more he does.”



 