
In contemporary Nigerian literature, muscular heroes of postcolonial 
independence have lost their swagger. Today’s patriarchs read like quaint 
fogies, stomping their feet about government, money, and gender roles.

Chigozie Obioma’s debut novel, The Fishermen, recuperates this toothless 
archetype with superb grace. His task is not to rescue the patriarch from 
becoming his country’s flattest character but to undermine dominant perceptions 
of masculinity, both within and outside ofNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, through the eyes of four boys who 
accidentally court death by following their father’s teachings.

The coming-of-age plot features four brothers between nine and 15 —Ben, 
Obembe, Boja, and Ikenna — who break rules all the time by doing what boys are 
wont to do, but with the wrong boys and in the wrong places. What would be 
normal teenage rebellion elsewhere carries fatal consequences in their 
political context, where masculinity and systemic brutality are entwined. 
Obioma reveals vulnerability, crisis, and anxiety as foundational to the 
embattled masculinity complex that has driven politics in Nigeria since the 
colonial era. In the process he deftly navigates the ethical quagmire of 
representing his country’s embroiled gender politics for an international 
audience. How can fiction undermine norms that promote women’s subjugation as 
status quo within Nigeria without vilifying black men, and thus affirming 
Western stereotypes that see Africans as barbaric?

In tackling this question, Obioma joins a wave of Nigerian luminaries under 
the age of 40, known as the “Third Generation,” who have incorporated changing 
attitudes towards gender into their ethos. Women like Chika Unigwe,Chimamanda 
Ngozi Adichie <https://www.theguardian.com/books/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie>, and 
Chibundu Onuzo (who was only 21 when her class-crossing romance,The Spider 
King’s Daughter,was published in 2012) are rethinking masculinity alongside men 
like Chris Abani and Teju Cole. Abani’s novel,The Virgin of Flames (2007), 
features a Nigerian muralist coming to terms with his attraction to a 
transsexual Mexican sex worker. In Cole’s much-acclaimed debutOpen City (2011), 
a drive towards sexual violence has burrowed so deeply into the protagonist’s 
ego as to become unconscious; he cannot comprehend his crimes against women or 
the damage to his personality caused by his patriarchal thinking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fboys-must-cry-masculinity-in-nigerian-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fcca8cc0cca158c2c7e81f74b34cdd63da44678%2F0_8_6942_4166%2F6942.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boys%20must%20cry%3A%20masculinity%20in%20Nigerian%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fboys-must-cry-masculinity-in-nigerian-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boys%20must%20cry%3A%20masculinity%20in%20Nigerian%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fboys-must-cry-masculinity-in-nigerian-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fcca8cc0cca158c2c7e81f74b34cdd63da44678%2F0_8_6942_4166%2F6942.jpg>
 Teju Cole, the Nigerian-American author and art historian. Photograph: Ulf 
Andersen/Getty Images 
Within the Third Generation, the bildungsroman has emerged as the 
quintessential genre for challenging political corruption in Nigeria. As our 
tragic hero and narrator, Ben, comes to see the Kafkaesque nightmare that 
militarized politics in his country in the 1990s, so do we. Whatever particular 
historical or cultural knowledge we bring to our reading, the coming-of-age 
novel allows our naivety and ignorance to fade alongside Ben’s, making the 
injustice he experiences all the more bewildering. Fifty years ago, Chinua 
Achebe exposed the disappointing aftermath of liberation in terms of his 
country’s reversion to oppressive norms. Obioma follows Achebe’s footsteps by 
exposing hypocrisies hampering Nigerian development today. Named after Benjamin 
Nnamdi Azikiwe, Nigeria’s first president who oversaw peace from 1963 to 1966, 
our narrator is born to be a game-changer. But also like his namesake, whose 
short legacy collapsed into twelve years of civil war, Ben cannot reverse the 
mistakes of the past without agitating prejudices that inflame violence in the 
present.

Order in Ben’s family depends on his father James’s retributive justice. James 
drives a Peugeot and reveres Western education as gospel. When work at the 
Central Bank displaces him 600 miles away, “the Guerdon,” James’s nickname for 
corporal punishment, disappears with him. Although “guerdon” denotes a reward, 
James’s middlebrow English has re-appropriated the term for beating children. 
The family is Igbo, the tribe that unsuccessfully tried to secede from Nigeria 
in the Biafran War of the 1960s. Despite their stigmatized tribal affiliation 
and his abuse, James has managed to inure his sons with dreams of upward 
mobility and jobs as doctors, pilots, professors, lawyers, and even as 
President.

Obioma subtly builds up his plot like a game of “Mother, May I?” leading his 
reader one step forward, then two steps back. Three months after James’s 
departure, his dreams cease to impress the boys, who begin ignoring their 
mother Adaku’s rules. In Obioma’s elegant and lissome prose, James’s “long arm 
that often wielded the whip, the instrument of caution, snapped like a tired 
tree branch,” breaking the boys “free.” The older brothers, Ikenna and Boja, 
flounder without discipline. Their academic standing plummets. When the boys 
kick soccer balls at disabled men’s heads, concussing them, they “play as if 
unhinged” instead of feeling bad. The positive correlation between the father’s 
absenteeism and sons’ risks for erratic or even criminal behaviour is a 
familiar story in the US. Even though Adaku has forbidden playing near the 
fictive Omi-Ala River, pretending to be fishermen in its toxic sludge becomes 
their favourite pastime. Fishing introduces them to Abulu, the homeless madman 
who prophesies that Ikenna, the oldest, will “die by the hands of a fisherman,” 
who Ikenna assumes will be one of his brothers. Their mother learns from a 
gossip that they have been fishing for weeks. Her threats — expressed in Igbo 
to ring in their ears — have little effect, even if her defiance does assert 
her strength for readers.

Perhaps Obioma’s approach to tackling patriarchy is particularly inventive 
(and risky) in his resistance to representing women like Adakubeyond 
stereotypes. Akure has the population of Cleveland, yet the Agwu boys never 
interact with girls besides their infant sister, who has no destiny because 
“there was no need to decide such things for women.” The boys only ever 
encounter women as tattlers, adulterers, idiots, whores (ashewos in Yoruba, the 
dominant language in Akure), witches, husband-murderers, and defiled corpses. A 
dubious feminist reader might decry this representational violence as yet 
another male-dominated vision of Nigeria failing to undermine militarism and 
sexist politics in African dictatorships. However, I would argue that violence 
against women sets the scene for the scuffles over masculinity that drive the 
plot, underscoring the insidious invisibility of gendered violence, which is 
clearly indefensible in Obioma’s view. Abulu, like his female victims, is more 
a paranoid specter of misogynistic evil than a real person. Rumor has it that 
his lunacy stems from the guilt of raping his mother; degrading women’s corpses 
and masturbating in public, he dangerously fuses every stereotype of black 
African sexuality as savage. His untamed concupiscence underscores the moral 
deficiencies of the Nigerian state, which has failed to discipline him.

Eventually it becomes clear that the boys’ failure to heed their mother’s 
warnings against fishing has set them on a path to committing violence against 
everyone they love—including each other. Shorn of their idyllic boyhood, 
shimmering with tadpoles and British TV, their distress quickly escalates far 
beyond their father hiding theirMortal Kombat video game. James returns to 
wield the Guerdon more ferociously than usual; his revulsion is piqued not so 
much because they disrespected their mother but becausehis sons stooped to the 
working-class status of fishermen. Despite his censure, the boys’ fates remain 
set on a far more perilous course. Abulu’s curse engulfs their imaginations. 
Deadly quarrels break out between brothers. When the boys who remain cite 
Achebe’sThings Fall Apart as vindicating their right to avenge themselves upon 
Abulu, they mistake Okonkwo’s fatal flaw, his obsession with proving his own 
masculinity, as a strength. Really, their setting better resembles the corrupt, 
modern Nigeria of Okonkwo’s descendant inNo Longer at Ease, where bribery and 
revenge have supplanted morality as a social norm. Abulu’s prophecy has 
emasculated their father and scrambled their mother’s brain; no matter their 
brothers’ roles in perpetuating violence, they believe Abulu, the specter of 
the state’s failures, is to blame. Neglecting moral responsibility to defend 
instead their masculinity and all its obligations—family, futurity, pride—only 
worsens their situation. But who knows? Perhaps their crime against a worthless 
lunatic would have gone unpunished if Ben hadn’t stabbed a Nigerian soldier 
during their ambush of Abulu. Amidst dictator Sani Abacha’s military rule, 
wherein the economy improved while writers like Ken Saro-Wiwa were executed for 
treason, masculinity is anxious to feign invincibility. Not even superficial 
wounds inflicted on a soldier’s body by a ten-year-old child can be tolerated.

Sentenced to come of age in an adult prison for his crimes, Ben must serve his 
time among men. He is trapped in “the Federal Republic of Anyhowness,” a 
Nigeria where anything the government says, goes, including $2 billion military 
budgets during peacetime. In Ben’s absence, his father, once “an impregnable 
man,” starves on the diet of “maggoty dreams” he fed his sons. Meanwhile Ben, 
instead of feeling smug for having survived, is psychologically stuck in the 
scene of the courtroom, where he cried instead of testifying as “the man” his 
father “trained [him] to be.” Ben’s shame testifies to why boys must be allowed 
to cry; no one can flourish within the circumscribed bounds of a stereotype. If 
being a man means mutilating the mentally ill, “menacing” society like 
“juggernauts,” and gritting one’s teeth at the taste of one’s own sin, then it 
means grooming villains, not heroes, to father the next generation.

*****

 * Nicole Gervasio is a PhD candidate in English and Comparative Literature at 
Columbia University. Her dissertation is on the ethics and politics of 
representing mass violence in postcolonial literature.  