
The right-wing news site Breitbart has declared “#WAR” on Kellogg’s, calling 
for a boycott of the cereal company’s products after they decided tocease 
advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/29/kellogg-pulls-ads-from-breitbart-news-alt-right>
 on the site.

On Tuesday, the Kellogg Company pulled their adverts from the site, saying 
that it wasn’t “aligned with our values”. Recent inflammatory stories include “
Birth Control Makes Women Unattractive And Crazy 
<http://www.breitbart.com/tech/2015/12/08/birth-control-makes-women-unattractive-and-crazy/>
”; “Data: Young Muslims In The West Are A Ticking Time-Bomb 
<http://www.breitbart.com/london/2016/03/22/polling-muslims-in-the-west-increasingly-sympathise-with-extremism-terror/>
” and “Would You Rather Your Child Had Feminism Or Cancer? 
<http://www.breitbart.com/video/2016/02/19/would-you-rather-your-child-had-feminism-or-cancer/>
”.

What Gamergate should have taught us about the 'alt-right'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/01/gamergate-alt-right-hate-trump>
“We regularly work with our media-buying partners to ensure our ads do not 
appear on sites that aren’t aligned with our values as a company,” Kris 
Charles, a spokeswoman for Kellogg’s, toldBloomberg 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-29/kellogg-pulls-ads-from-breitbart-amid-concerns-about-hate-speech>
. “We recently reviewed the list of sites where our ads can be placed and 
decided to discontinue advertising on Breitbart.com. We are working to remove 
our ads from that site.”

Other companies have pulled ads from the site, including Allstate, Nest, 
EarthLink, Warby Parker, SoFi and the investment groupVanguard 
<https://twitter.com/Vanguard_Group/status/803976398092255232>. Many did not 
realise they were advertising on Breitbart because their campaigns are run 
through automated systems which distribute ads across a large network of sites.

In response to Kellogg’s statement, Breitbart published a furious attack on 
the cereal company 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/11/30/dumpkelloggs-kelloggs-declares-hate-45-million-americans-blacklisting-breitbart/>
 on Wednesday saying that the move represents “an escalation in the war by 
leftist companies ... against conservative customers”. Editor-in-chief 
Alexander Marlow called for a boycott of the company’s products, saying: “For 
Kellogg’s, an American brand, to blacklist Breitbart News in order to placate 
left-wing totalitarians is a disgraceful act of cowardice.”

Breitbart News, founded in 2007 by conservative commentator Andrew Breitbart, 
rose swiftly to prominence in the last year as it became what its former 
chairman Stephen Bannon – now senior advisor to the president-elect –called 
“the platform for the alt-right” 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/08/stephen-bannon-donald-trump-alt-right-breitbart-news>
, a far-right political movementwith links to white supremacist organizations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/alt-right-conference-richard-spencer-white-nationalists>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&media=>
Stephen Bannon and the alt-right in the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/stephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
“They insult our incredibly diverse staff and spit in the face of our 
45,000,000 highly engaged, highly perceptive, highly loyal readers, many of 
whom are Kellogg’s customers,” said Marlow, whose publication ran a story in 
2015 with the headlineHoist It High And Proud: The Confederate Flag Proclaims A 
Glorious Heritage 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2015/07/01/hoist-it-high-and-proud-the-confederate-flag-proclaims-a-glorious-heritage/>
.

“Boycotting Breitbart News for presenting mainstream American ideas is an act 
of discrimination and intense prejudice,” he added. “If you serve Kellogg’s 
products to your family, you are serving up bigotry at your breakfast table.”

The article ends with a list of Kellogg’s products followed by the phrase 
“Kellogg’s: #WAR” and a link to advertise with the site.

Kellogg’s decision to pull its ads coincided with a campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/ivanka-trump-boycott-clothing-line>
 by Twitter userSleeping Giants 
<https://twitter.com/slpng_giants/status/802915214563807232> to pressure firms 
to drop their ads from Breitbart. Sleeping Giants is now receiving support from 
a likemindedonline campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/ivanka-trump-boycott-clothing-line>
 to persuade consumers to boycott the Trump brand and any retailers carrying 
their products, organized around the hashtag #GrabYourWallet.

The targeting of advertisers recalls a similar campaign perpetrated against 
the now-defunct Gawker Media by theGamergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamergate> movement which Breitbart 
vocallysupported 
<http://www.breitbart.com/london/2014/12/11/gamergate-anti-bullying-campaign-cost-gawker-over-a-million-dollars/>
. Breitbart technology editor and “alt-right” darling Milo Yiannopouloswrote at 
the time 
<http://www.breitbart.com/london/2014/10/23/gawker-dishonest-fascists-of-gamergate-could-cost-us-millions/>
 to chastise Gawker for not “apologizing for the tone of its coverage and the 
language of its writers”.

Representatives for Kellogg’s and Breitbart News did not respond to requests 
for comment.

 * Joanna Walters contributed reporting.
 