
A post-Brexit hard border on the island of Ireland would make police officers 
sitting ducks for dissident republican attacks, rank and file members of the
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> force have 
said.

New customs posts and other installations along the 325-mile frontier between 
Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic would become “propaganda gifts” and 
physical targets for the New IRA and other groups opposed to the peace process, 
the staff association representing more than 90% of police officers in Northern
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has said.

The Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Federation for Northern 
Ireland also expressed fears that a reinforced border would seriously undermine 
improving relations between frontier communities and serving police officers.

In an interview with the Guardian, Mark Lindsay, the chairman of the 
federation, which represents around 6,600 officers, pointed out that the 
dissident republican terror threat was still ranked as severe. This meant an 
attempt to murder or maim police officers could happen at any time, he said.

Lindsay said the threat would be even higher if officers were deployed at 
customs posts or crossing points to monitor the flow trade and people across 
the only land frontier between the UK and an EU state.

“We are still operating under what the government says is a severe threat, 
which means an attack on our members could happen at any time and is highly 
likely,” he said.

“If we are saying in the future that police officers could be deployed to 
customs posts and other fixed points on a hardened border then they would 
become static targets. They would in effect become sitting ducks for the 
terrorists.”

The police rank and file’s warning comes in a week of major political 
turbulence in Northern Ireland. As the row over a bungled green energy scheme 
costing hundreds of millions of taxpayers’ money pushes the Stormont assembly 
to the edge of collapse, the Northern Ireland secretary, James Brokenshire, 
said on Sunday that the UK government did not want to reimpose direct rule from 
London on the region.

Related: Martin McGuinness resigns as deputy first minister of Northern Ireland
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-to-resign-as-northern-ireland-deputy-first-minister>

Speaking on the Andrew Marr show, he ruled out joint authority over Northern 
Ireland between the British and Irish governments if the parties fail to reach 
a deal after elections that now appear inevitable.

“I’m not contemplating any alternatives to devolved government in Northern 
Ireland,” he said. “That is my absolute and resolute faith … My responsibility 
is to see that we are working with each of the parties to ensure that we are 
not looking at greater division.”


Brokenshire stressed, however, that the region will not be excluded from 
Brexit negotiations that are due to begin by the end of March.

Lindsay said his federation was not making a political comment on Brexit, but 
“simply raising practical, operational policing concerns”.

“Because on a very pragmatic level we wouldn’t even have the numbers to police 
a hard border. We are between 600 to 700 officers short of the peace-time level 
of policing numbers as recommended under Chris Patten’s police reforms for 
Northern Ireland. It would simply not be practical to police a hard border.”

He said the reinforcement of a post-Brexit frontier would also be a 
“retrograde step in relations between the community and policing”.

“Last year one of our members, Sergeant Sam Hoey, won a Queen’s Policing Medal 
for services to the community in Crossmaglen, South Armagh. I remember a time 
during the Troubles when you could only move about that area via helicopter and 
with about 16 armed squaddies accompanying your police patrol,” he said.

“Sam has established brilliant relations with the local community and he and 
his fellow officers can move about what was once one of the most dangerous 
areas to police in their patrols cars, doing ordinary police work, helping the 
people there.

“Imagine the damage to community-police relations if officers were redeployed 
to fixed border installations after Brexit … The only people to gain would be 
the terrorists, who would see these installations as a propaganda gift.”

Related: Brexit barriers would ruin Northern Ireland dairy farms, MPs told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/brexit-barriers-would-ruin-northern-ireland-dairy-farms-mps-told>

Lindsay pointed out that there are only a handful of Police Service of 
Northern Ireland (PSNI) stations still open along the border, which stretches 
from outside Derry city in the north-west to Newry and the Mournes in the 
south-east of the province, a result of major cuts in policing resources.

“On a basic level it is simply impractical to ask the police to impose a hard 
border and not only because of our reduced numbers that are again, I stress, 
below the peace-time levels recommended by Patten.

“There are only a handful of stations at places like Newry, Crossmaglen and 
Strabane still operating. What’s more there are hundreds of small cross points 
and roads that were opened during the peace process, which are unlikely to be 
shut off again by ‘dragons teeth’ type barriers.

“That would be politically unacceptable to all sides of the community, so what 
are we saying here? Police should just do fixed patrolling on the main routes 
between north and south while these smaller roads remain open? What would be 
the point of that?”

Lindsay said his members preferred to operate intelligence-led policing 
operations along the border in close cooperation with the Garda Síochána, the 
police force in the Irish Republic.

The New IRA, Continuity IRA and Óglaigh na hÉireann - the three main 
republican paramilitary organisations opposed to the peace process - have 
continued to target and try to kill members of the PSNI.

Related: Britain to push post-Brexit UK immigration controls back to Irish 
border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/09/britain-to-push-post-brexit-uk-immigration-controls-back-to-irish-border>

Since 2009 dissident republican paramilitaries have murdered two PSNI 
officers, constablesStephen Carroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/feb/17/stephen-carroll-murder-sharon-wootton>
 andRonan Kerr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/apr/03/ronan-kerr-murder-omagh-reaction>, 
and have attempted to murder at least a dozen other officers, including a 
number who work and live in border communities.

Dozens of others attempted sorties on police, military and civilian targets 
have been thwarted by north-south police cooperation and shared intelligence.

The UK prime minister, Theresa May, and her cabinet colleagues have insisted 
they are opposed to reimposing a hard border after Brexit that might resemble 
the heavily militarised frontier during the Troubles, with static army 
checkpoints and spy installations on hilltops over major north-south arterial 
routes.

Brokenshire told the Guardian in September that he preferred shifting 
immigration controls to the Irish Republic’s ports and airports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/09/britain-to-push-post-brexit-uk-immigration-controls-back-to-irish-border>
 to avoid having to introduce a hard border between north and south after the 
UK leaves the EU.
 