
Brexit’s negative impact on the economy has been splashed across the news, but 
tourism could buck the trend.

In the short term Britain’s tourism industry looks set to benefit from the 
weak pound as staycations increase and international tourists make the most of 
the exchange rate.


Research from the Tourism Alliance suggests there has already been a slight 
uptick in forward bookings of accommodation and tourist attractions since the 
referendum vote, while China’s group tour and foreign independent tour sectors 
believe Brexit will boost tourism to the UK from Chinaby 20-30% between July 
and August 
<http://www.tourismsoutheast.com/services-and-support/business-support/brexit.html>
. More than half of accommodation providers are expecting an increase in 
visitors following the EU referendum outcome, according to asurvey 
<https://www.visitbritain.org/accommodation-providers-across-england-expect-boost-tourism>
 by VisitEngland.

Matthew Thomson, who owns the South West franchise for Jamie Oliver’s Fifteen 
restaurant brand, believes it is hard to ascertain the immediate impact. “We 
are hoping there will be more people coming to Cornwall on holiday but I think 
it will take until next year before you start to see a measurable boost,” says 
Thomson. “There is going to be a growing staycation market partly due to 
pragmatics and currency but also because of philosophy.”

The rhetoric during the referendum campaign around Britain’s unique qualities 
will encourage people to holiday in this country, believes Thomson.


Paul Dendle, the cabinet member responsible for tourism in the Arun district 
in West Sussex, which includes the British seaside town of Bognor Regis, says 
there is optimism an alreadyburgeoning renaissance in traditional seaside 
holidays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/may/14/once-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back>
 will continue.


“We think there is an opportunity to re-establish the traditional seaside 
holiday by reinventing it with new offerings,” says Dendle. This includes 
“glamping” holidays, such asBillycan Camping <http://www.billycancamping.co.uk/>
, an eco friendly campsite where guests stay in yurts and tipis in Arundel. 
Also Butlins has built three hotels in Bognor Regis in recent years - and has 
another planned - that offer a more modern holiday experience. “It is the 
traditional old hi-de-hi holiday but with a new offering because it is more 
upmarket for what families want these days,” says Dendle.

The renaissance in the British seaside holiday began a decade ago with the 
increase of terrorism and rising fuel costs in 2007/08, he says.


Dendle, who founded EasyJet pre-runner Avro, warns the aviation industry could 
be seriously damaged by the referendum. “The established operators are under 
duress and a lot of independents will go out of business this year,” he says. 
He has already had to put on hold launch plans for Loloflights, a peak-season 
flight operation, because of Brexit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fbrexit-british-tourism-industry-benefit-pound%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc61ef6541af1a4b569865cb1be2c04dddd53e7c%2F0_0_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20and%20tourism%3A%20'We%20have%20devalued%20the%20Union%20Jack%20as%20a%20brand'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fbrexit-british-tourism-industry-benefit-pound%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20and%20tourism%3A%20%27We%20have%20devalued%20the%20Union%20Jack%20as%20a%20brand%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fbrexit-british-tourism-industry-benefit-pound%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc61ef6541af1a4b569865cb1be2c04dddd53e7c%2F0_0_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Butlins now offers a more modern holiday experience. Photograph: Martin Godwin 
for the Guardian 
More tour operators could follow Lowcostholidays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/15/lowcostholidays-administration-warning-travellers>
 and go bankrupt as currency fluctuations hit their margins, according to Prof 
Dimitrios Buhalis, head of the department of tourism and hospitality at 
Bournemouth University.


Such fears, alongside concerns about attacks in mainland Europe, are only 
likely to bolster the number of Britons who opt for a staycation.


“We are all going to be poorer and I don’t see the currency recovering very 
soon,” says Buhalis. “In that sense I expect the staycation will be around for 
a while.”

 This will come as a welcome boon to the British tourism industry because the 
most recent figures for England show that while international spend has 
increased, domestic tourism was on the decline.


The Great Britain Tourism Survey 
<https://www.visitengland.com/sites/default/files/downloads/260121199_gb_tourist_report_2014_-_17th_september_2015_0.pdf>
 found spend by domestic overnight visitors dropped by 3% year-on-year in 
England to £18.1bn in 2014, while international overnight visitors increased 
their spend 4% to £19.1bn.


The UK could benefit from international tourism as the weaker pound encourages 
greater numbers of international visitors and also results in them spending 
more.


“There’s anecdotal evidence to suggest some European or American travellers 
are perhaps not controlling their spending as much as they ordinarily would,” 
says Tanja Lister, owner of theKylesku Hotel <http://www.kyleskuhotel.co.uk/> 
in the Scottish Highlands.


Nevertheless, the outlook is not all rosy for the British tourism industry and 
Lister fears any short term increase in tourism is potentially “illusory” 
because of the greater risks to the wider economy.


Scotland could face a second independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/nicola-sturgeon-would-consider-2017-scottish-independence-referendum-brexit>
 in 2017 and Lister said the first one was “bad enough” because it almost 
forced her to cancel a £1m refurbishment project. “We have further plans for 
the business that would involve more significant spending on capital projects 
that are currently all on hold until we know for sure there is more stability,” 
she says.

Another potential threat to Britain is the damage done to the country’s 
international reputation. Thomson has had a number of cancellations following 
the Brexit vote, including a Dutch couple who decided not to come to Britain 
after hearing rumours about “racist mobs”.

“There is a terrible risk for the British brand at this moment in time,” says 
Thomson.


The ending of European development funding is another major risk because much 
of the money is spent on infrastructure development for tourism in areas such 
as Cornwall, according to Buhalis.


On top of this, margins of small businesses in the tourism industry could be 
threatened by spiralling food and wage costs. However, this may be offset by 
the boost in popularity of staycations.


“I will not be surprised if you will have more expensive hotel prices because 
the demand is going up,” says Buhalis. However, he also points out that the 
tourism industry is currently hugely reliant on EU workers and is concerned 
about “who is going to work in the hotels” if there is a clampdown on free 
movement.

As a business owner, Lister is sceptical of those who argue the British 
economy could be better off 15 years from now after extracting itself from the 
EU. “You do not know that is true and 15 years is a hell of a long time in the 
lifespan of a business,” she says.

She suspects there are other business owners holding off on investment, but 
admits this may end up becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy “where the whole 
thing stagnates”.


Thomson is taking the opposite approach because the “biggest risk is paralysis 
due to uncertainty”. “If other people are putting things on hold that increases 
the chance of success for those of us who just press on,” says Thomson, who has 
stepped up his expansion plans.

He has issued a rallying cry to the rest of the tourism industry because he 
believes it can help reverse international perceptions that post-Brexit Britain 
is “a little bit ridiculous, paranoid, and racist”.


“We have devalued the Union Jack as a tourism brand,” says Thomson. “The job 
of tourism is to counter that with really strong, positive, and welcoming 
invitations.”


A short-term boost to the British tourism industry is more or less guaranteed. 
Its long term fate is less certain and will rely on the British verve and 
tenacity that was a central pillar of the Brexiters’ campaign rhetoric.


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 