
Drive south along Croatia’s Adriatic freeways and you will stumble on the kind 
of border headache thatIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> 
might face when Britain leaves the EU.


An hour-long tailback at the border with Bosnia and Herzegovina makes 
motorists fume. A desultory passport check and everyone is on their way again – 
but not for long. Ten miles further south there’s another border, this time 
crossing from Bosnia back intoCroatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/croatia>.

When Croatia joined the EU in 2013, these became hard borders again overnight. 
If Britain opts for a “‘hard Brexit”, ending freedom of movement with the EU 
and requiring new trade arrangements, the same issues could rear up along the 
310-mile (500km) frontier betweenNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the Irish Republic.

Officials on both sides seem determined that no hard border will re-emerge. 
Many feel that passport checks in particular would be unnecessary, however 
urgently the British feel they need to “take back control” of their borders.

But questions remain: how will customs enforce differences in tariffs without 
searching lorries on the scores of roads that run between north and south? If 
the border is not policed, how will EU nationals who migrate to the Irish 
Republic be prevented from moving to the north, and then to Great Britain?
Croatia map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/oct/2016-10-03T15:06:26.html> 
Like the Irish divide, the 850-mile demarcation line in the Balkans cuts 
across cultural, family, and business ties, with bilateral trade worth £1.1bn 
(€1.3bn).

When Croatia joined the EU on 1 July 2013, the bloc’s external frontier was 
redrawn along the country’s borders with Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and 
Montenegro. The border with Bosnia and Herzegovina has proved particularly 
troublesome. Both were once republics of Yugoslavia, and 15% of Bosnian 
citizens are ethnic Croats, most of whom have Croatian EU passports.

In some cases, the results are surreal: houses and farms that are part in the 
EU and part not, and farmers who need to show ID to get to and from their own 
fields.

Ivan Glavota runs a winery with a 100-year-old wine cellar in Imotski, a 
picturesque small town on the Croatian side that is perched on cliffs above a 
striking azure lake. He has 1,000 vines on the Bosnian side of the border. In 
addition to the occasional bureaucratic hassle of crossing to his own land, he 
is not able to obtain EU or Croatian funding for the grapes harvested across 
the border, though the wine is made in Croatia.

“This creates a problem for numerous small agriculture producers in the area,” 
he says.

The border has become synonymous with such frustrations. Even though most 
Bosnian goods enjoy free-trade status within the EU, Bosnian agricultural goods 
can only be exported to Croatia through two customs posts on their long 
frontier, pushing up costs. Tariff-free trade privileges were suspended 
temporarily earlier this year during a bureaucratic wrangle.

“People tend to sometimes forget that Croatia is now part of a different 
system, that things are not like they used to be,” says Amer Kapetanovic, 
assistant minister for bilateral affairs and economic diplomacy at the Bosnian 
foreign ministry. “All these bureaucratic nuances suddenly became very 
important and this is the moment of realisation that Croatia is in the EU and 
we are not, despite the fact that we used to live together in one state, we 
speak the same language, listen to the same music, have the same jokes, have 
family either side of the border.”

Kapetanovic warns his counterparts to avoid a clean break when it comes to 
Brexit negotiations.

“It would be wise if during the negotiations on article 50 both the UK and 
Ireland strongly opt for continuing with an open border policy,” he says. “As 
neither are part of Schengen [passport-free travel zone], I think it would be 
the wisest approach. Otherwise some of our examples affecting our daily life 
with our EU neighbour Croatia might appear in your situation as well, and I’m 
sure your people would not like it.”

Croatian former interior minister Ranko Ostojic, who was in office when 
Croatia joined the EU, points out that citizens living within 30km of the 
border are eligible for special passes. But he acknowledges that there are long 
queues at the border as all other non-EU citizens (including most Bosnians) are 
subject to “full passport control” at the border, and require biometric 
passports.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fireland-brexit-headache-border%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F652e32e5f41df51fe1282b851ff9d465fc5242dd%2F0_0_4096_2732%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20border%20headache%3A%20what%20can%20other%20EU%20frontiers%20teach%20Britain%20and%20Ireland%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fireland-brexit-headache-border%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20border%20headache%3A%20what%20can%20other%20EU%20frontiers%20teach%20Britain%20and%20Ireland%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fireland-brexit-headache-border%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F652e32e5f41df51fe1282b851ff9d465fc5242dd%2F0_0_4096_2732%2F4096.jpg>
 Trucks queue on the Serbian side of the border between Serbia and Croatia. 
Photograph: Zoltan Balogh/EPA 
The Nordic model

About 2,000 miles to the north, another EU border provides further insights 
into what happens when two close trading partners have a hard tariff border.

In the Swedish town of Charlottenberg, sweet shops are thriving because of the 
different prices of sugar in Sweden andNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway>.
Sweden map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/sep/2016-09-30T15:49:54.html> 
Every weekend, Norwegians come to fill their boots – literally – from an 
assortment of 4,000 varieties of cheap candy in stores such asGottebiten 
<http://www.gottebiten.se/>, which is almost the size of a football field.

Enormous Swedish shopping centres within driving distance of Oslo also cater 
to Norwegian demand for low-tax tobacco and alcohol.

The creation of the Nordic Council after the second world war saw 
passport-free travel and a common labour market implemented across the Nordic 
countries. Sweden’s accession to the EU in 1995 did not change the arrangement, 
and indeed Norway’s membership of the European Economic Area makes issues such 
as freedom of movement moot.

The two countries that once split apart have grown closer together, despite 
one being inside the EU and the other outside. So could Norway andSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> hold any lessons for the future of 
Britain and Ireland?


“Passport-free movement while Norway is not an EU member is quite unique,” 
says Peter Dafteryd, a councillor for the ruling centre-right group on the town 
council of Strömstad, another community near the border with Norway. “The 
problem in Ireland is that that kind of arrangement has not been prepared. It 
will be a struggle for both sides, I think.”

The EU’s Interreg programme 
<http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/en/atlas/programmes/2014-2020/europe/2014tc16rfcb016>
 spends as much as €20m a year on strengthening economic cooperation across the 
border. “The EU wants to have good relations with its neighbours,” says Michael 
von Essen, a project officer for Interreg on the Swedish side.

Some Norwegian companies like to establish themselves inside the EU, so they 
open small offices in places such as Strömstad, just 80 miles from Oslo, 
according to Dafterydl.

“That way they have a daughter company in the EU, with quite different taxes 
and regulations. It’s a way of getting into the EU without being a member,” 
Dafteryd says. Norwegians bring more than 8bn krona (£715m) into the Strömstad 
area every year, paying the salaries of some 2,000 Swedes, he adds.

Germany-Switzerland

Another model for the future of the British-Irish border may be glimpsed where 
Germany meetsSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland>.


 Officially, there have been no land border controls between the two countries 
since 12 December 2008, and journeys by air have been denoted “inland flights” 
since 29 March 2009 – which means people only need to show their ID card to 
board a flight from Berlin to Zurich, and can walk from Basel to Weil am Rhein 
without any documents.
Switzerland map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/oct/2016-10-03T15:11:12.html> 
Apart from the odd cow fence, there are no fortifications along the 362-km 
border. About 54,000 people who live inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> commute daily to Switzerland.

 But since Switzerland is not part of the EU’s customs union, both countries 
carry out some checks at the crossings. For example, even though Switzerland is 
part of Schengen, Germans on holiday to the Swiss Alps are not allowed to take 
more than two bottles of wine or 500g of beef. Likewise, if expensive skiing 
equipment is purchased in Verbier, it must be declared to German customs when 
crossing back into the EU.

The line between controlling traffic of people and goods is hard to draw. 
Swiss customs officials are also required to carry out ID checks for security 
issues, and not just at fixed border points but also via mobile units that 
operate along the border. Customs officials say they can carry out spot checks 
without creating tailbacks at border points.

In September 2010 Bavarian police gained the first lead that eventually 
resulted in thediscovery of the Munich art hoard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/german-and-swiss-art-galleries-display-cornelius-gurlitt-nazi-art>
 after customs officers discovered €9,000 in cash on collector Cornelius 
Gurlitt during a spot check on a Zurich-Munich train. The legal limit is 
€10,000.

Since the start of 2015, even couriers who travel two miles to deliver pizzas 
from an Italian restaurant in Weil am Rhein to Basel have to declare their 
stone-oven-baked wares with Swiss customs. It’s easy to see why: a pizza 
margherita, which sells for about €4.90 on the German side of the border, costs 
€13 in Basel.

It is no coincidence the term “shopping tourist” was voted the Swiss word of 
the year in 2015. People in German border cities such as Konstanz complain 
about Swiss visitors gridlocking their medieval city.

Shopping tourists are already emerging in northern Ireland, as the slump in 
sterling makes goods in Britain that much cheaper.


But there have been no reports of gridlock in Belfast as yet.








 