
Dairy farms in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> will “go out of business” 
after Brexit if barriers to trade with the Republic of Ireland are erected, the 
government has been warned.

The risk centres not just on the potential loss of exports to the supermarkets 
in the republic but the loss of a highly successful global business in 
cross-border production of milk and cheese products, a House of Commons select 
committee was told on Wednesday.

About a third of milk from cows in Northern Ireland is transported across the 
border for production into butter, cheese and infant formula, Mike Johnston, 
the Northern Ireland director for Dairy UK, told the Northern Ireland affairs 
committee.

Related: PMQs: Theresa May attacks Red Cross description of NHS as 
'irresponsible and overblown' - politics live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/11/pmqs-may-corbyn-nhs-simon-stevens-10-plays-down-reports-of-rift-with-nhs-chief-simon-stevens-politics-live>

“Dairy farmers would have to go out of business as a consequence of their milk 
not being able to be processed,” he said.

He told the committee more than 25% of the region’s raw milk went south of the 
border to be processed but a hard Brexit would close down that flow, not just 
because of tariffs and customs checks, but because of the burden of paperwork 
relating to issues including traceability, animal welfare and food standards.

He said 25% of pasteurised milk went south of the border for use in products 
such as infant formula.

That business could ultimately be picked up in Northern Ireland after Brexit, 
but there was not enough time in two years to build facilities to replace those 
in the republic, he said.

The Brexit evidence-gathering session threw fresh light on the specific 
challenges facing farmers on both sides of the border in Ireland.

Politicians and business leaders on the island have warned of the 
“incalculable damage” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/irish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis>
 Brexit threatens but the detail on cross-border agricultural business has 
until now not been discussed so publicly. Individual farmers and food 
manufacturers have been reluctant to speak on the record with the media.

Johnston told MPs there had been “significant rationalisation” across the 
island of Ireland in diary production, driven by the need to compete with 
farmers in the southern hemisphere.

This had led to “site specialisation” with infant formula plants in the 
republic, for instance, and the creation of the largest cheese processing 
facility inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in 
Dunmanbridge in County Tyrone, Northern Ireland, said Johnston.

Related: Britain considering £1,000-a-year levy for skilled EU workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/11/britain-considering-1000-a-year-levy-for-skilled-eu-workers-robert-goodwill>

“This goes beyond hard or soft border,” said Johnston. “If we cannot overcome 
issues around labelling, traceability, common standards, then that business 
north and south would grind to a halt,” he said unless there was a transition 
period during which EU regulations “copied and pasted” into UK law would apply.

“In terms of the border, it’s a major, major issue for the dairy industry. We 
are very, very dependent on what we call an all-island value chain. If we have 
any interruption in the current practices it is going to affect the longer-term 
viability of the industry,” he told the committee.

The committee heard that Northern Ireland exported to up to 100 countries, 
including more than 50 countries which had a trade deal with the EU.

Johnston told MPs that the current 15-16% tariff imposed on their products in 
countries such as Thailand and Malaysia would “at least double” once the UK 
withdrew from Europe. “That would kill that business,” he said.

The committee also heard that 40% of lambs went south of the border with much 
of the meat from sheep going on from the republic to France, a supply route 
that could also be adversely affected by a hard or soft border.


Barclay Bell, the president of the Ulster Farmers’ Union, highlighted the 
challenges facing those trying to drum up business outside the EU and called on 
the government to put more effort into getting access to China.

“We’ve been trying to get pig meat into China for years, it just seems to be a 
very prolonged process. We feel resources at Westminster need to be expanded in 
some way … there needs to be a speeding up of the process. Other countries seem 
to be getting access,” he said.

Related: Of course farmers fear Brexit, but it could save the British 
countryside | George Monbiot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/farmers-fear-brexit-save-british-countryside-european-subsidy-wildlife-agriculture>

If future UK exports to Europe were subject to World Trade Organisation 
tariffs, “quite chunky charges” would be added to agricultural products from 
the UK.

Current tariffs on bovine products are around the 13% mark, while butter from 
outside Europe was subject to a tariff ranging from €1.90 to €2.30 a kilo, Bell 
told the MPs.

The Northern Irish farming industry was also questioned about the heavy 
reliance on migrant workers, with 65% of the workforce in the food-processing 
business coming from elsewhere in the EU.

Bell told MPs the industry would be crippled without these workers. “People 
from the red meat processing centre, they will tell you, local people don’t 
want to work in the food processing. They have basically said to us if we don’t 
have access to that migrant labour we’re gone,” he said.
 