
When Britain voted for Brexit, a strange thing happened in North Down, an 
affluent, unionist-dominated area ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> with a strong sense of British 
identity.

As the results came in it became clear North Down had other affinities: 
European. The area voted in favour of staying in the EU, as the majority of 
people in NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> did.


The outcome of June’s referendum triggered a summer of speculation. Had 
attitudes changed? If unionists saw EU membership as important, might they 
reconsider their ancient hostility to reunification with Ireland?


Some asked if there should be a “border poll”, a referendum on whether 
Northern Ireland should stay in the UK or join the Irish Republic.Others feared 
a push by Scotland towards independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/30/no-real-shift-towards-scottish-independence-since-brexit-vote-poll>
 could fatally undermine unionist confidence in the unity of the UK.


But passions quickly cooled. Politicians, among them Bertie Ahern, the former 
Irish prime minister, said the time wasn’t right for a reunification vote.


Irish Republic signals support for UK plan to avoid post-Brexit 'hard border'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/idea-of-uk-border-controls-in-ireland-is-ridiculous-says-irish-mep-matt-carty>
In unionist strongholds voters stress that pro-remain is not the same as a 
pro-reunification. Even diehard loyalists say they are opposed to any “hard 
border” with the Irish Republic post-Brexit.

In the North Down seaside town of Bangor, at her home overlooking the mouth of 
Belfast Lough towards the Irish Sea beyond, remain voter Jill McGimpsey says 
she never once thought about giving up on the UK even after the Brexit vote.

“The reason I voted to remain was because of all the economic warnings over a 
possible downturn in business if we left the EU,” says the 56-year-old estate 
agent. “For me that meant the impact on the local housing market and fear that 
it would be adversely affected.


“I never thought for one minute after the UK overall voted for Brexit that I 
would change my mind about Northern Ireland’s constitutional status. Brexit was 
and is irrelevant when it comes to my Britishness.”

She and her pro-Brexit neighbour Carl McLean stress that they are opposed to a 
hard border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic – the UK’s only 
land frontier with an EU state.


McLean, who has just returned from Brussels on business, says: “Unionists as 
well as nationalists enjoy the benefits of an invisible border and cross-border 
cooperation. We don’t want to be stopped at checkpoints or have our vehicles 
held up at customs posts.

“It might come as a surprise to some people on the mainland but we unionists 
like travelling and doing business down south in the republic. Many of us 
commute there on a daily basis, spend weekend breaks in the south and watch 
Ireland in the rugby internationals in Dublin. We would hate a hard border as 
much as any nationalist would.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrexit-reignites-debate-britishness-northern-ireland-unionists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b547c11b62777fc4038459d128ad51aaa2f4c4%2F0_170_5592_3356%2F5592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20vote%20reignites%20the%20debate%20on%20Britishness%20in%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrexit-reignites-debate-britishness-northern-ireland-unionists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20vote%20reignites%20the%20debate%20on%20Britishness%20in%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbrexit-reignites-debate-britishness-northern-ireland-unionists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b547c11b62777fc4038459d128ad51aaa2f4c4%2F0_170_5592_3356%2F5592.jpg>
 The Aughnacloy checkpoint between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland 
in 1985. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
For many unionists with links to Scotland, the big Brexit fear is that it 
might prompt a second referendum resulting in Scottish secession from the UK, 
leaving Northern Ireland in an odd rump state comprising England and Wales.

In the staunch unionist constituency of Lagan Valley, Scotland is on the minds 
of two loyalists who belong to Orange flute bands in the town of Lisburn.

“My sister works in a big bank in Edinburgh and was like many people in the 
Scottish financial sector very worried about the impact of Brexit and how jobs 
might be lost if the UK voted out,” says Graham Kenny. “She convinced me to 
vote for remain.
 Graham Kenny 
“There was also the worry about Brexit pushing the Scots towards another 
referendum vote. Given the family, cultural, political and social ties between 
Northern Ireland and Scotland the last thing I wanted was to see the Scots walk 
away from the other union.”

The 43-year-old, who is a member of the Ulster Political Research Group, the 
party that grew out of the loyalist paramilitary Ulster Defence Association, 
adds: “Even if Scotland walked away from the UK, which I think is not going to 
happen now, Brexit would never push me towards supporting a united Ireland. Our 
unionism is rock solid.”

His friend and fellow loyalist bandsman Gareth Walker voted for Brexit.


Walker says: “I work on a community project here in Lisburn that integrates 
immigrants into our community. We work on the Old Warren housing estate to 
ensure our large Polish population feel welcome and fully integrated with the 
locals. In the past we have had lectures and films teaching our young people 
about how Polish pilots fought in the Battle of Britain to save our country. So 
for me voting for Brexit was never about being anti-immigration. It was about 
taking control of our own affairs and not being bossed about by Brussels.”


Walker says he too is opposed to any hard border with the Irish Republic.


I don't think anyone should go off floating other ideas but keep strictly to 
the Good Friday agreement
Bertie Ahern 
“I try to follow the Northern Ireland football team everywhere around Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and often that means driving to 
Dublin airport to get to games abroad. I love the idea of no restrictions on 
the way down and I like visiting Dublin too. I have made friends with Republic 
of Ireland fans from the south at the airport on our way to games including 
Euro 2016 in France.

“I want those good relations north and south to continue even though, Brexit 
or no Brexit, I am still British.”


A BBC poll in September 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-37309706> found that eight out 
of 10 people in a survey of 1,000 voters said Brexit would not change their 
views on the union with Britain or a united Ireland. The same poll said 63% 
would still back remaining within the UK. A majority in the poll – 52% – were 
opposed to holding a border poll on Irish unity.


Among those who oppose a border poll is Ahern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/04/bertie-ahern-uk-reimpose-irish-border-after-brexit-eu-northern-ireland>
, the three times Irish taoiseach and Tony Blair’s key ally in the negotiations 
leading up to the 1998 Good Friday agreement.


He said: “Nobody should be talking about border polls. Border polls should 
only come into account when there is a realistic opportunity down the road, 
when I’ll be probably long gone, when there is a realistic chance of one 
succeeding.”


Ahern, who built up a deep friendship with the late Rev Ian Paisley in the 
discussions leading to the establishment of a devolved power sharing government 
in 2007, said any all-Ireland negotiations about Brexit’s impact should be only 
under the institutions set up via the Good Friday agreement.

“That should almost be the gospel. So I don’t think anyone should go off 
floating other ideas but keep strictly to that agreement which was underpinned 
by theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and is a recognised 
international treaty.”


Additional reporting by Stephen Collins, political editor, the Irish Times
 