
The Marvels is not an illustrated novel, but a novel told in words and 
pictures. It begins with roughly 400 pages of pictures, then there are 200 
pages of text, followed by another 50 pages of pictures. Because visual 
narratives are constructed in our minds very differently from text narratives, 
the experience of reading the story is affected by the use of words and 
pictures. This fascinates me and is at the heart of what lead me to experiment 
with visual storytelling inThe Marvels 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-marvels.html>, as well as its 
predecessors,The Invention of Hugo Cabret 
<http://www.theinventionofhugocabret.com/intro_html5.htm> and Wonderstruck 
<http://www.wonderstruckthebook.com/>.

Guardian children's fiction prize 2016 shortlist announced
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/18/guardian-childrens-fiction-prize-2016-shortlist-announced>
When we read, pictures often form automatically in our minds. We construct 
visual images of characters and locations based partly on the actual text, and 
partly on our own experiences, our own biases, our own dreams. This translation 
from words to images in our mind occurs unbidden.

 But looking at visual narratives does something different. It’s possible for 
a visual story to advance without making an equivalent automatic translation to 
words. We might look at a drawing of a character’s face and understand that the 
character is sad without thinking (or hearing in our minds) the word “sad”. 
Visual understanding can transcend language. We can understand the idea of 
sadness without having to label it with a word. And of course, like silent 
movies, pictures don’t need to be translated for people who speak different 
languages.

 If we skim a page of text, details can be missed and plot points overlooked. 
Yet we know that, when faced with a page of text, we need to start in the upper 
left-hand corner and work across the page, word by word, to understand it, and 
then move downward to the next line until we reach the bottom right corner of 
the page. To fully comprehend the story, we have to take in every letter; that 
is part of the deal we make as readers with the writer. We know that just 
looking at a page of text won’t give us the story.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbrian-selznick-on-visual-novel-the-marvels-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa60344d0af0209b90831e011566f742857ebf2c7%2F0_0_3301_2475%2F3301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brian%20Selznick%3A%20'I%20wanted%20my%20story%20to%20exist%20between%20pictures%20and%20words'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbrian-selznick-on-visual-novel-the-marvels-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brian%20Selznick%3A%20%27I%20wanted%20my%20story%20to%20exist%20between%20pictures%20and%20words%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbrian-selznick-on-visual-novel-the-marvels-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa60344d0af0209b90831e011566f742857ebf2c7%2F0_0_3301_2475%2F3301.jpg>
 Part of a dream sequence in Selznick’s visual novelThe Marvels 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/330545/>. 
Just as when we read a text too quickly, there can be problems if we don’t 
take the time to look at drawings carefully. But unlike with a story told only 
through a block of text, a viewer can look at a drawing and feel as if they 
instantly comprehend the subject. One look at a drawing can give you a huge 
amount of information. For instance, a drawing in The Marvels of a girl tied to 
the mast of a ship in the middle of a storm at sea can be understood in 
moments. All that information can even seem as if it was imparted in a single 
glance, like a lightning bolt. Then with a feeling of comprehension, the viewer 
might move on to the next drawing.

The Invention of Hugo Cabret is like a relay race, with the narrative being 
handed off between the words and pictures

But has the drawing really been understood? Depending on the complexity of the 
story, rushing through the images will leave the reader feeling as confused as 
if they were rushing through text. Spending time with the drawing, looking at 
all the details , is essential. This kind of “reading” will hopefully reveal 
information and nuances that make the story and characters more easily 
understood and more deeply remembered.

 The feeling of a story told in pictures is also distinct from one told with 
words. Some readers of The Invention of Hugo Cabret told me the picture 
sections of the book seemed quieter to them than the text sections because they 
could “hear” the text sections in their minds as they read. The pictures had no 
such accompanying noise, even as the narrative moved forward. Hugo is like a 
relay race, with the narrative being handed off between the words and the 
pictures, creating alternating moments of silence. These silences worked well 
in a story that was partly about silent movies. My hope was that, by the end of 
the book, the reader wouldn’t remember what parts of the story had been told in 
words and what part in pictures. My goal was for the totality of the story to 
exist somewhere between the two.

Brian Selznick's new book The Marvels – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/nov/06/brian-selznicks-the-marvels>
 This idea of visual silence intrigued me, and in my next book Wonderstruck, I 
tried to use it purposefully. I created two separate narratives set 50 years 
apart that weave together, one in text and another in pictures. We eventually 
discover the main character in the picture story, Rose, was born deaf, and my 
hope was that the reader might experience her story in a way that parallels her 
own experience. The silence of the pictures is a metaphor for the silence of 
her world.

 In The Marvels (inspired in part by the Dennis Severs’ House in London 
<http://www.dennissevershouse.co.uk/>) I once again created two stories, 
although they don’t weave together like the ones in Wonderstruck. The picture 
story, which covers five generations of a family, unfolds first across roughly 
400 pages, and then at a climactic moment the drawings stop and we find 
ourselves jumping ahead 90 years into a story told entirely in words. 
Initially, the second story seems to be separate from the first, but we 
discover a possible connection and weremember the drawings – they become part 
of the second narrative in our minds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbrian-selznick-on-visual-novel-the-marvels-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6ceae84c1708eb99f074021fa8708cc13db03a2%2F0_0_3301_2475%2F3301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brian%20Selznick%3A%20'I%20wanted%20my%20story%20to%20exist%20between%20pictures%20and%20words'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbrian-selznick-on-visual-novel-the-marvels-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brian%20Selznick%3A%20%27I%20wanted%20my%20story%20to%20exist%20between%20pictures%20and%20words%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbrian-selznick-on-visual-novel-the-marvels-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6ceae84c1708eb99f074021fa8708cc13db03a2%2F0_0_3301_2475%2F3301.jpg>
 The Marvels was partly inspired by the Dennis Severs’ house in Spitalfields, 
home to a family of Huguenot silk weavers from 1724 to the start of the 20th 
century. Illustration: Brian Selznick 
 Books are a technology, but we don’t usually think of them that way. They are 
made up of simple parts: covers and pages and thread and glue. I love how 
adaptable this simple apparatus can be, and how physical it is. The paper is in 
our hands. We are touching it and turning it. And when we turn the page, we 
discover a magic trick, because we never know what we’re going to find on the 
other side.

 “A thrilling picture book not only makes beautiful single images or 
sequential images,” my friend Remy Charlip, the great illustrator, wrote in an 
essay calledA Page Is a Door 
<http://www.theinventionofhugocabret.com/remy_essay.htm>, “but also allows us 
to become aware of a book’s unique physical structure, by bringing our 
attention, once again, to that momentous moment: the turning of the page.”

When you turn the page, pictures can become story, as in Hugo, or they can 
becomeexperience, as in Wonderstruck, or they can even become memory, as in The 
Marvels. This is why I love using pictures to tell stories in books. Anything 
is possible, and there are always new things to discover when you turn the page.

• The Marvels is published by Scholastic at £16.99 and is available at the 
Guardian bookshop for £12.99 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-marvels.html>
. The Guardian children’s fiction prize will be awarded on 17 November.


 <> 
 