
In the middle of winter (in the northern hemisphere at least), it is 
comforting to think about sunshine. Sunshine is what allows life on this 
planet. The sun spews out electromagnetic radiation around 93m miles (149m km) 
away here on Earth, life responds, on all sorts of timescales.

The most obvious type of solar radiation to reach us, and to all the other 
species which have evolved eyes over the last half a billion years, is visible 
light. Infrared radiation, with a lower frequency than the red end of the 
visible light spectrum, and which more or less corresponds to thermal 
radiation, is also a large component of the sun’s radiation. Finally, there is 
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, with a higher frequency than the violet end of the 
visible spectrum. This form of radiation enables our mammalian bodies to make 
vitamin D (good), but can also cause sunburn, and damage to DNA (bad).

UV radiation has huge direct effects on our planet’s climate, despite forming 
only 8% of the sun’s output. It causes the photochemical reaction which 
produces the ozone layer, and also heats the stratosphere. As well as the 
aforementioned damage to DNA which UV radiation causes, increased UV radiation 
can also produce stress in plants: their growth is stunted, they 
photosynthesise less, and a whole range of more subtle effects. And what is bad 
for plants is bad for the entire ecosystem. The effects of UV-B radiation (with 
a wavelength between 280 to 315nm) have been proposed asa factor in the biggest 
ecological crisis in Earth’s history <http://www.pnas.org/content/101/35/12952>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbring-me-sunshine-in-your-spores-the-science-of-pollen-fossil-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F109205c2cba350f9fb432e674e2646a58c3403c4%2F0_0_661_665%2F661.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bring%20me%20sunshine%20in%20your%20spores%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbring-me-sunshine-in-your-spores-the-science-of-pollen-fossil-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bring%20me%20sunshine%20in%20your%20spores%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbring-me-sunshine-in-your-spores-the-science-of-pollen-fossil-radiation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F109205c2cba350f9fb432e674e2646a58c3403c4%2F0_0_661_665%2F661.jpg>
 A spore tetrad (green) and trilete spores (blue, ~30-35μm diameter) from a 
late Silurian sporangium (Burgsvik beds, Sweden). Spore genus is Scylaspora. 
Photograph: By Smith609 (Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons 
What we haven’t had up until now is a reliable record of sunshine through deep 
time. A new study by Phillip Jardine and colleagues providesa new method for 
measuring UV radiation in the past, using pollen and spores 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep39269>. Spores and pollen, collectively 
known as sporomorphs, are the tiny reproductive structures of land plants, and 
have a highly resistant outer wall made of a biopolymer called sporopollenin. 
This means that they are often well preserved in the fossil record, and a good 
record of past vegetation. The study of spores and pollen is a discipline in 
its own right: palynology, and has had many importantpioneers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/06/william-chaloner-obituary>. 
Sporomorphs from different plants can be highly distinctive, and even 
beautiful, when extracted from rock using acid and viewed under a microscope. 
Because they are small, widely distributed and change over time, sporomorphs 
are useful as stratigraphic markers, as well as indicators of ecological 
diversity.

The truth about radiation - podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2016/jun/03/the-truth-about-radiation-podcast>
The key to measuring sunshine in the past is the chemistry of the 
sporopollenin wall of pollen and spores. Sporopollenin contains phenolic 
compounds which protect the spore contents by absorbing UV radiation. These can 
be measured using Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) microspectroscopy. The UV 
absorbing compounds (UACs) have been shown to vary with UV radiation in modern 
settings, showing that plants can up-regulate the levels of UACs in their 
spores in response to elevated UV levels. Because the chemistry of 
sporopollenin is a highly stable over millions of years, levels of UACs in 
fossil sporomorphs can tell us about ancient levels of solar irradiance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbring-me-sunshine-in-your-spores-the-science-of-pollen-fossil-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d3bac22cae11c4b9842c4b7c1aa13b1ad382b85%2F0_561_3104_3877%2F3104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bring%20me%20sunshine%20in%20your%20spores%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbring-me-sunshine-in-your-spores-the-science-of-pollen-fossil-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bring%20me%20sunshine%20in%20your%20spores%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbring-me-sunshine-in-your-spores-the-science-of-pollen-fossil-radiation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d3bac22cae11c4b9842c4b7c1aa13b1ad382b85%2F0_561_3104_3877%2F3104.jpg>
Lycopodium clavatum(a clubmoss) showing sporophylls. Photograph: Christian 
Fischer [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via 
Wikimedia Commons 
The research team used an elegant method to demonstrate the potential of using 
levels of UACs in spores as a proxy measure for sunlight. Because we know that 
solar irradiance (and therefore UV) decreases with increasing latitude, they 
took spores ofLycopodium, a widespread modern clubmoss, and demonstrated that 
UACs in its sporopollenin vary as predicted. This agreed with previously 
published data for pine trees, showing that distantly related plants show the 
same pattern: more solar irradiance means more UACs.

Radiation superflares make Earth-like planet uninhabitable, research suggests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/18/radiation-superflares-kepler-438b-earth-like-planet-uninhabitable>
The team also studied the pollen record from Lake Bosumtwi in Ghana, which 
today is surrounded by tropical forest, but for most of the last 500,000 years 
was dominated by grasslands. They modelled solar irradiance for Lake Bosumtwi 
for the last 140,000 years, based on the variation expected from Milankovitch 
cycles (which are caused by variations in the Earth’s orbit, over a scale of 
tens of thousands of years). Levels of UACs in measured in grass pollens from 
the same period agreed with the modelled variation, showing the potential of 
this approach in reporting solar irradiance levels in the geological past. It 
also demonstrated that pollen prepared using standard palynological methods 
still retained a good UAC signal, meaning that thousands of previously studied 
pollen preparations, stored in museums and institutions worldwide, may be 
repurposed to tell us more about sunshine in the past.
 