
DONALD TRUMP

Reality-TV show star and hotel magnate

He has upended the 2016 race and become the centre of attention on the 
Republican side. While he is highly unlikely to win – and has no support among 
the party establishment – his attacks on illegal immigrants and his barbed 
comments about his fellowRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> have both moved him to the 
head of the pack in a crowded field and further diminished the party’s already 
poor public image.

JEB BUSH

Former governor of Florida

On the surface, Bush should be considered the presidential frontrunner: he has 
strong establishment support, a war chest of more than $100m, no other strong 
candidate and, unlike his rivals, he at least “looks” like a potential 
president. But Bush also has among the highest unfavourable ratings of any 
candidate (47%), many conservatives mistrust him, and he makes too many gaffes 
for a man considered a serious contender for president. Above all, there is his 
last name – and its association with his brother, the former president. There’s 
no question it will be an albatross should he win the nomination.

SCOTT WALKER

Governor of Wisconsin

Walker is generally placed in the top tier of Republican presidential 
candidates. He is polling well in Iowa, the first caucus state, and he brings 
to the table a party-friendly combination of economic and social conservatism. 
Last month he called the minimum wage “lame” and in his home state of Wisconsin 
recently signed a bill making abortion illegal after 20 weeks, even in cases of 
rape or incest. Perhaps his biggest claim to fame came in 2011, when he pushed 
through legislation that stripped public-sector unions of collective bargaining 
rights. He then won a recall election launched by Democrats angered by the move.

MIKE HUCKABEE

Former governor of Arkansas

He brings to the nomination race the aw-shucks, populist demeanour of a 
southern preacher. His suggestion that Barack Obama is marching Israel towards 
another Holocaust was awful, but it’s par for the course for Huckabee, who in 
his presidential announcement speech compared Washington to a “roach motel” and 
in more recent weeks openly mocked Caitlin Jenner and other transgender 
Americans. Huckabee, however, has strong support among social conservatives who 
make up a large segment of the Republican electorate in Iowa. He is unlikely to 
win, but might stick around the race for a while.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Frepublican-party-us-presidential-candidates-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438455904538%2Ffc7f88c4-345e-4663-827d-7d7ea039b349-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bring%20on%20the%20debate%3A%20the%20faces%20hoping%20to%20star%20in%20the%20Republican%20TV%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Frepublican-party-us-presidential-candidates-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bring%20on%20the%20debate%3A%20the%20faces%20hoping%20to%20star%20in%20the%20Republican%20TV%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Frepublican-party-us-presidential-candidates-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438455904538%2Ffc7f88c4-345e-4663-827d-7d7ea039b349-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jeb Bush, Scott Walker, Mike Huckabee and Ben Carson AP/AP/Corbis/Reuters 
Photograph: AP, Corbis, Reuters 
BEN CARSON

Former neurosurgeon

He stumbled into politics after delivering an anti-Obama diatribe at the 
national prayer breakfast while the president sat only a few feet away. This, 
of course, made conservatives swoon. Carson, who is the only African-American 
running for president, takes a backseat to no Republican in his bombastic 
pronouncements. He has compared America under Obama to Nazi Germany; he called 
Obamacare the “worst thing to happen to America since slavery”; and he has 
suggested that homosexuality is a choice because “a lot of people who go into 
prison go into prison straight, and when they come out they’re gay”.

RAND PAUL

Kentucky senator

He is the iconoclast of the field, which means that he takes slightly less 
hawkish views on foreign policy and makes an effort to win over minority 
voters. On everything else, from government spending and tax policy to abortion 
policy and vaccinations (he has expressed scepticism about them being 
required), he is as radical as any other Republican. Buffeted by fundraising 
woes, low staff morale and an undisciplined candidate with a propensity for 
verbal gaffes, Paul’s candidacy is already being talked about in the past 
tense. The debate is a crucial opportunity for him to turn things around and 
impress.

TED CRUZ

Texas senator

Ted Cruz is a bit like Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> but with (slightly) better 
hair and less charm. He is bombastic, the party establishment hates him, and he 
says awful things about Obama. Like everyone else in the race, Trump’s rise has 
overshadowed him – hence his efforts to stir up a fight with Mitch McConnell in 
the Senate. The one potential opportunity for Cruz is that, if Trump begins to 
implode, it is not hard to imagine that some of his support would come Cruz’s 
way. Indeed, it is interesting to note that Cruz has been one of the few 
Republicans who has not attacked Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Frepublican-party-us-presidential-candidates-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438456030233%2Fd4573b0d-6048-4083-942e-4e37d8f7d49e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bring%20on%20the%20debate%3A%20the%20faces%20hoping%20to%20star%20in%20the%20Republican%20TV%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Frepublican-party-us-presidential-candidates-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bring%20on%20the%20debate%3A%20the%20faces%20hoping%20to%20star%20in%20the%20Republican%20TV%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Frepublican-party-us-presidential-candidates-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438456030233%2Fd4573b0d-6048-4083-942e-4e37d8f7d49e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio, Chris Christie and Carly Fiorina Reuters, 
Rex, Getty, AP Photograph: Reuters, Rex, Getty, AP 
MARCO RUBIO

Florida senator

At one point Rubio seemed to many like a top-tier candidate and someone who, 
because of his age and immigrant background, might have the best chance against 
the most likely Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, in a presidential 
election. Then Trump happened and Rubio is still mired in single digits in the 
polls. The Iran nuclear debate was supposed to play to his strengths on foreign 
policy, but with every Republican in the race trying to outdo the other in 
depicting the deal as the worst thing to happen to US foreign policy since 
Pearl Harbor he is not getting much traction. However, he has potential and his 
fundraising has been impressive.

FINAL SLOTS

Two from three

For the last two spots at the debate the race seems to be between two current 
governors (Chris Christie and John Kasich) and one former governor (Rick 
Perry). All have fairly glaring flaws. New Jersey’s Christie has the lowest 
favourability rating of any candidate except Trump - a product of his 
in-your-face demeanor – and faces possible indictment over his involvement 
inthe so-calledBridgegate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/12/chris-christie-federal-judge-bridgegate-investigation-notes>
 scandal. Kasich is a somewhat boring, technocratic Ohio governor who in a 
different year might attract some interest. But in his home state he pushed for 
expanding Medicaid, which is an integral element of Obamacare. That alone could 
disqualify him in GOP eyes.Rick Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry>, bless his heart. After 
hisinfamous“oops” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0uvmKnFY4uk> gaffe in a 2012 
TV debate he tried to convince people he wasn’t as dim-witted as he seemed by 
getting glasses and adopting a more serious, less confrontational demeanour. 
There’s little evidence that this strategy is working.

LATE TO THE PARTY

Other potential runners

Six other announced candidates are in the running, but at this point look 
unlikely to make the cut. Barring a late polling surge, former New York governor
George Pataki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/28/republican-george-pataki-announces-presidential-bid>
, 2012 runner-upRick Santorum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/25/rick-santorum-interview-slow-build-this-process-has-a-way-of-weeding-out-candidates>
, former Hewlett-Packard CEOCarly Fiorina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/03/carly-fiorina-run-for-president-hewlett-packard>
, South Carolina senator Lindsey Graham, Louisiana senatorBobby Jindal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/24/bobby-jindal-republican-creationism-2016-election>
 and the newest entrant, former Virginia governor Jim Gilmore, will participate 
in a pre-debate discussion before the main event.
 