
The British government has rejected criticism of its intervention in Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>, arguing its involvement saved 
civilian lives and claiming the Islamic State group has been weakened in the 
country.

MPs deliver damning verdict on David Cameron's Libya intervention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/mps-deliver-damning-verdict-on-camerons-libya-intervention>
The government’s comments follow a September report in which the parliamentary 
foreign affairs committeepublished a damning assessment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/mps-deliver-damning-verdict-on-camerons-libya-intervention>
 of the 2011 intervention alongside France.

The report said the UK’s strategy was based on “erroneous assumptions and an 
incomplete understanding of the evidence”, accusing the government of 
selectively taking the threats of dictatorMuammar Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muammar-gaddafi> at face value.

But in its response, published on Friday, the government argued its actions 
“undoubtedly” saved civilian lives in Libya.

“Gaddafi was unpredictable and had the means and motivation to carry out his 
threats. His actions could not be ignored, and required decisive and collective 
international action,” the government said in its written response.

Gaddafi was ousted and killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/20/muammar-gaddafi-dies-city-birth> 
during the uprising and Britain was criticised by the foreign affairs committee 
for expanding its mission to protect civilians to a policy of regime change, a 
charge rejected by the government.

Libya is another tragic example of Cameron’s folly. History will not judge him 
kindly | Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/libya-cameron-folly-foreign-affairs-committee-eu>
“Our objective remained clear at all times: to protect civilians and to 
promote stability in Libya,” the government said, adding that it was “entirely 
appropriate” to target military sites after the Gaddafi regime failed to 
implement a ceasefire.

The 2011 bombing campaign came after Gaddafi loyalists pounded the eastern 
city of Benghazi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/19/gaddafi-forces-battle-for-benghazi>
, raising fears of an imminent massacre in the rebel stronghold.

Britain’s then prime minister, David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, was blamed in the report 
as “ultimately responsible for the failure to develop a coherent Libya 
strategy”.

He declined to give evidence to the foreign affairs committee, which heard 
from key players includingformer defence minister Liam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/british-stabilisation-plan-post-gaddafi-libya-select-committee>
 andformer prime minister Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/11/tony-blair-gaddafi-deal-prevented-isis-getting-chemical-weapons-libya>
.

The government confirmed Blair had spoken to Gaddafi, and said efforts for a 
political solution “were unable to make progress”, dismissing the committee’s 
claim that the government should have made better use of this direct line of 
communication.

Five years after the intervention, Libya is run by two rival administrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/15/libya-coup-attempt-as-tripoli-militias-seek-to-topple-un-backed-government>
 and remains embroiled in violence including the presence of extremistssuch as 
Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/sirte-libya-forces-capture-university-isis-islamic-state>
.

The British government should have been aware that militant extremist groups 
would attempt to benefit from the rebellion, the committee report said.

Defending its decision-making, the government said the vast majority of people 
opposed to Gaddafi were not linked to extremism and claimed Isis was losing 
ground.

“Daesh are now on the back foot in Libya,” the government said.

But the chair of the foreign affairs committee, Crispin Blunt, said the 
goverment’s response showed it had not learned the lesson of the intervention.

Intervening in Libya in 2011 was the right thing to do | Bernard-Henri Lévy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/21/we-failed-in-libya-but-going-in-right-thing-to-do>
“The committee accepts that, as the government response suggests, UK policy in 
Libya was initially driven by a desire to protect civilians. However, we do not 
accept that it understood the implications of this, which included collapse of 
the state, failure of stabilisation and the facilitation of Islamist extremism 
in Libya …

“This suggests the government has yet to appreciate the lessons from our 
experience in Libya, including our lack of country knowledge amongst those 
drafting and deciding policy. This is troubling, because Libya should inform 
the development of future UK foreign policy,” Blunt said.

“I believe we are about to repeat the failure to have adequate plans and 
resources for stabilisationin Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/battle-for-mosul-iraq-asks-for-uk-help-to-get-thermobaric-weapons>
. Libya should have taught us these lessons.”
 