
Ramya, an Eritrean, was raped more than once by the traffickers who held her 
captive in a camp in Libya. Hala, from Aleppo, was offered a lower fee by a 
people smuggler in Turkey if she had sex with him. Reem, a Syrian, couldn’t 
sleep in refugee camps in Europe because she was scared the men around her 
would try to touch her during the night. Ada fled sexual violence in Nigeria, 
only to be kidnapped and abused by people smugglers in Libya on her journey to 
safety in Europe.


Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> and girls fleeing 
conflict and persecution face these terrifying risks every day, yet the issue 
has barely figured in the global response to the refugee crisis.

This is despite the fact that, through welcome interventions like the 
preventing sexual violence in conflict initiative 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/sexual-violence-in-conflict> or 
thenational action plan on women, peace and security 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-national-action-plan-on-women-peace-and-security>
, the UK government has repeatedly let the world know of its ambition to be an 
international champion for women’s and girls’ rights.

No sleep for Congolese mothers trying to save their girls from rape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/07/democratic-republic-congo-drc-mothers-trying-to-save-girls-rape-sexual-violence>
However, none of the specific risks faced by female refugees are addressed in 
the UK’s key foreign affairs commitments to women’s rights. And when Theresa 
May attended a world leaders’ summit on the refugee crisis hosted by President 
Obama in September, her speech did not mention the experiences of women and 
girls fleeing war and persecution, or the need to respond to the appalling 
levels of gender-based violence they often face.

The day after the summit, May told the UN general assembly 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/theresa-mays-speech-to-the-un-general-assembly>
: “We will continue to champion the rights of women and girls, making sure that 
all girls get the education they deserve, and tackling horrific abuses such as 
female genital mutilation and the use of sexual violence in conflict.”

You would imagine, therefore, that the UK would be doing all it could to 
protect women from sexual violence, whether during conflict or while fleeing 
it. Yet the government’s response to the refugee crisis has so far been 
pitiful. In failing to share responsibility for supporting and hosting 
refugees, or for providing more safe and legal routes for them to find 
sanctuary here, Britain has put thousands of women at risk of the very violence 
and human rights abuses the government claims it wants to combat. Female 
refugees pay for this failure with their health, wellbeing and – far too often 
– their lives.

In towns and cities across the UK, meanwhile, charities working with refugees 
have long complained ofdouble standards 
<http://www.asylumaid.org.uk/time-act-double-standards-sexual-violence/>. While 
women and girls’ rights are promoted abroad, they argue, those who come to the 
UK as refugees are frequently met with scepticism by the Home Office. Some are 
detained, while many face the risk of being returned to the unsafe countries 
from which they escaped.

Yet the number of refugees seeking safety in the UK constitutes only a tiny 
proportion <https://www.amnesty.org.uk/truth-about-refugees> of those who come 
to Europe – itself still host to very few refugees compared with countries in 
the Middle East and Africa.

Testimonies 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/07/refugees-and-migrants-fleeing-sexual-violence-abuse-and-exploitation-in-libya>
 gathered by Amnesty International reveal the horrors that traffickers and 
smugglers inflict on women travelling to Europe though Libya, a journey they 
undertake because so few secure and legal routes to safety exist. Sexual 
violence against female refugees in Libya is so common that women, aware they 
are likely to be raped, take the pill en route to avoid becoming pregnant.

In Lebanon, a tiny country hosting far more refugees than the UK and other EU 
countries, particularly from Syria, Amnesty has identifiedsexual harassment and 
exploitation <https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/mde18/3210/2016/en/> as a 
constant threat. Women who are the heads of their households are among those 
most at risk.

On reaching Europe, when they thought the worst was behind them, many women 
told Amnesty they felt threatened and unsafe on seeing closed borders and being 
subjected to physical abuse, financial exploitation, or pressure for sex from 
smugglers, security staff or male refugees en route to their final destinations.

The global refugee crisis is an international failure of compassion and 
solidarity. But it is also a women’s rights issue. It reveals the stark 
contrast between international commitments and obligations to end all forms of 
violence against women and girls, and the reality the same women face daily.

What sort of justice do survivors of sexual war crimes want? | Erica Hall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/justice-survivors-sexual-war-crimes-violence-in-conflict>
The UK’s high-level diplomacy and focus on sexual violence in conflict have 
laid out some important goals for protecting and empowering women and girls 
globally. However, to achieve change, provide protection and transform women’s 
and girls’ lives, Britain’s foreign and domestic policies must be joined up.

More of the same won’t do. Women’s rights priorities in the UK’s development 
and humanitarian affairs must be matched by a human rights-based and 
gender-sensitive response to the refugee crisis, immigration and asylum.

Amnesty International is calling upon the UK to step up and deliver.


• Kasia Staszewska is women’s human rights programme manager at Amnesty 
International UK
 