
Britain and New Zealand have agreed to set up regular trade policy talks as 
Britain prepares to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, the trade minister in London, Liam Fox, 
has announced.


 Britain voted to leave the bloc in June and is courting countries outside the 
EU on trade but cannot formally agree any deals until it has left the bloc, a 
process taking at least two years from when it starts exit talks.

 “In leaving the EU we have the opportunity to drive even greater openness and 
put Britain at the forefront of global trade,” Fox said after meeting New 
Zealand’s minister of trade, Todd McClay.

“This new trade policy dialogue reflects a strong political commitment from 
New Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> and the UK to take 
the lead in pushing for greater global trade liberalisation and reform and I 
look forward to working closely with them.”

Theresa May, appointed Britain’s prime minister shortly after the June 
referendum, has said she will trigger the formal Brexit procedure –article 50 
of the EU’s Lisbon treaty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/17/article-50-legal-case-is-attempt-to-reverse-brexit-court-told>
 – by the end of March 2017.
Article 50 explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=48ff8b3e-e2d2-43c0-94e1-5ad8411b6dc0>
 New Zealand, Canada and other members of the Commonwealth, whose members are 
mostly former British colonies, have been targeted by British officials as 
potential areas of growth.

 McClay said New Zealand was keen to agree a trade deal.

 “The UK is a major trading partner for New Zealand and we have signalled our 
interest in a free trade agreement with them when they are in a position to 
negotiate one independently of the European Union,” he said.

 “In the meantime we hope this dialogue will allow us to develop a better 
understanding of one another’s trade interests.”
 