
Britain is seeking to shift the frontline of immigration controls to Ireland’s 
ports and airports to avoid having to introduce a “hard border” between north 
and south after the UK leaves theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, the Guardian has learned.

The Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> secretary, 
James Brokenshire, has told the Guardian that London and Dublin will work to 
strengthen Ireland’s external borders in order to combat illegal migration into 
the UK once it leaves the European Union.

In an interview, Brokenshire said there was now a “high level of collaboration 
on a joint programme of work” between the two states to control immigration.

“We have put in place a range of measures to further combat illegal migration 
working closely with the Irish government,” Brokenshire said. “Our focus is to 
strengthen the external border of the common travel area [CTA], building on the 
strong collaboration with our Irish partners.”

The CTA is a unique arrangement that allows for full freedom of movement 
between people from Ireland and Britain on both islands.
How will Brexit affect Ireland? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=7340c0a7-09a6-4627-b639-349724fb0559>
After Britain’s vote to leave the EU in June, concern mounted that to control 
immigration, measures would have to be imposed on the 300-mile border between 
the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland. Any such border controls would 
probably be seen as a violation of the Good Friday agreement and a provocation 
in a region that has only relatively recently put violence behind it.


Shifting the onus of immigration control to Irish entry points such as Dublin 
airport and Rosslare port would avoid this. However, it would also make a 
mockery of claims by the Brexit camp that leaving the EU would enable Britain 
to “take back control of its borders”.

Brokenshire said: “We are already working closely with the Irish government 
and other members of the common travel area to prevent people from seeking to 
evade UK immigration controls from entering via another part of the CTA. There 
is a high level of collaboration on a joint programme of work. This includes 
investment in border procedures; increased data sharing to inform immigration 
and border security decisions; passenger data systems enabling the collection 
and processing of advance passenger information; and harmonised visa processes.”

The measures will be aimed primarily at non-Europeans seeking entry into the 
CTA. Politicians on all sides of the divide on the island of Ireland have 
expressed concern that Irish border towns such as Dundalk could become the “new 
Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/calais-migrant-camp-must-go-by-end-of-year-francois-hollande>
” if people-traffickers trying to send migrants into the UK target the Irish 
Republic as a “jump-off point” into Northern Ireland.

Precedents already exist for this Anglo-Irish collaborative model: Indian and 
Chinese visitors are subject to a system whereby they apply for a single visa, 
valid for travel in both Ireland and the UK.

The joint Anglo-Irish border procedures will not be able to stem the arrival 
of EU nationals, as they will retain the right to free movement to live and 
work in the Irish Republic. However, this point is seen as moot: officials 
believe few EU citizens will want to come and work illegally in the UK after 
Brexit. “The numbers would be very small,” said one diplomatic source familiar 
with Brexit discussions.

The Fine Gael-led coalition government in Dublin has confirmed it is in 
negotiations with London to better share intelligence to tighten immigration 
controls for people from outside Britain and Ireland.


Ireland’s foreign minister, Charles Flanagan, said he welcomed Brokenshire’s 
commitment to an invisible north-south border and agreed on the importance of 
an intelligence-led approach to curbing illegal immigration across the Irish 
border.

Flanagan said: “In terms of the threat of illegal immigration through the 
border, the sharing of information is vital, as is the sharing of systems and 
the use of digital technology. These are means by which we can ensure that any 
adverse impact is minimised. The object of our engagement is to maintain the 
common travel area.”


I caution that this will be a decision not just by the UK or Irish governments 
but ultimately also by the 27 EU states
Charles Flanagan, Irish foreign minister 
However, he stressed that upgrading immigration controls between the UK and 
Ireland would, from Dublin’s perspective, have to be negotiated alongside the 
country’s EU partners.

“I caution that this will be a decision not just by the UK or Irish 
governments but ultimately also by the 27 EU states. I have been impressing on 
my fellow 26 EU foreign ministerial colleagues the importance of maintaining 
what is now an invisible border. I have to say there was among them a deep 
understanding of theconsequences for the peace process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-fear-brexit-conflict-good-friday-agreement-eu>
 of the reimposition of a heavily fortified border,” he added.

Brokenshire said that Brexit would neither destabilise the power-sharing 
institutions set up under the Good Friday agreement nor provide any propaganda 
boost for hardline dissident republicans opposed to devolution in Belfast.

 “Political stability and prosperity in Northern Ireland has been hard fought 
over many decades, and we will not do anything to undermine it,” he said. 
“There is no reason to think that the outcome of the referendum will do 
anything to undermine the rock-solid commitment of the UK government and the 
people of Northern Ireland to the settlement set out in the Belfast agreement 
and its successors.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fbritain-to-push-post-brexit-uk-immigration-controls-back-to-irish-border%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F646b24f53b117d73cd1f37edfaadc726f40d3572%2F781_8_2704_1622%2F2704.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain%20to%20push%20post-Brexit%20UK%20immigration%20controls%20back%20to%20Irish%20border&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fbritain-to-push-post-brexit-uk-immigration-controls-back-to-irish-border%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%20to%20push%20post-Brexit%20UK%20immigration%20controls%20back%20to%20Irish%20border&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fbritain-to-push-post-brexit-uk-immigration-controls-back-to-irish-border%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F646b24f53b117d73cd1f37edfaadc726f40d3572%2F781_8_2704_1622%2F2704.jpg>
 James Brokenshire, right, with his Irish counterpart, Charles Flanagan, at 
talks in Dublin in September. Photograph: Brian Lawless/PA 
The Northern Ireland secretary insisted that he did not even want to see 
customs checks on the border when the UK triggers article 50 and finally leaves 
the EU.

“The open border for people and businesses has served us well and no one wants 
to see a return to the borders of the past. It is a high priority for the 
government that we do not see border controls coming into place. There is a 
very strong commitment from the Irish government as well as ourselves to see 
that that does not happen.”
 