
No matter who you’re talking to, when you ask people about what home means to 
them, you’re generally met with the same answers – it’s a place to relax and 
feel safe, it’s about family, making memories and a foundation upon which to 
build your life. Something that in 21st-century Britain, everyone should expect 
to have.

Four in 10 British homes not up to standard, says Shelter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/16/four-in-10-british-homes-not-up-to-standard-says-shelter>
But all too often these days, the meaning of home gets lost. From homes being 
seen purely as financial assets, to people thinking they have no choice but to 
get by in a home that isn’t up to scratch.

After 50 years of fighting bad housing in Britain, at Shelter we know all too 
well that there are far too many people who aren’t lucky enough to have a place 
to truly call home. Every day through our helpline and services we see the 
devastating consequences of this.

That’s why we decided to refocus on what makes a home a home, and why we want 
to make sure everyone in this country can have access to that basic need.

We know the housing crisis is looming large for an ever-growing number of 
people across the country. Fewer houses are being built, there are too many 
families in temporary accommodation, house prices continue to rise and 
conditions in parts of the private rented sector are as bad as we have seen in 
decades.

So, as we reflected on Shelter’s 50th anniversary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/31/shelter-cathy-come-home-homelessness-anniversary>
, we decided it was time for the public themselves to tell us what they need, 
expect and deserve from a home in Britain today.

The result is the living home standard 
<http://www.shelter.org.uk/livinghomestandard?utm_source=Shelter-Twitter&utm_medium=Definition-GIF&utm_campaign=2016_LivingHomeStandard-17thOctober_Post007>
, which we have launched with support from Ipsos MORI and British Gas. For the 
first time, this defines what everybody needs from their home to live and 
thrive, not just survive. It’s a measure of what makes a home a home, not just 
bricks and mortar.

The path to home ownership should not be paved by inheritance money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/14/home-ownership-inheritance-money-tory-housing-policy-barwell>
While this shouldn’t be too much to expect, shockingly we found that four in 
10 homes in Britain today fail to meet this standard; a tragic reflection of 
just how bad our housing crisis has become.

Unsurprisingly, affordability was the main reason for homes failing to meet 
the standard. People all across the country are facing a constant struggle to 
pay their housing costs and living in fear that a rent rise would leave them 
unable to cope – both things that the public told us were unacceptable.

Poor conditions were another huge issue, with too many people living in houses 
infested with pests, or riddled with damp and mould. And a feeling of 
instability is hitting renting families hard, with a lack of control over how 
long they can stay in their homes leaving them with no reassurance that their 
children could attend their local school without being uprooted at the whim of 
a landlord in six months or a year.

Time and time again when we talked to the public, it was the things that 
prevented a house from really feeling like a home that played on their minds. 
Our research showed one in eight people, for example, lived in homes where they 
weren’t allowed to have pets, while one in 10 had their daily life or sleep 
disturbed by outside noise.

We know that the housing crisis is touching people from all walks of life, up 
and down the country, but this report isn’t just another display of all that’s 
going wrong. Through this standard, the public are able to unite together to 
have their say on the homes they want in this country, and demand something 
better.

Shelter’s history tells us that change is possible, but what we need now is a 
national mission to get to grips with our housing crisis. There’s no one thing 
that can fix this, but by building more genuinely affordable homes, helping 
councils to stamp out rogue landlords, and giving renters more stability, we 
can make sure more homes meet the living home standard in the near future.

We’re calling on the government, as well as the public, businesses and other 
charities, to heed the call of the nation and come together to finally bring a 
safe, secure and affordable home for everyone back within reach. Surely that 
shouldn’t be too much to ask?

Join the Guardian Housing Network  
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/>to read more pieces like 
this and follow us on Twitter@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing> to keep up with the latest social housing 
insight and analysis.
 