
The exhibition Pharaoh: King of Egypt has just opened at the Great North Museum
 
<http://www.twmuseums.org.uk/greatnorthmuseum/thingstoseeanddo/exhibition/2011/07/16/pharaoh-king-of-egypt/>
 in Newcastle tomorrow. It's free and on there until September 25th before 
going on tour to Dorchester, Leeds, Birmingham, Glasgow and Bristol over the 
next two years.

With over 130 works from the British Museum 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/whats_on/national_tours/pharaoh_king_of_egypt.aspx>
, many of which have never been seen outside London before – and many of which 
aren't usually on display even there – the show claims to be the largest ever 
UK exhibition of ancient Egyptian artefacts on loan from the BM.Neil MacGregor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neil_MacGregor>, the BM's eximious director and 
presenter of Radio 4's"History of the World in One Hundred Objects"  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/ahistoryoftheworld/>, accurately stated that "this 
exhibition is a fantastic example of collaboration between the British Museum 
and its partners across the UK." His colleague Dr Neal Spencer, the curator of 
Egyptology and Sudan at the BM, told me today:

The Act of Parliament establishing the British Museum  
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_objects/archives/t/the_british_museum_act_of_1753.aspx>
in 1753 says it is "for all curious people", not just curious people in the 
capital, and this exhibition is a great way of using our collection and making 
sure different audiences across the country can see it.
 Ready for a night on the town - an ancient Egyptian gilded mask. Photograph: 
British Museum/PA 


One of the fascinating aspects of the exhibition is the way that it shows how 
Egyptians absorbed and assimilated foreign rulers. As Dr Spencer said, "Egypt 
was under foreign rule for centuries – Nubians, Persians, Libyans, Romans and 
Macedonians all provided Pharaohs and all of them, in Egypt at least, respected 
local traditions and gods." Tiberius, the emperor at the time of Christ's 
crucifixion, is represented here by a round-topped sandstone stela that shows 
him in classic pharaonic dress with a winged sun-disk kneeling before a couple 
of gods and with his name translated into hieroglyphs, recording the 
reconstruction of some flood-damaged temples at Karnak. Hadrian, whose wall 
passes less than a mile from the Great North Museum, also built temples in 
Egypt and started the cult of Antinuous after his lover was tragically drowned 
in the Nile. And a fascinating statue of a son or grandson of Alexander the 
Great's general Ptolemy shows him in almost identical garb and gait to a 
statuette over 1000 years earlier, while the Persian Darius the Great is also 
shown as indistinguishable to the untrained eye from a native pharaoh.

Most of the pharaohs displayed here seem to be gently smiling and amiable and 
generally unlike Shelley's Ozymandias based onRamses II 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramesses_II> "whose frown, and wrinkled lip, and 
sneer of cold command, tell that its sculptor well those passions read, which 
yet survive". Indeed the life-sized granite bust of Ramses II here shows him 
looking as if somebody has reminded him of a private joke.

Amongst other treasures on display is a tomb guardian, nearly 8 foot high, of 
Ramses I, made of what is assumed to be cedar of Lebanon in around 1295BC, an 
ebony label of around 3000BC – that's 5000 years old – celebrating the jubilee 
of the Pharaoh Dan, the earliest known named ruler of a united Egypt - and 
possibly the original 'Dan the Man'.

Conveniently in the next gallery to "Pharaoh: King of Egypt" is the Great 
North Museum's own impressive collection of mummies and other artefacts – which 
can be said to celebrate the lives and deaths of the Pharaoh's subjects. 
Included is the mysterious mummy of Bakt en Hor, who appears to have had 
enemies who carried their grudge beyond the grave - when a CT scan was done of 
her corpse, it was shown that her tongue and vocal chords had been removed, and 
that her name and titles were misspelled. Gill Scott, the Great North Museum's 
Egyptology expert, explained to me that both acts "mean that nobody can say her 
name and revive her spirit in the after-world", and both acts must have been 
done by somebody closely involved in the mummification process. As I say, 
somebody really had it in for Bakt en Hor.

There's an extensive lecture programme  
<http://www.twmuseums.org.uk/greatnorthmuseum/thingstoseeanddo/event/2011/07/18/free-lecture-series/>
accompanying the exhibition, including Gill Scott on Bakt en Hor (31 August), 
Neal Spencer on "Ideal vs reality: pharaohs, foreigners and conquered lands" 
(18 July and 15 September) and Joann Fletcher from York University on Egypt's 
female pharaohs – the lectures are free but booking is available by emailing 
greatnorthmuseum@twmuseums.org.uk.

It's great to be able to see such treasures in Newcastle, displayed in a way 
which is accessible to all without being crudely populist. Attendance at 
exhibitions is almost always better when the weather's bad, so the Great North 
Museum managers must have been delighted with rain onSt Swithun's Day  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swithun>to ensure this is the blockbuster it 
deserves to be.
 