
We live in a country whose banking system seven years ago was only saved by a 
£1tn intervention, and that remains crippled by the legacy of private debt and 
stunning losses. Months ago, the secession of Scotland, which threatened to 
break up the foundations of the state, was narrowly avoided; it remains an 
ongoing threat. Our share of world markets continues to shrink, and our trade 
deficit has climbed to unthinkable levels. Wages have fallen, in real terms, by 
the greatest degree in more than a century.Inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/25/inequality-has-become-challenge-how-good-we-can-be-extract-will-hutton>
 of income and wealth have risen to desperately high levels that may soon 
metastasise into a serious economic and social cancer.

Yet what is most extraordinary about the present moment is that all this now 
seems unexceptional; our political and economic order is so thoroughly broken 
that many no longer find that fact worthy of notice.

The crisis goes to the very roots of how we produce and work, and how we frame 
the institutions that should support the lives and ambitions of millions of 
ordinary people. Five million wait to be housed – yet over the last generation, 
five millioncouncil flats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/nov/11/-sp-no-exit-britains-housing-trap>
 have been sold and not replaced. Millions of workers struggle in a harsh 
demimonde of temporary jobs and zero-hours contracts. For many, it is no longer 
a realisable aim to acquire skills or a profession and pursue a stable career 
with an enduring and reliable organisation; our companies indulge in unending 
cycles of restructuring, regrading, and reshaping, while the public sector has 
been shrunk to an unprecedented degree. It is only those at the very top who 
see their pay and possibilities expanding – along with the ease of passing on 
advantages to their children, creating a new closed caste of elites and 
diminishing prospects for social mobility. If we wish to create an economy, and 
a society, in which the majority of us flourish, Britain in 2015 is not the 
model to follow.

There are alternatives to capitalism. We just need the political will | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/12/there-are-alternatives-to-capitalism-need-political-will>
But for all the egregious mistakes made on its behalf, the country is not a 
wasteland: there are successes on which a different government and a new policy 
agenda could build. Young people are more entrepreneurial. There are clusters 
of new hi-tech companies. Some of our great companies are trying to be more 
purposeful in their business strategies, and demonstrating a commitment to 
innovation and high performance – judged by criteria other than rising share 
prices. There are great universities sponsoring frontier research of global 
significance. There is a willingness to embrace the new: the possibilities of 
the internet are more quickly seized in Britain than almost any other leading 
industrialised country. If our people were allowed to capitalise on today’s 
enormous possibilities – which would require a rediscovery of national purpose, 
and reconfigured institutions to match – Britain could quickly turn itself 
around.

The problems in the British economy and society run deep. Put at its rawest, 
our private institutions do not provide sufficient public good to justify their 
unreformed autonomy. A democracy has both the right and the duty to ask tough 
questions of the effectiveness of all its institutions, public and private. To 
insist that private institutions can only be reformed if they provenly fail – 
as the current centre-right consensus insists – and that public institutions 
must, as far as possible, simulate private ones, is to accept that the only 
good order is private.

If there are no networks of reciprocal obligation, and no acknowledgement that 
human beings associate in a society they can construct, redesign and reform 
around those principles, then we are all reduced to atomistic consumers and 
workers – serfs who are no more than notations in the spreadsheets of companies 
and public bodies alike. Business, too, is part of this framework. Wealth 
generation is not some magic left to firms and individuals in their low-taxed 
private garden: it reflects how companies are owned, financed and incentivised 
within a framework of public law – and thus what risks are run and what 
innovation and investment is undertaken. Business is healthier in a healthier 
society: it cannot be blind to social obligations. There is of necessity an 
inter-relationship with the democratic state. Without this recognition 
politicians are turned into journeymen with no great purpose, and into the 
vacuum pour nationalists, populists and the weird. We can do better.

Smart societies are impossible to create without fairness, justice and 
enfranchisement

The aim of any manifesto for change must be to create the smartest economy for 
Britain – it is the only route to prosperity in the decades ahead. But a smart 
economy does not stand alone, independent from the society of which it is 
necessarily part. It cannot be constructed without enfranchised citizens, 
intelligent, risk-taking consumers and equally intelligent, reflexive, creative 
employees. They are the investors, workers and consumers in the better-owned, 
better-financed and more innovative enterprises that need to be at the core of 
a great economy. Our capacity to move forward depends on each others’ 
capacities as never before: our interests are interdependent. The smart economy 
and smart society are two sides of the same coin – and smart societies are 
impossible to create without fairness, justice and enfranchisement. These great 
values are not merely nice to have: they are the cornerstone of the good 
economy and society, and it is around them that a manifesto for reform must be 
organised.

What follows are proposals for deep change in the way wealth generation is 
approached, beginning with substantive reforms in the ways companies are owned 
and financed. The starting point is to ensure the foundation of any capitalist 
economy – the company – works as it should, and that legally, constitutionally 
and culturally, companies are purposed to do what they can do so well. To argue 
for the reform of capitalist enterprise should not be interpreted as 
“anti-business”; rather it is to be anti-dysfunctional business. For at their 
best, companies are organisations of genius, solving problems, innovating and 
delivering great goods and services. They should not be allowed to degrade into 
instruments of stock market speculation, so that managers are governed by the 
new god – the share price – and the temptations of their own colossal 
self-enrichment. Yet that is what has happened for a generation.

***

Twenty years ago, Britain’s greatest industrial companies were the chemicals 
giant ICI and the electronics conglomerate GEC. Rolls-Royce, by contrast, was 
secured from hostile takeover by a golden share agreement that allowed the 
government to override other shareholders and block an unwanted bid. It had a 
board that was committed to research and development and to investing in its 
business. ICI and GEC, under colossal pressure from footloose shareholders to 
deliver high short-term profits, tried to wheel and deal their way to success. 
They did not have owners concerned to promote their competitiveness and 
long‑term value: they were chips in the portfolios of global asset managers who 
had no constitutional, legal or cultural obligation towards them. They were 
ownerless corporations. Their great German rivals, BASF and Siemens – securely 
owned by long-term investors – took the Rolls-Royce route. Today Siemens is 
Europe’s largest engineering company, BASF the world’s largest chemical 
company. Their British rivals have literally disappeared. Rolls-Royce, free 
from concerns about hourly movements in its share price, has gone on to be one 
of our last remaining great industrial companies.

Britain has far too few firms like Rolls-Royce. Yet criticism of the ownership 
and financial system that produces such devastating failure has been trivial. 
Over the last decade, a fifth of quoted companies have evaporated from the 
London Stock Exchange, the largest cull in our history. Since 2004, £440bn 
worth of British companies have been sold overseas. Virtually no new risk 
capital is sought from the stock market – which has become more a vehicle for 
getting money out of companies than putting it in. Britain has no indigenous 
quoted company in the car, chemical, glass, industrial gases, industrial 
services and building materials industries – to name but a few. They are all 
owned overseas, with their research and development and strategic direction 
travelling abroad as well.

The stock market is ever more a casino. Now 72% of stock market trading is 
done by hedge funds, high-frequency traders or investment banks trading their 
own accounts. This business is served by a vast industry of intermediaries – 
agents, trustees, investment managers, registrars and advisers of all sorts – 
who have grown fat from opaque fees. The entire apparatus has become a 
mechanism to drive highly short-term expectations of profit into the boardroom, 
and into executives’ assessments of what investments should be authorised.

This, the business line goes, is the only route to prosperity. The wider 
results speak otherwise. Consider the pressures that forcedTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/22/tesco-loses-2bn-value-250m-profit-overstatement-investigation>
 to massage its profits by £250m and mistreat its suppliers, or led BP to cut 
corners in its drilling in the Gulf of Mexico, costing billions from the 
consequentoil spill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bp-oil-spill?page=4>. Or the scale-up 
crisis, in which so few dynamic British startups scale up to maturity, due to a 
financial system that forces many founders to sell out to others before their 
turnover has broached £2m. All attest to deep-set failures in our corporate and 
financial organisation.

No reimagining of contemporary British capitalism is possible without the 
reimagination of how companies are owned. Companies are, after all, the central 
economic actors in the market economy – the investors, the innovators and 
employers. They give any capitalism its particular character and dynamic. 
Britain’s increasingly divided society and the character of its labour market, 
with the emergence of so many contingent low-wage jobs, is inextricably 
intertwined with how its companies behave. So is the weakness of exports, 
investment and innovation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fbritish-capitalism-broken-how-to-fix-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423587933597%2F6dd6f75f-30b5-48fc-9032-035d41df1178-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20capitalism%20is%20broken.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20fix%20it%20%7C%20Will%20Hutton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fbritish-capitalism-broken-how-to-fix-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20capitalism%20is%20broken.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20fix%20it%20%7C%20Will%20Hutton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fbritish-capitalism-broken-how-to-fix-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423587933597%2F6dd6f75f-30b5-48fc-9032-035d41df1178-680x1020.jpeg>
 A Rolls-Royce jet engine test centre. Photograph: Sebastian WillnowAFP/Getty 
Images 
My contention is that limited-liability companies, having certain formal 
privileges and status, should not be the private playthings of transient owners 
interested only in their own immediate self-enrichment, without any concern for 
how their profits are made. They should be organisational structures that allow 
humanity to innovate and then produce to meet the great challenges of any era: 
in this context profits are made by delivering a noble, moral business purpose, 
integral to the wider legitimacy of the enterprise. Companies should be seen as 
the vehicle for the marshalling and stewarding of human, physical and knowledge 
assets in the service of humankind. It is for that reason society offers them 
privileges. It is not unreasonable to want to see the terms of the bargain 
reciprocated; indeed it lies at the heart of a just relationship between 
business and society.

The cornerstone of a new approach to ownership should be a Companies Act for 
the 21st century. Unlike the existing act, passed in 2006, this would set out 
unambiguously what society expects from companies in exchange for the 
privileges they are afforded. The aim is to create purposeful companies with a 
more just relationship between themselves and the wider society, capable of 
fostering the trust relationships that are at the heart of high-innovation and 
high-performance workplaces. Companies would be required to declare their 
business purpose on incorporation: they should incorporate to deliver 
particular goods and services that serve a societal or economic need and will 
need particular capabilities and skills. It is through delivery of their 
purpose that they should seek to make profits. Most great companies have this 
purpose at their heart already, even if informally. Unilever famously exists to 
make the best everyday things for everyday folk – Boeing to build planes that 
fly furthest safest. This should become the rule, not the exception.

At best, companies are organisations of genius, solving problems, innovating 
and delivering great goods and services

The objective is to put business purpose at the heart of every enterprise and 
make it something for which directors are held to account – to create a 
societal obligation to match the privileges of incorporation. This will not be 
a weaselly commitment to “have regard to” the delivery of business purpose, 
echoing section 172 of the current Companies Act. It should be a statutory 
obligation. Directors will have to produce an annual account of their 
stewardship of the company, of which today’s financial reporting will be but 
one element. There will also be an account of investment, innovation, research 
and development, human capital development, pay scales, executive pay in 
relation to median pay and supply-chain relations, along with an account of the 
company’s wider commitments on the environment and bribery.

***

Investors will thus buy shares in purposed companies, reflecting a new compact 
between the company and its shareholders. The asset-management industry has 
quadrupled in size over the last 30 years, so that roughly 40% of the shares of 
British companies are now held overseas, typically by a global asset-management 
group: British pension funds own a mere 5.1% of all shares and British 
insurance companies 8.6%.

No UK government can reform the global asset-management industry unilaterally, 
but it can frame the terms on which British shares are owned. It can demand, 
for example, that all investors in British companies sign and comply with a 
tougher stewardship code, which currently sets out milk-and-water obligations 
to monitor investee companies, exercise votes, steward companies and act with 
other investors if necessary. It is better than nothing, but essentially 
minimalist. The code should be greatly strengthened. It should insist on total 
transparency on strategies, costs, leverage and trading.

The proposed new Companies Act would set out a new legal framework that will 
privilege long-term, engaged investment. Mutuals should be created to aggregate 
proxy votes, and cast them on behalf of shareholders. The basic voting share 
will continue as now, but it will attract more votes the longer it is held; if 
shares are lent, voting rights will be forgone. This will strike many in London 
as going too far – a dagger at the heart of British capitalism. But when Google 
floated, its founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page issued two classes of shares, 
with class A shares having 10 times more votes than class B – so Brin and Page 
ended up with 37.6% of the votes for 3.7% of the shares. As they said in the 
letter accompanying the initial public offering, “we have set up a corporate 
structure that will make it much harder for outside parties to take over or 
influence Google. This structure will also make it easier for our management 
team to follow the long-term, innovative approach.” Ten years on from the 
flotation, who can say they were wrong?

LinkedIn offered its original long-term shareholders 10 times the votes when 
it floated in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/jan/06/linkedin-flotation-rumours-social-media>
, and the Glazersfloated Manchester United in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/04/manchester-united-debt-cayman-islands>
 rather than London because American rules allowed the family shares to have 10 
times as many votes. Owners in mainland Europe – from the Wallenbergs in 
Sweden, who have holdings in most of Sweden’s top companies, to the Piëch 
family, part-owners of Porsche – use similar devices. Where there is business 
success and innovation, look for non-British corporate structures.

This trinity – business purpose, trusteeship and a range of committed 
shareholders – will be the foundation for the creation of purposeful companies, 
freed to behave like long‑term trusts rather than dance to the tune of 
peripatetic day traders. They will be value creators rather than rent 
extractors. It would be stakeholder capitalism in practice.

These proposals must be supported by a new takeover regime. The argument in 
hostile takeovers should not just be over price: it should be whether business 
purpose is being protected – with both sides being required to ask their 
shareholders’ view – and long-term shareholders’ votes privileged over those 
who have bought for a quick buck. The government should refer bids that create 
public-interest concerns and use the Competition and Markets Authority more 
aggressively. In short, takeovers, especially hostile takeovers, should be the 
exception rather than the rule of British business life.

Britain can then go on to build a web of supporting policies similarly to 
reform other kinds of ownership. This would deliver better stewardship, more 
engagement and creativity. The more diversity, the better – from the ownership 
of football clubs to that of medium-sized companies. We need to reverse the 
steady drift to a monoculture of public companies and instead create a richer 
ecology within which many forms and types of ownership can flourish. Mutuals 
should be better protected; forms of employee share ownership promoted, company 
founders better allowed to retain control and the template created for 
public-benefit companies – from the media to the utilities – who for an 
explicit, undeviating declaration of public purpose can expect reciprocal 
privileges. There is even a case – whisper it softly – for outright public 
ownership of companies if they are natural monopolies.

The Shareholder Executive that holds public shareholdings before their 
inevitable sell-off should instead become the foundation of a British sovereign 
wealth fund – symbolic of a purposeful, value creating, long-term British 
capitalism. It should work alongside a revived Industrial and Commercial 
Finance Corporation, that for decades worked well as a provider of equity and 
debt to small and medium-sized business – taking risks its commercial bank 
owners would not take themselves. The very proposition is of course far-fetched 
– but that fact shows just how far Britain must travel if it is ever to become 
a more productive and innovative economy, which builds companies with real 
scale and impact.

***

All this needs to be undergirded by a financial system designed to support 
business growth, innovation and investment. The central pivot of this 
relationship is the Bank of England. The way it banks to the banking system, 
the privileges it affords when it supplies liquidity – cash – and the 
reciprocal demands it makes on the banks dictate the financial system’s 
incentives and momentum. The good news is that the Bank of England, whose 
balance sheet after the financial crisis is now bigger in relation to GDP than 
it was during the second world war, has firmly got the message that its former 
laissez-faire approach was wrong. Under governor Mark Carney, it has begun to 
reassemble an interventionist arsenal matching other leading central banks. It 
should use it.

The task is to move the financial system away from its fixation with property 
lending and on to a new basis in which it supports more innovation and business 
investment. The Bank of England must reorganise official support so that banks 
know that their lending to encourage innovation will be looked upon kindly. 
There needs to be a vast extension of the way public guarantees and private 
insurance are available to relieve some of the risk in lending to support 
innovation. Innovation and intangible assets must become as attractive as 
collateral as bricks and mortar. The tax system needs to be neutral between 
loan finance and selling shares.

The task is to move the financial system away from its fixation with property 
lending and onto supporting innovation

Britain must then exploit this new architecture to trigger an innovation 
revolution. Innovation is the transcendent driver of economic growth. The 
reinvention of how and what we do increases productivity, transforms the 
productive base and continually reframes how we work and live with reimagined 
goods and services. It happens best in open societies that invest in the 
creation and free diffusion of knowledge where the new is a matter of 
celebration. But there is a second reality. Innovation is risky, and it needs 
paying for. Many more innovations fail than succeed.

The neoliberal doctrine is that innovation will happen if there is no state 
involvement and if it is left to individuals having lightbulb moments, taking 
risks in free markets in the pursuit of bonanza profits. The number of 
general-purpose technologies – the generic technologies, such as steam or 
electricity, that change the world – will double in the 21st century, 
presenting enormous opportunities for innovation. But all such technologies in 
the past 500 years have one way or another been triggered by the state, with 
entrepreneurs and companies following on. The risk and the financial 
consequence of potential failure is beyond any one company or any single 
venture capitalist to bear, which is why, contrary to the avalanche of praise 
for individual risk-taking, in reality business and banks do not take much 
risk. Instead the job of frontier, game-changing innovation is, one way or 
another, catalysed by the state.

This is the opportunity for a national declaration of purpose, initiated by 
the state but working closely in an open relationship with business, finance 
and our world‑class universities. Britain should become the world’s leading hub 
for open innovation, a magnet for scientific endeavour worldwide and a creator 
of public knowledge. We already have the capability, with sufficient new 
investment, to be the global health hub in fields ranging from antibiotics to 
new gene technologies and regenerative medicine. We could also be the master 
co-innovator in big data, and the world centre for the co-creation of new 
materials. We should aim to be a leader in the green, sustainable and energy 
revolutions and to be at the forefront of global aviation and space technology. 
All this is within our grasp.

In 1980 Britain was one of the most R&D-intensive countries in the world: now 
it is one of the least. We are outspent by the US, Germany, France and Japan. 
Any innovation revolution must see a reversal of this trend. The paucity of the 
business response to a British invention such asgraphene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/nov/26/graphene-molecule-potential-wonder-material>
 – a revolutionary new carbon material developed at the University of 
Manchester – underlines the hollowing out of the country’s indigenous 
industrial and R&D base, along with the capability to capitalise upon 
invention, over the last 30 years. Britain has taken out just over 100 patents 
on graphene use; the US 1,700 and China 2,200. It is the combination – 
repurposed companies, reframed finance and an enabling state committed to 
innovation – that will redress this failure.

There needs to be a revolution in intellectual property law to encourage more 
sharing of copyrights and patents. Universities need to be more liberal about 
sharing their research. Companies need to commit to open innovation. An 
Innovation Bank should underwrite innovation risk. The government should double 
its R&D spend to £16bn to trigger an accompanying rise in business R&D. Overall 
R&D spending should rise from the current level of 1.7% of GDP – below the EU 
average – to around 3%. The government should make further frontier 
investments, say, in the eight great technologies identified by former 
innovation minister David Willetts. This should not be a stream of one-way 
grants and tax reliefs. It has to be a continuing, jointly created effort in 
the name of a great national goal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fbritish-capitalism-broken-how-to-fix-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423585938660%2F6d48886b-8124-4517-9523-fc9ec72b04ef-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20capitalism%20is%20broken.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20fix%20it%20%7C%20Will%20Hutton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fbritish-capitalism-broken-how-to-fix-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20capitalism%20is%20broken.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20fix%20it%20%7C%20Will%20Hutton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fbritish-capitalism-broken-how-to-fix-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423585938660%2F6d48886b-8124-4517-9523-fc9ec72b04ef-1020x612.jpeg>
 An artistic impression of graphene. Photograph: Jannik Meyer/AFP/Getty Images 
This matrix of policies will transform Britain’s capacity for genuine wealth 
generation, but they must be supported by policy on two more major dimensions. 
Firstly the social settlement must be reshaped to 21st-century conditions, 
recognising that in a fast-moving economy jobs will both be created and lost 
quickly, but respecting enduring values of social solidarity. Employers may 
need to move quickly and without penalty to adjust the size of their workforces 
downwards; reciprocally workers need a guarantee of skills and income between 
periods of employment. The trade union, the cornerstone of worker voice, 
participation and representation, has to be reinvented and relegitimised to 
rebalance the new brutalities of our labour market – to become a countervailing 
force to those generating ever higher levels of income inequality.

Unions need to become more like guilds – guarantors of skills and fair wages – 
than confrontational representatives of a shrinking working class. They should 
pioneer profit-sharing and employee share ownership schemes, be trusted 
advisers on pensions and skills, and partners with enterprise represented on 
remuneration committees and boards as trustees of company purpose. Thinking 
about a renewed social contract should be generous. It is not only about 
workplace organisation, fair wages and access to assets; it also encompasses 
housing, health, pensions, public transport, education, training, and access to 
art, culture and sport. The story has been one of shrinkage, privatisation and 
displacement of risk from the state and large organisations on to the 
individual. Year by year the effects often go unnoticed. Cumulatively the 
impact is shocking.

Secondly, there can no re-energising of Britain without a complete makeover of 
the state. It has to change from being a directive sovereign over us to a 
co-creator with us. Top-down directives and control from Westminster and 
Whitehall never did work well, but they work even less well today. The state 
will continue to strategise and enable, but it will have to work through 
revitalised or newly invented social and public institutions that fire up the 
networks and occupy the territory between the state and the individual. 
Crucially the state will have to devolve power to city and local government 
where this co-creation can be done more effectively, but it must also open 
itself up at all levels so its decision making becomes more iterative and 
deliberative. Indeed, unless Britain becomes more federal in structure, 
conceding proper self-government to Scotland and reconfiguring key institutions 
like the House of Lords and the Treasury, the legitimacy and capability of the 
state will diminish.

Ideology, blind faith and an overpowerful Ministry for Book-keeping – aka the 
Treasury – have been governing Britain. The country needs more innovation, 
enlarged opportunity, a step change in the quality and quantity of its public 
infrastructure, higher-quality education, a housing revolution and a new social 
settlement. These are indispensable preconditions for any mass flourishing and 
countering inequality – and a means of propelling the economy forward in the 
wake of a financial crisis whose depressive legacy will be felt for more years 
yet. Yes, the public deficit must be lowered, but within a larger and balanced 
programme of national renewal: taxes must rise substantially in the next 
parliament – the price tag for putting justice, equity, opportunity and wider 
economic wellbeing on our list of national objectives. Living within our means 
should not mean abandoning our civilisation or devastating public capacity to 
improve the lot of our citizens. The creation of a more federal Britain, 
devolving tax-raising powers, will entail the recasting and diminution of the 
Treasury. It is long overdue.

Britain could and should become an exemplar of the good economy and society. 
The best in British business and finance, officialdom, unions, media and 
academia know that the old model is bust and Britain has to strike out anew. It 
is the great Enlightenment values – openness, daring to embrace the new, 
justice, equity, liberty – that should animate this emerging coalition’s 
ambition, rather than any hankering for economic and social transformation 
around traditional left-of-centre preoccupations.
How Good We Can Be is published by Little, Brown (£16.99). To buy it for £13.59
 click here <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/277857/> 
Photograph: The Guardian 
The current national conversation is hardly conducive to the development of 
the ideas outlined here. The political right, which could adopt much of it, is 
transfixed by delusions of a libertarian future in a country they say they are 
going to reclaim from Europe. That is both their diagnosis and their solution – 
which in the terms of the arguments presented here are beside the point. 
Labour? It is in transition. It knows the socialism it used to champion no 
longer functions: it knows neoliberalism does not work either. It experimented 
with Blairism, which for all its electoral success did not address the 
fundamental weaknesses in the British system. It knows it is a party for the 
mass of Britain, with roots that must remain in the workplace and the 
day-to-day life of ordinary people. It is dedicated to their flourishing, and 
to the justice that must underpin it. The country at different times in its 
history has looked to its left and right traditions to do the correct thing. It 
now needs Labour to complete its transition, to pick up this programme, or 
something like it, and implement the change we need to show how good we can be.•

This is an edited extract from Will Hutton’s book How Good We Can Be, 
published on 12 February by Little, Brown.

Follow the Long Read on Twitter: @gdnlongread <https://twitter.com/gdnlongread>
 