
My interest in plinths goes back to my student days at St Martin’s School of 
Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> in the early 1960s. We were 
told that sculpture should go on the floor and not on plinths or pedestals – 
but I wasn’t going to be told what to do.

Later, in 1971, I was invited by Situation, an art space off Brook Street in 
London, to make a show; the idea was to change the exhibition every one or two 
days. I was an action sculptor at the time, making “impersonations” of 
sculptures. My throwaway pieces existed in the street and weren’t made for a 
gallery. As a conceptual artist, I wanted to get rid of the object.

Some people would call what I did “performance art”, but I don’t like the 
term. I’m a sculptor who makes live work, and I was trying to develop the 
nature of what sculpture could be. I’d rather be thought of as a dancer than as 
a performance artist – andI’m a very good dancer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rGP_hqUCuI&index=4&list=PLe8fMqg2xB9C0FFvuC4WCPa8XEYkh-Bqe>
.

People think I'm lampooning Henry Moore – but I did that in another work 
called Fallen Warrior

I went to the Tate and managed to borrow about 50 plinths from the basement. I 
put photographs from magazines of desirable objects, like a hairdryer or a 
wristwatch, on top of the plinths. After a few days I shipped the plinths back 
to the Tate, but there were three left behind. I thought: what can I do with 
them?

I started playing around, and thought it would be quite interesting to get on 
them. I was thinking about how the plinths affected me; I tried to let the 
plinths determine where I put my foot or my arm. It became a pose work, an 
action that I did throughout the day. Somebody photographed me and I liked how 
that looked. People always think it’s lampooning Henry Moore, but I actually 
did that with a piece calledFallen Warrior 
<http://projectsconcepts.com/early-works-key-photographic-pieces/>, where I’m 
lying on the beach.

Situation encouraged this kind of behaviour – it enabled young artists to try 
things out without any financial pressure, or a bums-on-seats approach. Nobody 
would have minded what I did. Conceptual art wasn’t very popular at the time 
and new art was completely unseen by most people. On a typical opening you’d 
get two men from Art & Project magazine and gallery in Amsterdam, a man from 
Italy, a few artists and a couple of strays.

I got unbelievably drunk before one show, but people only demanded half their 
money back – because the pianist was good

Pose Work for Plinths was just one of many pieces, but it seems to have become 
my hit record, and it was instrumental in helping me move on to other things. I 
got very interested in architecture and in how you behave in different spaces. 
It led to thinking about posing, and it’s the reason I started Nice Style with 
students from Maidstone College of Art – we were a “pose band” who didn’t play 
instruments, but just posed.

Hardly anyone was at our most famous action, High Up on a Baroque Palazzo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IKl0X-rxjDM 
http://projectsconcepts.com/high-up-on-a-baroque-palazzo-seminal-performance-sculpture/>
, but lots of people saw the photograph. I realised that the action hardly 
mattered, but the photograph was really important. Most things we see are 
received through a photographic image, whether it’s TV or a magazine. So an 
artwork could go straight to a magazine, where people would see it, and it 
would cut out the gallery.

There’s a line in a John Cooper Clarke song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37QUUwp9xIs>: “If I could have one wish I’d be 
a photograph.” I really like that.




Bruce McLean’s CV
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fbruce-mclean-interview-pose-work-for-plinths%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f1bffbd8ff04e1d48654a0d45910a9ab0f262a6%2F377_496_1377_1720%2F1377.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bruce%20McLean's%20best%20photograph%3A%20fun%20with%20three%20plinths%20the%20Tate%20forgot%20to%20take%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fbruce-mclean-interview-pose-work-for-plinths%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bruce%20McLean%27s%20best%20photograph%3A%20fun%20with%20three%20plinths%20the%20Tate%20forgot%20to%20take%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fbruce-mclean-interview-pose-work-for-plinths%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f1bffbd8ff04e1d48654a0d45910a9ab0f262a6%2F377_496_1377_1720%2F1377.jpg>
 Bruce McLean. 
Born: Glasgow, 1944

Studied: Glasgow School of Art and St Martin’s School of Art, London

High point: When I was in Berlin for a year on a scholarship with my family.

Low point: When I made a performance called Concept Comic in 1975. I 
accidentally got unbelievably drunk before the show and it was a nightmare. It 
was a pound to get in, but everyone demanded only half their money back, 
because the jazz pianist was so good.

Top tip: Look at everything the opposite of how it should be done. Do what you 
want to do the way you want to do it and learn how to say “no thank you” 
politely.

 * Bruce McLean’s Pose Work for Plinths 3 is in Conceptual Art in Britain 
1964-1979, Tate Britain, London 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/conceptual-art-britain-1964-1979>
, until 29 August.
 