
I have always wanted to be a civil engineer. I wanted to build, to create 
structures that would serve the communities around me – roads, bridges, dams – 
the bigger the better.

My journey with the UN refugee agency (UNHCR) started on 19 September 2001 in 
Sierra Leone. For me, it was an initiation into a surreal world where I decided 
which families could stop moving and restart their lives in a safe and secure 
home, and which families could not.

Since then, I have supported UNHCR operations in 18 countries across 
sub-SaharanAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and Asia.

Please help us help #childrefugees survive the winter - Guardian/Observer 2016 
Appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
Working in the field is vastly different from any other work environment. The 
extreme urgency when preparing and completing refugee camps means there is no 
time to take a step back and breathe. Such was the case inCameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cameroon> in 2014, where I was responsible 
for constructing the Lolo refugee site.


While working in Lolo, a small Christian village in the east of the country, I 
received an urgent call late at night from the UNHCR emergency coordinator. 
More than 100 refugees had crossed the border fromCentral African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic> (CAR) and were 
arriving at the site. It was raining heavily and we had no shelter ready for 
them. These families had been walking for over a month, surviving on leaves and 
shoots – essentially anything they could find. They were being hunted by a CAR 
rebel group. Many were severely malnourished. They had sunken eyes, emaciated 
frames, swollen chapped feet and torn clothes barely covering their backs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Frefugee-camps-unchr-shelter-human-need%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b55156b6669aaf3a12a3397d0d9e2068f48ff3%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Building%20refugee%20camps%20reminds%20me%20why%20shelter%20is%20a%20basic%20human%20need&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Frefugee-camps-unchr-shelter-human-need%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Building%20refugee%20camps%20reminds%20me%20why%20shelter%20is%20a%20basic%20human%20need&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhousing-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Frefugee-camps-unchr-shelter-human-need%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b55156b6669aaf3a12a3397d0d9e2068f48ff3%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
 ‘I have supported UNHCR operations in 18 countries across in sub-Saharan 
Africa and Asia’: Campbell at Bakassi camp, Maiduguri, Nigeria. Photograph: 
UNHCR 
Their despair and misery affected me in a way I had never experienced before 
in all my years working with UNHCR. Seeing people in these circumstances 
reminds you why shelter is a critical determinant of human survival in an 
emergency.

There was no space in Lolo that night, but I negotiated with the host 
community to convert their only primary school into a temporary shelter. The 
school was in very poor shape; there were large holes in the roof, the walls 
and floor were severely cracked, and doors and windows were missing. In the 
rain, I worked with the carpenters to cover the roof, windows and floor with 
plastic sheets.


I have built thousands of shelters for people in need. I have never before, 
however, felt that my actions would have a direct consequence on the very 
survival of those people – I did that night.


Over the years, I have witnessed families host displaced families five times 
their number in their tiny homes and communities. These are often already very 
poor people on the margins of society, yet, incredibly, they are willing, with 
open arms and hearts, to welcome people fleeing conflict and persecution.


'A place to sleep is luxury to us': how Scotland welcomes refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/sep/03/scotland-welcome-safe-housing-refugees>
These communities inspire my work and affirm my commitment to do whatever I 
can do to help shelter refugees.


 * Charles Campbell is raising awareness of UNHCR’s Nobody Left Outside 
campaign <http://www.nobodyleftoutside.org/>, which highlights the challenges 
faced by displaced persons in meeting shelter needs.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 