
This week’s serve of rightwing views comes as the Trump administration is 
almost bedded down, and he prepares to assume office. What do we know, and what 
should be the focus of our fears and our resistance? Do Trump’s military 
appointments threaten basic constitutional norms? Are we making a mistake by 
treating him as a world-historical aberration, rather than a pretty standard 
(if idiosyncratic) Republican populist?

Burst your bubble – again: five conservative articles to read this week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/rightwing-news-conservative-articles-trump>
Meanwhile, there’s some fun to be had as people on the right adjust themselves 
to new realities. The president-elect still faces criticisms from holdouts on 
the right which are as bitter as any from the left, but some of the #nevertrump 
crowd are desperately trying to walk back their own warnings from election 
season.

Is Civilian Control of the Military in Jeopardy? 
<http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/is-civilian-control-of-the-military-in-jeopardy/>

Publication: The American Conservative

Author: Kelley Vlahos is one of the most fearless and principled writers on 
America’s military-industrial complex and security state. The fact that she has 
to publish pieces like her exposé of the opulent lifestyles of the peoplewho 
live off military contracts 
<http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/rise-of-the-american-mercenary/>
 in the same publication that gives space to the ravings of Rod Dreher is an 
indictment of the timidity of other outlets.

Why you should read it: Vlahos uses paranoid masterpiece Seven Days in May – 
which depicts an attempted military coup in America – to frame a nuanced 
consideration of Trump’s appointments of recently retired generals to a range 
of cabinet positions. Is there a risk to the fundamental constitutional 
commitment to civilian control of the military?

Extract: “One could argue that many elements of the movie’s plot are present 
today: a military infrastructure bred and fed on decades of war is suddenly 
threatened by a peacetime posture, defense cuts, and a deal with a rival power 
that’s unpopular with many in the ranks. In the movie, one general, played 
forbiddingly by Burt Lancaster, believes it is his duty to right the wrongs of 
the civilian leadership (a peace deal with the Russians) and, thanks to the 
size and autonomy lavished upon the post-WWII military-industrial complex, can 
marshal the makings of an elaborate coup right under the noses of official 
Washington.”


Mark Levin SHREDS pro-Putin, global warming alarmist Rex Tillerson  
<https://www.conservativereview.com/commentary/2016/12/mark-levin-shreds-trump-secretary-of-state-pick-rex-tillerson?utm\_source=newsletter&utm\_medium=email&utm\_content=121516crcontentemail&utm\_campaign=newslettertraffic>

Publication: Conservative Review

Author: This is a wrap (including audio) of a full-bore rant by Mark Levin. 
Levin, perhaps talk radio’s angriest blowhard, is a Tea Party guy, longtime 
Trump sceptic and former Cruz-booster. His claim to authority is a stint in the 
Reagan White House, and a string of books outlining his philosophy of 
“constitutional conservatism”.

Why you should read and listen: Levin tears strips off Trump for appointing 
Rex Tillerson as secretary of state, hinting simultaneously that he is a Putin 
paland a creature of the conservative establishment. Talk radio dudgeon can be 
fun when directed at a common enemy, and it shows how Trump might still 
struggle to retain his anti-establishment credentials after his enemies in 
conservative media have done their worst.

Extract: “Lemme tell the giddy guys over at Heritage and so on, Ronald Reagan 
would never have picked a secretary of state with these ties to Russia … What 
is his foreign policy philosophy other than kissing Putin’s butt?”


Does a Never Trumper Need to Be Forgiven? 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/443364/never-trump-administation-cabinet-2016-election-character>

Publication: National Review


Author: Jonah Goldberg is a weird unit. He’s a longtime National Review 
habitué, author of a book thatcompares American liberalism to fascism 
<https://www.amazon.com/Liberal-Fascism-American-Mussolini-Politics/dp/0767917189>
, and, in a tough field, he was perhaps the whiniest #nevertrump conservative. 
As the American Prospectonce put it 
<http://prospect.org/article/jonah-goldbergs-bizarro-history-0> in a review of 
his magnum opus, he “has no credentials beyond the right-wing nepotism that has 
enabled his career as a pundit”. But he is instructive for what he represents.

Why you should read it: This piece is instructive rather than insightful. It 
shows how the #nevertrump crowd are calming down as they come to realize that 
Trump is shaping up to be much more like a regulation conservative Republican 
than they imagined. Expect people like Goldberg to walk back their election 
season opposition to Trump as they realize that he is going to give them most 
of what they want. This will be fun to watch, but it should also ring alarm 
bells – if Trump can do deals, progressives will learn exactly how quickly 
American government can act.

Extract: “That said, I already feel comfortable admitting that, beyond my 
electoral prognosticating, I got some things wrong about what a Trump 
presidency will look like. Though many on the left and in the media see his 
cabinet appointments and policy proposals as cause for existential panic, as a 
conservative I find most – but by no means all – of them reassuring.”

Do you suffer from Trump Derangement Syndrome? 
<http://www.latimes.com/opinion/op-ed/la-oe-raimondo-trump-derangement-syndrome-20161226-story.html>

Publication: LA Times 

Author: Justin Raimondo describes himself as a “conservative 
paleolibertarian”. He is editorial director ofantiwar.com <http://antiwar.com/>
, which runs a libertarian, anti-interventionist line on US foreign policy – as 
such it should be seen alongside paleoconservative “America First” outlets like 
Pat Buchanan’s American Conservative. Figures like Raymond have entertained 
high hopes about Trump’s anti-interventionist noises during the campaign season.

Why you should read it: Raimondo makes some points we might heed. The concern 
not to “normalize” Trump has led many on the liberal-left spectrum to panic 
about his every trollish tweet, and to make comparisons between what is 
increasingly looking like a rightwing Republican administration and mid-century 
fascism. Reactive hyperbole may not be the best posture from which to 
intelligently and strategically fight Trumpism.

Extract: “In the advanced stages of the disease, the afflicted lose touch with 
reality. Opinion is unmoored from fact. Life resembles a dark fairy tale in 
which the villain – Trump – is an amalgam of all the worst tyrants in history, 
past and present, while the heroes – Trump’s critics – are akin to the 
resistance fighters of World War II.”


The Conventional Threat to Trump 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/12/the-conventional-threat-to-trump-214544>

Publication: Politico Magazine 

Author: Rich Lowry carries the torch passed by William F Buckley, and is 
editor of National Review. As the standard-bearer for (now-embattled) movement 
conservatism, Lowry regularly places op-eds under major mastheads. He’s a 
habitual ideologue, but not immune to making the occasional good point.

Why you should read it: Lowry asks some penetrating questions about the 
Democrats’ response to Trump, both during and after the election. Instead of 
making the Republicans wear him as their nominee, and the culmination of 
everything they have recently stood for, Democrats caricatured him as an 
aberration and a Putin stooge. As his administration takes form, it 
increasingly looks like the recurring nightmare of conservative Republicanism, 
rather than something darker, and more novel. “Normalizing” him at least to the 
extent of tying him to the party that birthed him might pay dividends as they 
prepare to make deals with him.

Extract: “There is no doubt that Trump is unlike any prior president. But if 
Democrats begin thinking and acting a little more rationally, they will in all 
likelihood find their opposition to Trump running in a reassuringly familiar 
rut –Republicans are heartless tools of corporations and the wealthy. They 
don’t care if people lose their health insurance. They are cutting taxes for 
the rich. They are deregulating bankers. Etc., etc. This is the critique that
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> didn’t 
make of Trump, opting instead to emphasize his outlandishness and try to 
separate him from his party. In this vein, liberals are now resisting 
‘normalizing’ Trump, when they should be perfectly content to normalize him – 
specifically, to make him a normal Republican.”
 