
Greg Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/greg-clark>, the business, 
energy and industrial strategy secretary, has said making Britain a 
world-leading hub for next-generation electric vehicles will be at the heart of 
the government’s new industrial strategy, providing one of the clearest 
indications yet of the sectors it wants to focus on in a post-Brexit economy.

Clark said the automotive sector, particularly electric vehicles, driverless 
cars and battery storage, will be a “emblematic area of focus” and is going to 
be “one of the big features of the world and Britain’s industrial policy during 
the weeks, months and years ahead”.

The government is expected to lay out an outline of its industrial strategy in 
the next few weeks, with Clark saying it will publish “some directions that we 
want to work together [with businesses] to elaborate further”.

Brexit uncertainty could hit investment in UK, warns German car chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/23/brexit-uncertainty-could-hit-investment-in-uk-warns-german-car-chief>
The senior cabinet minister was talking at a meeting of political and 
automotive leaders from the Midlands on Thursday evening at the University of 
Warwick.

At the event, Ralf Speth, the chief executive of Jaguar Land Rover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jaguar-land-rover>, said his company is 
aiming to double its global workforce of 40,000 as it expands into electric 
cars and battery technology. This ambition would see the creation of 10,000 new 
jobs in the UK over the next few years as JLR continues its dramatic recovery 
since the financial crisis by opening new research and development sites.

How electric car drivers are being overcharged | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/how-electric-car-drivers-are-being-overcharged>
Speth said that JLR wants to build a new electric car plant in Britain, as 
well as a factory that can produce batteries, but that the carmaker needs 
support from the government.

“We want to build our EVs (electric vehicles) in the west Midlands, in the 
home of our design and engineering,” Speth said. “This is clear, it goes 
without saying. But there is a huge problem – we don’t currently have the 
capacity to produce them at scale nor at speed, the costs of doing business in 
the UK are high compared to other countries, and alongside the access to the 
right skills, energy infrastructure remains the single greatest challenge to 
Jaguar Land Rover.”

Speth said JLR needs the equivalent of four power stations and the “right 
legislative framework” to develop its electric car plans, and for the fledgling 
industry to flourish in the UK. The company unveiled its first electric car, 
the I-Pace, earlier this month in Los Angeles.

The JLR boss warned Britain will lose investment to other countries, such as 
Germany, if the government did not act.

“This is a race ladies and gentlemen, it’s really a race and either we win or 
we lose. The government must be the enabler,” he said. “Our opportunity is 
nothing less then to lead the world in smart cities, smart economy and smart 
mobility.”

In response, Clark said: “This is a sector – and particularly the electric 
vehicles, connected autonomous vehicles, battery storage – that couldn’t be a 
more emblematic area of focus that the industrial strategy will back and enable.

“This is going to be one of the big features of the world and Britain’s 
industrial policy during the weeks, months and years ahead.

“The pace of this is quickening all the time and so is our commitment to it. 
This is a big moment, for a hugely important combination of sectors 
technologies and institutions.

More charge points needed urgently for switch to electric cars | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/28/more-charge-points-needed-urgently-for-switch-to-electric-cars>
“You can count completely not just on my commitment but my involvement in 
progressing these discussions to turn them into actions.”


Clark also described how the creation of an industrial strategy will influence 
government policies.

He said: “What does it mean? It means if you have an industrial strategy there 
is no such as a short-term strategy, it is a contradiction in terms. So it is a 
explicit commitment to act in terms of policies and creating institutions for 
the long term rather than the short. A commitment to have a industrial strategy 
is to act for the long term.

“It can’t be something that the government announces to an unsuspecting world, 
it has to be done together. It is certainly not a laissez-faire strategy, it is 
not ‘over to you’, this is a partnership, and that is the strategic intent.”

Clark’s comments were welcomed by local authority leaders.

Jonathan Browning, chairman of the Coventry and Warwicksire LEP, said: “The 
industrial strategy is in its early days but it is pleasing to see that 
government recognises not only the importance of the advanced manufacturing 
sector but also the need for us to be at the forefront of developing the 
automotive technologies of the future.


“Jaguar Land Rover will be leading that vanguard and has spelled out its 
ambitions to produce electric cars, along with the growth and investment that 
will bring both directly and to the regional supply chain.”
 