
Standing in Canyonlands National Park, Utah; 103ºF under a cloudless summer 
sky. I’d call the canyon floor below “bone-white,” if it looked like anything 
had ever lived there long enough to leave its bones behind. This is the part of 
the world where Edward Abbey (in his 1968Desert Solitaire) said he came “to 
look at and into a juniper tree, a piece of quartz, a vulture, a spider, and 
see it as in itself, devoid of all humanly ascribed qualities, anti-Kantian.” 
And something like what Thoreau had in mind when he talked about “Earth … made 
out of Chaos and Old Night … no man’s garden, but the unhandselled globe.”

If you’d told me a month earlier that when I reached southern Utah humanity 
would soon start feeling like an irrelevancy—even a kind of irreverence—I would 
barely have looked up from my latte and iPhone long enough to chuckle. Still, 
it happened. I had a glimpse of “Matter, vast, terrific” (Thoreau again) and a 
sense of what a juniper tree or a piece of quartz might be up to … without me. 
I don’t know if the feeling was anti-Kantian, but it sure was memorable.

Yet as I struggled with the arid skeleton-scape of Canyonlands, my best 
guidance came from a book deeply skeptical about the redemptive power of that 
kind of inhuman emptiness. The way John Williams’sButcher’s Crossing (1960) 
tells it, the idea of embracing Nature’s inhumanity is not only naive, it’s 
downright destructive. Thoreau’s dreams of “Contact! Contact!” do notsolve 
humanity’s rapacious relationship with Nature — they are simply another 
incarnation of that rapacity. An opening epigraph from Melville sets the 
novel’s uneasy, almost sinister tone:

Aye, and poets send out the sick spirits to green pasture, like lame horses … 
Poets have it that for sore hearts … nature is the grand cure. But who froze to 
death my teamster on the prairie?

Critics have singled out movies of the early 1970s (Butch Cassidy and the 
Sundance Kid, The Outlaw Josey Wales, McCabe and Mrs. Miller, Jeremiah Johnson) 
and some novels of the early 1980s (especially Cormac McCarthy’sBlood Meridian) 
as the first wave of “revisionist westerns.” But back in 1960, without 
McCarthy’s lurid baroque extravagances, without any cool Hollywood soundtrack, 
John Williams wrote what may be the perfectanti-western. Butcher’s Crossing is 
a novel that turns upside down the expectations of the genre—and goes to war 
with a century of American triumphalism, a century of regeneration through 
violence, a century of senseless slaughter. To say it’s an attack on 
Eisenhower’s America is right enough; only we shouldn’t be so sure that it 
doesn’t also apply to Kennedy’s New Frontier, and to a half-century of 
triumphalism and exceptionalism since, under Republicans and Democrats alike.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fbutchers-crossing-an-appreciation-of-john-williamss-perfect-anti-western%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac5eb9d15d1b572bfd06c408747c2a2fdb7f6c86%2F233_565_2411_1446%2F2411.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Butcher's%20Crossing%3A%20an%20appreciation%20of%20John%20Williams's%20perfect%20anti-western&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fbutchers-crossing-an-appreciation-of-john-williamss-perfect-anti-western%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Butcher%27s%20Crossing%3A%20an%20appreciation%20of%20John%20Williams%27s%20perfect%20anti-western&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fbutchers-crossing-an-appreciation-of-john-williamss-perfect-anti-western%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac5eb9d15d1b572bfd06c408747c2a2fdb7f6c86%2F233_565_2411_1446%2F2411.jpg>
 A cowboy looks down on a large herd of cattle in Colorado. Photograph: Lucas 
Jackson/Reuters 
In recent years scholars and readers have rediscovered Stoner, John Williams’s 
1965 campus novel about a farmer’s boy turned unhappy and ultimately 
unsuccessful professor. Its Hollywood pitch might be “Jude the Obscure meets 
The Professor’s House”—can’t you hear producers rushing to acquire the rights? 
About Williams’s 1948 first novel,Nothing but the Night, the only good thing to 
be said is that he quickly disowned it. Williams’s austere, meditativeAugustus 
(a National Book Award winner in 1973) may not rival Marguerite Yourcenar’s
Memoirs of Hadrian, but it offers a very touching portrait of ancient Stoicism, 
a doomed but admirable effort to preserve one’s private dignity in the face of 
public horror.

There is no way for westward-moving white men to encounter “virgin land” 
without roughing or using it up

Butcher’s Crossing is in a different league from these other works. The novel 
is about a buffalo hunt in the late 1870s, just before the coming of the trains 
finished carving up buffalo country and the European market for buffalo robes 
collapsed: the bursting of the Buffalo Bubble. The novel chronicles a hunting 
party that heads out from Butcher’s Crossing, Kansas, into the Front Range of 
the Rockies. They’re searching for a valley hunters haven’t yet emptied of its 
buffalo herd—one of those herds that stretches far as the eye can see. Wealthy 
Bostonian Will Andrews, an Emerson- and Thoreau-quoting preacher’s son, hires 
the hardened mountain man Miller and a pair of his old-school associates (a 
skinner and a cook) in the novel’s first part. The second and longest part 
follows the hunt itself; the third details its miserable aftermath back at 
Butcher’s Crossing.

Early on, Miller comes across as positively satanic. The one appearance Native 
Americans make in the novel is in a remark he tosses off en route to the 
killing valley: “River Indians … they ain’t worth shooting anymore.” When 
Andrews witnesses Miller becoming a killing machine, no reader can doubt where 
the true evil resides:

During the last hour of the stand he came to see Miller as a mechanism, an 
automaton, moved by the moving herd; and he came to see Miller’s destruction of 
the buffalo, not as a lust for blood or a lust for the hides or a lust for what 
the hides would bring, or even at last the blind lust of fury that toiled 
darkly within him—he came to see the destruction as a cold, mindless response 
to the life in which Miller had immersed himself.

In an idyllic valley tucked between towering peaks, straight out of Zane Grey, 
Miller mills buffaloes into salable piles of hides.

We know how to read this: a clash between young civility and bloodthirsty 
evil. InHeart of Darkness terms, Andrews is the novel’s Marlow, its callow, 
suffering storyteller, and Miller its demoniacal Kurtz. Yet Williams makes it 
brutally clear that Will Andrews, no matter how innocent he may seem, does also 
unmistakablywill the slaughter he laments. His money bought the guns, the 
wagons, even the lead they melt for Miller’s bullets. The way Williams tells 
it, we not only (as Wordsworth put it) “murder to dissect,” we also murder just 
by being alive. There is no way for westward-moving white men to encounter 
“virgin land” without roughing or using it up. The seemingly stable distinction 
between encountering and exploiting ain’t what it’s cracked up to be.

Not only is this a novel about the price to be paid even for the most innocent 
kinds of movement over virgin land, it is also an exploration of the 
instability of all the categories we set up to distinguish between white-hat 
and black-hat behavior. The role played by the novel’s only significant female 
character, Francine, brings home how intimately Williams links Emerson’s 
Transcendentalist desire to explore the ever-new with the seemingly 
diametrically opposed desire to turn everything beautiful into a cash 
transaction. Francine, a prostitute, is unapologetic about her reasons for 
liking Butcher’s Crossing: fewer girls to compete with here than back in St. 
Louis. Yet she also likes the very same thing Andrews likes: virginal newness, 
freshness, youth — which is why she’s willing to take a break from her 
profession and sleep with Andrews for free. You might say that what the prairie 
represents for Andrews, Andrews represents for Francine.

This book came out in 1960... Is it surprising there was so little space for 
Williams’s un-American pessimism?

So what finally does Williams want his readers to make of Andrews’s Emersonian 
optimism, Miller’s pragmatic murderousness, Francine’s compassionate search for 
oblivion? After the failure of the hunt, Andrews and Miller come back home to 
meet the embittered hides dealer McDonald, who has been bankrupted by shifting 
fashions back in Europe and is now surrounded by worthless piles of buffalo 
hides. He offers the novel’s bleakest diagnosis. “You’re no better than the 
things you kill,” he informs Andrews, then goes on to tell him why “young 
people … always think there’s something to find out,” when really:

There’s nothing. … You get born, and you nurse on lies, and you get weaned on 
lies, and you learn fancier lies in school. You live all your life on lies, and 
then maybe when you’re ready to die, it comes to you—there’s nothing, nothing 
but yourself and what you could have done. Only you ain’t done it, because the 
lies told you there was something else.

Rather than leaving us with this piece of late Mark Twain darkness, however, 
Williams ends the novel by following Andrews back to Francine for a week of 
thoughtless beauty and pleasure, a space apart from the world.

Butcher's Crossing by John Williams – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/07/butchers-crossing-john-williams-review>
Butcher’s Crossing also follows him when he sneaks away from her, leaving the 
money she had pointedly refused to accept from him—money that makes their week 
together another salable commodity. That mercenary moment hints that at its 
core the novel is pushing readers to relate the pointless slaughter of 
unsalable buffaloes to the absence of Native Americans (except for those “River 
Indians” Miller finds not worth killing) from this spookily white West. The 
well-meaning Andrews’s unwitting swathe of destruction (which he can stand back 
and blame on the rapidly obsolescing Miller and his killing ways) mirrors the 
destructive zeal of Cold War America, reaching out eagerly, with Emersonian 
zeal, to the east, west, north, and south. Remember that this book came out in 
1960: Louis L’Amour ruled the western novel, and Hollywood featured 
leather-skinned John Wayne’s machismo and the liberal piety of Gary Cooper’s
High Noon. Is it surprising there was so little space for Williams’s 
un-American pessimism?

Butcher’s Crossing ends with the reader certain, dead certain, that the 
destruction of the past cannot be undone. Yet there’s a hint of hope in the 
novel’s final line: “he rode forward without hurry, and felt behind him the sun 
slowly rise and harden the air.” Andrews is riding westward, even though he is 
travelling over the very land he and his cronies turned from wilderness into 
waste, past now-worthless piles of hides, and past the buffalo meat they had 
poisoned to kill off timber wolves. Go west, not-quite-so-young man.

*****

 * John Plotz is Professor of Victorian Literature at Brandeis University and 
the author of The Crowd (2000), Portable Property (2008), and a young-adult 
novel, Time and the Tapestry: A William Morris Adventure (2014). His Public 
Books essays on Jean Stafford, Doris Lessing, and Ursula K. Le Guin are part of 
a new study, “The Recalcitrants.”
 