
Three Peakers and Pennine Wayers refresh themselves with beans on toast and 
capacious mugs of Yorkshire tea as they recount their endeavours. The cafe in 
Horton-in-Ribblesdale, like the adjacent house I grew up in, is at the end of a 
terrace with a grandstand view of Penyghent, 694m (2,277ft ), above. As a boy I 
first scaled this lion couchant by scrambling up the gritstone box of its nose 
and grabbing handfuls of its mane, namely long, wiry grasses. At 16 I traversed 
allThree Peaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jun/02/guardianspecial4.guardianspecial229>
, these 24 miles including the Table Mountain look-alike Ingleborough 
(2,372ft/723m) and Yorkshire’s Everest, Whernside (2,415ft 736m).

Novice cavers find marvels beneath the fissured limestone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/19/yorkshire-dales-caving-potholes-three-peaks>
The area is also popular with cavers, though they have to be wary during 
inclement weather. The worst of the new year’s floods missed this little 
community on the banks of the upper Ribble, but places like Ribchester further 
west in the Ribble Valley were swamped.

“That’s limestone country,” says a walker by the quaint clock-card timepiece 
on the wall that has recorded the start and end time for Three Peak ramblers 
and runners over many years. “These uplands are a sponge. They soak up 
rainwater, then spill it out lower down to feed rivers.”

In 1950 my brother walked up Vicarage Lane. On the moors above he met water 
rushing down a normally dry valley. The reason? After heavy rains (then, as 
recently, the Aire flooded parts of Leeds),Hull Pot 
<http://www.yorkshiredales.org.uk/visit-the-dales/discover-the-dales/caves-and-potholes/hull-pot>
, a huge pothole 91m long, 18m wide and 18m deep, recessed into the ground like 
a ship’s hull, was brim-full of water and overflowing.

In gumboots round the Three Peaks Race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2012/apr/30/yorkshire-mountaineering-three-peaks-ingleborough-whernside-pen-y-ghent-fellrunning>
I drain my mug, take my leave of the proprietor, Matthew Bayes, a Hortonian 
since a lad, and walk across fields to Bransghyll Head. Here, from a cave 
beneath pine trees, a beck goes on to join the Ribble, rolling on to Preston 
and the sea. Dye has indicated that it comes from Hull Pot.

This time the water is dyed beer-brown from the peat. Cutting it fine, I just 
manage to catch my train north on the Settle-Carlisle line, with a rainbow’s 
end touching the 19th-century station. Next stop: Ribblehead with its 
photogenic 24-arch viaduct across Batty Moss, near where the Ribble rises.
 