
Crews in hard hats and orange jumpsuits have started dismantling the makeshift 
camp inCalais <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> that has become a 
symbol of Europe’s refugee crisis, as thousands of people remained there 
waiting to be relocated.

The workers tore down plywood cabins, sheds and other temporary buildings at 
the camp in the port city in northern France, one of the biggest in Europe, 
where thousands of people have beenliving in dire conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/02/calais-refugee-camp-conditions-diabolical-report-jungle-bacteria-hygiene>
.

The demolition is taking place as authorities are emptying the camp of an 
estimated 6,300 people who have been living there, down from a high of 10,000 
this summer.


Earlier in the day, there were some isolated scuffles as police and French 
authorities began the second day of a planned week-long mass evacuation and 
closure of the camp.

Police initially appeared to struggle as hundreds of children penned into a 
small area outside a processing centre became impatient and anxious to get to 
the front of the queue. Volunteers arrived speaking Pashto to the mainly Afghan 
boys and young men at the front.

The migrants and refugees are being bussed to relocation centres elsewhere in 
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, where most hope to apply for 
asylum. More than 1,900 left on Monday, and the Calais prefecture said that as 
of midday on Tuesday a further 656 people had boarded buses from Calais.

The prefecture added that 139 more under-18s had been put in heated shelters 
in the camp, in addition to the 400 who had been sheltered on Monday.

Nearly 200 under-18s have arrived in the UK in recent days and hundreds more 
are expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/uk-to-take-hundreds-of-children-from-calais-home-secretary-says>
, the home secretary, Amber Rudd, told parliament on Monday. However, a quarter 
of English councils have refused to take part in resettling refugees.

Many more migrants and refugees are preparing for a huge day of departures on 
Wednesday. “People are leaving tomorrow. Lots of people have planned for 
tomorrow,” Abdul Walia, a community leader among the sizeable Afghan population 
of the camp, said.

Walia said the camp departures had been peaceful, despite the uncertainty for 
people being forced to leave. “Lots of people are upset as their hope is to go 
to England,” he said. “But this hope is finished.”
 