
If the incoming Trump administration makes good on its campaign promises about 
mass deportations,California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> 
will have a giant target on its back.

The state – the fifth largest economy in the world – is home to close to 3 
million 
<http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/731/docs/whats_at_stake_for_the_state.pdf>
 undocumented immigrants, almost a quarter of the national total. That, in 
turn, suggests a looming showdown between the Trump administration and local 
political leaders, almost all of whom see immigrants as a vital part of 
Californian life and the state’s powerhouse economy, and are determined to do 
whatever they can to protect them.

In the days since Donald Trump’s stunning electoral upset, the state’s 
predominantly Democratic political leadership has raced to assure frightened 
immigrants that they won’t simply roll over to the demands of the new 
administration or Immigration and Customs Enforcement – whether the target is 
to deport all 11 million estimated undocumented immigrants, as Trump said 
during the campaign, or just 2 or 3 million, as he suggested ina television 
interview 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/president-elect-trump-says-how-many-immigrants-hell-deport/>
 last Sunday.

“We want to support [Trump], but we also have to hold him accountable,” Los 
Angeles mayor Eric Garcetti told an emergency meeting of immigration advocates 
called in response to the election. “If, on his first day as president, we see 
something that is hostile to our people, hostile to our city, bad for our 
economy, bad for our security, we will speak up, speak out, act up and act out 
on that.”

Los Angeles is one of a growing number 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2016/11/15/despite-trumps-threat-to-cut-federal-funding-mayors-across-the-u-s-pledge-to-protect-undocumented-immigrants/>
 of cities – along with San Francisco, Seattle, Chicago, Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia and New York – that have publicly declared their intention to keep 
local police away from immigration enforcement, even if the Trump 
administration follows through on its threat to cut federal funding in 
retaliation.

In Los Angeles, the practice dates back to 1979 and an ultra-conservative 
police chief <http://assets.lapdonline.org/assets/pdf/SO_40.pdf> who believed 
it was more important to encourage immigrants to talk to the police for the 
sake of public safety than to question their legal status. “I don’t intend on 
doing anything different,” LAPD’s chief, Charlie Beck,told reporters 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-los-angeles-police-immigration-20161114-story.html>
 this week. “We are not going to work in conjunction with Homeland Security on 
deportation efforts. That is not our job, nor will I make it our job.”

#WithDACA: undocumented workers speak out amid fears for Obama program
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/daca-undocumented-immigrants-obama-program-trump>
Mayor Garcetti has promised to help immigrants in other ways, too – including 
directing his legal staff to keep filinglegal briefs 
<http://www.lacityattorney.org/blog/tag/immigrants> in defense of the immigrant 
community, and encouraging eligible candidates to apply for citizenship through 
aneducation program <http://www.lapl.org/citizenship> run through Los Angeles’ 
public libraries.


Many California cities have created so-called safe zones 
<http://laschoolreport.com/what-does-it-mean-that-lausd-is-a-safe-zone-from-immigration-officials/>
 in their schools that prevent federal immigration officials from entering 
except under extraordinary circumstances. State legislators, meanwhile, plan on 
re-examining confidentiality rules to make it as difficult as possible for 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement to gain access to driver’s license records, 
school and medical records.

Trump and his advisers – who include some of the country’s most outspoken 
anti-immigrant voices including Alabama senatorJeff Sessions 
<http://www.rollcall.com/news/opinion/jeff-sessions-unfit-cabinet>, Kansas 
secretary of stateKris Kobach 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-immigration-idUSKBN13B05C>, and 
his newly appointed White House strategistSteve Bannon 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/14/opinions/trump-bannon-ben-ghiat/> – say they 
want to focus their deportation efforts on criminals. But there isscant evidence
 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/there-arent-2-to-3-million-undocumented-immigrants-with-criminal-records-for-trump-to-deport/>
 that undocumented immigrants with criminal records come anywhere close to the 
2 million mark, especially since Barack Obama has already deported around 2.5 
million of them over the past eight years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=3%20million%20'criminal'%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=3%20million%20%27criminal%27%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&media=>
3 million ‘criminal’ immigrants to be deported, says Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/14/3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
“The number is closer to 800,000,” Marielena Hincapié of the National 
Immigration Law Center said, adding: “If they are serious about deporting 2-3 
million to show they are moving on this agenda, they will end up detaining many 
more people.”

One place the Trump administration is likely to start its deportation efforts 
is with Daca (deferred action for childhood arrivals), a program Obama 
championed in 2014 that has enabled more than 700,000 young people to claim 
temporary legal status. Since Daca was created by executive order, it can be 
canceled the same way, leaving enrollees vulnerable because their personal 
details are on file with their applications.

Many advocacy groups are encouraging those who received an initial two-year 
permit under Daca to reapply so they have some legal documentation when the new 
administration takes office. But they are discouraging new applicants because 
they will not be approved before inauguration day.

Undocumented students hope for university's protection under Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/undocumented-students-university-protection-trump-california>
Perhaps the most persuasive argument against the coming anti-immigrant tide, 
appealing to Republicans as well as Democrats, is economic. Onerecent study 
<http://www.caimmigrant.org/research-and-analysis/contributions-html/> 
suggested undocumented immigrants contribute an annual $130bn to California’s 
gross domestic product. For every farmworker, gardener, nanny, garment worker 
or restaurant dishwasher, there are multiplier effects that provide jobs to 
many non-immigrants too – truckers, landscape architects, fashion designers and 
so on.

Putting those workers on a path to legal status is not only cheaper than 
deporting them, but is also a form of economic stimulus because their incomes 
will go up at least 15% over the following three years, according to 
immigration expert Manuel Pastor of the University of Southern California.

People covered by Daca are likely to be even more productive, because many of 
them have university degrees and legal status allows them to jump straight from 
dishwasher to fully-fledged professional. “Some studies say their incomes go up 
50-60%” Pastor said. ““If you remove them, you are removing their entire 
productivity … The thing that is easiest for Trump to do, to reverse Daca, has 
the most significant economic costs.”

Some activists remain optimistic that the economic argument will restrain 
Trump, especially given the importance of the Californian economy to the US as 
a whole. Others, though, believe the hostility to immigrants is more 
obstinately ideological and is designed, primarily, to weaken the political 
coalition that put Obama in the White House for eight years.

“When I look at Kobach and Bannon, I have to say, I do not expect them to come 
up with a path to citizenship at all,” Hincapié said. “They might agree to 
legal status for some people, but never citizenship because those people would 
become voters. And they are afraid of those people becoming voters.”
 