
Voters around the US cast ballots for a diverse range of initiatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/americans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms>
 that seek to reform laws on marijuana, the death penalty, climate change and 
more. Below are results in the most important contests.

Marijuana <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cannabis>

Approved: California voters approved recreational marijuana, a huge victory in 
the fight for cannabis legalization, paving the way for the largest commercial 
pot market in the US.

Approved: Massachusetts also voted for recreational pot, extending legal weed 
from coast to coast.

Approved: Nevada became the third state to approve a recreational cannabis 
law, making the west an even stronger region for marijuana sales.

Approved: Earlier in the night, Florida voters passed a constitutional 
amendment to legalize medical marijuana, the first victory in a string of 
high-profile cannabis measures on Tuesday’s state ballots.

Approved: North Dakota was the second state to approve medical weed, with the 
approval ofMeasure 5 
<http://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/north-dakota-ballot-measure-5-medical-marijuana>
, which approves the use of marijuana to treat a number ofdiseases 
<http://www.kfyrtv.com/content/news/An-overview-of-all-5-ND-ballot-measures-what-they-are-what-theyll-do-400327791.html>
, including cancer, Aids, epilepsy and hepatitis C.

Election day: the key points as they happen with the votes being tallied
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/presidential-election-updates-trump-clinton-news>
Approved: Arkansas also passed a medical cannabis measure that would allow 
patients 
<http://www.thecannabist.co/2016/11/02/arkansas-issue-6-medical-marijuana-poll-issue-7/66621/>
 with specific conditions to buy medicine from dispensaries licensed by the 
government.

Rejected: Arizona was the first state to vote against its marijuana measure, 
with the news early on Wednesday morning that voters have rejected Proposition 
205. The measure would have legalized recreational pot.

Approved: Montana residents voted to expand the state’s medical marijuana 
system with the passage ofInitiative 182 
<http://helenair.com/news/local/montana-passes-measure-to-expand-medical-marijuana/article_8dadf5fa-9c91-5be7-8095-98a011aa35e2.html>
, which removes limits on the number of patients providers can serve. 
Proponents of the measure argued that the existing restrictions blocked 
patients from accessing care.

Advocates and opponents agree that California’s Proposition 64 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/04/california-marijuana-election-2016>
 is the most important cannabis measure America has seen and could be an 
international game-changer for marijuana policy in the US.

California, which recently overtook the UK to have the fifth largest economy 
in the world, is expected to have a recreational marijuana market greater than 
Colorado, Washington, Oregon and Alaska combined, said Ethan Nadelmann, 
executive director of the Drug Policy Alliance.

“When I talk to everybody from allies to government officials in Mexico and I 
ask them what’s it going to take to transform the debate,” he said, “the 
response to me is when California legalizes marijuana.”

Too close to call: As of Wednesday afternoon, a recreational measure in Maine 
was still too close to call.

Colorado and Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/07/marijuana-legalisation-colorado-washington-yes>
 became thefirst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/18/colorado-marijuana-law-report-adult-usage-increases-not-kids>
 states tolegalize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/08/marijuana-recreational-washington-state-how-much>
 recreational marijuana in 2012, paving the way forOregon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/21/oregon-cannabis-legalization-medical-marijuana-dying-market>
, andAlaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/28/charlo-greene-alaska-cannabis-club-reporter-marijuana>
 to follow suit.

As medical and retail cannabis operations have spread across the US, legal 
marijuana has become thefastest 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/01/26/marijuana-industry-fastest-growing_n_6540166.html>
-growing industry in the US, with some analysts projecting sales to reach $22bn
by 2020 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/katiesola/2016/04/19/legal-u-s-marijuana-market-will-grow-to-7-1-billion-in-2016-report/#502cb83c568d>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1b5994d846c04d7fa1cc965869b87158305477c%2F0_155_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1b5994d846c04d7fa1cc965869b87158305477c%2F0_155_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 People gather for an election watch party put on by supporters of a legal 
marijuana initiative in Phoenix, Arizona. Photograph: Nancy Wiechec/Reuters 
Although dozens of states have also taken steps to authorize medical marijuana 
or decriminalize pot, cannabis remains an illegaldrug at the federal level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/11/marijuana-laws-dangerous-drug-designation-us-government>
.

Opponents of legalization, who have spent millions 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/10/26/a-casino-magnate-is-spending-millions-to-fight-legal-marijuana-in-three-states/>
 campaigning against this year’s measures, have argued that pot shops pose
public safety risks 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/politics/2016/10/17/massachusetts-marijuana-dystopia-anti-marijuana-legalization-campaign-releases-first/QemmF8F3U5KvWPu1LeO2bI/story.html>
 and lead to an increase in adolescent drug abuse.

But supporters of the measures have argued that ending marijuana prohibition 
is critical foreliminating the war on drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/23/war-on-drugs-failing-decriminalisation-prohibition>
 that has fueled mass incarceration and disproportionately affected people of 
color.

Some studies have also cast doubts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/25/teen-adolescent-marijuana-weed-pot-use-abuse-decline>
 on fears that legalization leads to higher rates of teen abuse, and backers of 
legalization further point to the bigtax revenues 
<http://www.thecannabist.co/2016/02/09/colorado-marijuana-sales-2015-reach-996-million/47886/>
 the commercialindustries 
<http://time.com/4511895/colorado-surplus-marijuana-tax-revenue-bully-prevention/>
 have raised,exceeding initial projections 
<http://www.drugpolicy.org/resource/so-far-so-good-what-we-know-about-marijuana-legalization-colorado-washington-alaska-oregon->
.

Keith Humphreys, professor of psychiatry at Stanford University and an expert 
in drug policy, predicted that as more states legalize pot, there will be a 
continual decline in marijuana arrests.

“You’ll see plunging prices all over,” he added, “and you’re going to have a 
lot more consumption.”

Tuesday’s victories could encourage other states and Congress to pursue 
similar reforms, said Mason Tvert, director of communications for the Marijuana 
Policy Project.

“It emboldens legislators to take on the issue and treat it more seriously.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff209864e3db1656d252f4840bac04fcd56d9df79%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff209864e3db1656d252f4840bac04fcd56d9df79%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Supporters of medical marijuana wave signs at passing traffic at a street 
corner in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Photograph: Amy Beth Bennett/AP 
Death penalty <https://www.theguardian.com/world/capital-punishment>

Rejected: California rejected a high-profile measure to repeal the death 
penalty, which would have ended capital punishment and taken 741 inmates off of 
death row, instead sentencing them to life in prison without the possibility of 
parole.

Too close to call: As of Wednesday afternoon, the state’s competing death 
penalty measure – Proposition 66, designed to speed up executions – was still 
too close to call. If it passes, the measure would be a major loss for death 
penalty opponents across the nation, who have fought for years to make 
California a leader in repealing capital punishment.

Approved: Oklahoma passed a measure to reaffirm the state’s commitment to the 
death penalty after the state attorney general suspended executions last year. 
Question 776, known as the Allow Any Execution Method,protects the death penalty
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/oklahoma-ballot-measure-776-allow-any-execution-method>
 in the constitution, blocking it from being declared cruel or unusual 
punishment.

Approved: Nebraska voters passed an unusual ballot measure to reinstate the 
death penalty after state lawmakers repealed it in 2015. The vote is a big loss 
for opponents of capital punishment given that Nebraska was thefirst 
conservative state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/nebraska-death-penalty-ballot-measure-pete-ricketts?platform=hootsuite>
 to repeal the death penalty in more than 40 years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff724ee32a506490da61013bf60a36e66ad27313a%2F579_473_2421_1453%2F2421.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff724ee32a506490da61013bf60a36e66ad27313a%2F579_473_2421_1453%2F2421.jpg>
 The lethal injection facility at San Quentin state prison in California. 
Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
Minimum wage <https://www.theguardian.com/society/minimum-wage>

Approved: Arizona became the first state to raise the minimum wage on Tuesday 
night, with aProposition 206 victory 
<http://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/elections/2016/11/08/arizona-minimum-wage-proposition-206-election-results/92970650/>
, raising the rate to $12 an hour by 2020. The measure also requires employers 
to provide paid sick time to workers.

Approved: Washington state’s proposal to raise the minimum wage to $13.50 an 
hour was alsosuccessful 
<http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/politics/washington-state-minimum-wage-initiative-1433/>
 on Tuesday.

Approved: Colorado voters also approved a measure to increase the minimum wage 
to $12 an hour by 2020, which some studies suggest willboost incomes 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/09/23/colorado-amendment-70-higher-minimum-wage/>
 for 20% of households in the state.

Approved: Maine’s minimum wage increase proposal was another victory on 
Tuesday, solidifying a successful night for the Fight for $15 labor movement 
that has fought to make salary improvements for low-wage workers a national 
issue. Maine’sQuestion 4 
<http://www.pressherald.com/2016/11/08/minimum-wage-question-divides-voters/> 
also calls for $12 by 2020.

Rejected: South Dakota was an outlier this year with a referendum on whether 
to lower the minimum wage for workers younger than 18. But residents voted 
against the state’s Referred Law 20, which would have exempted youth from South 
Dakota’s new minimum wage, increased to $8.50 in 2014.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd4aed89e14f979c0e77328692b276a3270d031c%2F0_183_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd4aed89e14f979c0e77328692b276a3270d031c%2F0_183_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 The Fight for $15 labor movement helped put minimum wage increase initiatives 
on the ballot in Arizona, Colorado, Maine and Washington. Photograph: UPI / 
Barcroft Media 
Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change>

Rejected: Washington residents voted against a measure called Initiative 732, 
which called for the first carbon tax in the US. It would have cost emitters 
$25 for each ton of carbon dioxide from 2018. It would have increased gradually 
over the course of 40 years to $100 a ton.

Rejected: Florida voters said no to Amendment 1, a measure that would have 
restricted the ability of homeowners to sell electricity they create through 
rooftop solar panels to the grid. Environmental groups said the measure was 
“fundamentally dishonest” because it was backed by the state’s large utilities 
and could have hurt the regional solar industry.

Healthcare <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/healthcare>

Rejected: Colorado has voted against 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/11/08/coloradocare-amendment-69-election-results/>
 the creation of a single-payer healthcare system that would have made the 
state the first in the country to haveuniversal, government-run healthcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/coloradocare-healthcare-plan-faces-opposition-from-democrats>
. Amendment 69, also known as ColoradoCare, would have created a $36bn health 
system designed to ensure that every resident of the state is served. The 
program, which called for a new 10% payroll tax, would have replaced the 
private health insurance system. The defeat is a big win for major medical 
providers such asAnthem and Kaiser 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/09/23/colorado-amendment-69-coloradocare/>, 
which helped finance the opposition campaign.

Rejected: A California health proposal that received national attention thanks 
to an endorsement fromUS senator Bernie Sanders 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/essential/la-pol-ca-essential-politics-updates-bernie-sanders-campaigns-for-prop-61-in-1478559924-htmlstory.html>
 ultimately failed to earn enough votes. The state rejected Proposition 61, 
which would have restricted California from spending more on prescription drugs 
than the prices paid by the US Department of Veteran Affairs.

Opponents had spent $109m against the proposition 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/11/08/bernie-sanders-thinks-this-state-ballot-measure-to-rein-in-drug-prices-could-spark-a-national-movement/>
, which the pharmaceutical industry strongly opposed. Sanders had said he hopes 
the measure wouldspark a national movement 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/prop-61-california-drug-prices-pharmaceutical-industry-2016-11>
 to lower drug prices.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F028b143681afb184c90f44e84429544ddaef182d%2F0_172_5211_3128%2F5211.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F028b143681afb184c90f44e84429544ddaef182d%2F0_172_5211_3128%2F5211.jpg>
 Colorado is voting on a single-payer healthcare system, and California is 
voting on prescription drug prices. Photograph: Voisin/Phanie/Rex/Shutterstock 
Guns <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gun-control>

Approved: Washington state passed the first gun control ballot measure of the 
night, with the approval of Initiative 1491, which allows courts to issue 
protection orders to remove an individual’s access to firearms, such as 
domestic abusers.

Approved: California voters followed suit, passing a proposal 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-pol-ca-nra-initiative-20161009-snap-story.html>
 thatrequires 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/2016/09/22/california-gun-control-measure-backed-by-wide-margin-of-voters-new-poll-shows/>
 people buying ammunition to undergo background checks and outlaws possession 
of high-capacity ammunition magazines.

Approved: Nevada voters narrowly passed a measure to expand background checks, 
requiring that firearm transfers go through a licensed dealer. The proposal 
exempts transfers between immediate family members.

Rejected: Gun control advocates were dealt a major blow in Maine with the 
narrow defeat of Question 3, a measure that called for universal background 
checks. The proposal was supported by billionaire Michael Bloomberg and would 
have been abig victory for gun safety groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/05/gun-control-reform-maine-hillary-clinton-nra>
 in a state that has traditionally supported gun rights.

Homelessness <https://www.theguardian.com/society/homelessness>

Approved: A group of San Francisco’s tech billionaires and millionaires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/san-francisco-homeless-proposition-q-tech-investors>
 successfully passed a measure to ban tents that homeless people use to sleep 
on the street. Opponents have slammed Proposition Q – funded by venture 
capitalist Michael Moritz, angel investor Ron Conway and hedge fund manager 
William Oberndorf – as a cruel proposal that further criminalizes homeless 
people without providing new funding for housing or services. Critics have also 
pointed out that local shelters have long waitlists for beds and that city 
workers already conductregular sweeps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/01/sf-homeless-camp-razed-long-term-solution>
 of homeless encampments.

Approved: In Los Angeles, another city that has struggled with a homeless 
epidemic, voters approved a measure that creates a $1.2bn investment over 10 
years to support housing and programs through the issuance of bonds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe76fccc5d269638b913f4e9be4b60a5f4fe47571%2F0_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%2C%20Nevada%20and%20Massachusetts%20vote%20to%20legalize%20recreational%20marijuana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstate-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe76fccc5d269638b913f4e9be4b60a5f4fe47571%2F0_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Both San Francisco and Los Angeles have high-profile measures aimed to tackle 
homelessness in the west. Photograph: Frederic J. Brown/AFP/Getty Images 
Other initiatives

Rejected: California voted against Proposition 60, a controversial proposal 
that would have required pornography performers to wear condoms during film 
shoots.Performers opposed the measure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/18/porn-tasha-reign-california-condom-law-proposition-60>
, arguing thatindustry testing protocols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/18/california-porn-industry-safety-regulations-rejected-condoms>
 are effective and that the proposal would have opened the door for private 
citizens to file lawsuits against producers and actors.

Approved: Indiana and Kansas both passed so-called “right to hunt” measures on 
Tuesday by wide margins.

Those victories are part of an ongoing movement to enshrine a constitutional 
right to hunt and fish. Since 1996,18 states 
<https://ballotpedia.org/Right_to_hunt_and_fish_movement> have amended their 
constitutions to establish hunting and fishing as inalienable rights.

The measures are politically popular, even though critics have argued 
<http://www.journalgazette.net/opinion/editorials/Exercise-your-right-to-vote%20%E2%80%93%20no%20%E2%80%93%2015628014>
 that there are no legitimate threats to hunting or fishing.
 