
The UK’s highest phone box has been saved, after a successful community 
campaign to stopBT <https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> scrapping the 
Cairngorm “lifeline”.

The traditional red phone box, which sits 2,150 ft up Cairngorm at the skiing 
base station, is an iconic feature at the resort. But after the resort ranger 
found a note from BT inside it, saying it was to be scrapped to save money, 
locals have been fighting to save the UK’s highest payphone, claiming it not 
only serves as a popular tourist attraction, but is a vital lifeline for those 
on the mountain.

In a statement, BT said it listens carefully to any community concerns and, in 
light of those raised through the local planning authority, “will not remove 
the payphone”.

Among the groups to voice its opposition to BT’s plans was Aviemore & Vicinity 
Community Council, which had decided to formally object to its removal. “We 
felt it should be retained on safety grounds, but that it should only be 
available for 999 emergency calls,” said chairman John Grierson.

“Mobile phones do work in the area, but not everybody has one – or, after a 
long day on the hill, their battery is run down.”

Natural Retreats <http://www.cairngormmountain.org/natural-retreats/>, which 
operates the CairnGorm Mountain resort, had also backed the campaign by urging 
people to register their protest with Highland Council. The company describes 
the phone box as “a potentially life-saving tool”.

Mountaineering Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> had echoed 
this view, agreeing that public payphones can be a “lifeline” and urged the 
Highland Council to push BT to retain those located in areas of interest to 
mountaineers.

Speaking to UK Climbing 
<http://www.ukclimbing.com/news/item/70732/proposed_removal_of_highland_payphones_consultations_begin>
, chief executive officer of Mountaineering Scotland David Gibson said: “The 
closure of these payphones could result in a risk to life, if those involved in 
a mountaineering accident seek urgent contact with the police and mountain 
rescue.”

The campaign to save the phone box followed an announcement from BT that it 
plans to remove thousands of phone boxes across Scotland. It says that 700 of 
the boxes were not used for a single call last year.

According to BT, just five calls had been made from the Cairngorm mountain 
phone box in the same period. Each phone box costs £310 to maintain annually.

A spokesman said: “BT is committed to providing a public payphone service but, 
with usage declining by over 90% in the last decade, we’ve continued to review 
and remove payphones which are no longer needed. Any removal of payphones is 
carried out in strict adherence to the Ofcom guidelines and, where appropriate, 
with the consent of local planning authorities.”

 * This story was updated on 21 October 2016 after BT stated it would not be 
removing the phone box  