
Are the novelist Anthony Powell and the actor Danny Dyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-dyer> related? The biology has yet to 
be checked, but the evidence is compelling. Spiritually, at least, these two 
are blood brothers, intimately linked. Both are entertainers, both are fans of 
the pithy putdown (Powell: “His mastery of the hard-luck story was of a kind 
never achieved by persons not wholly concentrated on themselves”; Dyer: “Mate, 
you look like an earthworm who’s whacked a hoodie on”). And both are raging 
snobs. For Powell, lineage was of paramount importance, Burke’s Peerage his 
favourite book. Between writing, he devoted his studies to his own ancestry. 
The pedigree of others determined his attitude to them, from aristo pals to the 
postman. For all, he endeavoured to trace their descent back as far – and as 
posh – as possible.

Who Do You Think You Are? review – arise, King Danny Dyer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/25/danny-dyer-who-do-you-think-you-are>
Ditto Dyer. He wanted, he explained on his recent appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/14/danny-dyer-related-two-kings-thomas-cromwell-eastenders-william-the-conqueror-edward>
 onWho Do You Think You Are? 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b083wt14/ad/who-do-you-think-you-are-series-13-1-danny-dyer>
, to uncover a dead relative either landed or minted or even more famous than 
he was. He got the jackpot. On learningThomas Cromwell was his 15 times 
great-grandfather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/25/danny-dyer-who-do-you-think-you-are>
, Dyer was swift to point out their spooky parallels: self-starters, from the 
suburbs, raised by a single parent, a bit cheeky. “I’ve got his blood running 
through my veins,” said Dyer. “That excites me a lot.” When he found he could 
also claim a couple of kings as family, he had to take a moment; charmingly 
overwhelmed, oddly vindicated.

But of all the attributes Dyer and Powell share, their eagerness to claim 
celebrity roots is perhaps the least singular. Rather, it appears appallingly 
common: interest and belief in genetic inheritance are on the up. The current 
series of Who Do You Think You Are? is the 13th. Shows such as The Crown or 
Downton Abbey, which shore up the hereditary-dependent system by which our 
country is ruled (despite the monarchy’s disappointing reluctance to prove 
their claim through DNA tests), are wildly popular.

Hollywood has long been keen on high-stakes daddy issues; Star Wars’s paternal 
punchline concerns thelineage of a lord. 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Darth_Vader> And even the swankiest special 
effects can’t shift it from centre stage. This Christmas comesAssassin’s Creed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/may/12/assassins-creed-trailer-analysis-michael-fassbender>
, a very snazzy video-game adaptation in which Michael Fassbender is plugged 
into a machine by Jeremy Irons so he can “hear and feel the memories of your 
ancestor who’s been dead 500 years” (for world-saving purposes, rather than 
historical immersion). “We are avatars of our ancestors,” explains Irons’s 
scientist daughter, Marion Cotillard – who, with appropriate kit, “can relive 
the lives of those who made us who we are”.

It’s easy to see why such sentiments are attractive. You can fob off the 
foibles and embrace the great. Caught sleeping around? Sorry, love, that’s just 
my genetic programming. Think the world has stopped you fulfilling your 
potential? Point to the impressive achievements of a great-great-granny as 
proof. You can dodge responsibility and revel in glory you haven’t had the 
faff of actually earning. The motivation is not investigative but narcissistic; 
what we want most is to be reassured of our specialness.

But there is a problem. In part it’s because this is an industry built on 
hopes and dreams and shaky data. Another BBC show,Radio 4’s More or Less, did a 
brutal debunk job on Dyer’s discoveries 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04jzfx7>, exposing the flaws of this sort of 
pick-and-mix selectivity (bottom line: it’s quite rare to not be related to 
Edward III). Earlier this week science writerAdam Rutherford told BuzzFeed 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/tomchivers/this-dna-ancestry-company-is-telling-its-customers-mostly-to?utm_term=.na3RX5M8j#.ekMoPAja9>
 that the findings of one genetic testing company, BritainsDNA, were “mostly 
total bollocks”. Such outfits request phlegm and a cheque, and in return post 
back a gratifyingly exciting ancestry. One client was told their forebears 
“almost certainly brought to Britain a technology that changed society 
profoundly”. This technology was porridge.

But the stickiest issue is that invoking your genes in defence of behaviour 
now goes against almost everything we are supposed to believe. If you maintain 
your bloodline has conditioned aspects of your personality and performance, you 
must also be open to theories about inherited characteristics that are today 
deemed extremely dubious. Investment in our backstories is bad news for anyone 
who believes that, say, a lack of social mobility is more attributable to 
wealth inequality and government policy than the ways in which traits might be 
passed on through the generations. Murkier waters aren’t far off. Our culture 
risks steering us in a wholly different direction to that which even the 
limpest progressives must hope. In A Woman of No Importance, Oscar Wilde called 
Burke’s Peerage “the best thing in fiction the English have ever done”. We need 
to heed that description, lest we turn back the clock and make it a set text.
 