
As the NHS sinks ever deeper into financial crisis, and the search for 
efficiencies intensifies, it is unsurprising that the idea of harnessing the 
digital revolution to the way healthcare is delivered is gathering policy 
steam. Notwithstanding the spectacular top-downfailure of the NHS National 
Programme for IT 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/news/npfit-report/>
 and thedisappointing results <http://www.bmj.com/content/346/bmj.f1035> of the 
national Whole System Demonstrator programme, it is entirely reasonable to 
revisit the ways in which advances in technology might offer smart solutions.


Currently the policy landscape is littered with strategies, reports and 
evolving structures. The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, says the NHS must “go 
paperless” – by 2020 according to the Five Year Forward View; a national 
information board has been set up to deliver on this commitment; the air is 
thick with centrally-driven frameworks like the digital maturity index and 
local digital roadmaps; and a new digital delivery board has been set up by NHS 
England. Meanwhile, the influentialWachter Review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/using-information-technology-to-improve-the-nhs>
 along withweighty reports from the Nuffield Trust 
<http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/publications/delivering-benefits-digital-health-care>
 andthe King’s Fund <http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/digital-nhs> are 
all ratcheting up the pressure for change.

Research suggests that technology can indeed improve the quality of life of 
older people <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26919220> and their carers as 
well as support improvements in the safety and quality of care. Products are 
being developed at an astonishing rate, from low-level gadgets through to 
traditional telecare/telehealth and on to emerging digital technology including 
mobile phones, apps and televideo consultations. The key debate now is not so 
much about what can be done, but about how to put it into practice.

How digital technology will make people powered health a reality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/07/digital-technology-people-powered-health>
Four key issues need to be addressed.


Funding

There is thought to be about £1.3bn earmarked for the “paperless NHS” but 
little clarity over when it will be made available and whether it will be 
ringfenced. The size of the pot is also small for the shift from analogue to 
digital – Bob Wachter estimated a cost of £4.2bn for the secondary care sector 
alone. There is also the issue of allocation, with funding priority to be given 
to advanced organisations whose successes will, it is hoped, trickle down to 
the less advanced. Arguably the jam needs to be spread more thinly.

Stakeholder engagement 

There are two main groups whose engagement needs to be secured – frontline 
staff and end users. Frontline staff are too often seen as passive recipients 
of new technology and are not involved in the development of a system’s 
architecture or user interfaces. Failure to convince them of the virtue of 
change can lead to all manner of resistance strategies arising from inadequate 
understanding, lack of time, challenges to established routines and fears 
around job security.


Users also have to be convinced of the value of using new devices. Technology 
varies in the ways in which it requires engagement and action on the part of 
users. At one end of the spectrum, a telecare system based upon monitoring and 
surveillance may require little more than consent to installation of the 
equipment; at the other it needs active self-monitoring, self-management and 
engagement with the technology and with professionals. Where an active role for 
users is envisaged,issues of digital literacy and resistance come to the fore 
<http://www.tinderfoundation.org/what-we-do/nhs-widening-digital-participation>
, and localities will need robust strategies to maximise technological 
familiarity.

Systems not silos 

Even now the focus of technological development tends to be silo-based – GPs 
have long since invested in their own systems; Wachter only looked at the acute 
sector; non-acute trusts and social care are still out on a limb. Any solution 
for the incompatibility between IT systems used by all the different parts of 
theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is generally only focused on 
communication between hospitals or, at best, between hospitals and GPs. The 
reality for growing numbers of patients is that their “journey” traverses all 
of these sectors and more. Currently, wherever patients present there is little 
or no information on where they have been before or about where they might end 
up subsequently. A more ambitious, system-wide approach is needed.

A future of mobile-centric healthcare could save lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/aug/05/future-mobile-centric-healthcare-save-lives>
Patience 

The danger with all this digital razzmatazz is that too much is expected too 
quickly. Politicians and managers may expect a quick and unrealistic return on 
investment, along with unattainable demands for hard evidence of impact. If no 
such requirements can be met, then hard-pressed decision makers may well be 
reluctant to take a short-term risk for a potential longer-term gain. It is up 
to NHS England to construct a more realistic timeline for investment and change.


Wachter’s main conclusion is that using technology entails both technical and 
adaptive change – while the technology is knowable, what is less well 
understood is the requirement for people themselves to change. It is, in short, 
about culture and whole system change. The potential role for technology is not 
one of serving as an optional extra to normal business but rather a new 
paradigm to structure the way healthcare is conceived. This will require much 
more investment and support than is currently on offer.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 