
“I have too much care. I need less care. I am quite capable of leading my own 
care. For those of us with chronic, long-term conditions, self-management is 
the key.”

That was Carrie Grant, judge and vocal coach on TV talent shows and one of the 
on-stage hosts atExpo 2016 <https://www.england.nhs.uk/expo/>. She has Crohn’s 
disease, which causes inflammation of the digestive system, and is one of15 
million people 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/time-to-think-differently/trends/disease-and-disability/long-term-conditions-multi-morbidity>
 in England who live with at least one long-term condition, including almost 
six in 10 people aged 60 or over.


If the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and social care system is 
to survive in its present form, and is to be able to afford the innovations on 
show at Expo, then people like Grant will have to do much more to monitor and 
medicate their own conditions. Yet too often the system assumes they need a 
service.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhealth-care-deliver-changes-keep-public-on-side%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa616ef3e858027a21e6961959c06e55803d8dbda%2F0_440_3600_4500%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20health%20and%20care%20deliver%20changes%20and%20keep%20the%20public%20on%20side%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhealth-care-deliver-changes-keep-public-on-side%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20health%20and%20care%20deliver%20changes%20and%20keep%20the%20public%20on%20side%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhealth-care-deliver-changes-keep-public-on-side%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa616ef3e858027a21e6961959c06e55803d8dbda%2F0_440_3600_4500%2F3600.jpg>
 Carrie Grant at Expo 2016. Photograph: Tom Hampson/NHS England 
Jeremy Taylor, chief executive of National Voices 
<http://www.nationalvoices.org.uk>, a coalition of health and care charities in 
England, said he had been deeply impressed by a presentation at Expo bySalford 
Dadz 
<http://www.nhsalliance.org/salford-dadz-building-relationships-better-therapy/>
, a project begun with NHS funding that brings together fathers who might 
otherwise be reluctant to engage with health or other agencies.


“What matters to them is particularly not having another bloody service – they 
want to get out and do stuff,” said Taylor. “Sometimes what’s needed, and has 
the most transformative effect on people’s lives, isn’t something that the NHS 
and social care deliver.”


Such thinking is part of the puzzle being wrestled with by those behind the new
sustainability and transformation plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/stps-local-modernisation-plans-nhs-four-years>
 (STPs) for setting health and care on a sustainable footing. But not everyone 
gets the message – and not many STP teams have yet proved capable of delivering 
it to a sceptical public.


As Sir Bruce Keogh, NHS England’s medical director, argued in opening Expo, 
the paradox facing planners is that many people are defending a system they 
know to be deficient because they are frightened of change. “We are quite 
content with our expectations of our NHS,” he said. “We have to tackle that.”


Keogh warned of a “quadruple pincer” gripping the system: soaring demand for 
care, escalating costs, a funding straitjacket and public nervousness about 
change.

A lethal combination of secrecy and jargon has overshadowed NHS plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/09/lethal-combination-secrecy-jargon-overshadowed-nhs-plans>
Can transformation come soon enough? Jon Rouse, chief officer of the Greater 
Manchester devolved health and care partnership, estimated it would take five 
to 10 years to start to realise the full benefits – though he acknowledged that 
he would in the interim need to demonstrate some early results.


Simon Stevens, NHS England chief executive, offered the cautionary tale of the 
stethoscope, invented 200 years ago this year in France, which was but 
initially resisted fiercely by many doctors but ultimately became 
transformative in medical practice. And he also warned ofAmdahl’s law 
<http://home.wlu.edu/~whaleyt/classes/parallel/topics/amdahl.html>. According 
to this theory, usually applied to computing, transformation of an entire 
system occurs only at the pace of the slowest part to change. “We cannot solve 
this unless we solve the whole process,” said Stevens. “Hence the critical 
importance of the STPs.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 