
“It’s like owning your own newspaper – without the losses.” That’s how Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> described the San 
Francisco-headquartered social media tool in November 2012.

In a little over four years, the celebrity businessman turned president-elect 
has grown hisTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> audience 
from about 2 million followers to almost 19 million, using it as his personal 
Pravda to post propaganda and stream-of-consciousness musings .

His prolific and opinionated 140-character outpourings (“tremendous!”, “very 
unfair!”, “crooked”, “nice”) are amplified by traditional media, reporting on 
hisad hominem attacks 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/458763139866435584> and diplomatic 
gaffes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-questions-us-commitment-to-one-china-policy>
.

For Twitter, it’s been a marketer’s dream: barely a day goes by without TV 
channels, newspapers and websites name-checking the social media platform in 
stories about what @real Donald Trump is posting.

 President-elect Trump promises to Make America Great Again, but could he also 
Make Twitter Great Again?

Twitter had a troubled 2016, with a series of high-profile executives leaving 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/20/technology/twitters-chief-technology-officer-to-leave-company.html>
 the company a s it struggled to attract more users (it s user base has 
plateaued at around 300 million) and suffered from slowing revenue growth.

There were rumours the company might  be sold to Salesforce or Disney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/26/twitter-sale-benefit-buyers-google-disney-salesforce>
, but discussions were not fruitful. Since then the company has been in 
cost-cutting mode, shedding staff and paring back some of its business 
operations, including video-sharing platform Vine.

Now the company could benefit from its most talked-about user’s ascent to the 
White House.

 “Trump is the best thing that ever happened to Twitter,” said analyst Michael 
Pachter, from Wedbush Securities. “It’s likeE.T. eating Reese’s Pieces! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AfAzUAxWELU>” he said, referring to one of the 
earliest examples of product placement.

So keen on the platform is Trump that he’s even using it to announce potential 
policy changes, bypassing the conventions of White House press team filters. 
Despite promising in November tobe “very restrained, if I use it at all” in his 
social media use once 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/11/13/trump-tells-60-minutes-he-will-be-restrained-on-twitter-as-president.html>
 he’s president, Trump has already hinted he’d like tochange decades of policy 
on nuclear weapons 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/811977223326625792> and praised 
Vladimir Putin as “very smart” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
, even after intelligence agencies said Russia tried to influence the US 
election .



Trump hasn’t held a traditional press conference 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/12/donald-trump-mar-a-lago-press-conferences>
 since July 2016, opting instead for combining controlled settings of 
interviews with Twitter, which he views as a way of“fighting back” against 
stories he considers to be inaccurate or bad 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-60-minutes-interview-weighs-twitter-use-as-president/>
.

“This is his way of controlling the news cycle. He’s brilliant at that,” said 
analyst Leigh Drogen, founder and CEO of Estimize.

Trump’s use of the microblogging platform is raw and, for a person of his 
stature, unprecedented – or, to use the term he erroneously tweeted, ‘
unpresidented 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/17/trump-faces-unpresidented-moment-on-twitter.html>
’ .

But it is a huge marketing asset for the tech firm, which is being portrayed 
by Trump and his associates as an influential tool. “You know what? The fact of 
the matter is that when he tweets, he gets results,” Trump’s incoming press 
secretary, Sean Spicer, recently remarked.

The question is, can Twitter convert such a priceless endorsement into 
business success?

“I’ve not yet seen Twitter do anything to market the site to non-users. They 
are failing to exploit an opportunity,” said Pachter. Drogen agrees, citingMark 
Zuckerberg 
<http://thenextweb.com/twitter/2013/11/07/zuckerberg-called-twitter-clown-car-fell-gold-mine/>
 in describing the company as “a clown car that fell into a goldmine”.

“They have never actually grown out of that. They just fell into where they 
are. Trump will keep them relevant but it’s up to Twitter to figure out how to 
appeal to a larger set of people,” Droge said.

He pointed out that because of the lack of effective marketing, most non-users 
of Twitter joke that its purpose is to tell people what you had for breakfast. 
Twitter’s real value, he said, is as a breaking news source and that not all 
users need to post content. “99% of people should just be following news 
sources and celebrities, but Twitter has never really made that connection for 
people.”

Pachter is more hopeful, arguing that having shed most of the company’s 
management team CEO Jack Dorsey now has a “blank slate”.

 “Every person who voted for Trump should be following him on Twitter. Why 
aren’t they marketing it to the RNC?”

The flipside of Trump’s presence on Twitter, however, is the swell of 
harassment on the platform, much of which is fuelled by the pro-Trump 
alt-right. This has led to a number ofhigh-profile departures from the platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/ive-left-twitter-unusable-anyone-but-trolls-robots-dictators-lindy-west>
.

“I think harassment is a problem. There are no consequences for being an 
asshole on Twitter and there should be,” said Pachter, who suggests an 
Uber-style rating system for users, where people would get suspended for the 
site for a short period if they continually got bad scores.

Both Pachter and Drogen are intrigued to see what will happen with the 
@realDonaldTrump account once the president-elect is inaugurated. By that point 
he may be using the official White House@POTUS <https://twitter.com/POTUS> 
Twitter account.

“Normally the president takes a very nuanced view of what he wants to say and 
goes through several levels of filter before it gets out to people,” said 
Drogen.

Trump’s recent tweets do not suggest he is about to adopt a more presidential 
approach to his account.

Drogen believes that once in power, however, the gap between what Trump says 
on Twitter and what he does will become more obvious, particularly when it 
comes to business , where he’s been able to shift financial markets with single 
tweets  
<http://fortune.com/2016/12/13/donald-trump-twitter-lockheed-martin-stock-dump/>
.



“He’s going to keep saying crazy stuff because his brain is connected to 
fingers and fingers are connected to the phone, but I think the market is going 
to discount those things.” He added: “It’s not real policy, it’s literally just 
a dude saying things.”

Perhaps that could be Twitter’s new strapline?
 