
England’s men raced to a seven-wicket victory of extraordinary simplicity 
against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/30/england-new-zealand-world-t20-match-report>
 to send them off to Kolkata for their second WT20 final on Sunday havingwon 
against most people’s expectation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/09/england-won-2010-world-twenty20-cricket>
 in the Caribbean six years ago.

Jason Roy inspires England to World T20 final after win over New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/30/england-new-zealand-world-t20-match-report>
Now either West Indies or the favourites, India, who meet in Mumbai on 
Thursday, will look at England with some apprehension after the way they 
devastated the Kiwis here.

The target of 154 set by New Zealand was not so daunting though it might have 
been tricky but for a brilliant innings of 78 from 44 balls by Jason Roy. This 
was his highest T20 score for England and by the time he was dismissed only 44 
more runs were required.

Roy is not one of those cricketers, who suffers from paralysis by analysis – 
another reason why he is so effective in the shortest format of the game, where 
trusting one’s instincts is often the key to success. “That was pretty cool”, 
he said afterwards. “This seemed far, far away after the first game [when West 
Indies, in the form ofChris Gayle, overwhelmed England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/chris-gayle-hammers-england-with-century-for-west-indies-at-world-t20>
].” Roy’s batting philosophy has a familiar ring to it. “I watch the ball and 
try to hit it, hopefully into the gaps.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fjason-roy-england-world-twenty20-final-new-zealand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdec9bfac0325bde4a20d64764ae92d7aac1d404%2F0_160_2438_1463%2F2438.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carefree%20Jason%20Roy%20promises%20England%20will%20continue%20to%20play%20natural%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fjason-roy-england-world-twenty20-final-new-zealand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carefree%20Jason%20Roy%20promises%20England%20will%20continue%20to%20play%20natural%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fjason-roy-england-world-twenty20-final-new-zealand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdec9bfac0325bde4a20d64764ae92d7aac1d404%2F0_160_2438_1463%2F2438.jpg>
 Jason Roy’s buccaneering batting embodies England’s carefree approach and he 
insists they will not be abandoning that now they are in Sunday’s final. 
Photograph: Pal Pillai-IDI/IDI via Getty Images 
There has been much talk of the fearless, carefree approach of this England 
team and Roy seems to embody it precisely. “The boys were extremely chilled 
about this game. We just try to do what we do in practice. If it works, it 
works, if it doesn’t, it doesn’t. There will be bad days and good days. We are 
not a big talking side. We allow the players to do what they feel is right.”

England did just about everything right on Wednesday. Roy was quick to focus 
upon the excellence of England’s pacemen, who restricted the Kiwi batsmen to 20 
runs in the last four overs of their innings with Ben Stokes and Chris Jordan 
on top of their games.

“They were outstanding,” said Roy. “They gave us the momentum at the end of 
their innings and we carried that on. The bowlers have grown in confidence 
after the Sri Lanka match. It almost seems as if that was a practice session 
now.”

However, Roy made the chase a gentle stroll. He acknowledged that his innings 
was “right up there, pretty special” and that the team “is getting better with 
every game”.

“It will be an incredible experience in Kolkata,” he said. “And we’ll play our 
natural way – just as we have over the last 12 months.” A brief summary of the 
approach included a reference to “all guns blazing”.

World Twenty20 semi-final: England defeat New Zealand – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/mar/30/world-twenty20-semi-final-england-defeat-new-zealand-in-pictures>
For the New Zealanders there was an echo of the last World Cup in this defeat. 
Then, as now, they had played almost flawlessly through the group stages. 
Unfortunately their poorest performance came in a knockout match.

Kane Williamson, who has impressed everyone in the infancy of his captaincy, 
was philosophical afterwards. “Twenty20 can be a fickle game. It was not meant 
to be,” he said. “We were about 25 short but England bowled really well in the 
death period. And Roy was superb. Today we were up against a better team.”

Overall he was proud of the Kiwis’ performance in the tournament, during which 
their spinners had startled opponents at four different venues. The Kiwis had a 
tougher itinerary than England but Williamson was not inclined to complain 
about that.

Did he think that England could win the tournament? He paused and concluded: 
“Yes, I think England can win,” which excited Anglocentric observers who 
respect Williamson’s opinion. But then he added: “I also think anyone of the 
two other teams can win it. It’s whoever turns up on the day. There are a lot 
of uncontrollables but England are a very, very dangerous side, particularly on 
good surfaces.”

On the evidence of Wednesday England will turn up with a spring in their step 
and a determination to continue playing their free-flowing game.
 