
The Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina courted controversy on 
Friday, with atweet <https://twitter.com/CarlyFiorina/status/682999832189911040>
 which expressed support for the Iowa Hawkeyes against the Stanford Cardinals 
in that day’s Rose Bowl.

US presidential election 2016: the state of the Republican race as the year 
begins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/01/us-presidential-election-2016-republican-candidates-donald-trump-ted-cruz-marco-rubio>
“Love my alma mater,” said the former Hewlett-Packard chief executive, who 
graduated from Stanford <http://ecorner.stanford.edu/author/carly_fiorina> in 
1976, “but rooting for a Hawkeyes win today. #RoseBowl.”

Amidst a vituperative reaction on social media – sample reactions included “
Hahaha WTF, you always cheer for your alma mater 
<https://twitter.com/JamesStevenson/status/683003518517526528>” and “This is 
the kind of thinking that contributed to your disastrous reign at HP 
<https://twitter.com/benmeddle/status/683008042493857793>” – many respondents 
pointed to Fiorina’s lowly position in polls of the Republican field in Iowa, a 
key battleground state.


The realclearpolitics.com polling average for the state 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/ia/iowa_republican_presidential_caucus-3194.html>
, which opens the presidential primary season with its caucus on 1 February, 
puts Fiorina joint seventh in the 13-strong field, at 2.3% – 28 percentage 
points behind the leader, Ted Cruz.

In the same website’s national average, Fiorina sits eighth 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/2016_republican_presidential_nomination-3823.html>
, at 2.2%.

Though some political experts had wondered whether such a tweet might be coming
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/673598171788939264>, Republican party 
figures seemed taken by surprise.

The strategist Brian Walsh tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/brianjameswalsh/status/683002724179283968>: “Urgh. Who 
thought this tweet was a good idea?”

“I just groaned so hard I may have pulled a muscle,” tweeted former Michigan 
congressman John Dingell 
<https://twitter.com/JohnDingell/status/683002273128132608?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>.

The Rose Bowl, a traditional showpiece game at the end of the college football 
season, was due to kick-off in Pasadena, California, at 5pm EST. Republican 
presidential politics also intruded into the traditional pre-game parade, at 
which an unidentified skywriter emblazoned the empyrean with the words: “
America is great! Trump is disgusting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/01/trump-is-disgusting-skywriters-rose-parade-california>
.”

Fiorina studied medieval history and philosophy at Stanford, and then took a 
master’s degree in business administration at the University of Maryland. The 
Terrapins finisheda disappointing 3-9 
<http://www.umterps.com/SportSelect.dbml?SPID=120713> and last in the Big Ten 
East <http://www.bigten.org/sports/m-footbl/spec-rel/m-footbl-standings.html> 
this year, sparing Fiorina the temptation of publicly siding against them in 
any bowl game.
 