
Most works of art that cause controversy are by their nature sensational. They 
are sexually graphic, or violent, or politically contentious. Carl Andre’s
Equivalent VIII 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/andre-equivalent-viii-t01534> is 
different. It is the most boring controversial artwork of all time.

Who’s Afraid of Conceptual Art? review – a daft idea is not art
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/20/whos-afraid-conceptual-art-review-daft-idea-not-art>
Tonight BBC4 will rake over the boring controversy about these boring bricks 
one more boring time. But why?Bricks! <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07w6hdm>
 (9pm, BBC4) is part of a season on conceptual art that has ranged fromVic 
Reeves on the Dadaists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/aug/24/why-vic-reeves-is-the-strangest-most-perfect-presenter-for-bbc4s-dada-season>
 toa survey by James Fox <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07w6gkt>. It’s all a 
bit naive, as if the programmers don’t know that Britain has been in the grip 
of conceptual art for some years now – ever heard of the Turner Prize? The most 
baffling idea, however, is to return once more to the 1976 debate about the 
Tate Gallery’s decision to buy Carl Andre’s “pile of bricks”.

One problem is that if you look in your Bluffer’s Guide to Modern Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> you will find that Andre is a 
minimalist, not a conceptual artist: there is a difference. Conceptual art was 
a movement in the late 1960s and 1970s that replaced paintings and sculptures 
with ideas: the art object became a concept, something that could not be bought 
or sold because it was purely intellectual. Equivalent VIII is not immaterial 
in the way conceptual art aspired to be. It is as solid as brick. It is also as 
stupid as brick. If this is “idea art” (another term for conceptual art in the 
1960s), tell me: what is the idea it embodies?

It is not immaterial in the way conceptual art aspired to be. It is as solid 
as brick. It is also as stupid as brick

Equivalent VIII is the very opposite of conceptual art. Instead of airily 
escaping the physical nature of art into a world of thought, it dumbly and 
relentlessly insists on its material reality – and nothing else. Being an 
arrangement of bricks is all this arrangement of bricks does or wants to do. It 
is brute fact. It is there. And that’s that.

Of course, I can see why the BBC thinks it’s worth revisiting the scandal in 
1970s Britain 
<http://www2.tate.org.uk/archivejourneys/historyhtml/people_public.htm> when 
the Tate “spent taxpayers’ money” for a load of bricks. In fact the price paid 
was a princely £2,297. That modest sum didn’t stop the aesthetically 
conservativeBurlington Magazine 
<https://burlingtonindex.wordpress.com/2014/05/13/carl_andre/> and a barrage of 
newspaper articles from attacking the Tate for wasting public money on 
“experimental art.” The controversy anticipated later arguments in Britain 
about Rachel Whiteread’s House, Damien Hirst’s vitrines, and Tracey Emin’s My 
Bed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fcarl-andre-equivalent-viii-bricks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acd4ed0884f26d11e8e1a5665e34daf394396c0%2F0_111_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carl%20Andre's%20Equivalent%20VIII%3A%20the%20most%20boring%20controversial%20artwork%20ever%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fcarl-andre-equivalent-viii-bricks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carl%20Andre%27s%20Equivalent%20VIII%3A%20the%20most%20boring%20controversial%20artwork%20ever%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fcarl-andre-equivalent-viii-bricks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acd4ed0884f26d11e8e1a5665e34daf394396c0%2F0_111_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 ‘No-one should be made to look at it in a gallery’ … Carl Andre’s Equivalent 
VIII, at Tate Modern. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
I just wish the BBC had chosen to focus on one of those later rows – at least 
they were about interesting art. Sharks are fascinating. Bricks are not. The 
controversy was a debate about the value of modern art itself, that could 
equally well have had many other pieces of art as its provocation. 
Unfortunately, the work the scandal magnified is a dry and sterile object that 
the gallery bought for dry academic reasons. Equivalent VIII is a textbook 
illustration of minimal art that should stay in a textbook. No-one should be 
made to look at it in a gallery. WhileDonald Judd 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/judd-untitled-t06524> and Dan Flavin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/aug/28/artsfeatures> take minimalism 
to glorious heights of beauty, looking at Equivalent VIII is a bus ride to 
banality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fcarl-andre-equivalent-viii-bricks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17dd779a63cd57063abefec480625f8c791765fe%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carl%20Andre's%20Equivalent%20VIII%3A%20the%20most%20boring%20controversial%20artwork%20ever%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fcarl-andre-equivalent-viii-bricks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carl%20Andre%27s%20Equivalent%20VIII%3A%20the%20most%20boring%20controversial%20artwork%20ever%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fcarl-andre-equivalent-viii-bricks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17dd779a63cd57063abefec480625f8c791765fe%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 Better than bricks: Damien Hirst in front of his artwork The Physical 
Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living. Photograph: Oli 
Scarff/Getty Images 
I’ve recently taught two Guardian Masterclasses at Tate Modern and, each time, 
Equivalent VIII was a crushing disappointment. It is a work of art that leads 
nowhere, that inspires nothing. (Nearby in Tate Modern’s Switch House you’ll 
find Rachel Whiteread’sgreen resin cast of a floor 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/whiteread-untitled-floor-t07129> – a much 
more emotional, suggestive, spooky work of art.) I can’t believe we’re still 
talking about Equivalent VIII. The tragedy is that a long-ago 1970s row has 
made it somehow necessary for all good aesthetic liberals to defend this minor, 
pedantic, morose triviality.
 