
Carol Hogben, who has died aged 90, was one of the most remarkable museum 
curators of modern times. Based at the Victoria and Albert Museum, he was 
particularly prescient and influential in the fields of design, photography and 
prints, and was an early and important champion ofKenneth Grange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/aug/08/kenneth-grange-interview>
, Henri Cartier-Bresson and David Hockney. His exhibitions and acquisitions 
were on a grand scale. If one phrase could sum him up, it is Keats’s “a fine 
excess”.

Carol’s greatest contribution was as deputy keeper of the V&A’s circulation 
department (the travelling exhibition service) in the 1960s and early 70s. 
Carol ran the “college” side of the operation, which served educational 
institutions and university galleries. He bought contemporary works, because 
that is what college students wanted to see.

Carol was on friendly terms with most of the best artists, architects, 
designers, design writers and craft workers of the time, including Richard 
Hamilton, RB Kitaj, Eduardo Paolozzi, Man Ray,Reyner Banham 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1988/03/22/obituaries/reyner-banham-architectural-critic-dies-at-66.html>
, Bill Brandt andDon McCullin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/may/22/don-mccullin-southern-frontiers-interview>
.

Born in Barnard Castle, County Durham, Carol was the son of Alma (nee Ault), a 
violin teacher, and Eric Hogben, a maths teacher. The family moved south for 
work, and Carol attended St Paul’s school, London. In 1942 he went to Magdalene 
College, Cambridge, to study classics, but this was interrupted by the war and 
service in the Royal Navy, and on his return he read English.

After a brief spell as a personal assistant to the opera company director 
Bridget D’Oyly Carte <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bridget_D%27Oyly_Carte>, 
Carol joined the V&A as an assistant keeper in 1950.

I began working with Carol in 1970 and was impressed by his mile-long 
sentences, his wife, Gool (nee Chothia), a dancer, whom he married in 1950, the
poems he published <https://www.poetryfoundation.org/search?q=Carol+Hogben> in 
Poetry (Chicago) magazine and the wonderful prose he wrote for the museum’s 
exhibition catalogues.

These lines from 1969 for the catalogue Photographs by Henri Cartier-Bresson 
are characteristic: “It is precisely one of the things that distinguishes a 
practitioner of [Cartier-Bresson’s] rank that from looking at a body of his 
work one is able, without any difficulty at all, to apprehend the broad 
qualities of his mind – in this case, his compassion, his hatred of pretence, 
his sense of irony, his care of innocence. It is a mind far nearer to Turgenev, 
shall we say, than to a Toulouse-Lautrec.” That exhibition changed the climate 
of opinion about a medium of which the establishment had hitherto taken a dim 
view.

On the closure of the circulation department in 1977, Carol joined the 
National Art Library, sat on the V&A’s contemporary art archives and 
20th-century steering committees, and acted as the V&A’s liaison officer with 
the Design Council. He retired from the museum in 1986.

In retirement Carol became a seller of second-hand books and filled many gaps 
in the National Art Library holdings.

Gool died in 2003. Carol is survived by their sons, Gavin, Hugh and Allan, his 
grandchildren, William, Tristram and Emily, and brother, Neil.
 