
Stop everything. This is huge. Someone likes Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. Former surgeon Ben Carson 
doesn’t really have a fan club, but the failed presidential candidate wants you 
to know he hearts the brash billionaire.


One can’t help but wonder if everyone who endorses Trump, as Carson did on 
Friday morning, gets a fat bag of cashin exchange for their soul 
<https://vine.co/v/igHFKFWVDnO>. Or maybe they just get a lifetime supply of 
failed Trump products – piles of magazines from the 90s, rotten steaks and 
Virginia wine to serve only to the most annoying guest.


Soon there will be a wall of has-beens standing behind Trump, just like Chris 
Christie did last week. The blank stares of his endorsers are telling. They 
have either lost their souls, or never had one at all. They reveal the state of 
the Republican party today: it, too, is soulless.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Pathological%20and%20lacking%20faith'%3A%20Trump%10%E2%80%99s%20many%20attacks%20on%20Carson%20before%20endorsement%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Pathological%20and%20lacking%20faith%27%3A%20Trump%10%E2%80%99s%20many%20attacks%20on%20Carson%20before%20endorsement%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement&media=>
Ben Carson’s endorsement of Donald Trump comes after months of insults between 
the two candidates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/11/donald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement>
Consider Carson. The surgeon became popular in conservative circles when, 
instead of praying at a prayer breakfast in Washington, he rudely blasted 
President Obama in front of President Obama. It was audacious and ugly – a 
harbinger of things to come in this nasty election cycle.


Carson is known for being the soft-spoken Republican who uses his quiet tongue 
to toss around fiery rhetoric. But there’s little behind his barbs; merely 
anti-Obama angst that’s not thought through. In many ways, he’s the embodiment 
of today’s Republican party.


It wasn’t always like this. Sure, in the good old days, if they ever existed, 
politics was dirty. Nixon had his posse of thugs to do his anti-democratic 
bidding. Even Jefferson and Hamilton had their own partisan presses to taint 
and distort their enemies.


Things have devolved quickly in the Republican party, though. Dirty politics 
have morphed into mindless politics. Even Nixon would be ashamed of what his 
party has become. While he was one of the most petty and paranoid presidents of 
all time, he was smart. He laid out – and carried through with – actual policy.


But today’s Republican party has given us Trump – a bombastic billionaire who 
probably hasn’t read a book since leaving college (though he probably paid 
other students to read for him back then).


His rise is bringing with it all sorts of disturbing developments. This week 
one of Trump’s top staffers reportedly roughed up conservative reporter 
Michelle Fields. If the accusation is true, one wonders why a Trump body man 
would feel the need to physically abuse a reporter. Perhaps because they view 
journalists who dare to question Trump, to try to peel the layers back, as the 
enemy. God forbid they reveal him for being the vacuous reality TV wasteland he 
truly is.


Donald Trump accuses reporter in assault row of 'making the story up'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/donald-trump-reporter-assault-michelle-fields-corey-lewandowski>
Today’s Republican party is at a crossroads: they can reach for a book or two 
and read about their great history – the party of Lincoln and Reagan – or they 
can pop some popcorn and flip on Pawn Stars, wildly hooting and hollering for 
Trump. We know which sideBen Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson> is on. Now, it’s time to see 
where the rest of the Grand Old Party stands.

 