
The casting of a white actor as Martin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> in an Ohio university 
production of Katori Hall’s acclaimed play The Mountaintop was “a disservice to 
not just Dr King but an entire community”, the playwright has said.

Hall wrote an essay for the African American cultural website the Root on 
Monday 
<http://www.theroot.com/articles/culture/2015/11/the_white_version_of_mlk_in_the_mountaintop.1.html>
 about Kent State University’s production of her play, which dramatizes the 
night before King was assassinated in 1968.

Hall told the Guardian that director Michael Oatman’s decision to double-cast 
the six-show production with a black actor and a white actor as King went 
“deeper than just casting a white man in the role of MLK”.

“I just really feel as though it echoes this pervasive erasure of the black 
body and the silencing of a black community – theatrically and also, literally, 
in the world,” she said.

Oatman, who like Hall is black, said in a statement in August promoting the 
play 
<https://www.kent.edu/pas/news/kent-state-pan-african-studies-department-presents-mountaintop>
 that he chose a white actor for the production “to explore the issue of racial 
ownership and authenticity”.

“I didn’t want this to be a stunt, but a true exploration of King’s wish that 
we all be judged by the content of our character and not the color of our 
skin,” Oatman said. “I wanted the contrast … I wanted to see how the words rang 
differently or indeed the same, coming from two different actors, with two 
different racial backgrounds.”

Oatman did not respond to a request for comment, but Hall said she had a 
respectful phone call with the director about a month after he staged the play 
at the university’s Department of Pan-African Studies’ African Community 
Theatre from late September to early October.

She said that Oatman did not discuss the decision to use a white actor with 
her before the play ran and called the decision “disrespectful”.

Hall said she thought that if a director was going to experiment like Oatman 
did, then they should include a discussion with the audience or create another 
forum to measure the success of such an exercise.

“With a playwright’s intention being dangerously distorted, Oatman’s 
experiment proved to be a self-serving and disrespectful directing exercise for 
a paying audience,” Hall wrote.

Hall learned about Oatman’s decision to use a white actor in the production 
after the show had closed. She immediately notified her agent, who contacted 
the theatre licensing service Dramatists Play Service, which then wrote to the 
university questioning its decision.

Since the Kent State University production ran, Hall has adjusted The 
Mountaintop’s licensing agreement to say: “Both characters are intended to be 
played by actors who are African-American or Black. Any other casting choice 
requires the prior approval of the author.”

She said that the issue of representation is a common discussion topic for 
theatremakers of color, but rarely gets attention beyond that community. The 
decision to cast a white man as one of the country’s best-known civil rights 
figures, however, changed that.

“I feel as though a lot of theatremakers were a bit appalled at the choice 
that the director made – and that it was supported so wholeheartedly by the 
institution,” Hall said. “So it was really a moment to talk about playwright 
intention, but to then, beyond that, talk about much bigger issues, about not 
only being a black artist but also being a black person in America.”
 