
“When I read something saying I’ve not done anything as good as Catch-22, I’m 
tempted to reply, ‘Who has?’”Joseph Heller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/josephheller> once said – and it is an 
honest observation.

Total sales of all editions of Catch-22 are now more than 10m, a very large 
number for a novel as complicated, fiercely intelligent, uncompromising in its 
politics and remorseless in its satire as Catch-22.

Catch-22's crazy style reflects the madness of war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/16/catch-22s-crazy-style-reflects-the-madness-of-war>
Sure, Catch-22 is funny, and that explains a lot of its appeal. But as we 
discussed last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/16/catch-22s-crazy-style-reflects-the-madness-of-war>
, many of the jokes are tricky, deceptive and tangled. As is the book’s plot, 
whose structure was brilliantly described by Reading groupcontributor Palfreyman
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/16/catch-22s-crazy-style-reflects-the-madness-of-war#comment-81328363>
:

I think of it as a helix, like the threading on a screw or bolt. Heller keeps 
us circling back to a seeming repetition of incidents and tropes and jokes 
until we get dizzy. But actually, almost imperceptibly, the way a screw goes 
forward even as you are actually turning it clockwise, the plot progresses – so 
that, towards the end, you begin to realise … all the repetitive jokes and 
themes … have been leading up to this.

Yes, the structure of Catch-22 is a wonderful achievement (you can get an idea 
of how hard Heller worked on it by lookingat his handwritten outline 
<https://biblioklept.org/2013/05/15/joseph-hellers-handwritten-outline-for-catch-22/>
) - but it isn’t exactly the kind of thing that you would expect to set 
marketing men’s eyes aflame. So why did Heller’s novel manage to reach so many 
millions?

Partly, to be cynical, its early fame was driven by the brilliant hook 
provided by the notion of a catch-22, as well as a well-judged advertising 
campaign in international newspapers asking: “What’s The Catch?” Heller says as 
much in his 1994 introduction to the novel, where he also puts some of its 
early successes down to “coincidence”: a chain of acquaintances and chance 
conversations led to a review in the Herald Tribune, where the positive 
response in turn led to a review in the New York Times, then a steady 
accumulation of good reviews in the UK – and so on.

But possibly the best insight Heller provides into his creation’s enduring 
success comes again in that 1994 introduction. He tells a story about the time 
he first appeared on a network TV show, where he says that the host confided in 
him afterwards that he’d been posting stickers around the NBC building that 
read: “YOSSARIAN LIVES”. Readers immediatedly cared about Yossarian, and his 
survival. Yossarian is the point of connection and understanding; a strong 
central fulcrum around which the chaos of the novel spins. He’s also that 
universally appealing thing – an old-fashioned hero.

And when I say old-fashioned, I mean old-fashioned: as Reading group 
contributor Swelter has pointed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/09/reading-group-catch-22-by-joseph-heller#comment-81069569>
, there are strong parallels between Yossarian and Achilles. They both stew in 
their tents and refuse to fight. They are both humiliated and oppressed by 
vainglorious and intellectually challenged commanding officers. They are both 
devastated by the death of a friend (Nately in Yossarian’s case, Patroclus for 
Achilles). They both go on a rampage afterwards. Heller himself makes the 
connection explicit. “Who does he think he is – Achilles?” asks Colonel Korn 
when he learns that Yossarian won’t fly any more. We are also told, pointedly, 
that Korn is “pleased with the simile”.

A writer called Leon Golden was so taken with these connections that he even 
wrote an insightful (and surprisingly enjoyable) book on the subject called 
Achilles and Yossarian. He managed to talk to Heller, who told him that the 
Iliad was very much on his mind when he wrote Catch-22 - but he “tried hard to 
avoid specific allusions”. But there is a key difference between the two men, 
as Heller explained; Achilles undergoes a kind of moral revolution following 
the death of Patroclus – but Yossarian “never loses his ability for 
compassionate interaction with other humans”. The first sentence of Catch-22 
is: “It was love at first sight.” Yossarian is not motivated by revenge like 
Achilles; instead he has his “heart cracked” by compassion.

In 1962, Phillip Toynbee wrote in his Observer review of Catch-22 about a “man 
of deep and urgent compassion whose raging pity is concerned with the nature of 
human existence itself”. He was actually referring to Heller, but it could 
easily be about Yossarian. Writing at the same time, an anonymous reviewer for 
a magazine called Daedalus also said that Yossarian “follows a fashion in 
spitting indiscriminately at business and the professions, at respectability, 
at ideals, at all visible tokens of superiority”. The reviewer was actually 
trying to damn the novel, but it might as well be praise; an inversion Heller 
would have enjoyed, one hopes. And it explains why Yossarian’s kept a lasting 
grip on our collective psyche; he’s the ultimate moral rebel. To object to him 
would be to put yourself on the side of stuffed shirts, those who kill for 
profit and in the name of absurd patriotism. Small wonder that so many millions 
have decided to take Yossarian’s side.
 