
An American archbishop who is famous for taking a stand against incoming 
Republican vice-presidentMike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence> said the Roman Catholic church 
would be challenged over the next four years to fulfill its priority of helping 
refugees and migrants resettle in America.

But Joseph Tobin, who will formally be promoted to the position of cardinal on 
Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/pope-francis-rejects-rightwingers-with-us-cardinals-appointment-archbishop-blase-cupich>
, told the Associated Press in an interview that he was hopeful that the church 
“will meet the challenge”.

The remarks by a man who is very much aligned with Pope Francis’s own 
priorities – from welcoming immigrants to environmentalism – suggests that the 
church could soon take on a much more active and vocal role in opposition to 
anti-immigrant and anti-refugee policies adopted by the incoming Republican 
administration.

What might Trump's deportations look like? 'A system that defies imagination'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/donald-trump-deportations-undocumented-immigrants>
In an interview with 60 Minutes after his election, Donald Trump said he was 
prepared todeport 2 million to 3 million undocumented migrants who are involved 
in gangs, drugs or other crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/donald-trump-deportations-undocumented-immigrants>
, whether they have been convicted or not. He also did not rule out deporting 
millions more once the US has “secured” its border with Mexico and built a wall 
along its southern border.

Francis’s unexpected decision to elevate Tobin – who was serving as archbishop 
in Indianapolis but is now being moved to Newark, New Jersey – came one year 
after the Michigan nativechallenged a decision by Indiana’s governor, Pence, to 
block Syrian refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/syrian-refugee-families-arrive-texas-indiana>
 who were resettling in the state.

Tobin took on the now vice-president-elect – a Catholic who converted to 
extremely conservative evangelical protestantism in his early 20s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/04/vp-nominees-tim-kaine-mike-pence-catholic>
 – and prevailed. Tobin’s archdiocese settled more than 52 refugees last year. 
Tobin told the Associated Press that the church had been involved in such work 
for more than a century but that continuing it over the next four years would 
be “challenging”.

He added: “The ethical reflection of a nation isn’t reduced to the government 
... I have a lot of faith in the American people.”

Trump’s election can be seen as a repudiation of Pope Francis’s agenda and 
vision for the world, from his call for protection of the environment, to 
greater acceptance and integration of migrants and refugees. Despite that fact, 
white Catholic voters supported Trump, even though Francis once said the 
incoming president’s views about building a wall on the Mexican border were 
“not Christian”.

At the time, Trump called the pope’s remarks “disgraceful” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/18/donald-trump-pope-francis-christian-wall-mexico-border>
.

Kaine and Pence: two Catholic-inspired visions with little else in common
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/04/vp-nominees-tim-kaine-mike-pence-catholic>
In his interview with the Associated Press, Tobin seemed to give Pence the 
benefit of the doubt. “I’d like to believe that the governor himself felt 
caught, because I think that there was an overarching political interest in 
this thing, the governors banding together against the administration. And I 
think Governor Pence, who takes hisChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> seriously, felt conflicted by 
it.”

While Tobin is seen as a progressive archbishop, immigration is also a concern 
for traditionalists in the church. Earlier this week, US bishops elected José 
Gómez of Los Angeles, a conservative Mexican-born archbishop, as vice-president 
of the US bishops conference.

While the choice reflected Gómez’s popularity and devotion to traditional 
doctrine, Vatican journalist John Allen said the election of a man who is 
“passionate about immigrant rights” could also be read as a “powerful statement 
of priorities” by the American Catholic church.


“The defense of immigrants has emerged in recent years as an increasingly 
critical priority [for US bishops] – in part because they see it as a critical 
human rights priority that’s very much in sync with the agenda of Pope Francis, 
and in part because those immigrants also tend to be members of the bishops’ 
own flocks, since they’re disproportionately Catholic,” Allenwrote in a recent 
article on the Crux news site 
<https://cruxnow.com/analysis/2016/11/15/gomez-us-bishops-make-clear-pro-immigrant-statement/>
, a Catholic publication.

The bishops released a statement on Monday saying they were “ready to work 
with a new administration to continue to ensure that refugees are humanely 
welcomed without sacrificing our security or our core values as Americans. A 
duty to welcome and protect newcomers, particularly refugees, is an integral 
part of our mission to help our neighbors in need.”
 