
Tunskeen, Dumfries and Galloway

It all started here in Galloway Forest Park, not far from the Merrick, 
southern Scotland’s highest mountain. Tunskeen was one of many isolated old 
farmhouses around Britain. From the early 1900s, and particularly after the 
first world war, changes in agricultural practices meant these stone buildings 
were abandoned. But because they were unlocked, intrepid climbers and walkers 
would stay in them, not always with the landowners’ permission. In 1965, a 
bunch of outdoor enthusiasts, led by a Yorkshireman called Bernard Heath, came 
together to restore the one-room house, which was rapidly being lost to the 
elements, and the modern bothy was born.
• Further details 
<http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/bothy-details.asp?bothy_id=82>

Kershopehead, Cumbria

Close to the borders with Scotland and Northumberland, deep in the Kielder 
Forest, lies what appears to be an old two-storey farmhouse. Look more closely 
and you’ll realise that half of it is merely a shell, with only the holes for 
windows, brick walls and a roof remaining. But inside, amazingly, there’s a 
beautiful sitting room with comfy chairs, a solid fuel fire and a little 
library of outdoor books and magazines.
• Further details 
<http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/bothy-details.asp?bothy_id=90>

Dulyn, Snowdonia

Wales’s highest mountain attracts headlines and crowds, but a few miles to the 
north, the Carneddau mountains are very different. This more rounded cluster of 
peaks offers heather-clad grassland and winding rivers, all ripe for a 
crowd-free hiking experience. Tucked away among its boulders and rocks is Dulyn 
Bothy, an old shepherd’s hut near the lip of a reservoir. At this popular 
two-roomed abode, like-minded wilderness lovers spend the evening sharing 
stories by the fire.
• Further details 
<http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/bothy-details.asp?bothy_id=98>

The Schoolhouse, Sutherland

This bothy is unusual in that it wasn’t used for farming but had another use 
entirely – a classroom. In the early 20th century, to ensure that children in 
the far-flung corners of the Scottish Highlands received an education, local 
authorities constructed buildings like this one to serve as schoolhouses. It 
sits a few metres from the banks of the Einig river and when it was in full 
spate, the pupils’ journey here would have been quite arduous. The teacher 
would probably have lived in one of the building’s three rooms, and some old 
school desks remain for visitors to sit at while they record their adventure in 
the visitors’ book.
• Further details 
<http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/bothy-details.asp?bothy_id=7>

Blackburn of Corrieyairack, Great Glen

East of the Great Glen – the connecting series of lochs that slice Scotland in 
two – lie the lonely Monadhliath mountains. And running along the edge of this 
range, is a 40km military road built in the 1700s. Now a rough and rock-strewn 
path, it’s a registered ancient monument and open only to foot traffic. Follow 
it south from Fort Augustus and you’ll spy the green tin roof of this old 
stalker’s hut. A one-room affair, it has an open fireplace and a collection of 
books.
• Further details 
<http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/bothy-details.asp?bothy_id=40>

Taigh Seumas a’ Ghlinne, Highlands

This was the birthplace of a man called James Stewart, aka James of the Glen, 
who was tried and hanged in November 1752 for the murder of a man from a rival 
clan – a crime he maintained until his death that he did not commit. Standing 
on the scaffold, he recited a psalm, distraught that history would remember him 
as a murderer. The story inspired many – including Robert Louis Stevenson, 
whose novel Kidnapped is based on the tale. As recently as 2008 a petition to 
get a pardon for him was thrown out because it was so long ago. Hikers can soak 
up a little of this history while sitting in front of the fire in his former 
one-room homestead.
• Further details 
<http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/bothy-details.asp?bothy_id=71>

Greg’s Hut, north Pennines

To some walkers the Pennines is defined by its limestone pavements; to others 
its millstone grit edges; but for many its major feature is the seemingly 
endless stretches of boggy moorland. And none feels more endless than that 
around the mountain known as Cross Fell, in eastern Cumbria. A visit to this 
peak, with its infamously changeable weather, can be made more comfortable with 
a stop at this former mineworkers’ hostel. Its renovation was funded by the 
friends of one John Gregory, following his death while climbing in Switzerland. 
The two-room hut is now used each year by hundreds of walkers, shepherds and 
the Penrith Mountain Rescue Team.
• Further details 
<http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/bothy-details.asp?bothy_id=86>

Camasunary, Isle of Skye
 The old Camasunary bothy 
In the south of the most accessible of the Inner Hebrides, and a three-mile 
walk from the nearest town, is a beautiful bay where mountain and sea combine 
spectacularly. It’s called Camasunary and its beach offers views of islands 
including the dramatic stump-like Eigg and the rocky rump of Rum. Set back from 
the sand, this an old stone bothy has been open for walkers for the past 30 
years. However, 1km to the east, something special is happening. For the first 
time in the history of the MBA, a brand-new shelter is being built from scratch 
to replace it, paid for by the landowner. The old building will be taken back 
by the estate but the new, modern, insulated bothy should be open by the end of 
the year, offering money-can’t-buy views – for free.
• Further details 
<http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/bothy-details.asp?bothy_id=19>

Staying in a bothy is basically wild camping indoors. They cannot be booked, 
it’s a case of turning up and hoping there’s space (half the fun!), so you’ll 
need to take a tent or bivvy bag with you just in case. Some have raised 
sleeping platforms, at others you may have to sleep on the floor so take a good 
camping mat and warm sleeping bag. There’s no kitchen or running water but 
there’s nearly always a stream nearby so take a bottle or container to collect 
it – you’ll also need to take a camping stove to boil it (to sterilise it). 
Toilets are a welcome rarity but there will always be a shovel (dig a hole at 
least 200m from the bothy and 50m from any path and watercourse). Take your own 
tissue and a bag to carry out all waste.

Phoebe Smith’s guide, The Book of the Bothy, is published by Cicerone, price 
£12.95. Until the end of October, Guardian readers can get a 25% discount by 
visitingcicerone.co.uk  
<http://www.cicerone.co.uk/product/detail.cfm/book/756/title/the-book-of-the-bothy#.Vgp9xCpVhBc>
and entering the code BothyG25 at checkout. To donate to or join the MBA go to
moutainbothies.org.uk <http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/>

 