
THE TIN-POT TEST MATCH SPECIAL

It is not the looks. I can deal with the looks. Head dipped, eyebrow cocked, 
corners of the mouth turned down. It is the tone of voice that gets me. The 
mewling "poor you". That's what grates. I hear it a lot at this time of year, 
whenever I explain that I'll be spending most of my winter up all night, alone 
in an office, watching the Ashes.Barney Ronay recently wrote a poetic piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/nov/15/cricket-night-time-tv-ashes>
 in which he waxed lyrical about the lullaby-like effects of the washed out 
blues and greens of the southern hemisphere summer as seen through his 
television screen. The "overnight" Ashes. A source of pleasure for him, but of 
suffering for me. And if the sympathy offered by others irritates, it is only 
because it chimes with my own self-pity, which, as regular readers will know, I 
strive to disguise.

Barney, so far as I know, has never worked the 2am shift on the Perth Test. 
Never been untimely ripp'd from his bed to take the long, slow trudge through 
the freezing streets of King's Cross, made the soul-sapping stop at the petrol 
station to scrabble around among the scotch eggs in search of more something 
more substantial. A candy bar, a falling star, or a reading from Dr Seuss. He 
has never had to flail his arms around his head because the office lights are 
rigged to respond to motion and nothing, not even a church mouse, is stirring. 
He has never thought "sod it", and just decided to sit there in the dark 
instead. Listen hard. That's not your computer whining, it is a tiny violin 
playing the sad song of the lonely OBO writer.

It is all Sean Ingle's fault, though Lawrence Booth has to take his share of 
the blame too. In 2002 they decided to start providinglive text coverage of 
England's Test series against India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2002/jul/25/cricket.indiainengland2002>. 
After a perfunctory preamble, which revealed that a Welsh whippersnapper named 
Simon Jones was going to make his debut, the first entry suggested that "it was 
a glorious day and a good batting track", so "England will be looking for a big 
score today". The second entry, inevitably, began "Zaheer Khan strikes! England 
are 0–1". And so it started.

The first email came soon after, from Scott Murray, who, surprisingly, must 
have had nothing better to do at work that day. The second email was from an 
incredulous member of the public who wondered whether the Guardian was going to 
resort to providing live text coverage of "100m sprints, snooker, darts or 
anything else even more bizarre". All of which have since come to pass. Nothing 
though, has worked quite as well as cricket. We've had two books,Is It Cowardly 
to Pray for Rain? 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=5038495026101>
 and766 and All That 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571277810>
, branded T-shirts, mugs,thongs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/aug/14/over-by-over-reports-ashes>,
songs <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S5PfCPQnJc4>, and a few hundred thousand 
readers. Wait. A double-take. Thongs? Yes,thongs 
<http://www.cafepress.com/theobo.401718969>. No doubt we sold dozens of those.

Sharp-eyed readers will have spotted that the 10th anniversary of the first 
OBO came and went last year, passing unmarked in all the excitement around the 
Olympics. It is, in its own little way, something of an institution, a tin-pot 
Test Match Special, and while it may one day be superseded by online video 
streams, it is, for the moment, still the first thing that people ask me about 
when they discover what I do for a living.

Consider this, then, a belated commemoration, appropriately late given that 
we've never been noted for our punctuality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/jan/21/cricket.englandinsouthafrica2004052>
. And, if you'll excuse the self-indulgence, the OBO does seem worth 
celebrating. In 2002 the only other online commentaries were provided by 
Cricinfo, which were then dusty-dry, noting nothing more than how many runs had 
been scored off each ball. The difference between the two styles was best 
exemplified by Murray's memorable commentaryduring a match between New Zealand 
and India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/mar/14/cricketworldcup2003.overbyoverreports>
, which caused the Daily Mail to run an article on the "ranter of the guardian" 
the next day, and others to wonderwhether the site had been hacked 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2003/03/14/guardian_cricket_scribe_hacks_self/> 
or ask if he had had a nervous breakdown. "If he's like this all the time, how 
the blazes do Guardian readers find out what's going on in the cricket?" Well, 
quite.

A decade later, everyone is at it, including the Mail. The BBC have an 
equivalent, and most of the English newspapers and news sites have long-since 
launched their own version of the OBO. Imitation is flattery and all that, but 
frankly we'd rather have royalties. Sadly, no one ever thought to try and 
copyright the concept. If we had it would have helped during the legal wrangle 
with the ICC in 2007, when it insisted we were infringing on its rights 
holders' territory.

The authorities came around in the end. Giles Clarke, chairman of the ECB, 
says he is a reader. Which puts him in good company. The OBO audience 
encompasses all sorts, from ex-pat archeologists to philosophy professors to 
poets to players. I treasure the email we got from Michael Holding complaining 
that the uniform he wore while he was playing World SeriesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> was coloured "coral, not pink", 
just as much as the one Adam Foulds sent correcting someone else's 
misconceptions about John Donne's poetry. The OBO is a little like spending a 
day at the Test, chit-chatting about this and that with the fans around you in 
the ground.

And that's it really. The writers have had their moments, my erstwhile mucker 
Rob Smyth more of them than I can count <http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Rob_Smyth>
, but, if the Guardian's OBO is any better or more successful than anyone 
else's, it is because of the community of readers around it. There is, in a 
small school outside Jalalabad,a cricket pitch which was paid for with their 
cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/mar/21/afghanistan-cricket-pitch-guardian>
. Last season a group of them, strangers all, got together to go on tour in 
Tallinn, their only link being that they all loved cricket and had, on 
occasions,sent in emails to the OBO <http://oboccasionals.weebly.com/>. And if 
that seems a sizeable commitment to make on the basis of a mutual love of a 
text commentary service, it is nothing in comparison to the story of the two 
readers who met at an OBO drinks eveningand ended up marrying each other 
<http://thememoryblog.com/2012/03/31/its-not-my-fault/>. It's almost enough to 
make the 2am starts seem worthwhile. Almost.

• This is an extract from the Spin, the Guardian's free weekly cricket email. 
To sign up, click here <https://id.theguardian.com/email/list?guni>.
 