
Central American migrants are suffering from record levels of mental health 
problems, amid a rise in violent attacks after a US-sponsored immigration 
crackdown forced them to use more perilous routes throughMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>.


Two-thirds of migrants interviewed at shelters across the country reported 
suffering at least one violent attack – such as assault, rape or kidnapping – 
during their journey, according to a survey conducted byMédecins Sans Frontières
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/medecins-sans-frontieres> (MSF) and shared 
exclusively with the Guardian.

MSF runs three clinics in Mexico, providing care to injured and traumatized 
migrants with a team of doctors, psychologists and social workers.

Nine out of 10 migrants seen by MSF psychologists this year showed symptoms of 
anxiety or depression caused by violence and threats suffered during the 
journey – a three-fold increase since 2014.

Central American migrants desperate to reach US risk new dangers at sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/15/migrants-mexico-human-trafficking-us-immigration-crackdown>
The increase in violence against Central American migrants in Mexico is 
largely down to the Southern Border Plan, an immigration clampdown launched in 
July 2014 after a surge of unaccompanied minors and families at the US border.

American aid supported the deployment of thousands of Mexican troops to patrol 
alongside immigration agents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/04/mexico-deports-record-numbers-women-children-central-america>
. Checkpoints were set up along established migrant routes, forcing people to 
take even greater risks on their journey north.

Instead of traveling through southern Mexico by catching a ride on top of a 
freight train known as “La Bestia” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/23/migrants-mexico-train-the-beast-fleeing-poverty>
, most now journey by bus, on foot or by sea along isolated routes where armed 
bandits, kidnappers and human traffickers operate with almost total impunity.

“Since the Southern Border Plan, it’s much harder for us to reach people, but 
the level of violence is even higher than before,” Bertrand Rossier, MSF’s head 
of mission in Mexico, told the Guardian. “We’re concerned about the 
humanitarian impact of the plan.”

Mariano Martínez, 39, from El Salvador, is receiving medical and psychological 
treatment in MSF’s Mexico City clinic.

Martínez was stripped and robbed at gunpoint in August on the outskirts of 
Chahuites, Oaxaca, where rising numbers of migrants have been violently 
attacked in the past two years. Most arrive here on foot from Arriaga, a 
12-hour walk through isolated orchards and forests; before the Southern Border 
Plan they sped past the dusty town on top of the train.

Martínez, a truck driver who was trying to get back to New Jersey where he 
lived undocumented since the age of 17 before being deported, dislocated a 
shoulder and elbow when he was thrown to the ground by one of the assailants. 
He has been left with permanent nerve damage and restricted movement in his 
fingers.

“I feel sad, I can’t sleep, I’ve worked hard all my life, but now I can’t 
work, what’s going to happen to me?” Martínez said.

According to the MSF study, 54% of those who suffered serious physical 
violence did not seek medical help because they feared arrest or deportation. 
The survey is based on interviews with 467 Honduran and Salvadoran migrants 
conducted in September.

Just over 198,000 migrants were detained by Mexican immigration agents last 
year, a rise of 130% from 2013. Nine out of 10 of those detained were from the 
violent northern triangle of El Salvador, Honduras andGuatemala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guatemala> where record numbers are fleeing 
a relentless war between gangs, organized criminal groups and security forces.

Of those questioned by MSF, 57% said they were fleeing direct threats and 
violence targeting themselves or their families; half had lost a relative 
through violence in the past two years. Yet only a tiny proportion of migrants 
seek refuge in Mexico.

Central America's rampant violence fuels an invisible refugee crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/13/central-america-violence-refugee-crisis-gangs-murder>
The vast majority of migrants treated by MSF psychologists suffer symptoms 
such as poor sleep and concentration, low morale, anxiety and difficulties 
making decisions.

According to MSF psychologist Dora Morales, constant exposure to violence and 
persecution – both before and after migrants are forced to leave their homes – 
can lead to serious long-term mental health problems.

Morales said: “The normalization of violence is a symptom in itself, which 
diminishes a person’s capacity to accurately interpret danger. This can be very 
dangerous if left untreated as the symptoms can convert into pathologies like 
PTSD, paranoia and profound depression.”
 