
Theresa May will find a number of pressing matters in her in-tray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/05/the-guardian-view-on-the-next-prime-minister-in-tray-much-more-than-brexit>
 on her first day in No 10 – and not just about how Britain will leave the EU. 
From universal credit to junior doctors’ strikes, school academisation and 
farmers’ subsidies, she will inherit many challenges from David Cameron’s 
administration.


The EU

Simply saying Brexit means Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/30/theresa-may-launches-conservative-leadership-bid-brexit-means-brexit-video>
, as May frequently does, leaves all the relevant questions unanswered. The 
German chancellor, Angela Merkel, will be wanting a clearer picture soon, 
including whether the UK is going to give up its presidency of the EU in the 
second half of next year.

Toto has pulled back the Brexit curtain to reveal – oh dear! – Oliver Letwin | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/07/toto-brexit-curtain-oliver-letwin>
The Cabinet Office minister Oliver Letwin and one of May’s favoured Home 
Office civil servants, Oliver Robbins, have already been appointed by Cameron 
to look through the options for withdrawal. May has said she will set up a 
Brexit department. It is quite likely some EU states – probably not Germany – 
will demand that she speed up her plan to delay triggering article 50, the 
clause that starts the two-year process of withdrawal, until the turn of the 
year.

The civil service is likely to tell her that she should not start the clock 
ticking until she knows what kind of relationship with the EU she wants. The 
simplest – but politically difficult – option is a version ofNorway’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/norwegian-model-realities-brexit-norway-uk-eu>
 relationship with the EU. This would probably require accepting free movement, 
and payment of a fee for access to the single market. The more complex option 
is a unique relationship that ends free movement but retains some access to the 
single market. This will require a knowledge of trade negotiations that theUK 
lacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/uk-lacks-expertise-for-trade-talks-with-europe-says-top-civil-servant>
.

Eurosceptic MPs will want a pure sceptic in charge of the talks but that 
represents a diplomatic risk. It will take great skill to balance competing 
demands inside her party.Patrick Wintour

The economy

Stock markets crave political certainty and cheap money to invest. The 
elevation of May to No 10 secures the first. A vote by the Bank of England’s 
interest rate setting committee on Thursdayto cut the 0.5% base rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/10/bank-of-england-considers-interest-rate-cut-to-tackle-brexit-crisis>
 and pump extra funds into the financial system will meet the second. The 
post-referendum jump in the FTSE 100 from below 6,000 to almost 6,700 shows
investors are clearly confident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/01/post-brexit-apocalypse-why-markets-rising>
 that a cut in the cost of credit is on its way.

One reason the Bank should vote for a fresh stimulus is that the economy is 
clearly in need of help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/09/gloom-gathers-over-the-uk-economy>
. The most recent industry surveys showed growth had slowed to 0.2% in the 
second quarter. Housebuilding has ground to a halt and last monthconsumer 
confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/brexit-vote-batters-consumer-confidence-slide-gfk-yougov-regions>
 dived at its fastest pace for 21 years. Businesses will be looking to May for 
an extended timetable for Brexit that prevents any further shocks.Phillip Inman

Business

May presented herself as being on the side of workers rather than big business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-to-call-for-unity-equality-and-successful-exit-from-eu>
 on Monday, promising to curb bosses’ pay and put employee representatives on 
company boards. The CBI has already given that idea a very lukewarm welcome.

After six years of George Osborne in No 11, even City firms are coming round 
to the idea that austerity has run its course. With interest rates already at 
record lows, May’s chancellor may choose to borrow for spending on 
infrastructure to support business activity and jobs.

The UK has a record current account deficit, and the chancellor and governor 
of the Bank of England have both warned it has to be tackled. Five years after 
Osborne promised a “march of the makers”, Britain’s balance of payments is in a 
parlous state and manufacturing is struggling. The pound’s fall will not do 
much to help if exporters are fearful about post-Brexit trade barriers.

Then there’s the City. May needs a deal with the EU to deter banks and other 
financial firms from moving thousands of jobs to Europe – because 12% of GDP 
comes from financial services.Sean Farrell 

Defence

The Commons will debate the future of the UK’s Trident nuclear weapons 
programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/09/trident-vote-to-be-held-in-parliament-announces-cameron>
 on Monday. But anyone expecting May to take a significantly different position 
from Cameron is going to be disappointed. She has said publicly that, like her 
predecessor and like almost every Conservative MP, shefully supports the 
programme 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/04/theresa-may-calls-for-urgent-go-ahead-on-trident-replacement/>
. There have been arguments that the UK could cut the nuclear fleet from four 
submarines to three, but May is having none of it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fchallenges-theresa-may-inherit-david-cameron-administration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F675f3bd07e030699bbb900f58072aa25a7316dac%2F0_0_3500_2059%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Challenges%20Theresa%20May%20inherits%20from%20Cameron%3A%20from%20Brexit%20to%20benefits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fchallenges-theresa-may-inherit-david-cameron-administration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Challenges%20Theresa%20May%20inherits%20from%20Cameron%3A%20from%20Brexit%20to%20benefits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fchallenges-theresa-may-inherit-david-cameron-administration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F675f3bd07e030699bbb900f58072aa25a7316dac%2F0_0_3500_2059%2F3500.jpg>
 HMS Vengeance, part of the Trident fleet. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
She has said she is committed to UK membership of Nato and to the alliance’s 
target ofspending 2% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/08/george-osborne-pledge-nato-target-defence-spending>
 of GDP annually on defence.

Her first major test could come if there is a decision to be made on sending 
troops to help stabilise Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/05/uk-forces-libya-protection-training>
. The UK has provisionally offered to send 800-1,300 soldiers to join an 
Italian-led force.Ewen MacAskill

Home affairs

The new home secretary will be expected to confirm a decision to order an 
inquiry into South Yorkshire police’sviolent confrontation with striking miners 
at Orgreave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/25/mps-write-to-theresa-may-to-demand-inquiry-into-battle-of-orgreave>
 in 1984.

They will also face delicate Whitehall negotiations over the government’s 
long-delayed legislation on extremism, including the issue of banning 
non-violent extremists without falling foul of freedom of speech judgments in 
the courts.

But it will be on the success or failure in curbing EU migration that the next 
home secretary will be judged. May has already set out some possibilities, 
including being much tougher on the 30% of labour migrants who arrive in 
Britain without a specific job. But moves againstoverseas students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/07/theresa-may-plans-send-overseas-students-home-blocked>
, including ensuring they leave the country at the end of their studies, can 
also be expected.Alan Travis

Foreign affairs

The Foreign Office is desperate to send out a message that the EU vote does 
not signal a more isolationist, inward-looking stance. Diplomats’ morale will 
only worsen if May does not tend to fractured relations by insisting the UK is 
engaged in Nato, the United Nations and the G20.

A UK-sponsored conference on Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> 
later this month, including a visit by the US secretary of state, John Kerry, 
will be her first outing on the world stage. On 4 September she is due to 
attend the G20 in China, as well as the UN general assembly.

UK relations with Russia are at an all-time low, and the special relationship 
with China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/18/david-cameron-dismisses-risk-of-rift-with-us-over-china>
 developed by the probably outgoing chancellor, George Osborne, will be in need 
of attention.

She will also be under pressure from the Tory press and grassroots to row back 
on Cameron’s cherished commitment to spend0.7% of UK GDP on overseas aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
. The pledge, a symbol of Cameron’s modernising credentials, will hold less 
totemic sway over May.Patrick Wintour

Health

The biggest short-term issue is the stand-off with junior doctors. Jeremy Hunt 
has said he will impose a new contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/06/jeremy-hunt-to-impose-new-contract-on-junior-doctors>
 on them after it was rejected in a ballot of British Medical Association (BMA) 
members. Whether he stays on as health secretary could be a signal of May’s 
attitude to the dispute.

Jeremy Hunt to impose new contract on junior doctors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/06/jeremy-hunt-to-impose-new-contract-on-junior-doctors>
More pressing in the long-term is the NHS budget. Hospitals in England ran up 
a record deficit of £2.45bn in 2015-16.Michael Gove promised an extra £100m a 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/01/brexit-live-michael-gove-to-set-out-his-vision-for-britain-as-conservatives-reel-from-boris-johnsons-exit>
 for the NHS, which he said could be taken from Britain’s contributions to the 
EU. May has made no such pledge, and the BMA says even that would fill less 
than a quarter of the shortfall.

NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> bosses will also want urgent 
clarification on the status of EU nationals, with an estimated 40,000 working 
in the health service alone and more in the private care sector.Jessica Elgot

Education

For the last two years No 10 has driven the push for free schools and 
academies in England. May is unlikely to be any different. And British 
universities will expect little relief from the stringent visa regime on 
overseas students that May imposed as home secretary.

During a brief spell as Conservative shadow education secretary that ended in 
2001, May backed the party orthodoxy in favour of grammar schools. That policy 
ended under Cameron and Gove, but she might revive increased academic 
selection. As recently as last year she backedan attempt to extend a grammar 
school in her constituency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/29/comprehensives-maidenhead-grammar-school-campaign-no>
.

Two issues require immediate attention. One is the present and future status 
of EU nationals as pupils in British schools. The other is the “fair funding 
formula” for state schools in England, toeven out funding between urban schools 
and the rest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/07/london-and-inner-city-pupils-could-lose-out-over-changes-to-school-funding>
. May has supported it in the past, but unless there is new money involved the 
formula may disappoint many headteachers.Richard Adams

Welfare and pensions

Billions more in cuts are planned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/23/pip-u-turn-billions-of-pounds-welfare-cuts>
 from a four-year freeze in benefit rates, whilecuts to universal credit work 
allowances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/03/universal-credit-cost-cutting-treasury-benefit-reform-resolution>
 will see the abandoned tax credit cuts effectively reintroduced, hitting 
millions of low-paid working families by up to £3,000 a year by 2020. There are 
more controversial benefit changes to come:£30 a week cuts from next April to 
employment and support allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/27/charities-urge-ministers-to-drop-planned-cuts-to-work-support-allowance>
 for people found too sick to work; thetwo-child limit 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/11986399/Tory-two-child-limit-on-benefits-fundamentally-anti-family-faith-leaders.html>
 to tax credits hitting larger families; and thereduced household benefit cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/20/benefit-cuts-to-hit-huge-number-of-children-government-figures-show>
.

Despite these cuts, the government may struggle to keep down overall welfare 
spending ashousing benefit claims continue to soar 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/home-news/soaring-rents-and-low-wages-fuel-huge-housing-benefit-bill>
, and if the economy, as expected, experiences a Brexit-related downturn.

The biggest operational headache for the Department for Work and Pensions will 
continue to be thecontroversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/10/universal-credit-cuts-to-lose-low-income-families-up-to-200-a-month>
, much-delayed universal credit programme. But the biggest political decision 
could be around pensions: after years oftriple-locked inflation-busting annual 
rises for pensioners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/20/pensions-state-scrap-triple-lock-protect-paul-johnson-ifs>
, will May dare target this most powerful of voting blocs for cuts?Patrick 
Butler

Scotland

Nicola Sturgeon has already indicated that she expects “early engagement” with 
the new prime minister over Brexit. Sturgeon has said she will continue to 
pursue every avenue possible to secure Scotland’s continued place within the EU.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fchallenges-theresa-may-inherit-david-cameron-administration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35f94cffd19b9750f56a19b5f07af634ee7e640b%2F865_13_1669_1001%2F1669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Challenges%20Theresa%20May%20inherits%20from%20Cameron%3A%20from%20Brexit%20to%20benefits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fchallenges-theresa-may-inherit-david-cameron-administration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Challenges%20Theresa%20May%20inherits%20from%20Cameron%3A%20from%20Brexit%20to%20benefits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fchallenges-theresa-may-inherit-david-cameron-administration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35f94cffd19b9750f56a19b5f07af634ee7e640b%2F865_13_1669_1001%2F1669.jpg>
 Theresa May and Nicola Sturgeon. Composite: AP/Rex/Getty 
Obviously one way of doing so is to hold a second referendum on independence. 
AlthoughRuth Davidson, a May supporter and the leader of the Scottish 
Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/12/labour-nec-jeremy-corbyn-leadership-from-labour-leadership-ballot-would-be-sordid-fix-politics-live?page=with:block-5784c03ae4b0f36a6e1c585e#block-5784c03ae4b0f36a6e1c585e>
 was in London on Tuesday warning that such a move would be “irresponsible”, 
she has also said that a future Westminster government should not block 
Holyrood from holding another referendum. May – who campaigned for the union in 
the2014 independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2014/sep/18/-sp-scottish-independence-referendum-results-in-full>
 – has yet to address the issue directly. But the potential breakup of the UK 
following the split with Europe must surely be high on her agenda.Libby Brooks

Northern Ireland

During the EU referendum campaign May warned that if there was a Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/what-does-the-eu-referendum-mean-for-northern-ireland-and-ireland>
 it was “inconceivable” that there would be no changes to the border between 
Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. Now she will have to roll back from 
that prediction and assure the Irish government and nationalists in Northern 
Ireland that the border will not be fortified. Nationalists will be enraged if 
border posts or customs checks are reimposed.

May will also have to deal with demands from both communities for extra 
Treasury support to plug the EU funding gap. An estimated £8.20 of every £10 of 
Ulster farming income comes from the EU. She will also facedemands from Sinn 
Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/11/sinn-fein-irish-reunification-vote-brexit-eu-referendum>
 for a referendum on Northern Ireland’s place within the UK, which will 
intensify if Scotland goes for another independence vote.Henry McDonald

Media

BBC reshuffle has dealt the managers a winning hand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/10/bbc-reshuffle-managers-winning-hand>
The BBC has agreed in principle terms for renewing its royal charter to 2028, 
which include taking on the £700m-plus cost of free TV licences for over-75s, 
and replacing theBBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> with a 
unitary board. The BBCremains concerned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/09/bbc-fears-government-will-win-battle-to-impose-board-members>
 about proposals for the government to appoint almost half the board members, 
which critics say is a direct attack on editorial independence.

Speaking at the unveiling of the BBC’s annual report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/bbc-cliff-richard-legal-action-tony-hall-police-raid>
 on Tuesday, Tony Hall, the director general, said that it was a “good, hard, 
tough, difficult negotiation” that he hoped would not change. “I have no reason 
to think Theresa May won’t think it’s right,” he said.

The government is still considering whether to sell off a stake in Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/11/channel-4-must-not-be-sold-off-and-it-can-weather-brexit-say-peers>
. Proposals to completely privatise the state-owned, commercially funded 
broadcaster were scrapped earlier this year.

May will also have to decide whether to launch the second part of the Leveson 
inquiry into press ethics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/truth-behind-private-detectives-death-rests-on-leveson-ii-inquiry>
, which was put on hold amid criminal inquiries over phone hacking. The 
government has shown no desire to open the planned second inquiry, which was to 
have looked at the ties between police and journalists, despite calls from 
campaigning groups and Labour.Mark Sweney

Environment

The energy secretary, Amber Rudd, has said that tackling global warming will 
be harder outside of the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/29/leaving-the-eu-will-make-it-harder-for-uk-to-tackle-climate-change>
, but the general direction of travel will be the same as before 23 June, 
because ministers just days agoagreed a binding carbon target for 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/30/uk-sets-ambitious-new-2030s-carbon-target>
 – and it is tougher than the EU’s.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftheresa-may-and-minsters-arrive-for-david-camerons-final-cabinet-meeting-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20and%20ministers%20arrive%20for%20David%20Cameron's%20final%20cabinet%20meeting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftheresa-may-and-minsters-arrive-for-david-camerons-final-cabinet-meeting-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20and%20ministers%20arrive%20for%20David%20Cameron%27s%20final%20cabinet%20meeting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftheresa-may-and-minsters-arrive-for-david-camerons-final-cabinet-meeting-video&media=>
Theresa May and ministers arrive for David Cameron’s final cabinet meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/12/theresa-may-and-minsters-arrive-for-david-camerons-final-cabinet-meeting-video>
One key question is whether the UK will ratify last year’s historic Paris 
climate deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
 as part of the EU, or after it leaves. There is also uncertainty over 
political backing fornew nuclear at Hinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-plant-costs-up-to-37bn>
, whether the autumn statement will yield clarity for low carbon energy 
subsidies beyond 2020, and whether a plan on how to meet carbon targets will be 
published before the year is out, as previously planned.

In October, May’s environment secretary will face a legal challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/18/uk-faces-fresh-legal-challenge-over-weak-plans-to-tackle-air-pollution>
 at the high court over what campaigners say is an inadequate government plan 
to clean up the illegally high air pollution in many British cities. The 
environment department will also have to grapple with the future of support for 
farmers who currentlymake more than half of their income from EU subsidies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/26/uk-food-prices-set-to-rise-after-brexit-vote-farmers-union>
.Adam Vaughan

Justice 

The most controversial item on the justice agenda is the repeatedly delayed 
bill of rights aimed at redefining the UK’s relationship with the European 
Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.

During the campaign May initially signalled a more radical policy, calling for 
the UK to quit the European convention on human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/25/uk-must-leave-european-convention-on-human-rights-theresa-may-eu-referendum>
, which Britain helped draft in the 1950s.


Once the leadership campaign commenced, however, May swiftly reversed her 
position, acknowledging that there was no chance of a parliamentary majority to 
achieve that aim.


Theresa May: our writers’ verdict on the new prime minister | The panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/panel-theresa-may> 
She may also have calculated she needed the support of liberal-minded Tories. 
The need to concentrate on EU negotiations suggests the long-anticipated bill 
of rights may drop to the back of any legislative queue, or even be quietly 
forgotten.


The justice budget has been subject to deep cuts under austerity policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/27/austerity-policies-do-more-harm-than-good-imf-study-concludes>
, forcing ministers to raise court and tribunal fees to such high levels that 
many lawyers warn they restrict access to justice. May could be sensitive to 
jibes that the British courts are open to wealthy Russian oligarchs pursuing 
legal vendettas but closed to ordinary UK citizens.Owen Bowcott

Transport

The biggest longstanding questions are Heathrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/30/airport-expansion-decision-heathrow-gatwick-to-be-left-to-camerons-successor>
 andHS2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/08/hundreds-of-new-homes-will-be-razed-if-new-hs2-route-is-approved>
, but thefate of the Southern Rail franchise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/12/take-southern-rail-franchise-off-operator-urges-sadiq-khan>
 is forcing itself on to the political agenda.

Cameron’s early departure means he has concluded his political tightrope act 
of appearing to take action on airport expansion without reneging on his 
personal pledge to never build a third runway at Heathrow. More than a year has 
already elapsed without a proper governmental response since theAirports 
Commission recommended the runway be built 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/01/heathrow-third-runway-recommended-in-davies-report-on-airport-capacity>
. But May, a presumed but not explicit opponent of Heathrow expansion , would 
be expected to take a decision in the autumn.

HS2 is effectively in process, but recent costcutting measures such as 
deciding not to build a new Sheffield station, and possible budgetary pressures 
ahead, suggest the high-speed project could be further trimmed – or in 
campaigners’ highest hopes, scrapped – before its full parliamentary approval 
this winter.

Furious commuters, many in solid Tory constituencies, have demanded action 
over the disastrous performance of Southern Rail. Emergency measures such as 
breaking up the franchise or bringing the line back under state control would 
be counterintuitive forConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> but May has already shown 
she would countenance other ideas when popular or pragmatic.Gwyn Topham
 