
Chile’s supreme court has ruled that the government can file an extradition 
request to the United States for two former secret police agents wanted for a 
1976 car bombing in Washington that killed a former Chilean ambassador and a US 
citizen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchile-bombing-extradition-michael-townley-armando-fernandez-larios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef940389d8e27c894a10478cb8ac9327fdbe08d7%2F253_0_876_1095%2F876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chile%20can%20seek%20extradition%20of%20agents%20wanted%20in%201976%20US%20attack%2C%20court%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchile-bombing-extradition-michael-townley-armando-fernandez-larios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chile%20can%20seek%20extradition%20of%20agents%20wanted%20in%201976%20US%20attack%2C%20court%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchile-bombing-extradition-michael-townley-armando-fernandez-larios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef940389d8e27c894a10478cb8ac9327fdbe08d7%2F253_0_876_1095%2F876.jpg>
 Armando Fernandez Larios, seen in Miami in 2003. Photograph: Luis M. Alvarez/AP
In a unanimous decision on Monday, the court said the foreign ministry should 
begin the procedures needed to seek the extradition of Michael Townley, a US 
citizen, and Armando Fernandez Larios, a Chilean. They served under Gen Augusto 
Pinochet’s 1973-1990 dictatorship.

The decision came after a request by the Chilean judge Mario Carroza, who 
specializes in human rights crimes.

The attack killed the former envoy Orlando Letelier and US citizen Ronni 
Moffitt. Moffitt’s husband, who was an aide to Letelier, was also in the car 
but survived the bombing on 21 September 1976.

“After 40 years of the death of ... Orlando Letelier and Ronni Moffitt, we 
have taken a step forward in achieving justice for this horrid and cowardly 
crime committed just blocks from the White House,” Nicolas Pavez, a lawyer 
representing Chile’s Group of Families of the Politically Executed, told the 
Associated Press.

Pinochet directly ordered killing on US soil of Chilean diplomat, papers reveal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/08/pinochet-directly-ordered-washington-killing-diplomat-documents-orlando-letelier-declassified>
Declassified US intelligence documents that came to light last year revealed 
thatPinochet directly ordered Letelier’s assassination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/08/pinochet-directly-ordered-washington-killing-diplomat-documents-orlando-letelier-declassified>
. One document includes an assertion by the former head of Chile’s intelligence 
agency, Manuel Contreras, that “he authorized the assassination of Letelier” on 
“direct orders from Pinochet”.

In 2005, Contreras and his second-in-command were convicted in Letelier’s 
death. Contreras died last year.

Letelier had been a top official under President Salvador Allende, a Marxist 
who was ousted by Pinochet in a 1973 coup. Letelier was tortured and jailed, 
then later fled to the US, where he was the most influential voice against 
Pinochet’s dictatorship.

At the time of the bombing, Letelier was director of the Transnational 
Institute at the Institute for Policy Studies and Moffitt was a development 
associate at IPS.

Pinochet died in 2006 under house arrest without being tried on charges of 
illegal enrichment and human rights violations.
 