
Sudanese government forces have used chemical weapons repeatedly against 
civilians, including babies and young children, in one of the most remote 
regions of Darfur over the past eight months, according toallegations 
documented by Amnesty International <http://darfurconflict2016.amnesty.org/>. 

The alleged chemical attacks, believed to have killed up to 250 people, mostly 
children, represent a “new low” in the catalogue of serious abuses perpetrated 
by government forces in the region, said the human rights group.

The most recent of the alleged offensives recorded by the investigation 
occurred on 9 September. The attacks are ongoing, said Amnesty.

'We just want to live' – South Sudanese refugees bear scars of brutal civil war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/25/south-sudanese-refugees-scars-civil-war-uganda>
Using satellite images, more than 200 in-depth interviews by phone or 
internet, and expert analysis of dozens of distressing images showing babies 
and children with flayed and bloody skin, the investigation claims that at 
least 30 chemical attacks have taken place in the Jebel Marra area ofDarfur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/darfur> since January 2016.

Amnesty denounced what it called indiscriminate attacks on civilians by 
government troops as a war crime.

A spokesman for the Sudanese government denied any chemical weapon attacks had 
taken place. Dr Khalid al-Mubarak, the media attache at the Sudan embassy in 
London, said that fighting in the Jebel Marra district was the result of 
government troops trying to attack forces loyal to Abdul Wahid al-Nour, leader 
of theSudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> Liberation Movement.

“There were no chemical attacks,” said al-Mubarak. “Jebel Marra was the only 
spot in which there was any trouble. Now the government has full control. There 
is now a civilian police station and the administration in Darfur is returning 
to Jebel Marra.

“Amnesty International has this information second hand. They have talked to 
people selectively.”

Asked about allegations that up to 250 people have died as a result of the 
attacks, he said: “Have they counted them? They have not. No chemical attacks 
happened.”

But Tirana Hassan, Amnesty International’s director of crisis research, said: 
“The scale and brutality of these attacks is hard to put into words. The images 
and videos we have seen in the course of our research are truly shocking; in 
one, a young child is screaming with pain before dying. Many photos show young 
children covered in lesions and blisters. Some were unable to breathe and 
[were] vomiting blood.

“It is hard to exaggerate just how cruel the effects of these chemicals are 
when they come into contact with the human body. Chemical weapons have been 
banned for decades in recognition of the fact that the level of suffering they 
cause can never be justified. That Sudan’s government is now repeatedly using 
them against their own people simply cannot be ignored and demands action.”

The report alleged that hundreds of survivors suffered symptoms including 
severe gastrointestinal conditions, bloody vomiting and diarrhoea, blistering 
and rashes on skin that was later lost, eye problems – including a complete 
loss of vision – and respiratory problems, reportedly the most common cause of 
death.


A woman in her twenties, injured by shrapnel when a bomb that emitted a toxic 
cloud of smoke fell on her village, said she and her baby became sick and are 
still suffering six months later.

“When [the bomb] landed there were some flames and then dark smoke,” she said. 
“Immediately it caused vomiting and dizzying … My skin is not normal. I still 
have headaches, even after I took the medicine … The baby is not recovering … 
he is swollen … he has blisters and wounds … they said he would get better … 
but it is not working.”

One man who helped to care for people apparently affected by chemicals said 19 
people he cared for, including children, died within a month of exposure. He 
told Amnesty he had been helping to care for victims of the conflict in Jebel 
Marra since it began in 2003, and had never seen such ailments before. All 
those who died experienced major changes to the skin, he added. About half 
sustained wounds that turned green; the other half were affected by skin loss 
and weeping blisters.
The village of Karmal before and after the alleged attack (click on image to 
move between before and after images) 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/9b1ff37e9d2e2b535bb40807ae7607f81d4550c0/4_0_1099_1247/881.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/9b1ff37e9d2e2b535bb40807ae7607f81d4550c0/4_0_1099_1247/881.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/c885542d25f3e6f0e2ac90da16353de83ca21414/7_0_1095_1247/878.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/c885542d25f3e6f0e2ac90da16353de83ca21414/7_0_1095_1247/878.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 The village of Karmal before and after the alleged attack (click on image to 
move between before and after images). The later image shows the village has 
been been almost completely razed by fire. 
Amnesty said they were told the bombs were dropped from planes and rockets. 
Most of the 200 survivors they spoke to reported that the smoke from the 
weapons changed colour between five and 20 minutes after impact. Witnesses said 
it started very dark and then became lighter. Every survivor said the smoke 
smelled noxious. Using satellite imagery, the report concluded that up to 171 
villages were destroyed or damaged as a result of the eight-month campaign.

Two chemical weapons experts independently shown photographs, videos and 
witness testimony found “credible evidence” that chemical weapons agents were 
used in the attacks.Both concluded the clinical signs and symptoms they had 
seen and heard were consistent with a class of weapon known as blister agents, 
or vesicants, which includes sulphur mustard, nitrogen mustard and lewisite.

In a video interview, published alongside the report, Dr Keith Ward, an 
independent chemical weapons expert, said: “The pictures in conjunction with 
the eyewitness accounts, and in conjunction with a large constellation of 
clinical signs and symptoms of these victims, do give us enough information to 
make us very certain that chemicals of some sort were involved in this attack.

“We are certain that the kinds of injuries that we’ve seen and the explanation 
for … what people saw at the source of the attack could not be explained simply 
as a result of the explosive effect of conventional or incendiary munitions.”

The report was a collaboration between Amnesty and Situ Research 
<http://www.situresearch.com/>, an interdisciplinary studio that brings 
together geospatial information, satellite imagery, photographs and interviews.

'Untold devastation' in South Sudan triggers grave humanitarian crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/09/untold-devastation-in-south-sudan-triggers-grave-humanitarian-crisis-un>
Many victims told Amnesty they had no access to medicine and were being 
treated only with a combination of salt, limes and local herbs.


“The use of chemical weapons is a war crime” said Hassan. “The evidence we 
have gathered is credible and portrays a regime that is intent on directing 
attacks against the civilian population in Darfur without any fear of 
international retribution.”


Amnesty International has called on the UN security council to urgently 
investigate the alleged use of chemical weapons, ensure the arms embargo is 
implemented and apply political pressure on the Sudanese government to so that 
peacekeepers and humanitarian groups are allowed access to remote regions like 
Jebel Marra.

Jebel Marra, in the centre of Darfur, is a volcanic massif with an estimated 
1,500 towns, villages and hamlets. The UN Mission in Darfur, a joint UN-African 
Union peacekeeping force, is present in the region but is unable to provide 
protection to any civilians against attacks in Jebel Marra beyond its northern 
base in Sortoni, the report said.


The alleged attacks on villages in Jebel Marra were perpetrated by government 
soldiers and allied militias known as Janjaweed, according to witnesses, some 
of whom provided the names of officials in charge. Other government forces 
allegedly included the Sudanese Armed Forces and Rapid Support Forces.

Amnesty said it was forced to conduct its research remotely, due to 
restrictions on access by the Sudanese government. The group said no 
journalist, humanitarian rights investigator or other humanitarian group has 
gained access to areas of Jebel Marra affected by the conflict in 2016.

Survivors and local human rights monitors provided the names of 367 civilians, 
including 95 children, who were killed in Jebel Marra by government forces in 
the first six months of the year, the report said.

The report, which said the international community’s response to attacks on 
Darfur was deplorable, concluded: “The government of Sudan’s ongoing attacks in 
Jebel Marra – the latest in a series of military operations dating back to 2003 
that have ravaged Darfur’s civilian population – are but the most recent 
illustration of a catastrophic pattern of violence.”

Speaking in advance of the report’s publication, a UN peacekeeping official 
said no reports had been received of the use of chemical weapons in Jebel 
Marra. “Despite repeated requests to the government of Sudan, including most 
recently last week by the joint special representative during his visit to 
Zalingei in central Darfur, the UN and the mission does not have access to 
conflict areas in Jebel Marra,” said the official.

“We are aware that the Amnesty International report is scheduled to be 
released and we would like to study it in detail before commenting.”
 