
Children’s laureate Chris Riddell, backed by all eight former children’s 
laureates includingQuentin Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/quentin-blake> and Julia Donaldson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/julia-donaldson>, has made a powerful and 
passionate call for the Department of Education to end the “disadvantageous 
school library lottery” that has seen hundreds of school libraries lose a 
dedicated librarian over the last decade.

In an open letter to Justine Greening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, the secretary of state 
for education, Riddell writes that he is “deeply concerned” the work school 
libraries and librarians do in promoting reading for pleasure “is not fully 
appreciated and, worse, is being undermined through lack of economic and 
intellectual investment”.

He pointed to the recent closure of two major school library services in 
Dorset and Berkshire, and to the year-on-year loss of members at theSchool 
Library Association <http://www.sla.org.uk/> (SLA) as numbers shrink through 
lack of funding. The SLA estimates that over the last decade it has lost around 
1,000 members, as “more and more schools are taking the economic route and 
saying they haven’t got the money and they’ve got to get rid of their 
librarian”, said the organisation’s director, Tricia Adams.

Riddell, supported by the eight former children’s laureates – Blake, Anne Fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-fine>, Michael Morpurgo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/michaelmorpurgo>, Jacqueline Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jacquelinewilson>, Michael Rosen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michaelrosen>, Anthony Browne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-browne>, Donaldson and Malorie 
Blackman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/malorie-blackman> – called on the 
Department of Education to act on the request from the All-Party Parliamentary 
Group on Libraries to gather official statistics on school library provision so 
the “extent of this problem can be understood”.

The request was made in 2014, and has yet to be met, making the exact fall in 
the number of school libraries and libraries hard to pin down. But a joint 
piece of research from theChartered Institute of Library and Information 
Professionals <http://www.cilip.org.uk/> (CILIP) and the all-party 
parliamentary group (APPG) on Libraries in 2014 found a loss of 280 school 
librarians in England between 2012 and 2014. CILIP also pointed toSoftlink’s 
2015 UK school library survey 
<https://www.softlinkint.com/downloads/2015_UK_School_Library_Survey_Report.pdf>
, which found that 54% of schools feel their library is not adequately funded, 
and tothe 2016 Association of Teachers and Lecturers survey 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwj6kM3k8qDQAhXDtRQKHbqRAskQFggbMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.sla.org.uk%2Fdwl.php%3Fdoc%3Dapril-6-2016---atl-school-libraries-survey.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGomOHgdGldKTxWfqGqai7AtAwQXg&sig2=cQg2CBWJqZNlddRUZ5AL5A>
, which found that more than a fifth of respondents (22%) said their school 
library budget had been cut by at least 40% since 2010, with 21% saying that 
the budget does not allow their library to encourage pupils to read for 
enjoyment.

“I am asking you to act on [the APPG’s] request and then, with the support of 
Ofsted, to set out clear standards for library provision that will end this 
disadvantageous school library lottery that limits many children’s life 
chances. I am asking you to fund this from the education budget so that every 
school has a library service it can be proud of: books to borrow and wherever 
possible a school librarian to help children choose,” wrote Riddell to Greening.

The children’s laureate was clear in his message to the education secretary 
that “by promoting reading for pleasure, introducing our children to 
life-changing books and turning them into lifelong readers, school libraries 
are a vital resource that must be nurtured”.

“When every parent knows the name of their child’s favourite book, author and, 
yes, school librarian and can share and read together with their child the 
books they bring home, we know literacy standards will soar and we’ll all be 
richer,” he told Greening.

Riddell said that when he took on the role as laureate, he viewed it as 
“surely madness” that all schools were not required to have a library. “But as 
I visit schools across the UK I find that library provision is wildly 
inconsistent. While there are great examples of well-funded and staffed 
libraries, it is obvious many schools are unable to provide what their pupils 
need: books they can read for pleasure, and ideally a librarian to help them 
grow as readers.”

“Incredibly, it is impossible to know exactly how bad the problem is, as the 
government has not yet acted on the advice of its own all-party group to start 
the simple act of collecting information on existing services from schools,” 
said the author and illustrator.

“While schools face insidious pressures on budgets and staff, things cannot 
change. That is why, with the backing of my fellow laureates, I am now calling 
on Justine Greening and the Department of Education to act on the all-party 
group’s request and then set out clear standards of library provision, and put 
into place the necessary funding.”

Riddell would, he added, be pushing the message to the more than 1,500 
children he meets as he tours the UK over the next two weeks, starting in 
Blackpool on 15 November. “I want every child to go back to his or her teacher 
asking where their school library is, and I hope that, very soon, every teacher 
will be able to show them,” he said.

He was backed in his message by Nick Poole, chief executive of CILIP, which 
has, together with the APPG, called for libraries for every school to have a 
library.

“School librarians are a vital part of teaching and learning in the modern 
world, but figures show that many schools are failing to make adequate 
provision for a properly staffed and stocked school library, particularly in 
the state sector,” said Poole. “We need every parent to demand that head 
teachers and politicians ensure their children can benefit from a great school 
library and a professional librarian.”
 