
The Obama administration has announced a $1.83bn (£1.2bn) arms sale to Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan>, the first offered by the US to the 
self-governing island in four years.

China regards Taiwan as part of its territory and has said the sale, which was 
expected, should be cancelled to avoid harming its relations across theTaiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> Strait and between China and the US.

The administration notified US Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-congress> that the proposed arms 
package includes two decommissioned US navy frigates, anti-tank missiles, 
amphibious assault vehicles, and Stinger surface-to-air missiles. There’s also 
support for Taiwan’s capabilities in intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance, and a weapons system to defend against anti-ship missiles.

Congress has 30 days to review the sale, but it’s unlikely to raise 
objections. There’s been mounting bipartisan concern that Taiwan is 
inadequately armed to defend itself against an increasingly powerful mainland
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

David McKeeby, a state department spokesman on political-military affairs, 
said the package is consistent with US support for Taiwan’s ability to defend 
itself under the Taiwan Relations Act.


 Republican lawmakers quickly welcomed the announcement, but called for more 
frequent arms sales to Taiwan.

“I remain deeply concerned about the administration’s delays that needlessly 
dragged out this process,” said representative Ed Royce, chairman of the house 
foreign affairs committee. “In fact, some Taiwanese requests have still not 
seen the light of day. We should handle arms transfers for Taiwan just as we 
would for any other close security partner.”


Senator John McCain <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain>, chairman 
of the senate armed services committee, said the US must establish a more 
regularised process for considering Taiwan requests, “in order to avoid 
extended periods in which a fear of upsetting the US-China relationship may 
harm Taiwan’s defence capabilities”.

The administration had announced more than $12bn in arms sales to Taiwan since 
2010, but only one sale had occurred since – $5.9bn worth that included 
upgrades for Taiwan’s F-16 fighter jets. That drew a diplomatic protest from 
Beijing, which suspended some military exchanges with the United States. It did 
not seriously impair ties.

How China's artificial islands led to tension in the South China Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/tensions-and-territorial-claims-in-the-south-china-sea-the-guardian-briefing>
Barack Obama has sought greater cooperation with China on issues such as 
climate change, and the two sides have increased military exchanges to reduce 
the risk of conflict. But at the same time, relations have been roiled by 
China’s construction of artificial islands in the South China Sea and 
allegations of Chinese cyber theft.

In Beijing on Tuesday, China’s foreign ministry issued a stern warning that 
the sale threatened relations with the US.

On Wednesday, Ma Xiaoguang, China’s spokesman for the cabinet’s Taiwan affairs 
office, reiterated China’s opposition to arms sales to Taiwan from any country 
and called for Taiwan to “treasure” improved relations with the mainland.

Relations across the Taiwan Strait have undergone a steady improvement over 
the past two decades, especially under the China-friendly administration of 
Taiwanese president Ma Ying-jeou.

 