
A year on from the “Don’t Blush Baby” incident, West Indian cricketer Chris 
Gayle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-gayle> has re-ignited 
controversy, by posting a raunchy video on social media and telling Australia 
to “lighten the phuck up”.

The powerful batsman posted a video on Instagram and a tweet which alluded to 
comments made during a sideline interview with then-Channel 10 host Mel 
McLaughlin.

4th Jan officially 1 year anniversary #DontBlushBaby - Australia, lighten the 
phuck Up!!! #StreetBruckOut #Ultra #CaribbeanTheBest 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BO1Qj3gg8z9/>

A video posted by KingGayle 👑 (@chrisgayle333) on Jan 3, 2017 at 10:20pm PST

The interview took place exactly a year ago after a Melbourne Renegades Big 
Bash League game in which Gayle had just played.

Chris Gayle’s latest excruciating interview and his startling race remarks | 
The Spin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/24/chris-gayle-cricket-the-spin-interview-race-remarks>
During the interview Gayle asked McLaughlin whether she would be interested in 
getting a drink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/04/chris-gayle-reporter-drink-blush-network-ten-big-bash-melbourne>
 with him and then said “don’t blush baby” when she became noticeably 
uncomfortable with his antics.

He was later fined $10,000 over the incident and condemned by Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia for his comments. 
Afterwards, Renegades CEO Stuart Coventry formally apologised to McLaughlin in 
a statement.

“Chris’s comments were completely inappropriate and disrespectful,” it said.

Gayle also apologised, saying: “There wasn’t anything at all meant to be 
disrespectful or offensive to Mel and if she felt that way I’m really sorry for 
that.

“There wasn’t any harm meant in that particular way to any particular person 
like that.

“It was a simple joke, the game was going on. Entertainment, things get out of 
proportion but these things do happen.”

In the anniversary video–– shot during a street festival – Gayle makes 
suggestive poses and simulates sex acts with a woman, understood to be his 
partner Natasha Berridge.


His tweet which accompanied a link to the Instagram video read: “4th jan 
officially 1 year anniversary #DontBlushBaby - Australia lighten the phuck 
up!!!”
 