
There was one moment in another riveting day which must have left every 
cricketer of Test/county/ club/village/Observer XI standard in a state of some 
bewilderment. In the afternoon Sabbir Rahman, who bowls occasional leg-breaks, 
was summoned up as a potential partnership breaker and he proceeded to bowl a 
couple of deliveries that would have had the captain of the Observer XI casting 
around for some respectable alternative.

Ben Stokes and Zafar Ansari help England hang on against Bangladesh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/england-bangladesh-second-test-match-report>
First, Sabbir bowled a chest-high full toss to Adil Rashid, which was swatted 
gently to deep midwicket for a single. The umpires did not show much interest 
in this delivery. Soon after, with Chris Woakes on strike on 38, Sabbir 
delivered another full toss, a little lower than its predecessor. The startled 
batsman smote the ball hard but straight into the hands of midwicket, who 
celebrated Bangladesh’s good fortune.

Woakes set off for the pavilion in disgust. “I immediately thought it was 
out,” he said. “I was just annoyed at getting out.”

Off he marched but he was swiftly intercepted by Sundaram Ravi, who had been 
standing at square leg and who was conscious of regulation 42.6b, which demands 
that any delivery passing the batsman above hip height should be deemed a 
no-ball. The third umpire, Chris Gaffney, was consulted and he decreed that 
Sabbir’s delivery was indeed a no-ball. Back came Woakes, briefly as surprised 
and elated as Lazarus.

England are still in a muddle over their batting and bowling hierarchies | 
Vithushan Ehantharajah and Dan Lucas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/29/england-batting-bowling-steve-finn-zafar-ansar-chris-woakes>
Every cricketing bone in my body felt that Woakes was out. That regulation had 
been introduced primarily because of the number of high deliveries bowled by 
pacemen, usually at the tailend of a limited-overs game. But in this day and 
age regulations are regulations. However, Gaffney did not ask to use the 
ball-tracker. If he had he might have concluded that the ball, dipping sharply 
towards the end of its ugly flight path, was just about legal.

This looked like a major turning point but there seems to have been so many in 
the past seven days of Test cricket in Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/stuart-broad-england-bangladesh-test-one-of-best>
 that we cannot be sure. Woakes merely reported: “It felt very quiet out there 
[he had already put on 78 with Rashid] and they thought they had burgled a 
wicket. And they did not say much afterwards.”

Woakes is the most cheerful of men and he was beaming when giving his 
assessment of the state of play at the close. He said the game was “evenly 
balanced. I would like to think that we could get 240-250 in the final 
innings.” Needless to say he is an optimist as well.

Woakes also highlighted the difficulty of opening the batting – for England at 
least – especially when Mehedi Hasan has the ball. “It is always spin bowling. 
They bowl stump to stump and one skids, then one skips.”

Bangladesh v England: second Test, day two – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/29/bangladesh-england-second-test-day-two-live>
This prompts the question whether England should have be so hidebound about 
the need for regular opening batsmen in Bangladesh. There are no pacemen to 
face, no swinging deliveries and no bouncers, so suddenly different qualities 
are required by the openers. These might include right-handedness and an 
appetite for spin bowling rather than the more traditional virtues. In my very 
limited experience with the Observer XI they are far more flexible – but with 
them it mostly depends upon who turns up on time.
 