
Chris Gayle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-gayle> may yet return to 
the Big Bash next winter despite the furore he caused in a controversial 
broadcast interview during the latest edition of Australia’s Twenty20 
tournament.

The West Indies batsman caused a stir in January when his response to a 
question from reporter Mel McLaughlin was to ask if she would like to have a 
drink with him before adding: “Don’t blush, baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/04/chris-gayle-reporter-drink-blush-network-ten-big-bash-melbourne>
.”

Chris Gayle controversy: sexist, not sexy – and certainly not funny | Marina 
Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/06/chris-gayle-controversy-sexist-women-cricket>
The unfavourable reaction from pundits cast a cloud over Gayle’s prospects of 
playing in the Big Bash again. But the door appears ajar after Melbourne 
Renegades coach David Saker said on Wednesday there is “still a chance” of 
Gayle returning.

Saker, speaking after Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Australia chief executive James Sutherland recently clarified that no BBL 
franchise would be prevented from signing Gayle, told Fairfax Media that 
factors such as the controversy over Gayle’s interview would not affect his 
judgment on whether to re-sign him. “That doesn’t enter my mind, I just pick a 
squad of players,” said the former England bowling coach. “If the hierarchies 
or people in higher positions than myself come down on that, they do. All I try 
to do is pick a squad to win.”

Reflecting on Gayle’s remarks four months ago, Saker added: “We know it was 
the wrong thing to do, and he probably identified that quite quickly. We all 
did. But I think what happened afterwards was a bit of a ‘beat-up’. We really 
want women in sport, and I think in Australia we’re embracing that quite well.

“Mel [McLaughlin] does a fantastic job with what she does. We know it was 
wrong, but a lot of people put their two bob’s worth in that probably didn’t 
need to.”

Gayle, who has been badly out of form since his brilliant World Twenty20 
century against England in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/chris-gayle-hammers-england-with-century-for-west-indies-at-world-t20>
 and will play for Somerset in this summer’s NatWest Blast, has reportedly 
recently named his new-born daughter Blush.
 