
Senate Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> on Wednesday 
elected Chuck Schumer of New York to lead the party into the Donald Trump era, 
while Senate Republicans re-elected Mitch McConnell of Kentucky to be their key 
legislative bridge to the next administration.

Schumer had hoped he might be the majority leader if his party recaptured the 
Senate, working closely with Hillary Clinton’s administration. Instead, the New 
York Democrat will serve as the party’s main counterweight to a Trump 
presidency as minority leader. He will replace Harry Reid, the sharp-tongued 
senator from Nevada, who is retiring.

Trump: transition is going 'so smoothly' despite reports of disorder – 
politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/16/donald-trump-transition-team-president-us-politics-live>
“When you lose an election like this, you can’t flinch,” Schumer told 
reporters during a brief press conference after the elections.

In a signal that the party is listening to voters’ demands for change, Schumer 
was flanked by senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Bernie Sanders of 
Vermont and Joe Manchin of West Virginia, all of whom were given leadership 
roles.

Sanders, an independent who caucuses with Democrats, was also named as a 
ranking member of the budget committee. Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois, will 
continue on as the No 2 Democrat in the chamber.

“We needed a sharper, bolder, stronger economic message and we needed to let 
Americans understand what we all believe: that the system’s not working for 
them and we’re going to change it,” Schumer said.

Schumer added that they will work with the incoming administration on areas 
where they agree, but said to expect a “strong and tough fight” when liberal 
values and progress is under attack.

Asked about the appointment of Stephen Bannon, the executive chairman of 
rightwing website Breitbart whohas been called a champion of white supremacists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
, as a senior White House adviser, Schumer called the former Trump campaign 
chief’s rhetoric “reprehensible” but stopped short of calling for his 
resignation.

On Tuesday Reid called on Trump to rescind Bannon’s appointment during a fiery 
address from the Senate floor. He has implored Democrats to be vigilant against 
attempts to “normalize” Trump’s behavior.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsenate-democrats-trump-steve-bannon-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Senate%20Democrats%20call%20on%20Trump%20to%20fire%20Steve%20Bannon%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsenate-democrats-trump-steve-bannon-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Senate%20Democrats%20call%20on%20Trump%20to%20fire%20Steve%20Bannon%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsenate-democrats-trump-steve-bannon-video&media=>
Senate Democrats call on Trump to fire Steve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/senate-democrats-trump-steve-bannon-video>
McConnell was elected unanimously, a reward for keeping the Senate from 
flipping to the Democrats in a tough political climate. Senator John Cornyn of 
Texas was re-elected as the Republican whip. Republicans will control the 
Senate with a 51-48 edge, with one race still yet to be decided.

Republican representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin was unanimously chosen to 
another term as speaker of the House on Tuesday. He will face a majority-rule 
vote before the full House at the start of the next session of Congress. 
Republicans control the House by a margin of 238-193, again with one race still 
to be decided.

“Welcome to the dawn of a new unified Republican government,” Ryan said before 
the elections.

Also on Wednesday, Nancy Pelosi officially announced that she is seeking to be 
re-elected as House minority leader.

“It is with both humility and confidence that I write to request your support 
for House Democratic leader. As of this writing, I am pleased to report the 
support of more than two-thirds of the caucus,” Pelosi wrote in a letter to 
colleagues on Wednesday.

The announcement comes after she was pressured to delay leadership elections 
amid growing rancor among rank-and-file Democrats who are upset by the election 
results. The elections will now take place on 30 November.

It is unclear if anyone will challenge the California Democrat, especially now 
that she has signaled she has broad support.
 