
Compared with their American counterparts, British civil servants have, in 
theory, somewhat less to fear from recent political upheaval. While more than 
4,000 new political appointees will parachute in to run federal departments, 
agencies and embassies afterDonald Trump is sworn in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/bill-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-inauguration>
, most of those required to navigate Britain’s equally momentous departure from 
the EU remain career officials, answering to whichever politicians are in power.

But the resignation of Sir Ivan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/quote-sir-ivan-rogers-resignation-eu-brexit-email-in-full>
, Britain’s permanent representative to the EU, has reopened debates dating 
back centuries over whether such an independent structure is fit for purpose in 
today’s highly politicised Whitehall environment.

Ministers 'failing to defend independence of senior mandarins'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/ministers-failing-to-defend-independence-of-senior-mandarins-dave-penman>
Eurosceptics rejoiced 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4086208/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-hire-diplomat-truly-backs-Brexit.html>
 at his departure, claiming his warnings about the difficulties of Brexit were 
symbolic of bureaucratic resistance to the will of the British people. Civil 
service representatives havehit back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/ministers-failing-to-defend-independence-of-senior-mandarins-dave-penman>
 at the failure of ministers to defend the principle that their mandarins need 
to provide impartial advice, regardless of whether it is what political masters 
want to hear.

Unhappiness about Brexit among civil servants is no surprise. Many have built 
careers around becoming experts in the complex interplay between Brussels and 
Whitehall. Such was the level of private misgiving after June’s referendum 
result that one government lawyer has said there was an informal self-help 
group to provide counselling sessions to officials struggling to cope with 
implementing something they felt was a terrible mistake.

Worrying implications of EU ambassador exit | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/worrying-implications-of-eu-ambassador-exit>
But those who know him dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/04/ivan-rogers-brexit-eu-ambassador-ids-couldnt-be-trusted-by-ministers-claims-duncan-smith-politics-live?page=with:block-586cf724e4b081b2b4ed9f47#block-586cf724e4b081b2b4ed9f47>
 suggestions that our man in Brussels had simply gone native. “The irony is 
that Ivan Rogers was part of a Treasury takeover of European relations because 
they were seen as less easily captured by foreigners,” says Mark Leonard of the 
European Council on Foreign Relations. “If now even this expertise is being 
swept away too, you are seeing a double undermining of the professional 
classes.”

Following similar Downing Street anger at an independent report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/deloitte-apologises-for-brexit-memo-in-effort-to-make-peace-with-no-10>
 that warned an additional 30,000 civil servants were needed to implement 
Brexit, there is a growing fear in Whitehall that politicians no longer want to 
hear bad news, even when presented neutrally.

“This is probably the most difficult clash between politicians and the civil 
service that the country has seen for a generation,” says Leonard. “The message 
that it sends out to the rest of the civil service is that if you put a 
political foot wrong you could be out on your ear. It will send shockwaves 
through the system.”

 “The only thing I can think with parallels is the run-up to the Iraq war, 
where there were similar deep misgivings in Whitehall about the political 
direction,” he adds.

The Foreign Office still has a long way to go before it reaches Washington 
levels of politicisation. Most US ambassadors to plum postings in wealthier 
countries are not just political appointees, but have been rewardedas the 
president’s richest donors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/10/obama-donors-top-embassy-jobs-rewards>
.

Theresa May was said to have resisted parachuting in an overtly political 
replacement for Rogers, such as Brexit champions Michael Gove and Nigel Farage.

Ironically, the critical interview given by the prime minister that first 
raised fears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/whitehall-may-attacked-civil-service-bashing-union-jams>
 among civil servants also included instructions to them to give her 
unvarnished advice. There was a “a tendency in the system to try to interpret 
what they think you want, and to deliver that”, she told the Spectatorlast month
 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/12/theresa-may-i-get-so-frustrated-with-whitehall/>
. “Don’t try to tell me what you think I want to hear. I want your advice, I 
want the options,” she said.

Yet waves of cuts in Whitehall in recent years have left the austerity-ravaged 
machinery of government feeling unloved and under-resourced at the best of 
times. The consequences of a disorderly Brexit, where UK civil servants have to 
suddenly step in and perform the countless “competences” now devolved to the 
EU, could put intolerable strain on an already creaking system.

In this context, the fear is not that the government will suddenly decide to 
make hundreds of US-style political appointments, but that much-needed talent 
will be sidelined if it is seen as out of step with the prevailing mood.

“It will mean politicisation more like other European countries, such as 
France where you have a hybrid civil service,” says Leonard. In such systems 
there are few direct political appointees, but many top officials whose 
political persuasions are well known; who thrive under a certain type of 
government and linger in more junior roles when it is out of power.

It would be an ironic twist for British mandarins if the escape from European 
bureaucracy left them looking more like their continental cousins.
 