
A coalition of more than 70 civil rights groups have written to Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> demanding that the company 
clarifies its policies for removing content and alleging that it has repeatedly 
removed posts documenting human rights violations.

In a letter addressed to CEO Mark Zuckerberg 
<http://sumofus.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/NewFacebookCensorshipSign-OnLetter.pdf>
, the rights groups – including the ACLU, Center for Media Justice, SumOfUs and 
Color of Change – express deep concern over the censorship, particularly when 
posts are removed at the request of police.

When Facebook censors content that depicts police brutality, it sets a 
dangerous precedent for marginalized communities

“Your company is taking on an increasingly central role in controlling media 
that circulates through the public sphere. News is not just getting shared on 
Facebook: it’s getting broken there,” the letter said. “We are deeply concerned 
with the recent cases of Facebook censoring human rights documentation, 
particularly content that depicts police violence.”

The campaign groups referenced the deactivation of Korryn Gaines’ account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/03/korryn-gaines-facebook-account-baltimore-police>
 during a standoff with police, the suspension oflive footage from the Dakota 
Access pipeline protests 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/9/15/12926058/facebook-dakota-pipeline-video-censorship-protest>
, the removal ofhistoric photographs such as “napalm girl” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/facebook-deletes-norway-pms-post-napalm-girl-post-row>
, thedisabling of Palestinian journalists’ accounts 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/9/26/13055862/facebook-israel-palestinian-journalists-censorship>
 and reports ofBlack Lives Matter activists’ content being removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/12/facebook-blocks-shaun-king-black-lives-matter>
.

“When the most vulnerable members of society turn to your platform to document 
and share experiences of injustice, Facebook is morally obligated to protect 
that speech,” said the letter.

“When Facebook unilaterally censors user content that depicts police brutality 
at the request of the authorities, it sets a dangerous precedent that further 
hurts and silences marginalized communities, particularly communities of color.”

The signatories point out that Facebook’s public image is one of inclusiveness 
and solidarity, illustrated by features such as the safety check-in and 
solidarity filters for profile pictures.

Zuckerberg proves he is Facebook's editor by allowing Trump's hate speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/21/mark-zuckerberg-facebook-trump-hate-speech-censorship>
“However, Facebook’s repeated silencing of marginalized communities that 
attempt to make their stories and struggles known proves otherwise.”

“From Black Lives Matter in the United States, to journalists in Palestine, 
Facebook’s lack of transparency has resulted in reports of censorship on almost 
a weekly basis, which proves that this is not an individualized ‘glitch’ but a 
broader policy problem,” said Nicole Carty, a campaigner at SumOfUs.

The letter comes a week after Facebook announced 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2016/10/input-from-community-and-partners-on-our-community-standards/?utm_source=Daily+Lab+email+list&utm_campaign=72ddc3d9a7-dailylabemail3&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_d68264fd5e-72ddc3d9a7-395967273>
 that it will allow newsworthy content on its platform even if it might 
otherwise violate the company’s community standards. The change of heart comes 
in the wake of a lengthy dispute over a celebrated Vietnam war photo that 
violated Facebook’s rules preventing child nudity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Ffacebook-human-rights-censorship-civil-rights-mark-zuckerberg-aclu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F339206c6ad58ce19cf2f5404dedf5281d17b59f9%2F0_135_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Civil%20rights%20groups%3A%20Facebook%20should%20protect%2C%20not%20censor%2C%20human%20rights%20issues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Ffacebook-human-rights-censorship-civil-rights-mark-zuckerberg-aclu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Civil%20rights%20groups%3A%20Facebook%20should%20protect%2C%20not%20censor%2C%20human%20rights%20issues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Ffacebook-human-rights-censorship-civil-rights-mark-zuckerberg-aclu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F339206c6ad58ce19cf2f5404dedf5281d17b59f9%2F0_135_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The letter comes a week after Facebook announced that it will allow newsworthy 
content on its platform even if it might otherwise violate the company’s 
community standards. Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
In early September, Facebook deleted the photo of a naked girl fleeing a 
napalm attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/facebook-mark-zuckerberg-napalm-girl-photo-vietnam-war>
 called The Terror of War (but nicknamed “napalm girl”) from the page of writer 
Tom Egeland and suspended his account because child nudity is not allowed on 
the platform. When the Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten reported on Egeland’s 
battle with the social network using the same photo, it was censored, too. The 
newspaper ran a front-page letter criticizing Facebook and describing 
Zuckerberg as the “world’s most powerful editor”. The situation escalated to the
prime minister, Erna Solberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/facebook-deletes-norway-pms-post-napalm-girl-post-row>
, who said Facebook was “editing out history 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-facebook-norway-primeminister-idUSKCN11F194>
”.

Despite Facebook’s change in policy to adopt more of an editorial 
decision-making process, its executives insist it is not a media company. 
Speaking at theWSJD Live last week 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/facebook-media-company-or-technology-platform-1477880520>
, chief product officer Chris Cox was asked whether Facebook is a news company.

“If you look at how we’ve defined ourselves internally for 12 years now, it 
has been a technology company. A media company is about the stories that it 
tells. A technology company is about the tools that it builds,” he said.

However, he added, “we also realize that we’ve become a significant part of 
the way a lot of people get information” and “that comes with a huge 
responsibility” that Facebook takes “very seriously”.

With Facebook's flaws in the spotlight, Mark Zuckerberg's silence is deafening 
| Espen Egil Hansen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/19/facebook-censorship-mark-zuckerberg-terror-war-vietnam>
“Facebook is walking in the direction of becoming a media company, and with 
that comes a level of responsibility,” said Chinyere Tutashinda from the Center 
for Media Justice. The need for transparency and accountability over the 
content it removes is even more pressing with the rise of Facebook’s live video 
streaming, she said.

“It’s not just a platform where people are getting news, but it’s increasingly 
a platform where people are documenting human rights injustices and breaking 
news.”

Tutashinda said that with both “napalm girl” and more recent cases of 
censorship, it comes down to Facebook’s policies. “It’s clear they don’t take 
into account historical documentation, civil rights documentation or human 
rights documentation,” she said.

A Facebook spokeswoman said: “We have received the letter and are reviewing 
it. As we recently said, we welcome feedback from our community as we begin 
allowing more items that people find newsworthy, significant, or important to 
the public interest.”
 