
There was a spate of claims of hate crimes in the US on Thursday made on 
social media and to police, in which the alleged victims said abusers had in 
some way cited Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election.

Social media was rife with accounts of sometimes violent incidents of hate 
targeted at Muslims, Latinos and African Americans.

Have you experienced a rise in abuse since Trump's win?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-stories-donald-trump-president>
Muslim students in campuses across the country reported incidents of hate. At 
San Diego State University, a Muslim woman who was wearing a hijab toldcampus 
police 
<http://www.kpbs.org/news/2016/nov/09/san-diego-state-investigates-robbery-incident-hate/>
 that two men pulled up next to her and jumped out of a car, then made comments 
about Muslims and Trump before robbing her of her purse, backpack and car keys. 
The woman could then not locate her car.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrump-victory-a-whitelash-against-a-black-president-says-cnns-van-jones-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20victory%20a%20'whitelash'%20against%20a%20black%20president%2C%20says%20CNN's%20Van%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrump-victory-a-whitelash-against-a-black-president-says-cnns-van-jones-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20victory%20a%20%27whitelash%27%20against%20a%20black%20president%2C%20says%20CNN%27s%20Van%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrump-victory-a-whitelash-against-a-black-president-says-cnns-van-jones-video&media=>
Trump victory a ‘whitelash’ against a black president, says CNN’s Van Jones – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/trump-victory-a-whitelash-against-a-black-president-says-cnns-van-jones-video>
Mark Potok, a senior fellow at the Southern Poverty Law Center who monitors 
hate in extremism, said that he’s seen a spike in hate crimes including attacks 
on women wearing hijabs and racist graffiti – and that suicide prevention 
hotlines were receiving high numbers of calls.

“I think this is absolutely clearly a result of Trump’s election,” Potok told 
the Guardian. “Donald Trump has ripped the lid off Pandora’s box.”

I think this is absolutely clearly a result of Trump’s election. Donald Trump 
has ripped the lid off Pandora’s box
Mark Potok, Southern Poverty Law Center 
Muslim women tweeted that they or people they know are considering not wearing 
a hijab so they could not be visibly identified and targeted.


Twitter also painted a picture of divided high schools across the country as 
students shared incidents that ranged from African Americans being called 
cotton pickers to Latinos being told to leave the country. Last week, one 
principal at Southern Lehigh high school in Pennsylvaniaheld a special assembly 
<http://www.lehighvalleylive.com/education/index.ssf/2016/11/students_yelling_cotton_picker_heiling_hitler_at_this_local_school.html#incart_most-read_warren-county_article>
 after reports of students yelling homophobic slurs, calling black students 
cotton pickers and using Hitler salutes.

Trans Lifeline, a national hotline for transgender people in crisis, told the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/transgender-rights-lgbt-donald-trump-presidency>
 it saw its normal call volume triple on Tuesday night into Wednesday morning.
According 
<http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/crime/2016/11/07/cookeville-transgender-womans-truck-painted-trump-lit-fire/93452240/>
 to the Tennessean, a transgender woman reported on Friday that her truck was 
set on fire in her driveway, and the word “Trump” had been spray-painted on its 
scorched back.

Potok compared the spike in hate crimes to the one felt in the UK following 
Brexit. Britain’s most senior police officertold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/28/hate-crime-horrible-spike-brexit-vote-metropolitan-police>
 a court hearing in September that Britain had experienced a “horrible spike” 
in hate crimes after it voted to leave the EU.

Trump’s campaign has also emboldened white supremacist groups. A Ku Klux Klan 
newspaper endorsed Trump, and the former KKK grand wizard David Duke was one of 
the first people to congratulate Trump on Twitter following his victory. Potok 
said that Klan members have been distributing literature in Alabama since 
Trump’s victory, and one local Klan group is organizing a celebratory rally.

Donald Trump's shock victory sparks protests across America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/anti-donald-trump-protests-new-york-chicago-san-francisco>
Hate crimes against Muslims in particular have risen significantly over the 
past year. Georgetown’s Bridge Initiative, a group that studies Islamophobia, 
found that 2015 saw the most incidents of hate crime in any year against 
Muslims since 9/11.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Jordan Denari Duffner, a research fellow at The Bridge Initiative, warned that 
it was difficult to draw precise causation between Trump’s campaign and spikes 
in hate crimes.

“It’s been hard up until now to say that Trump is the sole reason for this,” 
she said. “What will be interesting is how often racist attacks are accompanied 
by explicit support forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.”

In his victory speech early on Wednesday, Trump said he wanted to heal 
divisions in the country and be a president for “all Americans”.

•This article was updated after a University of Louisiana student who told 
police she was attacked by two men acknowledged to police that she fabricated 
the story. This section of the story was removed
 