
A drive down Dr Martin Luther King Drive in St Louis changed Melvin White’s 
life. Roaming the city, he noticed for the first time that the street named 
after his hero was reduced to dusty lots, makeshift brothels, and the 
occasional storefront church. Not long before, wild dogs hadkilled 
<http://www.deseretnews.com/article/830090/Mother-in-St-Louis-jailed-after-dogs-kill-her-10-year-old.html?pg=all>
 and eaten a fourth-grader in a local park. MLK looked like a set for a 
post-apocalyptic Will Smith film, while nearby Delmar Boulevard echoed the 
tastes of Brooklyn hipsters – sidewalk-hogging strollers, sneaker boutiques, a 
cafe that serves coffee in chemistry beakers.

 Melvin, who is black and in his mid-40s, with an athletic frame and a neatly 
trimmed beard, spent his early years along MLK. A night-shift postal employee, 
he heard mailmen were now scared to deliver mail on the street. Melvin knew 
that Chris Rock joke – if you find yourself on MLK,run! run! run! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7hJxWr1TKK8> – but he’d never thought about it 
for his childhood neighborhood.

 Life had treated Melvin well. His mother had spirited her boys to the 
suburbs, and he’d graduated high school and joined the military. The post 
office provided a good living – a government job is the gold standard of 
respectability. But sorting mail in the early hours of the morning, he worried 
the job was institutionalizing him. He couldn’t sleep, knowing something more 
was out there for him.

 “It hit me so hard,” he told me, as we drove along Delmar Boulevard, less 
than two miles from MLK. “Why couldn’t MLK be more like Delmar?”

 And why shouldn’t he be the one to make it happen?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fcleaning-up-the-streets-that-bear-the-name-of-his-hero-martin-luther-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38bc1fbc593d435dedaa4376aea6e03c85a7e6aa%2F60_0_2821_1694%2F2821.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cleaning%20up%20the%20streets%20that%20bear%20the%20name%20of%20his%20hero%20%E2%80%93%20Martin%20Luther%20King&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fcleaning-up-the-streets-that-bear-the-name-of-his-hero-martin-luther-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cleaning%20up%20the%20streets%20that%20bear%20the%20name%20of%20his%20hero%20%E2%80%93%20Martin%20Luther%20King&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fcleaning-up-the-streets-that-bear-the-name-of-his-hero-martin-luther-king%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38bc1fbc593d435dedaa4376aea6e03c85a7e6aa%2F60_0_2821_1694%2F2821.jpg>
 The nonprofit agency Beloved Streets of America is leading an effort to 
revitalize streets named in honor of Martin Luther King Jr. Photograph: Sid 
Hastings for the Guardian 
In the winter of 2003, Randall Sims, a sanitation worker in Muncie, Indiana, 
proposed the city name a street afterMartin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> Jr. (Muncie already 
had an MLK street, but it was, according to Sims, “out in the boondocks”).

Sims’s suggestion launched a mini-civil war in Muncie. At a public meeting, a 
county employee said Sims’s supporters were “acting like niggers”. Existing 
King Street signs were defaced with “Koon”. A federal mediator descended on 
Muncie, and a group of 20 citizens huddled in a closed-door meeting for three 
months.

 Muncie’s no outlier. In Americus, Georgia, an assistant fire chief supported 
naming half a street after Dr King – if the other half was named for his 
assassin, James Earl Ray. MLK signs in Dade City, Florida, were renamed after 
General Robert E Lee. Greenville, North Carolina, residents protested that 
adopting an MLK street would obliterate the historical value of the existing 
name – East Fifth.

Businesses have shifted addresses to side streets to avoid King’s name. Cities 
have made Solomonic compromises, renaming only the “black” portion of the 
street. For years, a battle over naming a prominent street after King raged in 
High Point, North Carolina, near my hometown. Right after the city council 
approved the change, the chairmanproclaimed 
<http://www.wxii12.com/news/high-points-kivett-drive-to-be-renamed-martin-luther-king-jr-boulevard/32002654>
, “A lot of courage was shown tonight.”

But why, in 2015, was renaming a street after a man with a national holiday 
courageous?

 Today,more than 900 streets 
<http://tntoday.utk.edu/2013/01/18/ut-professor-studies-streets-named-martin-luther-king-jr/>
 in the US honor Martin Luther King (you’ll also find MLK streets in Senegal, 
Israel, Zambia, France and Australia.) Predominantly African American, they’ve 
been branded “Black America’s Main Street 
<http://www.amazon.com/Along-Martin-Luther-King-Americas/dp/140006080X>.” 
Indeed, even St Louis’s dilapidated street holds resonance with the black 
community; Michael Brown might have died Ferguson, but his funeral packed a 
church on MLK.

 It’s hard to evaluate the truth in bad stereotypes, though one report 
suggests that residents of neighborhoods with MLK streets are$6,000 poorer 
<https://inhouse.unt.edu/student-researches-us-streets-named-martin-luther-king-jr>
 than those without, even holding race constant. But geographer Matthew 
Mitchelson has argued that MLK streets are not economically worse than Main 
Streets, they’re just different – boasting more gift shops than bail bondsmen, 
more insurance companies than liquor stores.

 Nevertheless, Dr King’s name has become shorthand for urban decline. “It’s 
ironic,” Derek Alderman, an expert on MLK streets, told me, “that we have 
attached the name of one of the most famous civil rights leaders of our time to 
the streets that speak to the very need to continue the civil rights movement.”

 Melvin acted quickly on his vision of a new MLK. Pooling money from friends 
and family, he leased a building at 5901 MLK Drive. Heworked his way 
<http://news.stlpublicradio.org/term/beloved-streets-america> from community 
television to NPR, advertising his cellphone number slowly at each appearance, 
and discovering professors, ministers and students, neighbors and local 
businesses waiting to help. Cold-calling, Melvin recruited an elderly 
architect; when he died, the next architect he dialed, Derek Lauer, volunteered.

 Melvin convinced a downtown law firm to fill out the paperwork incorporating 
his nonprofit. He first christened it United Vision, but people kept asking 
about eyeglasses. Eventually he settled on Beloved Streets of America, after 
King’s vision of a “beloved community”, a place where God’s creatures could 
coexist in love and harmony.

 Later Melvin and his friends organized marches, wearing sharp suits and 
linking arms to recall King in Selma. On the ragged lot across the street, they 
handed out clothes, pancakes, and toys, with upbeat music blasting from car 
windows. Melvin brandished a microphone, interviewing kids about MLK on YouTube.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dcnkj60dH1io&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dcnkj60dH1io>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dcnkj60dH1io&media=>
 When I arrived in St Louis, Melvin opened the office’s metal grates to show 
me around. Inside, Beloved Streets resembled a classroom in Black History 
Month, plastered with black-and-white photographs of King thinking, marching, 
speaking. “MLK stands for Materials, Labor, Knowledge,” Melvin told me, 
pointing to a plan taped to the wall. Melvin envisions parks, hotels, public 
art, and cafes lining the street.

 We moved to the vast, unfinished space in the back of his building. The week 
before, Melvin told me, a boy had overdosed on the tiled floor. I ran my 
fingers along “RIP Reggie” etched into the wall. Years of garbage, trash, 
needles, and condoms, had just been cleared.

 It’s here that Melvin plans an indoor hydroponic organic farm, where 
vegetables grow without soil. “We’re going to grow lettuce, baby corn, squash, 
carrots, tomatoes,” Melvin’s cousin Barry told me. He paused for a second. “Can 
we grow bananas?”

 It sounds unrealistic, but Melvin is persuasive. With Lauer’s help, he won a 
$25,000 grant. Washington University agreed to buy all the produce. A father 
heard Melvin on NPR, and convinced his son, an engineer, to help with 3D 
printing for the project.

 Melvin took me upstairs, where he hoped to house employees to run the farm 
and adjoining cafe. In realtor-speak, the place has “good bones” – pocket 
doors, arched doorways, vaulted ceilings. Squatters had just moved out. The 
windows had long since shattered, allowing clean sunlight to fall on items left 
behind – a sagging mattress, a curly hair extension, a child’s stuffed rooster. 
Spray-painted on the wall was a message: “Hustlers, Go Harder or Go Home.”

 In 1945, JD Shelley, a black father of five from Mississippi, bought a modest 
brick rowhouse off what is now MLK Drive in St Louis. The neighbourhood 
association sued; a covenant on the house forbade the sale to anyone of 
“Negroid or Mongolian” race. The Supreme Courtfound the covenants 
unconstitutional, 
<http://blog.constitutioncenter.org/2014/05/shelley-v-kraemer-legal-reform-for-americas-neighborhoods/>
 but the street only became more segregated as whites fled.

 It’s a story that Colin Gordon, the author of Mapping Decline, describes as 
“famously tragic.” St Louis, still one of the most segregated cities in 
America, he argues, was the product of racial restrictions and failed city 
policies that isolated and marginalized St Louis’s black community. Newspapers 
listed properties for African-Americans under a separate section—“for colored.” 
The “colored” sections shrunk, cramming multiple generations into single-family 
homes. A 1948 real estate manual warned of home-buyers likely to instigate 
blight, lumping together bootleggers, call girls and “a colored man of means 
who was giving his children a college education and thought they were entitled 
to live amongst whites.”

 The hospital, the neighborhood’s economic engine, closed. Government policies 
excluding African-Americans from low-interest loans kept black feet off 
property ladders. The city spent urban renewal money on highways and tourist 
attractions that transferred wealth to the rich, demolishing African-American 
neighborhoods in the process.

 Black communities couldn’t recover. The suburb of Ladue, which is 94% white, 
has a median household income of over $177,000. About seven miles away, MLK 
Drive is 94% black, the neighborhood’s median income about$22,350 <http:// 
Ladue, St. Louis, 
http://www.city-data.com/neighborhood/Wells-Saint-Louis-MO.html>.

 “We live like the Flintstones compared to the Jetsons, yabba dabba doo,” 
Alderman Samuel Moore, whose district includes much of MLK, told me. “But we 
aren’t having a gay old time.”

 He paused. “It’s almost prehistoric in here.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fcleaning-up-the-streets-that-bear-the-name-of-his-hero-martin-luther-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cdf73cf6deefc7ffbe4edf5d8dc1aa8b2a004d2%2F0_111_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cleaning%20up%20the%20streets%20that%20bear%20the%20name%20of%20his%20hero%20%E2%80%93%20Martin%20Luther%20King&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fcleaning-up-the-streets-that-bear-the-name-of-his-hero-martin-luther-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cleaning%20up%20the%20streets%20that%20bear%20the%20name%20of%20his%20hero%20%E2%80%93%20Martin%20Luther%20King&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fcleaning-up-the-streets-that-bear-the-name-of-his-hero-martin-luther-king%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cdf73cf6deefc7ffbe4edf5d8dc1aa8b2a004d2%2F0_111_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘Many doubt Melvin...’ Photograph: Sid Hastings for the Guardian 
Many doubt Melvin. Planners have not always included him, and politicians 
resented the newcomer. A local newspaper questioned whether Melvin could fix 
the street when he couldn’t fix the toilet in his office. Melvin’s sunk several 
thousand dollars of his own money into Beloved Streets and struggles to raise 
more. He’s had to go on disability from the post office because his hands were 
wrecked from sorting mail. Over Christmas, thieves stripped the building’s 
bright green awning and lights.


 But Melvin is a long-term guy, still going a decade later. His sincerity 
draws allies. Conversations about him often begin, “Well, I like Melvin.” And 
he’s attracting attention from high places. A class from the Harvard Design 
School, led by Daniel D’Oca, flew to St Louis and designed projects for the 
street. Melvin critiqued the students’ midterms and finals as Harvard’s guest. 
(Other critics included DC’s Director of Planning, and a class of 
uncompromising fifth graders.) Afterwards, Melvin celebrated with students at a 
party in a clapboard house in Harvard Square. Melvin hadn’t even known Harvard 
was near Boston.

 He’s thinking bigger too, about how to bolster the economic fortunes of the 
street. After Michael Brown’s death Melvin protested, but he disagreed with 
some of the organizers’ approaches. “Why do we have to go to jail?” he asked. 
“We can march all day long but they aren’t really responding because we don’t 
have any money behind us.”

Melvin began to see that the best way to further MLK’s vision might require 
modifying his tactics. Civil disobedience alone isn’t enough – what 
African-Americans need are innovative plans and entrepreneurs that will raise 
the community’s economic fortunes.

 In 1957, fifteen years before a street in the city bore his name, Martin 
Luther King spoke to eight thousand people in a St. Louis basketball stadium. 
“A time like this demands great leaders,” King told the crowd. “God grant that 
ministers, and lay leaders, and civic leaders, and businessmen, and 
professional people all over the nation will rise up and use the talent and the 
finances that God has given them.”

 “Yes, yes, yes 
<http://kingencyclopedia.stanford.edu/primarydocuments/Vol4/10-Apr-1957_ARealisticLook.pdf>
,” the crowd called back.

•••

 Early on a summer’s morning, Melvin welcomed a band of volunteers to MLK 
Drive. The cleanup was sponsored by Transformation Team St. Louis, a mostly 
white, suburban group of St Louisans “committed to activating global 
transformation through empowerment, awakening, subconscious and 
super-conscious, and unconditional love now.”

 The volunteers ranged from 20-something dreadlocked women to middle-aged men 
in khakis. They peppered their speech with “groovy”, “awakening”, and 
“super-conscious”. They carried bongo drums, guitars and chia-seed smoothies. 
But they also ordered dumpsters, rented a Portapotty, and organized waiver 
forms.

 Melvin bounced around, assigning tasks. The block needed weeding. Trash was 
everywhere. Windows required boarding-up. Volunteers donned gloves and wrenched 
out a tree that had grown into the brick building, laying it out like a corpse. 
They sang as they stacked fallen bricks in the heat.

 Residents on the street shared drinks. A pawnshop donated trash bags. A man 
in a pickup truck stopped traffic to flag some volunteers painting. “I want to 
thank you, for what you’re trying to do here,” he shouted to the sidewalk from 
the middle lane.

 “We’re not trying, man,” a twentysomething redhead wearing a painter’s cap 
called back. “We’re doing.”
 