
The race between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump appears to be getting even 
closer with just six days left before the election. Anaverage of six different 
polls 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/general_election_trump_vs_clinton-5491.html>
 shows that Clinton is now just 1.7 percentage points ahead of Trump. But 
there’s still a lot of variation – one poll finds that Clinton is three points 
ahead, another finds that she is six pointsbehind Trump. Both surveys were 
conducted after news that the justice department had obtained a warrant to 
investigate an aide to Clinton’s emails, before which her lead was already 
shrinking.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nevada's%20women%20stand%20divided%20over%20Trump%20and%20Clinton%20on%20eve%20of%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nevada%27s%20women%20stand%20divided%20over%20Trump%20and%20Clinton%20on%20eve%20of%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women&media=>
Nevada’s women stand divided over Trump and Clinton on eve of election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/03/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women>
That variation between polls isn’t surprising – it can be explained by the 
fact that different polls speak to different people. For example, the LA Times 
poll which has consistently found that Trump has more national support, 
includes one19-year-old black male 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/13/upshot/how-one-19-year-old-illinois-man-is-distorting-national-polling-averages.html>
 respondent who consistently said he’ll vote for the Republican nominee. That 
one individual has a disproportionate impact because of a statistical process 
calledweighting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/jun/01/political-polls-bad-for-democracy-heres-why-video>
 (where one respondent can end up representing hundreds of thousands of voters).

So, are current polls a good reflection of what will happen on election day? 
Historically, the answer is “not bad”, although they will probably be a much 
better indicator by the morning of 8 November rather than now. Clinton’s email 
scandal will probably go down in US political history as an “October surprise 
<http://politicaldictionary.com/words/october-surprise/>”, a last-minute news 
event that can cause a shift in public opinion. Those surprises –which have 
included Lyndon Johnson’s announcement of a halt in the bombing of North 
Vietnam in 1968, and the news of a drunk-driving charge for George W Bush in 
2000 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/01/us/october-surprises-dont-necessarily-sway-elections-or-occur-in-october.html>
 – typically don’t affect final outcomes all that much though, as the chart 
below shows. It compares polling a week before from election day and the 
morning of with the final voting outcome.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Felection-polls-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-october-surprise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e48888fd374a891b6e8016e12c159f33c62a32a%2F0_0_640_373%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20'October%20surprise'%20helps%20Trump%20in%20polls%20%E2%80%93%20but%20will%20it%20affect%20election%20day%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Felection-polls-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-october-surprise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clinton%27s%20%27October%20surprise%27%20helps%20Trump%20in%20polls%20%E2%80%93%20but%20will%20it%20affect%20election%20day%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Felection-polls-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-october-surprise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e48888fd374a891b6e8016e12c159f33c62a32a%2F0_0_640_373%2F640.jpg>
 ABC polls one week before the election v the result. Photograph: ABC 
The only snag is the electoral college system. In 2000, it wasn’t just ABC and 
the Washington Post that predicted a Bush win – polling averages also showed 
the Republicanthree points 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/how-much-do-october-surprises-move-the-polls/>
 ahead of Al Gore. Though both candidates ended up with 48% of the popular 
vote, that’s only after rounding. The actual result was Gore-Bush,48.4%-47.9% 
<http://uselectionatlas.org/RESULTS/national.php?f=0&year=2000>. Bush 
ultimately became president because the distribution of those votes worked in 
his favour – he collected 271 of the 538 electoral college votes (270 are 
needed to win).

The map looks a little more daunting for the 2016 Republican candidate, 
though. Even if Trump can winFlorida 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/fl/florida_trump_vs_clinton-5635.html>
,Ohio 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/oh/ohio_trump_vs_clinton-5634.html>
 andIowa 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/ia/iowa_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-5981.html>
 (three important states where he is in a close race with Clinton),and all the 
other states where he is leading (including those where it’s close), he would 
still need to secure at least one state with adecent number 
<https://www.archives.gov/federal-register/electoral-college/allocation.html> 
of electoral college votes likeVirginia 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/va/virginia_trump_vs_clinton-5542.html>
,Pennsylvania 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/pa/pennsylvania_trump_vs_clinton-5633.html>
 orMichigan 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/mi/michigan_trump_vs_clinton-5533.html>
. But Clinton is ahead in all three of those states by a pretty safe margin of 
five to seven points.

The Trump campaign may take solace in the fact that history might not be a 
great guide in this election. The accuracy of polling is now indoubt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/datablog/2016/jan/27/dont-trust-the-polls-the-systemic-issues-that-make-voter-surveys-unreliable>
. More importantly, in this election, Americans are faced with a choice between 
two of themost disliked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/polls-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-unpopularity>
 presidential candidates in living memory, where media reporting on polling 
data is continually shaping their choices. If would-be Democratic voters think 
a Clinton win is inevitable, or dislike both candidates in equal measure, they 
might juststay at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/01/clinton-trump-polls-election-voter-turnout-suppression>
. And if there are enough of those voters in the right states, Trump could 
still become the 45th president of the US.
 