
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> has made 
her first public appearance since conceding the election to Donald Trump a week 
ago, challenging supporters to continue the fight for a country that is 
“hopeful, inclusive and big-hearted”.

“I will admit coming here tonight wasn’t the easiest thing for me,” Clinton 
told the audience in Washington on Wednesday night. “There have been a few 
times this past week when all I’ve wanted to do was just to curl up with a good 
book or our dogs and never leave the house ever again.”

Donald Trump renews war with media as transition chaos continues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/donald-trump-media-new-york-times-tweets>
Clinton was scheduled to appear at the event – a gala for the Children’s 
Defense Fund, where she began her career more than four decades ago – before 
her stunning defeat. The organization’s founder, Marian Wright Edelman, a 
longtime friend, introduced Clinton to the predominantly female audience as 
“the people’s president”, noting that she wasleading the popular vote  
<http://cookpolitical.com/story/10174>by more than 1 million votes.

“I know that over the past week a lot of people have asked themselves whether 
America is the country we thought it was,” Clinton said. “The divisions laid 
bare by this election run deep. But, please, listen to me when I say this: 
America is worth it. Our children are worth it. Believe in our country and 
fight for our values and never, ever give up.

“The words of Dr King, often repeated by President Obama: ‘The arc of the 
moral universe is long but it bends toward justice.’ I know sometimes it can 
feel awfully long – believe me, I know. But I also know it does bend.”

Clinton chose to honor the commitment to address the gala, an aide said, 
describing the event as a “homecoming”. In 1969, as a first-year law student, 
Clinton heard Edelman speak at Yale University and approached her to inquire 
about an internship. Edelman said the organization had no money to hire her, 
but if she could find a way, she was welcome.

“And she did,” Edelman said on Wednesday. “She has always been able to figure 
out how to get done whatever had to be done.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhillary-clinton-first-public-appearance-bernie-sanders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F459d9184e9ae866c601fa9e68274b31086c873d0%2F0_0_3000_1981%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton%3A%20'There%20have%20been%20times%20when%20I%20wanted%20never%20to%20leave%20the%20house%20again'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhillary-clinton-first-public-appearance-bernie-sanders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clinton%3A%20%27There%20have%20been%20times%20when%20I%20wanted%20never%20to%20leave%20the%20house%20again%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhillary-clinton-first-public-appearance-bernie-sanders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F459d9184e9ae866c601fa9e68274b31086c873d0%2F0_0_3000_1981%2F3000.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton receives a standing ovation at the Children’s Defense Fund 
gala at the Newseum in Washington. Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images 
In closing, Clinton invoked her late mother, Dorothy Rodham, whose resilience 
in the face of a difficult childhood was a central part of her message on the 
campaign trail.

“I dream of going up to her and taking her in my arms and saying: ‘Look, look 
at me and listen. You will survive,’” Clinton said, her voice wavering. “‘You 
will have a family of your own – three children. And as hard as it might be to 
imagine, your daughter will grow up to be a United States senator, represent 
our country as secretary of state and win more than 62 million votes for 
president of the United States.’”

Clinton spoke shortly after her rival for the Democratic nomination, Bernie 
Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders>, vehemently denied 
claims that he had contributed to her defeat.

In a letter to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/15/opinion/as-the-democrats-lick-their-wounds.html?_r=0>
, Theda Skocpol, a professor of government and sociology at Harvard University, 
claimed Clinton’s campaign had been undermined by Sanders during a bruising 
primary contest: “Mr Sanders’ refusal to concede in a timely way as Hillary 
Clinton won many millions more votes and his constant harping that she was 
‘corrupt’ furthered Mr Trump’s message and contributed to the conman’s 
catastrophic victory.”


 Sanders told an audience at a Politics and Prose event at George Washington 
University on Wednesday: “My campaign brought millions of people into the 
process, I suspect the overwhelming majority of whom ended up voting for 
Hillary Clinton.”

Noting emails from Clinton campaign chair John Podesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
, published by WikiLeaks, Sanders added: “To say the very least, the DNC 
[Democratic National Committee] was not a neutral force in the campaign and we 
had to take on virtually the entire Democratic establishment. Do I think our 
campaign in a sense made Hillary Clinton a better candidate? Yeah, I do.”

By the end of the primary contest, he said, Clinton was against the Keystone 
pipeline and Trans Pacific Partnership trade deal and supported free college 
tuition. The Democratic platform is now the “most progressive” in US history, 
Sanders added.

Despite losing the nomination, Sanders received 18,183 write-in votes on 
election day in Vermont,according to its secretary of state’s office 
<https://vtelectionresults.sec.state.vt.us/Index.html#/federal>, putting him 
third behind Clinton and Trump with nearly 5.7% of the vote.

On Wednesday Sanders was appointed to a junior role in the Senate Democrats’ 
leadership team, responsible for outreach. During his speech, part of a book 
tour, he said the party should move away from centrist Clinton territory.

“Can you go out and raise substantial amounts of money from the wealthy and 
Wall Street and other powerful special interests and then convince the American 
people that you are on the side of workers and the middle class, or do you 
finally have to say that we are going to take on the oligarchs, we are going to 
take on Wall Street and the drug companies and the insurance companies and the 
corporate media, and we are going to bring millions of people together to 
create a very different type of party than currently exists? That is a 
fundamental difference that exists between Bill and Hillary Clinton and myself.”

Clinton and Obama urge Democrats to rebuild party after election defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/clinton-obama-democratic-party-chair-trump-election-loss>
Sanders – who, like Trump, beat Clinton in states such as Michigan and 
Wisconsin – said Senate Democrats would be willing to work with the new 
president on economic issues that benefit working families. “Towards the end of 
the campaign he was actually using the term that many Democrats don’t use. He 
was saying that he was going to be the champion of the American working class. 
Well, Mr Trump, we have a list of everything that you said, and we are going to 
hold you to account.”

But Sanders vowed to oppose bigotry, earning a huge cheer from the audience, 
many of them students. He called on Trump to rescind hisappointment of Steve 
Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/steve-bannon-donald-trump-hire-republican-dont-criticize>
 of the far-right Breitbart News as chief strategist, saying: “The president of 
the United States should not have a racist at his side. Unacceptable.”
 