
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and 
Barack Obama have urged their party to reflect on what went wrong as Democrats 
search to find a new leader and rebuild after her stunning defeat to Donald 
Trump.

On a conference call with congressional lawmakers, Clinton offered a raw 
evaluation of how the loss has affected her but encouragedDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> to fight for the party’s values 
harder than ever in the Trump era.

“No one is sorrier than me,” she said, according to a Democrat on the call. 
“Heartbreaks don’t heal overnight, and this one won’t.”

Clinton said the party must “analyze” and warned lawmakers against becoming 
“distracted or divided” in the many fights ahead.

Meanwhile, Obama addressed supporters on a conference call late on Monday, 
congratulating Clinton on a “history-making race” while acknowledging how 
painful it is to lose.

“Expected losses are hard enough, unexpected ones are just worse,” Obama said. 
“I was telling my team, you’re allowed to mope for a week and a half, maybe two 
if you really need it. But after that, we’ve got to brush ourselves off and get 
back to work. We’ve got to come together and focus on a way ahead.”

Like Clinton, Obama encouraged the party to evaluate what went wrong and to 
rework its strategy at a grassroots level.

“We have better ideas,” Obama said. “But they have to be heard for us to 
actually translate those ideas into votes and ultimately into action.”

Also on Monday, Clinton officially won New Hampshire’s four electoral college 
votes by a razor-thin margin of less than 1%. Trump’s campaign had until Monday 
evening to ask for a recount but did not do so.

In the end, Clinton won 232 electoral college votes to Trump’s 306, which is 
the only measure that counts in determining the outcome of a US presidential 
election. Although final vote tallies are not in, Clinton is leading the 
popular vote bymore than 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/u/1/d/133Eb4qQmOxNvtesw2hdVns073R68EZx4SfCnP4IGQf8/htmlview?sle=true#gid=19>
 800,000 votes.

“Our vision for America earned more votes … We can’t afford to be discouraged 
or divided. We are stronger together,” she told Democrats.

Clinton’s campaign requested the conference call to thank members of the 
Democratic caucus for their efforts during one of the most divisive 
presidential elections in modern history, according to a Democrat on the call. 
It lasted about 18 minutes.

Clinton had an all-star team of Democrats who blanketed the country on her 
behalf, most notably Obama, first lady Michelle Obama, Vice-President Joe 
Biden, and senators Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-on-us-election-this-is-what-i-think-went-wrong-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%20on%20US%20election%3A%20'This%20is%20what%20I%20think%20went%20wrong'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-on-us-election-this-is-what-i-think-went-wrong-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%20on%20US%20election%3A%20%27This%20is%20what%20I%20think%20went%20wrong%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fbernie-sanders-on-us-election-this-is-what-i-think-went-wrong-video&media=>
Bernie Sanders on US election: ‘This is what I think went wrong’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/bernie-sanders-on-us-election-this-is-what-i-think-went-wrong-video>
On the call, the House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi, said: “Our hearts are 
broken but our determination is deepened.” She thanked Clinton for her service, 
saying: “Hillary, you are one of the greatest leaders in our country’s history 
– president or not.”

Clinton has kept a low profile since her concession speech from the New Yorker 
hotel in Midtown on Wednesday. The next day, a woman and her 13-month-old 
daughter, Phoebe, saw the Clintons walking their dog near her home in 
Chappaqua, New York.

Margot Gerster posted the photo, presumably taken by the former president, of 
her and Hillary Clinton standing in the fall leaveson Facebook with the hashtag 
#ImStillWithHer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hillary-clinton-hike-new-york-after-election-donald-trump>
.

“I got to hug her and tell her that one of my proudest moments as a mother was 
taking Phoebe with me to vote for her,” Gerster wrote. “She hugged me and 
thanked me and we exchanged some sweet pleasantries and then I let them 
continue their walk.

“Now, I’m not one for signs but I think I’ll definitely take this one. So 
proud.”
 