
3.00am BST 03:00  <> 

Today in Campaign 2016
 Donald Trump Photograph: Jeff Swensen/Getty Images 
 * Hillary Clinton is in “excellent mental condition”, her doctor said in a 
letterreleased this evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/hillary-clinton-doctor-letter-pneumonia>
 by the Democratic presidential candidate’s campaign, as focus on her health 
continues to escalate as she recuperates from pneumonia. “She continues to 
remain healthy and fit to serve as president of the United States,” physician 
Lisa Bardack wrote in the letter, which also gave new medical information. 
Bardack added that Clinton was “recovering well with antibiotics”, namely 
Levaquin, which she was advised to take to treat the pneumonia for 10 days. “My 
overall impression is that Mrs Clinton has remained healthy and has not 
developed new medical conditions this year other than a sinus and ear infection 
and her recently diagnosed pneumonia.” 
 *  Meanwhile, Donald Trump revealed his medical records on the Dr Oz Show in 
a preview clip released by the show’s production studio. In the short clip, 
Trump asks the crowd if they want to see his medical reports, before producing 
two letters from his pocket, which he says are copies of his physical and a 
medical report from the Lenox Hill hospital. Donald Trump ‘reveals’ medical 
records in Dr Oz teaser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/14/donald-trump-dr-oz-show-medical-records-video>
 * As both campaigns wait to assess the impact of a bumpy weekend for 
Democrats, ashock new poll 
<https://assets.bwbx.io/documents/users/iqjWHBFdfxIU/r2.771xfmKOI/v0> from the 
Buckeye state released this morning places Trump five percentage points ahead 
of Clinton, helping him lead in arolling average 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/oh/ohio_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-5970.html>
 there for the first time. 
 * Melania Trump, Trump’s wife, released a letter from an immigration lawyer 
that says she never worked as a model on improper visas. The question had 
arisen based on the timing of modeling work Trump did in the mid-1990s, before 
she had American citizenship. The lawyer’s letter asserts Melania Trump never 
worked in the United States in 1995 and in fact never was in the United States 
in 1995. MELANIA TRUMP (@MELANIATRUMP) 
pic.twitter.com/GcJKb80k4H <https://t.co/GcJKb80k4H>
 <https://twitter.com/MELANIATRUMP/status/776050512772886529> September 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/MELANIATRUMP/status/776050512772886529> 
 * Additional Colin Powell emails obtained by the hacker group DC Leaks, which 
Powell has acknowledged are his real emails, surfaced today. “I would rather 
not have to vote for her, although she is a friend I respect,” Powell wrote to 
Democratic megadonor Jeffrey Leeds. “A 70-year-old person with a long track 
record, unbridled ambition, greedy, not transformational, with a husband still 
dicking bimbos at home (according to the NYP).” 
 * In a post appropriately headlined “We’re suing the IRS for audits of Donald 
Trump’s tax returns,” Vice News has announced that it hasfiled a Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit 
<https://news.vice.com/article/were-suing-the-irs-for-audits-of-donald-trumps-tax-returns>
 in against the IRS for the audits of Republican presidential nominee Donald 
Trump’s tax returns from 2002 onward. 
 * In a contentious interview with Cosmopolitan 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.com/politics/a3356886/ivanka-trump-child-care-maternity-leave-policy/>
 - yes, contentious interviews with Cosmopolitan happen - Ivanka Trump told the 
magazine that Donald Trump’s new child care policy that she largely organized 
will not include paid parental leave for same-sex male couples, or for any new 
parents who did not physically birth their child. “The original intention of 
the plan is to help mothers in recovery in the immediate aftermath of 
childbirth,” Trump told Cosmopolitan, when asked to clarify whether that meant 
that same-sex couples where the new parents were male would be able to avail 
themselves of parental leave.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c%23block-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c%23block-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c%23block-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c%23block-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c%23block-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c%23block-57d9fe4be4b0e813b694d23c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.48am BST 02:48  <> 

Ben Jacobs

Donald Trump publicly raised questions about Hillary Clinton’s health for the 
first time since the former secretary of state wasforced on Sunday to leave a 
ceremony for the victims of 9/11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/hillary-clinton-leaves-911-ceremony-after-feeling-overheated>
.

Speaking in a well air-conditioned minor league basketball arena in Canton, 
Ohio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio>, Trump made his most direct 
reference to Clinton’s recent diagnosis of pneumonia and her campaign saying 
she left the event in New York because she felt “overheated”.

“You think this is easy?” Trump asked. “In this beautiful room that’s 122 
degrees. It is hot, and it is always hot when I perform because the crowds are 
so big. The rooms were not designed for this kind of crowd. I don’t know, 
folks. You thinkHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> would be able to stand up 
here and do this for an hour? I don’t know.”

The Republican nominee later went on to add of his Democratic rival, “Now 
she’s lying in bed, getting better and we want her better, we want her back on 
the trail, right?”

Sounding like the classic unscripted Trump, the Republican presidential 
nominee often deviated from his teleprompters in a 40-minute speech that ranged 
from Clinton’s health to thewater crisis in Flint, Michigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/donald-trump-flint-visit-water-plant-tour>
.

‘You think this is easy?’: Trump questions Clinton’s health at Ohio rally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/trump-clinton-health-medical-records-ohio-rally>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508%23block-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508%23block-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508%23block-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508%23block-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508%23block-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508%23block-57d9fdf2e4b05caf65ecd508&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.37am BST 02:37  <> 

Ivanka Trump: No paid parental leave for gay dads

In a contentious interview with Cosmopolitan 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.com/politics/a3356886/ivanka-trump-child-care-maternity-leave-policy/>
 - yes, contentious interviews with Cosmopolitan happen - Ivanka Trump told the 
magazine that Donald Trump’s new child care policy that she largely organized 
will not include paid parental leave for same-sex male couples, or for any new 
parents who did not physically birth their child.

“For same-sex couples as well, there’s tremendous benefit here to enabling the 
mother to recover after childbirth,” Trump said of her plan. “It’s critical for 
the health of the mother. It’s critical for bonding with the child, and that 
was a top focus of this plan.”

For non-gestational parents, however, there’s no parental leave to be had.

“The original intention of the plan is to help mothers in recovery in the 
immediate aftermath of childbirth,” Trump told Cosmopolitan, when asked to 
clarify whether that meant that same-sex couples where the new parents were 
male would be able to avail themselves of parental leave.

The interviewer clarified that in instances of adoption or surrogacy, or where 
the two parents are both men, “they would not be receiving special leave for 
that because they don’t need to recover or anything?”

Trump laughed at the question.

“Well, those are your words, not mine,” Trump said. “Those are your words. The 
plan, right now, is focusing on mothers, whether they be in same-sex marriages 
or not.”

Later in the interview, Trump criticized what she called the “negativity in 
these questions” when asked about remarks her fathermade in 2004 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump-2004-pregnancy-inconvenience-employers-n580366>
, in which he characterized pregnancy as an “inconvenience” for employers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1%23block-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1%23block-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1%23block-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1%23block-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1%23block-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1%23block-57d9f37ce4b05caf65ecd4e1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.56am BST 01:56  <> 

New Hampshire’s eminent Union Leader, the conservative newspaper that has 
never failed to endorse a Republican presidential nominee in the past 100 
years, has declined to endorse Donald Trump, insteadendorsing Libertarian 
challenger Gary Johnson 
<http://www.unionleader.com/An-Editorial-Joseph-W-McQuaid-Publisher-A-better-choice-for-President-No-need-to-hold-your-nose-09142016&template=mobileart>
.

The man is a liar, a bully, a buffoon,” wrote Joseph McQuaid, the newspaper’s 
publisher. “He denigrates any individual or group that displeases him. He has 
dishonored military veterans and their families, made fun of the physically 
frail, and changed political views almost as often as he has changed wives.”

“Americans are being told that we have to choose the lesser of two evils,” 
McQuaid continued. “No, we don’t.”

Instead, the paper’s editorial board was endorsing Johnson, a former New 
Mexico governor - and a former Republican - who recently made it on the ballots 
of all 50 states and the District of Columbia, along with running mate Bill 
Weld.

“Their records,” McQuaid said of the ticket, “speak well of them. They would 
be worth considering under many circumstances. In today’s dark times, they are 
a bright light of hope and reason. The Union Leader and Sunday News endorse 
them.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d%23block-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d%23block-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d%23block-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d%23block-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d%23block-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d%23block-57d9f050e4b0e813b694d20d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.45am BST 00:45  <> 

And Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5%23block-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5%23block-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5%23block-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5%23block-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5%23block-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5%23block-57d9e106e4b0e813b694d1d5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.33am BST 00:33  <> 

Speaking in Canton, Ohio, Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> declared that Ford Motor 
Company’s decision to move the production of its small vehicles to factories in 
Mexico will be terminated by a “four, five-minute phone call” between himself 
and the company’s CEO.

“If you’re gonna build your new factory… and if you think you’re going to make 
cars and you’re gonna sell them tax free,” Trump said, in the imaginary 
conversation between himself and Ford CEO mark Fields, “not gonna happen.”

“We’re going to charge you a 35% tax on every car that’s made outside of the 
United States, and you know what? It’s not too late,” Trump said. “I think the 
reason they announced today is that they think that I’m gonna win and they 
wanna beat the deadline. But lemme tell you, there’s no deadline!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b%23block-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b%23block-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b%23block-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b%23block-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b%23block-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b%23block-57d9ddf9e4b05caf65ecd49b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.15am BST 00:15  <> 

House homeland security chair Mike McCaul has issued a statement correcting 
earlier remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/14/trump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live?page=with:block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469#block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469>
 he had made to CNN’s Wolf Blitzer this evening that Russian state actors had 
hacked the Republican National Committee, saying that he only meant to say that 
Republican political operatives had been hacked.

“I misspoke by asserting that the RNC was hacked,” McCaul said in a statement. 
“What I had intended to say was that in addition to the DNC hack, Republican 
political operatives have also been hacked.”

McCaul had been pressed about his allegations during the interview, which have 
never been made before, and doubled down on the assertion that the Russian 
government, at the behest of Russian president Vladimir Putin, had hacked into 
the RNC.

“They have hacked into the RNC, so this is, again, they’re not picking sides 
here, I don’t think,” McCaul said. “They’re hacking into both political 
parties. What they intend to do with that information, I don’t know.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba%23block-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba%23block-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba%23block-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba%23block-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba%23block-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba%23block-57d9d98de4b0e813b694d1ba&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.10am BST 00:10  <> 

Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook released a statement this evening 
lambasting Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump’s appearance on Dr. 
Mehmet Oz’s daytime television show, calling the appearance a “charade” and 
“completely unserious.”

“It’s fair to say the public now knows more about Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> than nearly anyone in 
public life,” Mook said. “Hillary Clinton’s release of updated medical 
information today meets a standard followed by presidential candidates like 
Barack Obama and Mitt Romney. Additionally, Hillary has made public nearly 40 
years of tax returns over her lifetime.”

“In start contrast, Donald trump is hands down the least transparent 
presidential nominee in memory.,” Mook continued. “His Doctor Oz charade is as 
completely unserious as his original joke of a letter written in five minutes. 
He continues to hide his taxes and business dealing behind fake excuses. And it 
begs the question: what is he trying to hide?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7%23block-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7%23block-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7%23block-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7%23block-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7%23block-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7%23block-57d9d865e4b067ad30087cc7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.05am BST 00:05  <> 

Speaking at a campaign rally in Canton, Ohio, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> rallied the crowd by name 
checking the Football Hall of Fame before launching into his traditional state.

“Ohio is a very, very special place to me,” Trump said, “and we just had some 
good news because we just had some polls come out. This morning… Bloomberg came 
out and we were 48 to 43, up, and then we just got one a little while ago, and 
that was a big one, 48 to 43, so these polls seem to me to be very close!”

The crowd cheered loudly.

“We’re up three in Florida - we’re up, sort of, everywhere,” Trump said. 
“States are in play that theRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> fly over those states. Me? 
I’m gonna land there.”

“I think we are going to have an unbelievable November 8 - gotta get out and 
vote. Gotta get out and vote.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484%23block-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484%23block-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484%23block-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484%23block-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484%23block-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484%23block-57d9d795e4b05caf65ecd484&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.02am BST 00:02  <> 

Donald Trump holds rally in Canton, Ohio

Watch it live here:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e%23block-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e%23block-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e%23block-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e%23block-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e%23block-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e%23block-57d9d6dfe4b05caf65ecd47e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.38pm BST 23:38  <> 

House homeland security chair: Russian hackers penetrated RNC computer systems

The Republican National Committee’s computer network has, like its Democratic 
counterpart, been penetrated by hackers, according to the chair of the House 
homeland security committee.

“It’s important to note, Wolf, that they have hacked not only hacked into the 
DNC but also into the RNC,” Mike McCaul, a Texas Republican, told CNN host Wolf 
Blitzer. “So they are not discriminating one party against the others. The 
Russians have basically hacked into both parties at the national level and that 
gives us all concern about what their motivations are.

“The FBI director would tell you they’re just trying to undermine the 
integrity of the process,” McCaul continued, after Blitzer noted that if Russia 
had hacked the RNC, it was news to him. “They are not discriminating one party 
against the other.

“They have hacked into the RNC, so this is, again, they’re not picking sides 
here, I don’t think,” McCaul said. “They’re hacking into both political 
parties. What they intend to do with that information, I don’t know.”

Earlier this summer, hackers believed by the US government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/russia-hackers-democratic-national-committee-email-leak>
 to be likely agents of the Russian government successfully infiltrated the 
data networks of the Democratic National Committee. That hack led totens of 
thousands of internal DNC emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/23/dnc-emails-wikileaks-hillary-bernie-sanders>
 being released on the internet days before the Democratic national convention 
in Philadelphia, infuriating supporters of onetime Democratic presidential 
candidate Bernie Sanders, who cited emails deriding the candidate as evidence 
that the party’s establishment had been hostile to Sanders’ candidacy.

The resulting turmoil eventually led to the resignation of DNC chair Debbie 
Wasserman Schultz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/24/debbie-wasserman-schultz-resigns-dnc-chair-emails-sanders>
 - as well as speculation that the Russian government was actively involved in 
the hack in a bid to interfere with the US presidential election.

Although McCaul did not cite specific evidence of a hack, and similar document 
releases of internal RNC emails and files have not occurred, so far at least, 
McCaul appeared confident that the Russian government had penetrated the 
party’s computer network at the direction of Russian president Vladimir Putin.

“It was interesting to watch Mr Putin talk about how Russia had nothing to do 
with this, but that how it was good to be transparent, for this to come out 
publicly,” McCaul said. “I don’t trust Mr Putin, I don’t trust his intentions.”

Putin has recently been praised by Republican presidential candidate Donald 
Trump, who has alsoappeared to incite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hillary-clinton-emails-dnc-hack>
 Russia to hack into and publish his opponent’s Hillary Clinton’s private 
emails.

Updated at 11.58pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469%23block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469%23block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469%23block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469%23block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469%23block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469%23block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.13pm BST 23:13  <> 

Live from Donald Trump’s upcoming rally in Ohio:
Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) 
"Things I trust more than Hillary Clinton" pic.twitter.com/hMQzJZfIYt 
<https://t.co/hMQzJZfIYt>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776174256761761792> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776174256761761792> Ben Jacobs 
(@Bencjacobs) 
CC: @icecube <https://twitter.com/icecube> pic.twitter.com/NjZZXKJfNy 
<https://t.co/NjZZXKJfNy>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776172597709012993> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776172597709012993> Ben Jacobs 
(@Bencjacobs) 
Deplorables gets despicable pic.twitter.com/XV57YkCa94 
<https://t.co/XV57YkCa94>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776171172526428161> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776171172526428161> Ben Jacobs 
(@Bencjacobs) 
Support your local militia pic.twitter.com/i6UI6gqtgA <https://t.co/i6UI6gqtgA>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776177649706229760> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776177649706229760> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d%23block-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d%23block-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d%23block-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d%23block-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d%23block-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d%23block-57d9cb53e4b067ad30087c8d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.04pm BST 23:04  <> 

Ryan Felton

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> visited the 
beleaguered city of Flint, Michigan, this afternoon, for a campaign stop 
punctuated by a brief spat with a local pastor.

 Donald Trump. Photograph: Mike Segar/Reuters 
The Republican presidential nominee, whose visit followed a stop earlier this 
month in Detroit, was halfway through remarks at the Bethel United Methodist 
church that constituted more of a typical stump speech than anything tailored 
to focus onFlint’s two-year water crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/lead-drinking-water-level-nrdc-report-flint-crisis>
, when the Rev Faith Green Timmons interrupted.

“Mr Trump, I invited you here to thank us for what we’ve done in Flint,” she 
said, “not give a political speech.”

“Oh, oh, OK,” Trump responded, as several in the audience applauded. “That’s 
good.”

Trump’s brief stop in Flint was met elsewhere in the city with disdain by 
residents who viewed the visit as nothing more than an opportunistic photo-op, 
while the Republican nominee attempted to blame the water crisis on a myriad of 
issues.

“Flint’s pain is the result of so many failures,” Trump said at the church 
before about 50 attendees.

The visit was initially light on details. By the early afternoon on Thursday, 
only two stops were confirmed – a brief visit to the city’s water plant and the 
church, where Trump was expected to speak with local pastors about the 
community. Before his arrival at the church, Flint resident LaShonda Richmond 
said she came to “support our city – not to support him”.

“Shame on him,” Richmond, 46, said of the visit. “He don’t care about anyone 
but Trump.”

Flint residents bristle at Donald Trump's visit to beleaguered city
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/donald-trump-flint-visit-water-plant-tour>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f%23block-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f%23block-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f%23block-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f%23block-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f%23block-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f%23block-57d9c948e4b067ad30087c7f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.00pm BST 23:00  <> 

The Democratic presidential ticket is disclosing its full bill of health this 
evening, with Hillary Clinton’s campaign releasing running mate Tim Kaine’s 
health information this eveningas well as Clinton’s own. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/14/trump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live?page=with:block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b#block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b>

In a letter penned by Dr. Brian Monahan, the attending physician of Congress, 
the Virginia senator’s doctor writes 
<https://m.hrc.onl/secretary/10-documents/05-physician-letter/TK_physician_letter.pdf>
 that Kaine is “in overall excellent health and active in [his] professional 
work, and physical fitness endeavors without limitation.”

Apart from pulmonary nodules uncovered in a 2011 chest CT scan and slight left 
atrial enlargement noted in March of 2016, Kaine’s health history is 
unremarkable, according to the letter. Kaine’s most recent physical examination 
revealed a blood pressure of 120/80 and a resting heart rate of 71. The 
senator’s LDL cholesterol levels were at 138, and HDL was at 65.

Monahan concludes the letter by encouraging the senator to take Vitamin D 
supplements.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443%23block-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443%23block-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443%23block-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443%23block-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443%23block-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443%23block-57d9c696e4b05caf65ecd443&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.44pm BST 22:44  <> 

Vice sues Internal Revenue Service for Donald Trump's tax returns

In a post appropriately headlined “We’re suing the IRS for audits of Donald 
Trump’s tax returns,” Vice News has announced that it hasfiled a Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit 
<https://news.vice.com/article/were-suing-the-irs-for-audits-of-donald-trumps-tax-returns>
 in against the IRS for the audits of Republican presidential nominee Donald 
Trump’s tax returns from 2002 onward:

 In the suit, filed jointly with Ryan Shapiro, a doctoral candidate at MIT and 
research affiliate at the Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society at 
Harvard University, we asked the IRS for ‘any and all requests by law 
enforcement agencies for copies of... Trump’s individual tax returns’ and ‘any 
and all records mentioning or referring to requests by law enforcement agencies 
for copies of individual tax returns.’


The news organization has also filed a separate suit to obtain any FBI 
documents relating to Trump’s comments earlier this summer in which he was seen 
to have encouraged supporters of gun rights to take the Second Amendment into 
their own hands.

“If she gets to pick her judges, nothing you can do, folks,” Trump said at the 
time. “Although the Second Amendment people - maybe there is, I don’t know.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440%23block-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440%23block-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440%23block-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440%23block-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440%23block-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440%23block-57d9c3e1e4b05caf65ecd440&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.38pm BST 22:38  <> 

Meanwhile, Donald Trump’s health disclosure today was decidedly less... formal?
Donald Trump ‘reveals’ medical records in Dr Oz teaser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/14/donald-trump-dr-oz-show-medical-records-video>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e%23block-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e%23block-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e%23block-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e%23block-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e%23block-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e%23block-57d9c332e4b05caf65ecd43e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.15pm BST 22:15  <> 

Hillary Clinton's physician: 'She continues to remain healthy and fit to serve 
as President'

Hillary Clinton’s personal physician has released a letter 
<https://www.hillaryclinton.com/page/medical-information/> updating the 
candidate’s health since she initially released a letter overviewing the 
presidential candidate’s medical history earlier this year. In the letter, Dr. 
Lisa Bardack writes that the former secretary of state has not developed any 
new medical conditions save for an ear infection and her recently diagnosed 
pneumonia and that Clinton “continues to remain healthy and fit to serve as 
President.”
 Hillary Clinton. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
In addition to seasonal allergies and a prescription for the blood thinner 
Coumadin, Clinton was treated in January of 2016 for a sinus and ear infection. 
“To help alleviate her symptoms, a myringotomy tube was placed in her left 
ear,” Bardack wrote. “Further follow-up evaluation with a CT scan of the brain 
and sinuses was done in March” that showed “no abnormalities of the brain and 
mild chronic sinusitis.” Clinton’s symptoms resolved, according to Bardack.

The pneumonia diagnosis was made on Friday, September 9, one week after 
Clinton was evaluated for a low-grade fever and fatigue, an upper respiratory 
tract infection for which she was prescribed antibiotics and advised to rest. 
Clinton did not rest, however, and a non-contrast chest CT scan revealed “a 
small right middle-lobe pneumonia.” Clinton was treated with antibiotics and 
advised to rest, but, as has now been well-documented, did not do so.

Clinton has since been evaluated by Bardack and “continues to improve.”

As for the nitty-gritty, Clinton currently takes a thyroid medication, 
Coumadin, Clarinex for allergies and B12, as needed. Her blood testing has 
revealed normal results, with cholesteral at 189, LDL at 103, HDL at 56 and 
trigylcerides at 159. Clinton has a blood pressure of 100/70, a resting heart 
rate of 70 and a respiratory rate of 18. All of this lead Bardack to conclude 
that Clinton “has remained healthy and has not developed new medical conditions 
this year,” aside from the ear infection and pneumonia.

“She continues to remain healthy and fit to serve as President of the United 
States,” Bardack concluded.

Updated at 10.19pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b%23block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b%23block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b%23block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b%23block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b%23block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b%23block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.59pm BST 21:59  <> 

Hillary Clinton's campaign releases more health information

As promised, Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton’s campaign has 
released more information about the former secretary of state’s health, 
painting a picture of Clinton as a healthy 68-year-old woman despite herrecent 
diagnosis of pneumonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/hillary-clinton-leaves-911-ceremony-after-feeling-overheated>
.
 Hillary Clinton speaks at a campaign rally in Charlotte. Photograph: Andrew 
Harnik/AP 
According to Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/clinton-releases-more-medical-information-after-pneumonia-diagnosis-228175>
, Clinton underwent a CT scan on Friday that revealed “a small right 
middle-lobe pneumonia.” The candidate was prescripted a treatment of the 
antibiotic Levaquin and instructed to take a course of the medication for ten 
days.

In addition to the antibiotic, Clinton also takes a thyroid medication and the 
blood thinner Coumadin, both of which have been previously disclosed by the 
Clinton campaign.

The Clinton campaign will release a letter from Dr. Lisa Bardack, Clinton’s 
personal physician, later today with more full information on the candidate’s 
health.

Clinton’s health has long been a topic of unfounded rumors and conspiracy 
theories, but became a focus of mainstream media organizations after Clinton’s 
campaign told reporters that she had “overheated” at a ceremony commemorating 
the anniversary of the 9/11 terrorist attacks in New York, only to later 
clarify that the candidate had been diagnosed with pneumonia three days 
previous.

Updated at 10.01pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140%23block-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140%23block-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140%23block-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140%23block-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton's%20doctor%3A%20Democratic%20nominee%20is%20'fit%20to%20serve%20as%20president'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140%23block-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftrump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140%23block-57d9b80ce4b0e813b694d140&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close   Donald Trump Photograph: Jeff Swensen/Getty Images 
 * Hillary Clinton is in “excellent mental condition”, her doctor said in a 
letterreleased this evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/hillary-clinton-doctor-letter-pneumonia>
 by the Democratic presidential candidate’s campaign, as focus on her health 
continues to escalate as she recuperates from pneumonia. “She continues to 
remain healthy and fit to serve as president of the United States,” physician 
Lisa Bardack wrote in the letter, which also gave new medical information. 
Bardack added that Clinton was “recovering well with antibiotics”, namely 
Levaquin, which she was advised to take to treat the pneumonia for 10 days. “My 
overall impression is that Mrs Clinton has remained healthy and has not 
developed new medical conditions this year other than a sinus and ear infection 
and her recently diagnosed pneumonia.” 
 *  Meanwhile, Donald Trump revealed his medical records on the Dr Oz Show in 
a preview clip released by the show’s production studio. In the short clip, 
Trump asks the crowd if they want to see his medical reports, before producing 
two letters from his pocket, which he says are copies of his physical and a 
medical report from the Lenox Hill hospital. Donald Trump ‘reveals’ medical 
records in Dr Oz teaser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/14/donald-trump-dr-oz-show-medical-records-video>
 * As both campaigns wait to assess the impact of a bumpy weekend for 
Democrats, ashock new poll 
<https://assets.bwbx.io/documents/users/iqjWHBFdfxIU/r2.771xfmKOI/v0> from the 
Buckeye state released this morning places Trump five percentage points ahead 
of Clinton, helping him lead in arolling average 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/oh/ohio_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-5970.html>
 there for the first time. 
 * Melania Trump, Trump’s wife, released a letter from an immigration lawyer 
that says she never worked as a model on improper visas. The question had 
arisen based on the timing of modeling work Trump did in the mid-1990s, before 
she had American citizenship. The lawyer’s letter asserts Melania Trump never 
worked in the United States in 1995 and in fact never was in the United States 
in 1995. MELANIA TRUMP (@MELANIATRUMP) 
pic.twitter.com/GcJKb80k4H <https://t.co/GcJKb80k4H>
 <https://twitter.com/MELANIATRUMP/status/776050512772886529> September 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/MELANIATRUMP/status/776050512772886529> 
 * Additional Colin Powell emails obtained by the hacker group DC Leaks, which 
Powell has acknowledged are his real emails, surfaced today. “I would rather 
not have to vote for her, although she is a friend I respect,” Powell wrote to 
Democratic megadonor Jeffrey Leeds. “A 70-year-old person with a long track 
record, unbridled ambition, greedy, not transformational, with a husband still 
dicking bimbos at home (according to the NYP).” 
 * In a post appropriately headlined “We’re suing the IRS for audits of Donald 
Trump’s tax returns,” Vice News has announced that it hasfiled a Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit 
<https://news.vice.com/article/were-suing-the-irs-for-audits-of-donald-trumps-tax-returns>
 in against the IRS for the audits of Republican presidential nominee Donald 
Trump’s tax returns from 2002 onward. 
 * In a contentious interview with Cosmopolitan 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.com/politics/a3356886/ivanka-trump-child-care-maternity-leave-policy/>
 - yes, contentious interviews with Cosmopolitan happen - Ivanka Trump told the 
magazine that Donald Trump’s new child care policy that she largely organized 
will not include paid parental leave for same-sex male couples, or for any new 
parents who did not physically birth their child. “The original intention of 
the plan is to help mothers in recovery in the immediate aftermath of 
childbirth,” Trump told Cosmopolitan, when asked to clarify whether that meant 
that same-sex couples where the new parents were male would be able to avail 
themselves of parental leave.
 
Donald Trump publicly raised questions about Hillary Clinton’s health for the 
first time since the former secretary of state wasforced on Sunday to leave a 
ceremony for the victims of 9/11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/hillary-clinton-leaves-911-ceremony-after-feeling-overheated>
.

Speaking in a well air-conditioned minor league basketball arena in Canton, 
Ohio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio>, Trump made his most direct 
reference to Clinton’s recent diagnosis of pneumonia and her campaign saying 
she left the event in New York because she felt “overheated”.

“You think this is easy?” Trump asked. “In this beautiful room that’s 122 
degrees. It is hot, and it is always hot when I perform because the crowds are 
so big. The rooms were not designed for this kind of crowd. I don’t know, 
folks. You thinkHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> would be able to stand up 
here and do this for an hour? I don’t know.”

The Republican nominee later went on to add of his Democratic rival, “Now 
she’s lying in bed, getting better and we want her better, we want her back on 
the trail, right?”

Sounding like the classic unscripted Trump, the Republican presidential 
nominee often deviated from his teleprompters in a 40-minute speech that ranged 
from Clinton’s health to thewater crisis in Flint, Michigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/donald-trump-flint-visit-water-plant-tour>
.

‘You think this is easy?’: Trump questions Clinton’s health at Ohio rally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/trump-clinton-health-medical-records-ohio-rally> 
In a contentious interview with Cosmopolitan 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.com/politics/a3356886/ivanka-trump-child-care-maternity-leave-policy/>
 - yes, contentious interviews with Cosmopolitan happen - Ivanka Trump told the 
magazine that Donald Trump’s new child care policy that she largely organized 
will not include paid parental leave for same-sex male couples, or for any new 
parents who did not physically birth their child.

“For same-sex couples as well, there’s tremendous benefit here to enabling the 
mother to recover after childbirth,” Trump said of her plan. “It’s critical for 
the health of the mother. It’s critical for bonding with the child, and that 
was a top focus of this plan.”

For non-gestational parents, however, there’s no parental leave to be had.

“The original intention of the plan is to help mothers in recovery in the 
immediate aftermath of childbirth,” Trump told Cosmopolitan, when asked to 
clarify whether that meant that same-sex couples where the new parents were 
male would be able to avail themselves of parental leave.

The interviewer clarified that in instances of adoption or surrogacy, or where 
the two parents are both men, “they would not be receiving special leave for 
that because they don’t need to recover or anything?”

Trump laughed at the question.

“Well, those are your words, not mine,” Trump said. “Those are your words. The 
plan, right now, is focusing on mothers, whether they be in same-sex marriages 
or not.”

Later in the interview, Trump criticized what she called the “negativity in 
these questions” when asked about remarks her fathermade in 2004 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump-2004-pregnancy-inconvenience-employers-n580366>
, in which he characterized pregnancy as an “inconvenience” for employers.
 
New Hampshire’s eminent Union Leader, the conservative newspaper that has 
never failed to endorse a Republican presidential nominee in the past 100 
years, has declined to endorse Donald Trump, insteadendorsing Libertarian 
challenger Gary Johnson 
<http://www.unionleader.com/An-Editorial-Joseph-W-McQuaid-Publisher-A-better-choice-for-President-No-need-to-hold-your-nose-09142016&template=mobileart>
.

The man is a liar, a bully, a buffoon,” wrote Joseph McQuaid, the newspaper’s 
publisher. “He denigrates any individual or group that displeases him. He has 
dishonored military veterans and their families, made fun of the physically 
frail, and changed political views almost as often as he has changed wives.”

“Americans are being told that we have to choose the lesser of two evils,” 
McQuaid continued. “No, we don’t.”

Instead, the paper’s editorial board was endorsing Johnson, a former New 
Mexico governor - and a former Republican - who recently made it on the ballots 
of all 50 states and the District of Columbia, along with running mate Bill 
Weld.

“Their records,” McQuaid said of the ticket, “speak well of them. They would 
be worth considering under many circumstances. In today’s dark times, they are 
a bright light of hope and reason. The Union Leader and Sunday News endorse 
them.”
 
And Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is out.
 
Speaking in Canton, Ohio, Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> declared that Ford Motor 
Company’s decision to move the production of its small vehicles to factories in 
Mexico will be terminated by a “four, five-minute phone call” between himself 
and the company’s CEO.

“If you’re gonna build your new factory… and if you think you’re going to make 
cars and you’re gonna sell them tax free,” Trump said, in the imaginary 
conversation between himself and Ford CEO mark Fields, “not gonna happen.”

“We’re going to charge you a 35% tax on every car that’s made outside of the 
United States, and you know what? It’s not too late,” Trump said. “I think the 
reason they announced today is that they think that I’m gonna win and they 
wanna beat the deadline. But lemme tell you, there’s no deadline!”
 
House homeland security chair Mike McCaul has issued a statement correcting 
earlier remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/14/trump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live?page=with:block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469#block-57d9d10fe4b05caf65ecd469>
 he had made to CNN’s Wolf Blitzer this evening that Russian state actors had 
hacked the Republican National Committee, saying that he only meant to say that 
Republican political operatives had been hacked.

“I misspoke by asserting that the RNC was hacked,” McCaul said in a statement. 
“What I had intended to say was that in addition to the DNC hack, Republican 
political operatives have also been hacked.”

McCaul had been pressed about his allegations during the interview, which have 
never been made before, and doubled down on the assertion that the Russian 
government, at the behest of Russian president Vladimir Putin, had hacked into 
the RNC.

“They have hacked into the RNC, so this is, again, they’re not picking sides 
here, I don’t think,” McCaul said. “They’re hacking into both political 
parties. What they intend to do with that information, I don’t know.”
 
Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook released a statement this evening 
lambasting Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump’s appearance on Dr. 
Mehmet Oz’s daytime television show, calling the appearance a “charade” and 
“completely unserious.”

“It’s fair to say the public now knows more about Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> than nearly anyone in 
public life,” Mook said. “Hillary Clinton’s release of updated medical 
information today meets a standard followed by presidential candidates like 
Barack Obama and Mitt Romney. Additionally, Hillary has made public nearly 40 
years of tax returns over her lifetime.”

“In start contrast, Donald trump is hands down the least transparent 
presidential nominee in memory.,” Mook continued. “His Doctor Oz charade is as 
completely unserious as his original joke of a letter written in five minutes. 
He continues to hide his taxes and business dealing behind fake excuses. And it 
begs the question: what is he trying to hide?”
 
Speaking at a campaign rally in Canton, Ohio, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> rallied the crowd by name 
checking the Football Hall of Fame before launching into his traditional state.

“Ohio is a very, very special place to me,” Trump said, “and we just had some 
good news because we just had some polls come out. This morning… Bloomberg came 
out and we were 48 to 43, up, and then we just got one a little while ago, and 
that was a big one, 48 to 43, so these polls seem to me to be very close!”

The crowd cheered loudly.

“We’re up three in Florida - we’re up, sort of, everywhere,” Trump said. 
“States are in play that theRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> fly over those states. Me? 
I’m gonna land there.”

“I think we are going to have an unbelievable November 8 - gotta get out and 
vote. Gotta get out and vote.”
 
Watch it live here:
 
The Republican National Committee’s computer network has, like its Democratic 
counterpart, been penetrated by hackers, according to the chair of the House 
homeland security committee.

“It’s important to note, Wolf, that they have hacked not only hacked into the 
DNC but also into the RNC,” Mike McCaul, a Texas Republican, told CNN host Wolf 
Blitzer. “So they are not discriminating one party against the others. The 
Russians have basically hacked into both parties at the national level and that 
gives us all concern about what their motivations are.

“The FBI director would tell you they’re just trying to undermine the 
integrity of the process,” McCaul continued, after Blitzer noted that if Russia 
had hacked the RNC, it was news to him. “They are not discriminating one party 
against the other.

“They have hacked into the RNC, so this is, again, they’re not picking sides 
here, I don’t think,” McCaul said. “They’re hacking into both political 
parties. What they intend to do with that information, I don’t know.”

Earlier this summer, hackers believed by the US government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/russia-hackers-democratic-national-committee-email-leak>
 to be likely agents of the Russian government successfully infiltrated the 
data networks of the Democratic National Committee. That hack led totens of 
thousands of internal DNC emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/23/dnc-emails-wikileaks-hillary-bernie-sanders>
 being released on the internet days before the Democratic national convention 
in Philadelphia, infuriating supporters of onetime Democratic presidential 
candidate Bernie Sanders, who cited emails deriding the candidate as evidence 
that the party’s establishment had been hostile to Sanders’ candidacy.

The resulting turmoil eventually led to the resignation of DNC chair Debbie 
Wasserman Schultz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/24/debbie-wasserman-schultz-resigns-dnc-chair-emails-sanders>
 - as well as speculation that the Russian government was actively involved in 
the hack in a bid to interfere with the US presidential election.

Although McCaul did not cite specific evidence of a hack, and similar document 
releases of internal RNC emails and files have not occurred, so far at least, 
McCaul appeared confident that the Russian government had penetrated the 
party’s computer network at the direction of Russian president Vladimir Putin.

“It was interesting to watch Mr Putin talk about how Russia had nothing to do 
with this, but that how it was good to be transparent, for this to come out 
publicly,” McCaul said. “I don’t trust Mr Putin, I don’t trust his intentions.”

Putin has recently been praised by Republican presidential candidate Donald 
Trump, who has alsoappeared to incite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hillary-clinton-emails-dnc-hack>
 Russia to hack into and publish his opponent’s Hillary Clinton’s private 
emails.
 
Live from Donald Trump’s upcoming rally in Ohio:
Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) 
"Things I trust more than Hillary Clinton" pic.twitter.com/hMQzJZfIYt 
<https://t.co/hMQzJZfIYt>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776174256761761792> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776174256761761792> Ben Jacobs 
(@Bencjacobs) 
CC: @icecube <https://twitter.com/icecube> pic.twitter.com/NjZZXKJfNy 
<https://t.co/NjZZXKJfNy>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776172597709012993> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776172597709012993> Ben Jacobs 
(@Bencjacobs) 
Deplorables gets despicable pic.twitter.com/XV57YkCa94 
<https://t.co/XV57YkCa94>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776171172526428161> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776171172526428161> Ben Jacobs 
(@Bencjacobs) 
Support your local militia pic.twitter.com/i6UI6gqtgA <https://t.co/i6UI6gqtgA>
 <https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776177649706229760> September 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Bencjacobs/status/776177649706229760>  
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> visited the 
beleaguered city of Flint, Michigan, this afternoon, for a campaign stop 
punctuated by a brief spat with a local pastor.

 Donald Trump. Photograph: Mike Segar/Reuters 
The Republican presidential nominee, whose visit followed a stop earlier this 
month in Detroit, was halfway through remarks at the Bethel United Methodist 
church that constituted more of a typical stump speech than anything tailored 
to focus onFlint’s two-year water crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/lead-drinking-water-level-nrdc-report-flint-crisis>
, when the Rev Faith Green Timmons interrupted.

“Mr Trump, I invited you here to thank us for what we’ve done in Flint,” she 
said, “not give a political speech.”

“Oh, oh, OK,” Trump responded, as several in the audience applauded. “That’s 
good.”

Trump’s brief stop in Flint was met elsewhere in the city with disdain by 
residents who viewed the visit as nothing more than an opportunistic photo-op, 
while the Republican nominee attempted to blame the water crisis on a myriad of 
issues.

“Flint’s pain is the result of so many failures,” Trump said at the church 
before about 50 attendees.

The visit was initially light on details. By the early afternoon on Thursday, 
only two stops were confirmed – a brief visit to the city’s water plant and the 
church, where Trump was expected to speak with local pastors about the 
community. Before his arrival at the church, Flint resident LaShonda Richmond 
said she came to “support our city – not to support him”.

“Shame on him,” Richmond, 46, said of the visit. “He don’t care about anyone 
but Trump.”

Flint residents bristle at Donald Trump's visit to beleaguered city
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/donald-trump-flint-visit-water-plant-tour> 
The Democratic presidential ticket is disclosing its full bill of health this 
evening, with Hillary Clinton’s campaign releasing running mate Tim Kaine’s 
health information this eveningas well as Clinton’s own. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/14/trump-clinton-ohio-poll-us-election-live?page=with:block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b#block-57d9bac2e4b0e813b694d14b>

In a letter penned by Dr. Brian Monahan, the attending physician of Congress, 
the Virginia senator’s doctor writes 
<https://m.hrc.onl/secretary/10-documents/05-physician-letter/TK_physician_letter.pdf>
 that Kaine is “in overall excellent health and active in [his] professional 
work, and physical fitness endeavors without limitation.”

Apart from pulmonary nodules uncovered in a 2011 chest CT scan and slight left 
atrial enlargement noted in March of 2016, Kaine’s health history is 
unremarkable, according to the letter. Kaine’s most recent physical examination 
revealed a blood pressure of 120/80 and a resting heart rate of 71. The 
senator’s LDL cholesterol levels were at 138, and HDL was at 65.

Monahan concludes the letter by encouraging the senator to take Vitamin D 
supplements.
 
In a post appropriately headlined “We’re suing the IRS for audits of Donald 
Trump’s tax returns,” Vice News has announced that it hasfiled a Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit 
<https://news.vice.com/article/were-suing-the-irs-for-audits-of-donald-trumps-tax-returns>
 in against the IRS for the audits of Republican presidential nominee Donald 
Trump’s tax returns from 2002 onward:

 In the suit, filed jointly with Ryan Shapiro, a doctoral candidate at MIT and 
research affiliate at the Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society at 
Harvard University, we asked the IRS for ‘any and all requests by law 
enforcement agencies for copies of... Trump’s individual tax returns’ and ‘any 
and all records mentioning or referring to requests by law enforcement agencies 
for copies of individual tax returns.’


The news organization has also filed a separate suit to obtain any FBI 
documents relating to Trump’s comments earlier this summer in which he was seen 
to have encouraged supporters of gun rights to take the Second Amendment into 
their own hands.

“If she gets to pick her judges, nothing you can do, folks,” Trump said at the 
time. “Although the Second Amendment people - maybe there is, I don’t know.”
 
Meanwhile, Donald Trump’s health disclosure today was decidedly less... formal?
Donald Trump ‘reveals’ medical records in Dr Oz teaser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/14/donald-trump-dr-oz-show-medical-records-video> 
Hillary Clinton’s personal physician has released a letter 
<https://www.hillaryclinton.com/page/medical-information/> updating the 
candidate’s health since she initially released a letter overviewing the 
presidential candidate’s medical history earlier this year. In the letter, Dr. 
Lisa Bardack writes that the former secretary of state has not developed any 
new medical conditions save for an ear infection and her recently diagnosed 
pneumonia and that Clinton “continues to remain healthy and fit to serve as 
President.”
 Hillary Clinton. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
In addition to seasonal allergies and a prescription for the blood thinner 
Coumadin, Clinton was treated in January of 2016 for a sinus and ear infection. 
“To help alleviate her symptoms, a myringotomy tube was placed in her left 
ear,” Bardack wrote. “Further follow-up evaluation with a CT scan of the brain 
and sinuses was done in March” that showed “no abnormalities of the brain and 
mild chronic sinusitis.” Clinton’s symptoms resolved, according to Bardack.

The pneumonia diagnosis was made on Friday, September 9, one week after 
Clinton was evaluated for a low-grade fever and fatigue, an upper respiratory 
tract infection for which she was prescribed antibiotics and advised to rest. 
Clinton did not rest, however, and a non-contrast chest CT scan revealed “a 
small right middle-lobe pneumonia.” Clinton was treated with antibiotics and 
advised to rest, but, as has now been well-documented, did not do so.

Clinton has since been evaluated by Bardack and “continues to improve.”

As for the nitty-gritty, Clinton currently takes a thyroid medication, 
Coumadin, Clarinex for allergies and B12, as needed. Her blood testing has 
revealed normal results, with cholesteral at 189, LDL at 103, HDL at 56 and 
trigylcerides at 159. Clinton has a blood pressure of 100/70, a resting heart 
rate of 70 and a respiratory rate of 18. All of this lead Bardack to conclude 
that Clinton “has remained healthy and has not developed new medical conditions 
this year,” aside from the ear infection and pneumonia.

“She continues to remain healthy and fit to serve as President of the United 
States,” Bardack concluded.
 
As promised, Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton’s campaign has 
released more information about the former secretary of state’s health, 
painting a picture of Clinton as a healthy 68-year-old woman despite herrecent 
diagnosis of pneumonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/hillary-clinton-leaves-911-ceremony-after-feeling-overheated>
.
 Hillary Clinton speaks at a campaign rally in Charlotte. Photograph: Andrew 
Harnik/AP 
According to Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/clinton-releases-more-medical-information-after-pneumonia-diagnosis-228175>
, Clinton underwent a CT scan on Friday that revealed “a small right 
middle-lobe pneumonia.” The candidate was prescripted a treatment of the 
antibiotic Levaquin and instructed to take a course of the medication for ten 
days.

In addition to the antibiotic, Clinton also takes a thyroid medication and the 
blood thinner Coumadin, both of which have been previously disclosed by the 
Clinton campaign.

The Clinton campaign will release a letter from Dr. Lisa Bardack, Clinton’s 
personal physician, later today with more full information on the candidate’s 
health.

Clinton’s health has long been a topic of unfounded rumors and conspiracy 
theories, but became a focus of mainstream media organizations after Clinton’s 
campaign told reporters that she had “overheated” at a ceremony commemorating 
the anniversary of the 9/11 terrorist attacks in New York, only to later 
clarify that the candidate had been diagnosed with pneumonia three days 
previous.
 