
The first presidential debate is in the can. Here’s a summary of what happened:


 * Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump engaged in an occasionally raw series of 
clashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/debate-clinton-trump-recap-presidential-election-hofstra>
 on topics from trade policy to the Iran deal to Trump’s taxes. 
 * The Republican candidate came out swinging on Nafta and on, he said, his 
Democratic rival’s failed record of public service. His most aggressive attacks 
had Clinton appealing to “fact-checkers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/debate-fact-check-trump-clinton-live-quotes-hofstra>
” instead of offering rebuttals. 
 * Clinton’s performance was magisterial. She slipped easily into the details 
of many policy areas – cyber warfare, community policing, paid family leave – 
that Trump could not touch. 
 * Clinton also scored the biggest moment of wit, at the end of a long Trump 
boast about his temperament, which he delivered hotly. “Whew, OK!” she said 
when he was through, smiling. 
 * Clinton flayed Trump on his refusal to release his tax returns, on his 
“long record” of “racist behavior”, on his lack of knowledge about the deal to 
withdraw US troops from Iraq, on climate change being a Chinese “hoax”, and on 
and on. But his best line was: “Hillary’s got experience, but it’s bad 
experience.” 
 * Clinton’s best line (apart from “Whew, OK!”): “I think Donald just 
criticized me for preparing for this debate. And yes I did. And you know what 
else I prepared for? I prepared to be president. And that’s a good thing.” 
 * Clinton’s runner-up best line, in reply to a Trump charge that “we don’t 
have the money because it’s been squandered on your ideas”, was: “Maybe it’s 
because you haven’t paid your taxes!” 
 * There were lots of manterruptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/26/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-presidential-debate-live?page=with:block-57e9cf34e4b0a785ec48bcd8#liveblog-navigation>
. Trump alsohad the sniffles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/trump-sniffles-presidential-debate-clinton-hofstra>
. 
 * Trump lost altitude quickly after the first half hour, shifting from 
pointed interruptions to a more incoherent, sloppy pattern of interruption. 
 * Trump tried to deny five years of spreading birtherism – the conspiracy 
theory that Barack Obama was born outside the US. Clinton replied sharply: “It 
can’t be dismissed that easily ... He has a long record in engaging in racist 
behavior.” 
 * Trump cast doubt on the notion that the hacking of the Democratic National 
Committee was Russia-backed. He said it may have been China or, bizarrely, a 
“400lb person sitting on their bed”. 
 * Clinton said neighborhood security would come from community policing and 
getting guns off streets while Trump called for “law and order” and 
“stop-and-frisk”. 
 * Clinton poked fun at Trump’s unlimited indictment of her record. “I have a 
feeling that by the end of this evening everything is going to be my fault,” 
she said. Then Trump agreed with her. ABC News Politics (@ABCPolitics) 
.@HillaryClinton <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton> after Trump's comment 
about her temperament: "Whew! Okay."https://t.co/LFGeC7wIJD 
<https://t.co/LFGeC7wIJD> #Debates 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Debates?src=hash> https://t.co/0bZczb87cv 
<https://t.co/0bZczb87cv>
 <https://twitter.com/ABCPolitics/status/780599581994209280> September 27, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/ABCPolitics/status/780599581994209280> 
 * Clinton launched a last-minute attack on Trump for his insults of women. 
She introduced the world to Alicia Machado, a beauty pageant contestant who 
said Trump called her “Miss Piggy” and “Miss Housekeeping”. Hillary Clinton 
(@HillaryClinton) 
The woman Trump called “Miss Piggy” has a name: Alicia. #debatenight 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/debatenight?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/XlthzE8X8j 
<https://t.co/XlthzE8X8j>
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/780597333650239488> September 27, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/780597333650239488> Alicia 
Machado (@machadooficial) 
Gracias señora @HillaryClinton <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton> su respeto 
a las mujeres y nuestras diferencias la hacen grande! Estoy con usted!
 <https://twitter.com/machadooficial/status/780598124075110401> September 27, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/machadooficial/status/780598124075110401>  