
What makes the nightlife scene unique?

The diversity. People in Manchester are so open-minded there are no real 
boundaries. On any night you could be listening to African music, jazz, funk 
and soul 45s or in the midst of a massive rave like the Warehouse Project, then 
go to a late-night party in a warehouse or a gallery space and listen to a 
local legend playing records. People are exposed to new things on a daily basis.

What’s the atmosphere in Manchester on a night out?

Without sounding too cheesy, it’s energetic. You see everyone from 19 year 
olds to 50-somethings out drinking beer in the street. Then you have football 
fans rolling about causing their own kind of mayhem, and all the club nights. 
It creates an energy that sets the tone for a night out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fclub-culture-guide-manchester-nightlife-krystal-klear-dj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429094417820%2Fb51226e2-5e80-45d6-bb91-757e83faaa0c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Club%20culture%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Manchester's%20nightlife%20%E2%80%93%20by%20Krystal%20Klear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fclub-culture-guide-manchester-nightlife-krystal-klear-dj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Club%20culture%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Manchester%27s%20nightlife%20%E2%80%93%20by%20Krystal%20Klear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fclub-culture-guide-manchester-nightlife-krystal-klear-dj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429094417820%2Fb51226e2-5e80-45d6-bb91-757e83faaa0c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Krystal Klear DJing at Soup Kitchen 
Where should you warm up for a night out?

Soup Kitchen <http://soup-kitchen.co.uk/> is my one-stop shop. You can get the 
best of everything there. It’s the perfect place to get going – upstairs is a 
really nice old school kitchen room, like a refectory, with massive long 
tables. Then there’s a canteen area with freshly cooked food, vegan food and a 
good selection of beers. Downstairs is the basement club. It’s kind of a dingy 
spot, rough around the edges, but clean if you know what I mean. It has a great 
sound system and it’s been a location for all themeandyou 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/_meandyou/158528564198221> and Swing Ting 
<http://swingting.com/> parties. So many DJs say it’s the best place they’ve 
played.


Can you recommend a place to go for a more sophisticated night out?

Not really. I don’t know anyone who wants to have a sophisticated night out.

Where should you go for a massive rave?

Warehouse Project <http://www.thewarehouseproject.com/index.php> is amazing. 
If you’ve never been it will be pretty jaw-dropping when you walk in for the 
first time. The line-ups are always really well considered. I think that’s the 
best thing about it. Ultimately they could put on whatever they want but they 
are really good at curating line-ups that support underground diversity and 
exposing that to a much bigger audience.

Which club has the most history?

Number one for me will always be the Roadhouse 
<http://www.theroadhouselive.co.uk/>, it’s where I started off playing for 
Hoya:Hoya <http://www.hoyahoya.co.uk/> and it was the first club I ever went to 
in Manchester. It’s pretty famous and I’m sad to say it’s closing down at the 
end of May.


What clubs are making a new impression?

The Soup Kitchen has taken the helm. I could get shot down for this, but I 
know there’s going to be a handful of brand new mid-size venues opening in the 
next year or two that are going to challenge a lot of stuff and they all sound 
really interesting. With the number of old industrial warehouse space in 
Manchester it’s just a matter of time before youngsters start getting hold of 
the spaces and trying to make something out of them. There are thousands of 
them and they’re all on the cusp, if not in, the city centre. They’re made for 
small raves.

Where should you go for a more alternative night?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fclub-culture-guide-manchester-nightlife-krystal-klear-dj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429021254587%2F98da488e-b2dc-42ef-8050-30fe508d2384-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Club%20culture%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Manchester's%20nightlife%20%E2%80%93%20by%20Krystal%20Klear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fclub-culture-guide-manchester-nightlife-krystal-klear-dj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Club%20culture%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Manchester%27s%20nightlife%20%E2%80%93%20by%20Krystal%20Klear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fclub-culture-guide-manchester-nightlife-krystal-klear-dj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429021254587%2F98da488e-b2dc-42ef-8050-30fe508d2384-1020x612.jpeg>
 Islington Mill specialises in more left-field creativity 
Islington Mill <http://www.islingtonmill.com/> would be a good spot. It’s a 
massive mill a bit further out, in Salford, and contains a lot of artists’ 
studios. They do a bit of everything, but veer to the more left field in terms 
of bands, art installations, club nights, visual installations and stuff like 
that. It’s always got a really good energy.

Which club nights are worth checking out?

Hoya:Hoya – I have to say that because I’m part of it and it’s my heart and 
soul in Manchester. Then Swing Ting, which is a great night to go to at Soup 
Kitchen. Then MeAndYou which is more deep house and techno territory. And 
despite the name - and they won’t mind me saying that –Stevie Wonderland 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Stevie-Wonderland/515615111815146> puts on some 
really good disco parties.Wet Play <https://soundcloud.com/wet-play> and 
Bohemian Grove <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Bohemian-Grove/147419195296262> 
are staples as well.

Club culture: a guide to Glasgow's nightlife – by Optimo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/25/club-culture-guide-to-glasgow-nightlife-by-optimo>
What new DJs/producers from the city should we listen out for?

Maurice Alexander <https://soundcloud.com/rinsefm/mauricealexander170215>, 
Trus’Me <https://soundcloud.com/trusme>, Garth B, the Swing Ting Lads, Mc Fox 
<https://www.facebook.com/MCFoxMCR/timeline>, Chunky 
<https://www.facebook.com/ukchunky>, Paleman <https://soundcloud.com/paleman>. 
Levels are doing some really challenging stuff right now.

Can you sum up the Manchester nightlife scene in three words?

Diverse, energetic, fun. (My roommate always says “convenient”, but I think 
that’s a shit word.)

Red Bull Music Academy will be in Manchester from 16-19 April. For a full 
program of events visitredbullmusicacademy.com 
<http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/events/rbma-uk-tour-glasgow>
 