
The abstract painter Clyfford Still 
<http://clyffordstillmuseum.org/clyfford-still> is a craggy enigma of American 
art. He painted canvases that look like ruined walls – rough, torn and stained. 
The ragged surfaces of his thickly layered patches of colour, like giant pieces 
of ripped paper, make me think every time of street walls covered with 
mouldering old posters for forgotten films and political rallies.

Still, who died in 1980, was one of the abstract expressionists who 
transformed not just the look but the international reputation of American art 
in the 1950s. Up to then, US artists tended to defer to their heroes in Paris. 
But whenJackson Pollock <http://www.kaliweb.com/jacksonpollock/art.htm> was 
featured on the cover of Life magazine with his free-spirited swirls, American 
modern art became the gold standard.

The kind of fame that hounded Pollock's life and death 
<http://www.nga.gov/feature/pollock/> never quite came to Still. Perhaps he 
will get his glory now: theClyfford Still Museum 
<http://clyffordstillmuseum.org/museum/about-museum> opens in Denver, Colorado, 
on 16 November. Interest in his work is lively, judging from the impressive 
price – $61.7m – that hasjust been paid for one of his paintings 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-15670902>, one of four from his 
widow's estate put on sale to benefit the new museum.

It makes sense for a Still museum to be located in Colorado, even though it 
was not his native state, because his paintings powerfully recall the vast 
landscapes of the American west. Flying over Denver recently, I found myself 
transfixed by the carved and sculpted landscapes, the bald deserts and red 
river canyons, the mountains hewn by ancient dust storms.

Early US artists painted the west as a fantasy land of wagon trains and 
cowboys, creating the visual myths that later fed the imaginations of 
film-makers.Frederic Remington's Scout 
<http://www.nga.gov/feature/remington/scout.jpg>, showing an Indian on 
horseback, is a good example. Still has little in common with such artists. He 
is an abstract artist. Yet it is his art, with its great gorges and canyons and 
ridges of colour, that most powerfully evokes the grandeur of the American 
landscape.

Still is a truly mysterious and fascinating artist. He turns inward. If his 
paintings recall both the poster-scarred walls of a great city and the empty 
vastness of a parched landscape, their spreading flows of blackness also 
suggest thoseRorschach blots 
<http://www.crosswordfiend.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/rorschach-test.gif>
 used in psychological testing. What depths of anguish do they intimate?

Still is an American great. Congratulations to Denver for securing his legacy.
 