
Apparently, a swimming costume and a willingness to leave the house beat 
turkey curry andrepeats of Only Fools and Horses hands down 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C_fHScmyWTA> when it comes to recovering from 
the excesses of the festive season.

I know – I'm as surprised as anyone. Up until a couple of years ago I was a 
happy traditionalist when it came to getting over the demands ofChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> indulgences, lounging in 
my pyjamas, consuming my body weight in chocolate orange and clutching at my 
head until the haze lifted.

But recently, the orgy of consumption required by this most wonderful time of 
the year has needed a rather more hardcore response. We're talking cold water, 
freezing temperatures and exercise …

Welcome to the unique world of the festive outdoor swim.

My initiation into this club of eccentrics, nature lovers and, frankly, the 
occasional masochist, came via the art deco splendour ofCheltenham lido's 
Christmas Day swim 
<http://www.sandfordparkslido.org.uk/e19-christmas-day-swim.html> – an 
adrenaline shot of festive cheer and a kill-or-cure approach to any lingering 
Christmas Eve hangover.

And as with any outdoor swim, after the initial gasping, numbness and 
swear-words rendered incoherent, it offers all of the gorgeous, tingling sense 
of being reborn in a world where colours are brighter, shapes are sharper and 
everything seems just that little bit more magical – appropriately enough for 
the time of year.

Far from being a Gloucestershire anomaly, the lido swim is just one of a 
series for the brave, committed or just plain foolhardy up and down the 
country. Here are nine others:

Brighton Swimming club – Christmas Day swim 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-sussex-16327561>
If you like a bit of history intermingled with your "oh good grief, that's 
cold" then the Brighton beach swim could be the one for you. It has run every 
year since 1860 (except 2012 when bad weather intervened), and the fact that 
you're swimming in the sea, not a manmade pool, lends the whole thing further 
romance.

Saundersfoot festivities – New Year's Day swim 
<http://www.saundersfootnyds.co.uk/>
For those who fancy a side serving of whimsy with their swim, the Saundersfoot 
New Year's Day event attracted nearly two thousand people to the beach last 
year, many of them in fancy dress. And in the spirit of the season, the swim 
also raises some significant cash for charitable causes.

Firth of Forth – New Year's Day swim 
<http://www.demotix.com/news/1703389/thousand-loony-dookers-take-new-year-dip-firth-forth>
Of course, those soft southern swims aren't for everyone. So how about taking 
the plunge in the Firth of Forth as a "loony dooker" for fundraising fun in a 
more northern setting? And don't worry, while the word "dooker" might sound 
like a dodgy sexual manoeuvre, in fact it's just another word for a sea swimmer.
 More swimmers at the Loony Dook. Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images 
December Dip – Parliament Hill lido 
<http://www.londontown.com/LondonEvents/Plum-Pudding-Plunge/b763d/>
A more gentle introduction to the world of the festive swim is offered by the 
December Dip, formerly known as the Plum Pudding Plunge, which takes place at 
Parliament Hill lido on the first Saturday in December. You only have to do two 
widths (unless you fancy more) and theOutdoor Swimming Society 
<http://www.outdoorswimmingsociety.com/> organisers offer Christmas hats, mince 
pies and even sneaky Christmas tipples to ease the shock.

Sutton Park – Christmas Day swim 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/local-news/sutton-park-swimmers-keep-christmas-167560>
The Black Country may not be the first place you think of when it comes to 
outdoor swimming, but the Christmas Day swim atBlackroot pool in Sutton Park 
<http://www.sp.scnhs.org.uk/lakes.html> offers one of a limited number of 
freshwater festive swims, with around 60 people in various states of (fancy) 
dress jumping in. Last year it was even the scene of a memorable marriage 
proposal, in the form of a banner reading: "Will you keep me warm for the rest 
of my life?" Aww.

Sennen Cove – Christmas Day swim <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rotPA_kQJTY>
In the summer, Sennen offers golden sands and Mediterranean-style seas. In the 
winter it's a rather different prospect, but this doesn't deter several hundred 
keen water-babies from heading in for the annual Christmas Day swim. There's 
plenty of Cornish wildlife to keep an eye out for, if the screaming doesn't 
scare it off.

Whitby District Lions – Boxing Day dip 
<http://www.whitbylions.org/?page_id=235>
The Whitby dip is another swim with an emphasis on charitable fundraising 
alongside the usual fun, bravado and icy waters. There's even an official 
fancy-dress competition to take your mind of your chattering teeth and numb 
limbs.

Serpentine Swimming club – Christmas Day swim 
<http://serpentineswimmingclub.com/>
Sadly, this one is spectating room only unless you're a member, but it does 
have some unique quirks that make it well worth a watch. Participants are 
serenaded into the water and then proceed to race for the Peter Pan cup, a 
reference toJM Barrie <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/jmbarrie>'s 
association with the club. In fact, had you won the race between 1903 and 1932 
it would have been Barrie himself presenting you with your prize.

What all of these swims ultimately have in common is a certain joie de vivre 
that comes from taking on the elements and living to tell the tale. (Although, 
obviously, it's important to follow the safety advice and use your common sense 
to ensure the latter.) Festive swims are a joyful celebration of life in the 
middle of winter's darkness – just like Christmas itself. See you on the beach?
 