
Last month, I read a beautiful story 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2258226/billionaire-founder-of-corona-beer-brewery-makes-everyone-in-his-village-a-millionaire-in-his-will/>
 that would forever make the lime squeezed into my Corona taste sweeter. 
Antonino Fernandez, CEO of the brewer behind that beer, had died aged 99, 
leaving €200m (£172m) to the Spanish village where he grew up in poverty as one 
of 13 siblings, making all 80 residents millionaires overnight.

Except, they didn’t. 
<http://mashable.com/2016/11/25/corona-antonino-fernandez-spain-village/#MQKNKpd1Yuql>
 This story, reported by the Daily Telegraph, Mirror, Independent, Sun, Daily 
Mail, Sydney Morning Herald and others, is a prime example of the Oxford 
Dictionaries word of 2016: post-truth.

Strictly speaking, it’s defined as when objective facts are less influential 
than emotional appeals. But, the definition feels broader. Post-truth isn’t 
just about Trump, Brexit and the lies told on the ever-aggressive political 
campaign trail. At its worst it turned into outright “fake news”,shared widely 
on social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/facebook-fake-news-satire>
because of its appeal to users’ prejudice. Criticism that these stories 
influenced the outcome of the US election prompted Facebook to introduce 
measures to try to fact-check and flag up such canards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/15/facebook-flag-fake-news-fact-check>
.

Now, not everyone is a ‘word of the year’ fan. Encapsulating a year into one 
word is audaciously reductive and, let’s face it, usually a dictionary 
marketing exercise. Nevertheless the respective words of the year by major 
dictionaries do give a concise summary of the dogshitshow of 2016:

 * Oxford Dictionaries: post-truth

 * Dictionary.com: xenophobia

 * Cambridge: paranoid

 * Collins: Brexit

Dismally dispiriting diction, I’m sure you’ll agree, in juxtaposition to the 
jaunty words of 2015 (crying with laughter emoji; binge-watch; sharing 
economy). How did we move from semantic utopia to doomsday in 12 short months?


When reduced to four stark words, 2016 sounds like a bleak Margaret Atwood 
novel. The dictionaries’ lexical precis suggests it is the year society ate 
itself and regurgitated Beelzebub’s new year’s resolutions. But at least the
portmanteau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mind-your-language/2012/nov/23/staycation-brawesome-spagbol-mind-your-language>
 linguistic device went mainstream with Brexit. That was the single highlight 
of 2016. A portmanteau. Even that was used as a euphemism for something ghastly.

Some other buzzwords that could surmise the year: confirmation bias; echo 
chamber; filter bubble. They’re Orwellian words of some strange, immediate 
dystopia. Those chambers and bubbles contain nothing but dangerous, sinister 
nodding heads. All terms reflect the digital enclave within which we cocoon 
ourselves, saying lalalala with hands over our ears whenever our world-view is 
challenged with something not reverberating insidiously in affirmation or 
popping that safe bubble. It is a false economy which sees us willingly allow 
our prejudices to be massaged, bringing us to the happy ending we can’t 
actually get in real life. Grim.

Echoing, filtering and post-truthing are ominous words that may not just 
represent the year, but perhaps the decade ahead.

Perhaps the perfect concept to understand where we are now is delicious term 
‘Gutenberg parenthesis’, coined by academic Thomas Pettitt. It describes the 
500-year anomaly between the 15th and 20th centuries when Gutenberg’s printed 
press dictated and broadcasted information by carefully selected experts. It 
was consumed prescriptively because it was such a fixed, authoritative format.

The digital era returns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/09/the-rise-of-the-reader-katharine-viner-an-smith-lecture>
 us to the time before the first bracket of those parentheses - when 
communication flowed unfiltered and unedited in the town square, in the form of 
gossip, rumour and spirited, robust conversation. This promotes a healthy 
scepticism about the subjective nature of the word ‘truth’ and its own true, 
complex meaning.

In addition to new buzzwords, existing words have evolved in meaning this 
year. Elite, expert and emotion are three that have shifted. ‘Elitist’ used to 
mean a toff born into wealth on the well trodden path from Eton to PPE at 
Oxbridge and then a career of professional mansplaining of some form or 
another. Today, an elite is simply a politician, or a professional or an 
expert. They could come from any class, be born into any background or even 
define as a socialist. In the us and them binary, they’re the them.

Similarly, experts used to be highly-regarded professionals at the top of 
their niche field. Now, the geek-bullying of the playground has festered into 
adulthood and “expert” is almost a pejorative,sneered at by the likes of 
Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mind-your-language/2016/jul/08/now-more-than-ever-its-time-for-the-geeks-to-fight-back>
 and Donald Trump.

“Emotion” used to count for something that we invested in, germinated and paid 
attention to. Now it’s dismissed up against its binary opposite: objective fact.

Carol Cadwalladr recently wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/06/technology-disruption-infects-political-system>
 about a particularly zeitgeisty word that has changed its meaning radically: 
“Once, children might get told off for being loud or unruly or, as we called it 
then, “disruptive”... In 2016, it’s cool to be disruptive. It’s what every 
startup in Silicon Valley is straining to do.”

Disruption has happened on a grand scale: to politics, to democracy and to 
language itself. Disruption to the point of dystopia. Or, perhaps, to the point 
of melodrama. Depends on what you believe is true.

Relax over those holidays, folks.

Gary Nunn writes regularly for Mind your language @garynunn1 
<https://twitter.com/GaryNunn1>
 