
Over the course of a weekday morning in Manchester, a significant change takes 
place. As trains, trams and cars zip along roads and tracks, the population 
alters rapidly. More than half of the people facing computer screens or talking 
to colleagues at 10am were not sleeping in the city hours earlier: they were in 
other towns and cities.

Nearly 180,000 people commute into Manchester every day 
<http://www.neighbourhood.statistics.gov.uk/HTMLDocs/dvc193/>, outnumbering 
both the 100,000 who live and work in the same borough and the 15,000 
Mancunians who work from home.

In other places the change is even starker. In the London Borough of Tower 
Hamlets, 79% of the working population live in another borough: fewer than 500 
live and work in the borough. Workers come from far afield – 44 people commute 
in from the southernmost tip of Cornwall, 14 fly from Belfast and two from 
Shetland. In 21 local authorities ringing the capital, three of which are 
outside outer London, over 20% of working residents commute into inner London.

Commuting is now a fact of life for millions of Britons and the days of 
walking from home to work in 15 minutes have been relegated to the past. The 
Trades Union Congress reports thatthe length of our commutes has also risen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/09/million-people-two-hours-commuting-tuc-study>
: more than three million people now commute for more than two hours a day. 
Between 2004 and 2014, the average commute time rose from 52 minutes to 55 
minutes – a number that sounds negligible but amounts to 12 hours a year in a 
rammed tube, train or bus. .

Millions of people spend two or more hours commuting a day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/09/million-people-two-hours-commuting-tuc-study>
High house prices in the south-east have forced many people out of the capital 
and into longer commutes. Other cities experience the same thing: Oxford 
schools struggle to fill teaching jobs as rents rise and housing costs far 
outstrip wage increases. Key worker housing can help, but without better 
infrastructure, cities become crowded and quality of life continues to suffer. 
With better transport links, the pace of life becomes easier: if you could move 
to a larger house in a quieter, cheaper area and have a reasonable commute, 
millions of people would happily do it.

Instead, thousands of people are stuck in a lose-lose situation. Extreme 
commutes mean relying on expensive childcare and spending less time with loved 
ones. Technology has enabled a rise in home working, and we can hold conference 
and video calls easily, but most new jobs created aresouth of the Watford Gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jan/27/great-migration-south-private-sector-jobs-london>
 so many of us are still forced to spend hours on packed trains.

Better transport links could help everyone. Many people want to live in London 
but many would leave if it was practical. Making it easier to reach big cities 
would take the heat off housing markets in many parts of the country, meaning 
fewer people are forced out, and those who want to live further from the office 
can get in quickly.

But the problems for commuters are longstanding. Research by the Scottish 
government in 2006 <http://www.gov.scot/resource/doc/138456/0034465.pdf> (pdf) 
reported concerns about public transport costs, overcrowding and a lack of 
linked-up infrastructure, meaning trains and buses often failed to serve 
long-distance commuters. Instead, many people turned to cars but felt the road 
system had not kept up with changing use. Business are also worried – a2011 
report by the Confederation of British Industry 
<http://www.cbi.org.uk/media/1052324/2011.09-cbi-kpmg-infrastructure-report.pdf>
 (pdf) found that 65% of firms believed the local road network had deteriorated 
since 2006. Almost half of firms also expressed concern over the state of the 
UK’s commuter rail network: just 22% are satisfied that it was improving.

Commuters save £3,000 on property each minute further out of London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/03/commuters-save-3000-for-each-minute-travelled-out-of-london>
Across the UK, house prices differ vastly. While some areas have plenty of 
affordable housing, their transport links make relocating an unattractive 
prospect for workers. In turn, their economies suffer as more and more capital 
gets concentrated in smaller and smaller geographic hubs, with overheating 
housing markets. Home-working can free people from the grind of the daily 
commute but anxieties about workplace exclusion and being passed over for 
promotion mean many people choose to go into the office. Few people now stay in 
the same profession for a lifetime: better transport links across the country 
would offer the opportunity to extend job searches beyond a limited, commutable 
area.

Making the workplace more mobile, and commutes less expensive and onerous, has 
a dual purpose – those who want to can live in areas of the UK that are 
cheaper, with more space and a quieter pace of life. Fewer people will opt for 
a second home if staying away from home is not the only option during weekdays 
due to long commutes. And those in built up cities will see the battle for 
housing, whether renting or buying, ease a little.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 