
Mies van der Rohe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2002/nov/30/architecture.artsfeatures>
 was born first, in 1886, in Aachen, Germany.Le Corbusier  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/sep/11/le-corbusier-india-architecture-1965>
arrived the following year, and 250 miles to the south, in La Chaux-de-Fonds, 
Switzerland. Mies went on to become the godfather of the steel-and-glass
international style 
<https://www.britannica.com/art/International-Style-architecture>; Corbu, 
enamored with the possibilities of concrete, essentially createdbrutalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/18/raw-concrete-beauty-of-barbarism-barnabas-calder-review>
. Which means that not only were the two architects great builders in their own 
right; they were also responsible for creating the greatest sibling rivalry in 
the history of architecture.

Le Corbusier’s brutalism took an early lead, not least because of concrete’s 
cost advantage: it is cheap and abundant, the second most consumed material in 
the world, after water. Brutalism also had the art-historical advantage of 
fitting easily into a centuries-long narrative. The monumental brutalist 
vaulting of the Washington Metro, for instance, is uncannily similar to that 
found in largest concrete dome in the world – the 2,000-year-old Pantheon, in 
Rome.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe613bcf786b96a23c390b91d7b8f00432ceff672%2F0_262_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe613bcf786b96a23c390b91d7b8f00432ceff672%2F0_262_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A mass Donna Summer roller disco tribute takes palce outside Boston City Hall. 
Photograph: Boston Globe via Getty Images 
Yet by the 1960s, when both movements really hit their stride, it was the 
international style that was in the ascendant. Mies had given New York City the 
Seagram Building, “the millennium’s most important building”,according to 
Herbert Muschamp 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1999/04/18/magazine/best-building-opposites-attract.html>
 of the New York Times. Citizens of modern cities on every continent started 
looking up and seeing shimmering sheets of glass, as their formerly parochial 
towns were transformed into something resembling the Emerald City from The 
Wizard of Oz. A new international phenomenon emerged: the modern skyline, 
comprising buildings that aspired to float – effortlessly, impossibly – 
upwards, in a reverie of light and transparency. This, surely, was the golden 
future. The lucky few were part of it already, and everybody else wanted in.

Meanwhile, the 99% (although they didn’t call themselves that at the time) 
found themselves raising families in suburban concrete housing estates that 
were direct descendants ofCorbusier’s Unité d’habitation 
<http://www.archdaily.com/85971/ad-classics-unite-d-habitation-le-corbusier>, 
or housing unit, in Marseille. The impetus behind such buildings was just as 
idealistic as any Miesian tower, but concrete architecture is unforgiving, and 
budgets were tight, and no one ever bothered to consult the people whose lives 
were ostensibly being improved.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee630e93064fb19dfe0f703ee4aa49f3cd40659f%2F0_0_1368_2000%2F1368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee630e93064fb19dfe0f703ee4aa49f3cd40659f%2F0_0_1368_2000%2F1368.jpg>
 Pedestrians cross New York’s Park Avenue in front of the landmark Seagram 
Building. Photograph: Richard Drew/AP 
The result was that brutalism, in the public mind, became the architecture of 
a forgotten underclass: windswept plazas, crumbling concrete, ugly dystopian 
soullessness. Far from being something to aspire to, it was something to escape 
from. The name didn’t help: even though it derives from the Frenchbéton brut, 
for raw concrete, it still connotes brutality. The architecture could be pretty 
brutal too: hulking, massive, monumental. Certainly by 1981, when Tom Wolfe 
publishedFrom Bauhaus to Our House 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/98/11/08/specials/wolfe-bauhaus.html>, brutalism 
had become something to hate, a symbol of everything that was wrong with modern 
architecture.

The story, however, does not end there. The international style evolved, and 
not well. What used to be aspirational started becoming an in-your-face 
statement of conspicuous consumption. The gauche gaudiness of was embraced not 
only where you might expect it (the Wynn towers of Las Vegas, say), but also in 
places with real history, such as New York City. Go to Columbus Circle today, 
for instance, and you’ll see Christian de Portzamparc’s billionaire condos at 
One57 face off against “a 1950s international style glass skyscraper in a 1980s 
gold lame party dress,” as Muschampdescribed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1995/06/21/nyregion/trump-tries-convert-50-s-style-into-90-s-gold-makeover-starts-columbus-circle.html>
 the Trump International Hotel. Such erections generate almost as much hatred 
today as the worst mistakes of brutalism did in the 1960s, and understandably 
so: they represent a world in which the more obtrusive and ostentatious you 
are, the more profit you make.

The international style, deservedly or not, is bearing the brunt of the global 
backlash against rising inequality at all levels of society. Gentrification has 
become a dirty word, and nothing exemplifies gentrification more than some new 
steel-and-glass tower going up in the middle of a tight-knit middle-income 
community. The openness and transparency ostensibly espoused by the 
architectural vernacular fool no one: these “residences” are sealed off from 
their neighborhoods, shiny bubbles of wealth and privilege invariably protected 
from their less salubrious neighbors by multiple layers of security.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffec2532e19c625715e698e81a12f2e79dfec092d%2F0_0_4168_3173%2F4168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffec2532e19c625715e698e81a12f2e79dfec092d%2F0_0_4168_3173%2F4168.jpg>
 An exterior view of the Met Breuer, named after Marcel Breuer, who designed 
it. Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images 
Thus was the stage set for the resurgence of brutalism. You can’t put a 
brutalist building in a gold lame party dress: raw concrete is raw concrete. 
It’s down-to-earth, honest, unpretentious, egalitarian, and creates buildings 
rooted in place:Boston City Hall 
<http://www.archdaily.com/117442/ad-classics-boston-city-hall-kallmann-mckinnell-knowles>
, New York’s Whitney Museum (now the Met Breuer), the city of Brasília.

Unlike steel and glass, concrete has terroir: the reddish concrete of Boston, 
for instance, looks and feels very different from the fine-grained concrete of 
Japan. You take the local rock, bind it with cement and water, and there you 
have your concrete. Its very nature is local rather than blandly international.

When they’re treated with care and respect, brutalist buildings can become 
treasured by a city in a way that glass-and-steel towers very rarely are. In 
London, for instance, locals and tourists alike swarm to the concrete cultural 
buildings on the south bank of the Thames at Waterloo Bridge. These 
masterpieces – the Royal Festival Hall, the Hayward Gallery,Denys Lasdun’s 
National Theatre 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2014/10/06/brutalist-buildings-national-theatre-london-denys-lasdun/>
 – are a beloved part of the capital, a destination even for people with no 
particular reason to go there.

A similar possessiveness can be found in residential architecture. Consider 
Rupert Murdoch, a man who seemingly buys and sells New York homes as a hobby, 
never staying in one too long, and sometimes never moving in at all. In London, 
by contrast, he has lived in a Lasdun-designed brutalist apartment block 
overlooking Green Park for decades, which I very much doubt he will ever sell.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e02941a1e5d53c96e05513a92978d6dd8604f39%2F0_763_4690_2814%2F4690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e02941a1e5d53c96e05513a92978d6dd8604f39%2F0_763_4690_2814%2F4690.jpg>
 Denys Lasdun’s National Theatre, built in 1975 on London’s South Bank. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Great brutalist buildings, it turns out, have soul, in a way that antiseptic 
glass curtain walls never will. And they have undeniable power, too. Consider 
Peter Eisenman’s haunting holocaust memorial 
<http://architecture.about.com/od/greatbuildings/ss/holocaust.htm> in Berlin: 
it would be unthinkable in anything but concrete.

Brutalism is protean, as well. With concrete, anything is possible, and 
astonishing new ideas can emerge at any time: considerOlafur Eliasson’s Studio 
Other Spaces <http://www.studiootherspaces.net/>, which has developed a 
technique to cast huge chunks of glacial ice in concrete. When the ice melts, 
it leaves a series of gorgeously textured irregular spaces. The raw-concrete 
interiors formed using this technique are like nothing the world has ever seen.

Most subversively, brutalism is old. If you move into a brutalist building 
today, there’s a very good chance that it was built 50 years ago. Certainly 
contemporary architects such asPeter Zumthor  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2011/jun/19/architecture-serpentine-pavilion>
continue to do wonderful work in the same vein, alongside greats likeTadao Ando 
<http://www.archdaily.com/tag/tadao-ando/>. But venture to the heart of 
brutalism and you won’t find brand names andstarchitects and buildings of 
preternatural beauty. Instead you’ll find thousands of much humbler structures, 
characterized by simplicity, functionality and what-you-see-is-what-you-get 
directness.

Brutalism today has developed a unique ability to cut across class divides. 
Blue-collar workers and billionaires alike appreciate its charms even if they 
are sometimes frustrated by its inflexibility; are attracted to its plainness 
while being inspired by its palpable integrity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa70928c2094acf911b7279a1d16c2c6329af2817%2F0_0_2717_1129%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Concrete%20jungle%3A%20why%20brutalist%20architecture%20is%20back%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgrey-pride-brutalist-architecture-back-in-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa70928c2094acf911b7279a1d16c2c6329af2817%2F0_0_2717_1129%2F2717.jpg>
 Tom Hiddleston in High Rise: the organic and the concrete. Photograph: 
StudioCanal/Planet Photos 
It’s easy to see, then, how brutalism is flourishing in the age of Occupy. But 
there’s another force driving the brutalist resurgence, which is maybe less 
austere and selfless: photography, in general, and Instagram, in particular.

If you’ve seen High-Rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/17/high-rise-review-tom-hiddleston-ben-wheatley-jb-ballard>
, the 2015 Ben Wheatley adaptation of JG Ballard’s novel, you will surely 
remember the vision of Tom Hiddleston’s smooth yet chiseled naked body as seen 
from above, framed by a raw-concrete balcony. The intersection of the organic 
with concrete makes for striking visuals, and even concrete on its own has 
stunning visual power. Something as simple as a shadow packs a much harder 
punch when it falls across a beautifully textured grey background.

Say what you like about brutalist buildings, you have to admit they look 
gorgeous in photographs and in coffee-table books such asThis Brutal World 
<http://www.coolhunting.com/culture/this-brutal-world-architecture-book-phaidon>
, recently published by Phaidon. Brutalism might still be a bit austere for 
many people’s taste. But when you live in something that good looking, you 
can’t help but feel a little bit of glamor by association.
 