
It was the most indecisive Irish general election in decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/fianna-fail-ceasefire-will-allow-kenny-to-continue-as-taoiseach>
: an election with no clear winners which raised more questions than answers.

As counting continues, Fine Gael’s Enda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> looks set to continue as 
taoiseach, with the largest opposition party, Fianna Fáil, respecting a 
“political ceasefire”to allow a minority Fine Gael-led administration to govern 
in the short term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/fianna-fail-ceasefire-will-allow-kenny-to-continue-as-taoiseach>
.


What does the election say about the state of politics in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>? Below is a selection of readers’ 
takes on what it all means. Agree? Disagree? Share your own thoughts in the 
comments section below.


“A large portion of the Irish electorate is sick and tired of the traditional 
and mainstream parties”
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4477806> Ernekid  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4477806> 28 February 2016 9:39am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69554996> 
This election is a massively significant realignment of Irish politics. There 
are a few things to take away from these election results as they trickle in. A 
significant thing to see is that a large portion of the Irish electorate is 
sick and tired of the traditional and mainstream parties. The large number of 
independent candidates and candidates from small parties elected is 
unprecedented. The local nature of Irish politics and the PR electoral system 
has enabled independent candidates to flourish in ways that they couldn't in 
other European democracies.
It's a terrible weekend for the Irish Labour Party, They'll be lucky if they 
have the 7 TDs that will give them formal speaking rights in Dáil Éireann. It's 
not a great weekend for Fine Gael either. The 'Keep the Recovery Going' message 
didn't ring with the majority of people especially as FG have made a balls of 
the health service.
This election has made clear that Gerry Adams continues to be a complete 
liability of Sinn Fein. Will the likes of Pearse Doherty and Mary Lou McDonald 
have the balls to instigate a palace coup and get rid of him?
FF is on the slow road to recovery. Its seems that Irish people have short 
memories. It looks like a grand coalition between Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael is 
the most likely option. Will it be the end of civil war politics? Although it 
might not be evident to external observers, there is a massive amount of bad 
blood between the parties. Despite there not being a fag paper between most of 
their policies there is a real bitterness between the two parties. Local 
rivalries and personality clashes that have been incubated since the founding 
of the state. If they go into government together. I don't reckon it'll be 
massively stable.

I say the Irish people could be going back to the polls before the year is 
out. Interesting times lie ahead!

“The coalition delivered more of the same dressed up as change”
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14954212> deise_sage  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14954212> 28 February 2016 8:58pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69585293> 
The constant running through the last two elections is a demand for change. 
Unfortunately for the coalition they delivered more of the same dressed up as 
change (irrelevant Seanaid referendum, no justice against protagonists of the 
crash,stars of the tribunals still walking free etc ad nauseum).
All the while, the majority of citizens have been left with the bills for the 
misbehaviour of a minority. The election results is unsurprising as we tell our 
political class we're taking no more.
So what will change look like now?Hopefully not the above but the challenge 
will be expressing and acting on it coherently given the fragmentation and 
proliferation of independents and smaller parties.
If FF/FG coalesce maybe nothing will change - but surely even they will get 
the message?

“Austerity has been a painful experience yet it has not been accompanied by 
any real substantive reform”
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14031221> Rob Mawdsley  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14031221> 29 February 2016 4:09am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69598999> 
Austerity has been a painful experience yet it has not been accompanied by any 
real substantive reform - Ireland's institutions remain untouched. Property is 
again storing up trouble and public services provide poor value. The idea that 
once again FF can exert influence may seem odd at first, but the crash wasn't 
simply caused by bankers and politicians but also by vastly inflated credit 
shored up by an asset bubble which the population as a whole simply refused to 
admit was a danger. Although few would admit as much, maybe much of the anger 
of austerity has been more internal than might be assumed and in the absence of 
any real structural reforms voters are simply ready to move on. An opportunity 
has been missed.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fconfused-by-the-irish-election-our-readers-explain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41012334a1fd5c985790e29f5027488a2fd29296%2F0_268_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Confused%20by%20the%20Irish%20election%3F%20Our%20readers%20explain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fconfused-by-the-irish-election-our-readers-explain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Confused%20by%20the%20Irish%20election%3F%20Our%20readers%20explain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fconfused-by-the-irish-election-our-readers-explain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41012334a1fd5c985790e29f5027488a2fd29296%2F0_268_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Campaign posters depicting Enda Kenny of Fine Gael (top) and Micheal Martin of 
Fianna Fail (bottom) outside the Irish Parliament in Dublin, Photograph: Aidan 
Crawley/EPA 
“Ireland needs a credible left wing party” 
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15567961> cbothsideslass  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15567961> 28 February 2016 2:49pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69569725> 
Ireland needs a credible left wing party to offer a cohesive alternative to 
FF/FG led govs. Labour have blown it and Sinn Fein's history means they will 
never have the broad appeal needed to become major party. The independents are 
mostly left wing but are still a disparate group and some of them are not at 
all progressive ( i.e. the Healy Raes Mattie McGrath).

 “I keep asking local FG and FF representatives for the real difference in 
philosophy or principles between the parties and none can give me an answer”
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4218689> westcorkthinktank  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4218689> 28 February 2016 9:32pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69586663> 
The good news is that those people feeling left out of the system in Ireland 
have turned to local independents (in rural areas) and anti austerity parties 
(in more urban areas) rather than joining Britain and much of the rest ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in swinging towards parties 
scapegoating foreigners and immigrants.
The sad news is that the opportunity to use these polls to reshape Irish 
politics away from its clan based, Civil War referenced, political system seems 
not to be being taken. I keep asking local FG and FF representatives for the 
real difference in philosophy or principles between the parties and none can 
give me an answer. The international money lenders who determine our lending 
rates (and we do need them to remain low) and the multinationals who dominate 
our high skill sector industries are interested in stable coherent government 
not tribal point scoring.
A coalition between the FF and FG would give a clear centre right option to 
the population based on the country's current not historical situation. 
Equally, rather than arguing with each other they would better scrutinise Sinn 
Fein and help it to come up with more robust and consistent left of centre 
policies rather than letting them get away will an 'all things to all men' 
stump. Ditching some of its gangster past would enable it to develop as a more 
coherent left wing party which would be attractive to people who are put off by 
Adams, his past and his cronies. There are some able young politicians there.
Sadly the one party that isn't referenced to the revolutionary past, Labour, 
got destroyed by trying to help run the country when unpopular policies were 
always going to be turned back on them. It is not surprising then that FF and 
SF both prefer the opposition benches where it is easier to criticise than do 
something to solve the problem.

“The fact that they’re both broadly centrist is precisely the issue”
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13748050> Epivore  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13748050> 29 February 2016 11:07am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69616128> 
The fact that they're both broadly centrist is precisely the issue. There's 
been little to distinguish them from one another for decades but they managed 
to carve up the Dail between them by playing to exaggerated divides. I'm 
thinking of the urban/rural & labour/capital divides more than civil war 
politics, which I really don't think anyone under 50 seriously regards as 
having any real bearing on a post-Good Friday Ireland. Their issue with going 
into coalition is that the illusory distinction between them would completely 
fall apart the moment they're standing shoulder to shoulder and essentially 
saying the same thing. They'd effectively be signing themselves out of 
existence as independent parties. The pantomime Fianna Fail play out over input 
into the budget will be telling as they 'prioritise public spending' while 
'acceeding' to Fine Gail's inheritance tax giveaway (which their own voters 
will happily lap up). It's a confidence scam and has been for over 30 years...
 