
Tens of thousands of paramilitaries and policemen have been deployed across the
Democratic Republic of the Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo> as 
the vast central African country braces for violent protests and riots when the 
mandate of the president, Joseph Kabila, expires on Monday.


Heavily armed security forces set up checkpoints around Kinshasa, the capital, 
while soldiers in armoured vehicles were deployed to strategic points in the 
sprawling city of 12 million.

Flights into DRC have been empty for days, while family members of the 
country’s wealthy elite have rushed to safe havens in neighbouring countries 
including SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and Europe.

The Observer view on Congo and the failure of democracy in Africa | Observer 
editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/22/observer-view-on-congo-failure-of-democracy-in-africa>
Markets in Kinshasa were busy on Sunday, as people stockpiled food and fuel 
supplies in anticipation of a prolonged crisis. The UN mission has redeployed 
some troops from peacekeeping operations in the east of the country to 
reinforce its presence in the capital. The British and US embassies have 
withdrawn all non-essential staff and warned against all travel.

Observers fear the vast central African country, which has never known a 
peaceful transfer of power since gaining independence from Belgium in 1960, 
could plunge into a prolonged period of damaging, and possibly very violent, 
instability.

“There will be lots of deaths. We will never know their number, because we 
never do around here, but there will be many, sadly,” said Valentin Mubake, 
political adviser to the DRC’s main opposition leader, Étienne Tshisekedi.

Ministers loyal to Kabila, who won elections in 2006 and 2011 but is 
constitutionally limited to two terms, say logistic and financial problems make 
it impossible to hold fresh elections within 18 months.

However, their claim that the constitution allows the president to remain in 
office until a successor is elected is contested by opposition politicians and 
many observers, who accuse Kabila of seeking to hold on to power indefinitely.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcongo-braces-for-violence-president-mandate-expires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad4c719ac46108e020dbfa96293cd80a3e6fb746%2F0_105_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Congo%20braces%20for%20violence%20as%20president's%20mandate%20expires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcongo-braces-for-violence-president-mandate-expires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Congo%20braces%20for%20violence%20as%20president%27s%20mandate%20expires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcongo-braces-for-violence-president-mandate-expires%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad4c719ac46108e020dbfa96293cd80a3e6fb746%2F0_105_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 A demonstration in Goma in September. Photograph: Mustafa Mulopwe/AFP/Getty 
Images 
The crisis has been building for several months, with negotiations and 
protests intensifying as the end of Kabila’s mandate approaches.

In September, more than 60 people died when security forces opened fire on an 
opposition march calling for Kabila 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/drc-opposition-calls-for-protests-despite-recent-deaths-joseph-kabila>
 to step down. At least four policemen were lynched.

Opposition leaders have said they would not call for mass demonstrations on 
Monday, but would let “the people express their anger” instead.

Last-minute talks brokered by the Catholic church between government 
representatives and a coalition of opposition groups failed to reach agreement 
on Saturday, but are scheduled to start again next week after bishops visited 
Rome where they will see Pope Francis.

Government officials have blamed the opposition for the lack of progress in 
reaching a settlement, and accused western powers, which have tried to pressure 
Kabila to make concessions byimposing sanctions  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/us-sanctions-drc-officials-democratic-republic-congo>
on key members of his entourage, of “a neo-colonial mindset”.

“The US and the Europeans shouldn’t try and force us. It’s a pretty clumsy 
approach to take. It is lucky that the president is a very calm man,” said 
Lambert Mende, minister of information and a close confidante of Kabila.

In a rare speech last month, Kabila accused politicians and foreigners of 
manipulating youths. “It is morally reprehensible to try to come to power by 
spilling Congolese blood,” he said.

Large groups of young men gathered on Sunday outside the offices of Kabila’s 
party and coalition allies. “He is a man of peace, our president. Those others 
in the so-called opposition are hooligans, bandits,” said Marius Bayolo, 29.

A key question now is the degree to which opposition parties can channel 
widespread popular discontent, or whether they are seen as part of the problem 
rather than a potential solution by ordinary people.

Activists from dozens of opposition groups are expected to demonstrate this 
week across the country, but it is unclear how many people outside party 
structures will join them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcongo-braces-for-violence-president-mandate-expires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d433621c179c47bbd7054f2613aa4cd3a760d73%2F282_295_3652_2192%2F3652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Congo%20braces%20for%20violence%20as%20president's%20mandate%20expires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcongo-braces-for-violence-president-mandate-expires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Congo%20braces%20for%20violence%20as%20president%27s%20mandate%20expires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcongo-braces-for-violence-president-mandate-expires%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d433621c179c47bbd7054f2613aa4cd3a760d73%2F282_295_3652_2192%2F3652.jpg>
 Joseph Kabila. Photograph: John Bompengo/AP 
High inflation, the devaluation of local currency, and flagging investment are 
causing deep economic hardship throughout the country, where two-thirds of the 
estimated 70-million population live on less than £1.50 a day.

“It is very difficult to live. Every week is harder. No one has money. No one 
has jobs,” said Annie, 45, who runs a street stall selling fried chicken and 
rice in the Matongi neighbourhood. She refused to give the Guardian her full 
name, for fear of government reprisals.

The government has already moved to counter the protests, with reports on 
Sunday of the arrest of opposition activism in Kinshasa and other cities.

Last week, authorities ordered the blocking of social networking websites, 
including Facebook and Twitter, from late on Sunday night.

In 2006, Kabila oversaw the first free vote in decades, ushering in a period 
of relative stability and economic growth as mining firms invested billions of 
dollars. But recent years have seen allegations of massive corruption levelled 
at the president’s close family, and growing repression 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2016/country-chapters/democratic-republic-congo>
.

Many observers now fear a return to the brutal civil wars that killed an 
estimated 5 million people in the DRC between 1997, when the dictator Mobutu 
Sese Seko was ousted after a 32-year rule, and 2003.

“It is the balance of power on the ground which counts – look at the Russians 
and Aleppo. The balance of power will now be worked out on the streets and then 
we will take again. But in the long run, whether its around a table or in the 
streets, Kabila will lose,” said Mubake.
 