
It was time to purge the hacker from the US government’s computers.

After secretly monitoring the hacker’s online movements for months, officials 
worried he was getting too close to critical information, so they devised a 
plan, called the “Big Bang”, to expel him.

Trouble was, with all their attention focused in that case, they missed the 
other hacker entirely.

A congressional report provides previously undisclosed details and a 
behind-the-scenes chronology of one of the worst-ever cyber-attacks on the 
United States. It lays out missed opportunities before the break-in at the 
Office of Personnel Management exposed security clearances, background checks 
and fingerprint records. That intrusion – widely blamed on China’s government – 
compromised personal information of more than 21 million current, former and 
prospective federal employees; led to the resignation of the OPM director; and 
drew outrage over changing explanations about its severity.

NCSC says OPM hack exposing data of 21 million wasn't their responsibility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/16/ncsc-opm-hack-wasnt-their-responsibility>
The report by the House committee on oversight and government reform faulted 
the personnel agency for failing to secure sensitive data despite warnings for 
years that it was vulnerable to hackers. The report concluded that the hacking 
revealed last year could have been prevented if the agency had put in place 
basic, required security controls and recognized from an earlier break-in that 
it was actually dealing with a sophisticated, persistent enemy.

“We had literally tens of millions of Americans whose data was stolen by a 
nefarious overseas actor, but it was entirely preventable,” Jason Chaffetz, the 
committee chairman, said in an interview.

“With some basic hygiene, some good tools, an awareness and some talent, they 
really could have prevented this,” said Chaffetz, a Republican representative 
from Utah.

The agency’s acting director, Beth Cobert, said in a statement that OPM 
disagrees with much of the report, which she said “does not fully reflect where 
this agency stands today”. She said the hack “provided a catalyst for 
accelerated change within our organization”, including hiring new cybersecurity 
experts and strengthening its security.

The committee’s top Democrat, Elijah Cummings of Maryland, said he could not 
support the report because of “several key deficiencies”. He said some of the 
criticism was unfair and that the report failed to properly address the role of 
contractors in cybersecurity.

The government discovered the first hacking in March 2014. A homeland security 
department team noticed suspicious streams of data leaving its network between 
10pm and 10am – the online equivalent of moving trucks hauling away filing 
cabinets containing confidential papers in the middle of the night. The 
government’s Einstein intrusion warning system detected the theft.

“DHS called us and let us know, ‘Hey, we think this is bad,’” Jeff Wagner, 
OPM’s director of information security operations, told officials investigating 
the hack, according to the report.

For the next few months, the personnel office worked with the FBI, National 
Security Agency and others to monitor the hacker to better understand his 
movements. Officials developed a plan to expel the hacker in May 2014. That 
effort included resetting administrative accounts, building new accounts for 
users who had been compromised and taking offline compromised systems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fopm-cyber-attack-hack-congressional-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61d644ad9ab574ce17fa64b32dc5e8f0f560f656%2F0_45_3634_2181%2F3634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Congressional%20report%20highlights%20missed%20opportunities%20to%20avert%20OPM%20cyber-attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fopm-cyber-attack-hack-congressional-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Congressional%20report%20highlights%20missed%20opportunities%20to%20avert%20OPM%20cyber-attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fopm-cyber-attack-hack-congressional-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61d644ad9ab574ce17fa64b32dc5e8f0f560f656%2F0_45_3634_2181%2F3634.jpg>
 Jason Chaffetz: ‘We had literally tens of millions of Americans whose data was 
stolen by a nefarious overseas actor, but it was entirely preventable.’ 
Photograph: Susan Walsh/AP 
“The risk of kicking them out too early had come and gone,” Wagner said, “and 
now the risk was becoming having them in too long, and we didn’t want to keep 
them around any longer than we had to.”

The problem was far from solved.

Unknown to the experts, a second intruder posing as an employee of a federal 
contractor had infiltrated the system weeks before the “Big Bang” and created 
an undetected foothold. That hacker used a contractor’s credentials to log into 
the system, install malicious software and create a backdoor to the network.

Over the next several months, the hacker moved unchecked through the system 
and stole sensitive security clearance background investigation files, 
personnel files and, ultimately, fingerprint data.

That breach went undetected until April 2015, when an OPM contract employee 
traced the flow of stolen material back to an internet address that had been 
registered to Steve Rogers, the alter ego of Captain America, indicating a 
spoof account. By then, sensitive information on millions of American workers 
had been compromised.

The report also faulted the personnel office for failing to quickly deploy 
security tools from an outside firm to detect malicious code and other threats. 
Once used, the tool from Cylance Inc of Irvine, California, “lit up like a 
Christmas tree”, indicating it found malware throughout the federal computers, 
a Cylance official is quoted as saying in the report.

“Could they have done better? Absolutely,” Cylance’s founder and chief 
executive, Stuart McClure, said in an interview. “But once they had been 
definitively convinced there was a breach, they took it very seriously.”

The congressional report said OPM officials misled the public about the scope 
of the breach and also by saying the two breaches were unrelated when, instead, 
“they appear to be connected and possibly coordinated”.

“The two attackers shared the same target, conducted their attacks in a 
similarly sophisticated manner, and struck with similar timing,” the report 
said.

Though the US suspects the hack was an act of Chinese espionage, the House 
inquiry did not go into great detail about who was responsible. It mentions 
that the data breaches discovered in April 2015 were probably perpetrated by 
the group “Deep Panda”, which has been linked to the Chinese military.
 