
As the US Congress returned to Washington on Tuesday after a seven-week 
recess, lawmakers remainedat an impasse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/us-senate-zika-virus-funding-bill-deadlock>
 over funding to combat the Zika virus even after the mosquito-borne disease 
spread rapidly during the summeracross Puerto Rico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/puerto-rico-zika-virus-fears-mosquitos-misinformation>
 anda host 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/texas-gulf-coast-zika-virus-medicaid-mosquito-repellent>
of states 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/01/zika-virus-found-mosquitoes-miami-beach>
across the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/new-york-first-documented-zika-sex-case>
.

WHO recommends safe sex for people returning from Zika-affected zones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/zika-safe-sex-world-health-organisation>
Democrats in the US Senate again blocked a measure that would provide $1.1bn 
in funding to tackle Zika, objecting to language inserted by House Republicans 
that would targetPlanned Parenthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood>, undermine healthcare 
and reverse a ban on flying the Confederate flag at veterans’ cemeteries. The 
52-46 procedural vote marked the third time the bill had failed to garner the 
60 votes required to advance, prompting a bipartisan blame game that has become 
par for the course on Capitol Hill.

Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell said it was “hard to explain” why 
Democrats had blocked the funding, while his Democratic counterpart Harry Reid 
accused Republicans of being “more interested in attacking Planned Parenthood 
and flying the Confederate flag – can’t make this stuff up, that’s really the 
truth – than protecting women and babies from this awful virus”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fcongress-deadlocked-zika-bill-planned-parenthood-measures-republicans-senate-democrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa97843b303c327f21fd05621ce8987548c1cd085%2F0_121_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Congress%20remains%20deadlocked%20over%20%241.1bn%20Zika%20bill%20after%20seven-week%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fcongress-deadlocked-zika-bill-planned-parenthood-measures-republicans-senate-democrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Congress%20remains%20deadlocked%20over%20%241.1bn%20Zika%20bill%20after%20seven-week%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fcongress-deadlocked-zika-bill-planned-parenthood-measures-republicans-senate-democrats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa97843b303c327f21fd05621ce8987548c1cd085%2F0_121_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A Miami-Dade County mosquito control inspector, uses a Golden Eagle blower to 
spray pesticide to kill mosquitos in Miami Beach. Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty 
Images 
But away from the finger-pointing, senators frustrated by the inaction 
conceded an agreement must be reached with just three weeks remaining until 
lawmakers depart once more for a final stretch at home before election day.

Roy Blunt, a senator from Missouri and member of Republican leadership, 
signaled the path forward could be to tie Zika funding to a continuing 
resolution that must be passed by 30 September to prevent a shutdown of the 
federal government. Although he did not yet know what that package might look 
like, Blunt acknowledged that Republicans might have to do without the Planned 
Parenthood rider and other provisions being decried by Democrats as “poison 
pills”.

“Surely, the goal of the Senate should be to get each of those things done as 
soon as we possibly could,” he said.

Marco Rubio, the Florida senator and former Republican presidential candidate, 
told reporters it was “pretty clear” Democrats were not going to accept the 
language related to Planned Parenthood and renewed his call for House 
Republicans to take up a bipartisan Zika bill thatpassed the Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/17/zika-funding-us-senate-house-of-representatives>
 back in May. That measure provided $1.1bn in funding with no strings attached.

Susan Collins, a Republican senator from Maine known for forging compromises 
across party lines, was more explicit in calling for the language restricting 
funds to a Planned Parenthood affiliate inPuerto Rico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/puerto-rico> to be dropped from the bill.

“Given that a lot of women are going to decide to delay childbearing during 
this public health crisis, it does not make sense to exclude an organization 
like Planned Parenthood which is a source of family planning for so many,” she 
said.

“I view this as a public health crisis and one that we should act on.”

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have estimated more than 2,700 
cases of Zika in the continental US – putting the figures at more than double 
what they were when Congressskipped town in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/zika-virus-funding-congress-politics-cdc>
 without resolving the stalemate. There are at least 14,000 cases in US 
territories, with Puerto Rico the most heavily impacted by the virus.

Barack Obama, who first called for $1.8bn in funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/08/obama-zika-virus-congress-research-funding-vaccine>
 to combat Zika in February, was forced to reallocate money from other programs 
– such cancer research – which public health officials said were no less vital. 
It was the only way to prevent a lapse in clinical trials for vaccine 
development, which CDC director Tom Frieden warned could soon grind to a halt 
without additional funds from Congress.

The pleas of health experts have nonetheless gone ignored against the backdrop 
of election-year politics.

Speaking at a rally in Tampa, Florida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida>, Democratic presidential nominee 
Hillary Clinton reiterated her call on Republicans to vote in favor of a Zika 
bill that did not seek concessions in return.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fcongress-deadlocked-zika-bill-planned-parenthood-measures-republicans-senate-democrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F947d9cf3e406025da462c58e994d9d328e411783%2F439_461_2983_1790%2F2983.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Congress%20remains%20deadlocked%20over%20%241.1bn%20Zika%20bill%20after%20seven-week%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fcongress-deadlocked-zika-bill-planned-parenthood-measures-republicans-senate-democrats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Congress%20remains%20deadlocked%20over%20%241.1bn%20Zika%20bill%20after%20seven-week%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fcongress-deadlocked-zika-bill-planned-parenthood-measures-republicans-senate-democrats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F947d9cf3e406025da462c58e994d9d328e411783%2F439_461_2983_1790%2F2983.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton speaks during an election campaign rally in Tampa on Tuesday. 
Florida has been the hardest hit by Zika in the US. Photograph: Cristobal 
Herrera/EPA 
“They can’t help themselves from playing games, even when lives are on the 
line,” Clinton said.

“I call on all Republicans to put people before politics and finally vote on a 
clean funding bill to fight Zika right here in Florida.”

South Florida, dubbed as “ground zero” for Zika in the US, remains the hardest 
hit by the outbreak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/14/florida-keys-zika-virus-genetically-modified-mosquitoes>
. In addition to the state having confirmed 577 cases of people who contracted 
the virus while traveling overseas, concerns are now rising overlocal 
transmissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/zika-virus-miami-florida-cases-mosquito-wynwood>
.

The Florida department of health announced seven new cases on Tuesday in which 
people contracted Zika from mosquitos in Miami Beach – the epicenter of the 
city’s$24bn tourism industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/miami-zika-virus-tourism-industry-winter-season>
 – bringing the tally of homegrown cases above 50.

With control of the Senate up for grabs in November, the partisan rancor over 
Zika could prove a wedge issue in the battleground of Florida. Rubio, who is 
seeking re-election to a second term, is facing a challenge from Democratic 
congressman Patrick Murphy in a race that is critical for Republicans to hold 
onto their slim 54-seat majority.

Murphy on Tuesday attacked Rubio as ineffective in delivering Zika funding to 
Florida, telling reporters his opponent was “playing politics with women’s 
health.” His comments followed a new six-figure ad buy in Florida by Naral 
Pro-Choice America, one of the nation’s largest abortion rights groups, which 
targets Rubio foropposing abortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/07/marco-rubio-zika-virus-abortions-florida>
 even if a woman is infected by Zika.

'Nobody's looking': why US Zika outbreak could be bigger than we know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/17/zika-virus-outbreaks-us-testing-difficulties-mosquitoes>
But not everyone is as willing to trade barbs over a public health crisis. 
Bill Nelson, the senior senator from Florida and a Democrat, defended Rubio’s 
efforts to secure funding for Zika, and pointed out that Rubio was the only 
Senate Republican who supported meeting Obama’s request in full.

“Remember, he voted for the $1.9bn, he was my co-sponsor, and he voted for the 
$1.1bn with no riders,” Nelson said, while noting that voters would ultimately 
“see through the political machinations” on both sides.

“The person that hasn’t delivered a Zika funding bill is Mitch McConnell,” he 
added.

Speaking on the Senate floor following the Zika vote, Rubio warned that 
Congress had arrived at a “moment of truth”.

“How will history remember this moment 20 years from now if – God forbid – 
there are hundreds or even thousands of children who were born with 
microcephaly while we stood here, playing politics, and did nothing?” he said.

“This has the potential to tarnish the legacy of our generation of national 
leaders – and, far worse, to cause grave health challenges for an untold number 
of Americans.”
 