
Moise Katumbi, the most popular politician in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo,according to recent polls 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-congo-politics-idUSKCN12P0S8>, has 
intervened in the country’s ongoing crisis by calling on the president, Joseph 
Kabila, to stand down to avoid chaos and bloodshed.

A massive security presence, the suspension of the internet and a wave of 
arrests appeared to have largely stifled expected opposition protests on Monday 
against the continuing rule of Kabila.

With less than 12 hours before Kabila’s mandate expired at midnight – 
launching the vast resource-rich central African state into the political 
unknown – there were only scattered clashes and standoffs between security 
forces and opposition protesters in the capital, Kinshasa.

Has Africa had its fill of ‘strongmen’?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/africa-strongmen-angola-dos-santos-zimbabwe-mugabe-uganda-sudan>
Opposition leaders have repeatedly promised to launch a wave of civil protest 
on Monday to force Kabila, who took power in 2001 and has won two elections, to 
step down and most observers expected widespread violence. The constitution 
does not allow a third term.


Katumbi, the former governor of the southern province of Katanga, called on 
Kabila to step down before he became “an illegitimate” ruler. “[He] does not 
want the elections so I am advising him it is still possible to leave a legacy. 
It is very important … At midnight on [Monday] he will no longer be a 
legitimate president,” Katumbi told the Guardian in a telephone interview.

Katumbi has been in exile since being convicted on a minor charge of fraud, 
which supporters say was politically motivated. He said he has no immediate 
intention of returning to DRC.


“If I want to go back I can go today or tomorrow but I am a man of peace. I do 
not want my people to die. We want peace to be our priority. [Kabila] can shoot 
me, jail me, kill me and create more chaos. I don’t want that. I want a 
peaceful transfer of power,” said Katumbi, who has spent recent weeks traveling 
between western capitals to rally support.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcongo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d433621c179c47bbd7054f2613aa4cd3a760d73%2F816_274_2555_1534%2F2555.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Congo%20on%20a%20knife-edge%20as%20opposition%20leader%20calls%20for%20Kabila%20to%20step%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcongo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Congo%20on%20a%20knife-edge%20as%20opposition%20leader%20calls%20for%20Kabila%20to%20step%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcongo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d433621c179c47bbd7054f2613aa4cd3a760d73%2F816_274_2555_1534%2F2555.jpg>
 Joseph Kabila took power in 2001 and has won two elections. Photograph: John 
Bompengo/AP 
Critics accuse Kabila of seeking to hold on to power indefinitely, and 
promised a “trial of strength on the streets” in coming days. Talks between the 
government and opposition factions are suspended but are scheduled to restart 
later this week.


Valentin Mubake, chief political adviser to veteran opposition leader Étienne 
Tshisekedi, said the absence of violence was “the calm before the storm”.

'I only dream of bicycles': the DRC cycling club offering hope (and breakfast)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/i-only-dream-of-bicycles-the-drc-cycling-club-offering-hope-and-breakfast>
Supporters and ministers say Kabila, 45, has no intention of clinging to 
office and have promise elections would be held as soon as practically 
possible. They dismiss the opposition as troublemakers who do not reflect the 
will of the country’s 70 million inhabitants.

Barnabé Kikaya, a key diplomatic aide of Kabila, told reporters in Kinshasa 
that the government of the DRC was “committed to ensuring peace, order and the 
respect of law” at this “challenging moment”.

“President Joseph Kabila will remain in office [on Tuesday] and until we are 
able to hold free and fair elections ... The demand that President Kabila 
abandons his responsibilities ... at midnight tonight is not serious. The 
constitution states that he will remain president until his successor is 
elected,” Kikaya said.


Observers fear the crisis could plunge DRC, which has never known a peaceful 
transfer of power since gaining independence from Belgium in 1960, into a 
prolonged period of damaging, and possibly very violent, instability.


Such concerns will be reinforced by reports of renewed fighting in eastern DRC 
on Monday linked to the political crisis. A newly emerged armed group broadly 
connected to the opposition launched assaults overnight on government troops’ 
positions in North Kivu, according to humanitarian officials.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcongo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e7c9b7f6d76926187078126b09e097054d50cdb%2F893_524_4579_2747%2F4579.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Congo%20on%20a%20knife-edge%20as%20opposition%20leader%20calls%20for%20Kabila%20to%20step%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcongo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Congo%20on%20a%20knife-edge%20as%20opposition%20leader%20calls%20for%20Kabila%20to%20step%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcongo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e7c9b7f6d76926187078126b09e097054d50cdb%2F893_524_4579_2747%2F4579.jpg>
 Police have been out in force in Kinshasa and elsewhere in DRC. Photograph: 
John Bompengo/AP 
Over the weekend tens of thousands of armed police and paramilitaries were 
deployed on to streets across the country, while armoured vehicles protected at 
strategic points in key towns and cities.

In September more than 60 people died when security forces opened fire on an 
opposition march.

“Today there were lots of police everywhere so we did not go into the streets. 
But we will tomorrow,” said one opposition activist in Bunia, a city near the 
Ugandan border.


 In Kinshasa almost all shops and businesses were shut and streets were 
largely deserted.


There were unconfirmed reports of scores of detentions. Organisations such as 
Lucha and Filimbi favoured by young, educated opposition activists appear to 
have been particularly targeted. Gloria Sengha, a prominent member of Lucha, 
has been missing for the past three days, friends and family told local media. 
The 23-year-old lawyer was last seen in Kinshasa, Her current whereabouts were 
unknown,they said 
<https://actualite.cd/2016/12/18/kinshasa-gloria-sengha-militante-tres-active-de-lucha-portee-disparue/#bxL1evjMMZMAU91X.99>
.

Human Rights Watch, the campaign group, said it had received credible reports 
of at least 42 people arrested in Goma, the eastern city, on Monday morning.

The opposition has been hobbled by a lack of unity and by successive 
crackdowns, with demonstrations banned for several months. Meanwhile 
negotiations have intensified as the end of Kabila’s mandate has approached. 
Washington and European capitals have sought to pressure him into holding 
elections.

Last-minute talks brokered by the Catholic church between DRC government 
representatives and a coalition of opposition groups failed to reach agreement 
on Saturday, but are scheduled to start again on Wednesday after Congolese 
bishops return form a visit to Rome where they will see Pope Francis.

Government officials blame the opposition for the lack of progress in reaching 
a settlement and accuse western powers, which have tried to pressure Kabila to 
make concessions by imposing sanctions on key members of his entourage, of “a 
neo-colonial mindset”.


“The US and the Europeans shouldn’t try and force us. It’s a pretty clumsy 
approach to take. It is lucky that the president is a very calm man,” said 
Lambert Mende, minister of information and a close confidante of Kabila.


But there is little doubt there is widespread popular discontent over Kabila’s 
rule.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcongo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49a3263b239cd709697dcbd65769fe303e19b6f9%2F0_92_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Congo%20on%20a%20knife-edge%20as%20opposition%20leader%20calls%20for%20Kabila%20to%20step%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcongo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Congo%20on%20a%20knife-edge%20as%20opposition%20leader%20calls%20for%20Kabila%20to%20step%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcongo-moise-katumbi-calls-for-joseph-kabila-to-step-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49a3263b239cd709697dcbd65769fe303e19b6f9%2F0_92_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 An opposition supporter displays a red card against Joseph Kabila’s rule. 
Photograph: Thomas Mukoya/Reuters 
On Monday, a crowd gathered by the roadside near the University of Kinshasa, 
waving red cards – mimicking football referees – and shouting anti-Kabila 
slogans.


“He must go. We are all suffering too much. There is too much pain from him 
for us. The government are thieves,” said Olivier, a 28-year-old unemployed law 
graduate.


At the university hundreds of students faced off with riot police who forced 
journalists away from the scene. Elsewhere in the capital there were reports of 
stones being thrown at security forces and public buses.


Countrywide protests are scheduled for Tuesday, however, raising the prospect 
of further unrest later in the week.


High inflation, the devaluation of local currency and flagging investment is 
causing deep economic hardship throughout DRC, where two-thirds of population 
live on less than £1.50 a day.


Many observers believe Katumbi, who also owns one of Africa’s most successful 
football clubs, could unify the fragmented opposition and present a more 
credible alternative to Kabila than Tshisekedi, a 84-year-old former prime 
minister.


In 2006, Kabila oversaw the first free vote in DRC in decades, ushering in a 
period of relative stability and economic growth as mining firms invested 
billions of dollars.

But many observers now fear a return to the brutal civil wars in which an 
estimated 5 million people were killed between 1997, when the dictator Mobutu 
Sese Seko was ousted after a 32-year rule, and 2003.

“It is the balance of power on the ground which counts … The balance of power 
will now be worked out on the streets and then we will talk again. But in the 
long run, whether its around a table or in the streets, Kabila will lose,” said 
Mubake, Tshisekedi’s adviser.


 