
Sales of tablet computers fell by more than 6m over the past year as the 
market contracted 14.7%, according to a report.

At a time when consumers are questioning whether they really need both a 
computer and a tablet or either along with a smartphone, the only part of the 
market to grow was the sub-$200 offerings.


Tablet sales were down from 50.5m to 43.0m year-on-year worldwide in the third 
quarter, according to IDC, after four straight quarters of double-digit 
declines. Even premium tablets such as theiPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> suffered big declines, with 
Apple’s sales down 6.2% to 9.3m iPads in Q3 year-on-year. Apple’s marketshare 
grew though as competitors shrank further, with second-place Samsung down 19.3% 
and fourth-placed Lenovo down 10.8%.

Amazon, however, continued its rampant growth with its Fire tablets, of which 
all but one cost £100 or less, up 319.9% in Q3 year-on-year.Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> is now the third-biggest tablet 
manufacturer after Apple and Samsung after its 5,421.7% increase in Q1 and 
1,208.9% increase in Q2, going from tens of thousands of sales to 7m total 
tablet sales in three quarters.

Chinese smartphone and electronics manufacturer Huawei also bucked the 
tumbling trend with a 23.4% increase in year-on-year sales in Q3, after a sales 
up 116.6% in 2015 and up 82.2% and 71% in the first and second quarters of 2016 
respectively.

However, the race to the low end has created quite a few devices that are 
simply not worth buying. Jitesh Ubrani, senior IDC research analyst, said: 
“Unfortunately, many low-cost detachables also deliver a low-cost experience.

“The race to the bottom is something we have already experienced with slates 
and it may prove detrimental to the market in the long run as detachables could 
easily be seen as disposable devices rather than potential PC replacements.”

Some manufacturers including Amazon have benefited from the ability to cut the 
right corners and make low-cost machines that aren’t terrible and fill a 
growing niche for basic media consumption. But cheap and terrible tablets, like 
the frustrating budget smartphone experiences before 2013, have put people off 
tablets.

Consumers simply aren’t as interested in tablets as in smartphones, they have 
instead become the new PC in the drawer that never gets replaced. At the same 
time 2-in-1 devices - PCs that double in some capacity as tablets with 
touchscreens - have begun to cannibalise both traditional PC sales and classic 
mobile operating system tablet sales.

If the decline in high-end tablet sales continues, it’s clear that where 
people used to buy a high-end tablet for the home, they’re instead turning to 
the smartphone, the computer or budget models that are just good enough.


 * Your next computer should be a laptop-tablet hybrid. Really 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/11/laptop-tablet-hybrid-microsoft-two-in-one>
 