
There is a point in history where every former president ceases to be much 
more than a collection of cliches. This usually takes places after he dies; 
it’s much easier to malign or deify someone when he’s not around to tell you 
otherwise. Nixon was a crook. Reagan was a folksy Hollywood charmer who ended 
the cold war with a couple of cheeky speeches. FDR was a stern, disciplined 
commander-in-chief who saved the free world from a wheelchair. Lincoln was an 
ugly guy in a top hat who freed the slaves.

Obama's second term: a president faces the limits of his power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/barack-obama-second-term-achievements-sandy-hook>
America is a nation of storytellers, and our presidents are the protagonists 
in the narrative of the nation.

Barack Obama’s journey into history’s dusty pages already seems different, 
though. As our first black president (and our last president before handing 
over power to a rich despot with no concept of personal boundaries), Obama is 
already practically a saint to liberals – and more specifically African 
Americans. Whereas his immediate predecessors stumbled out of office in the 
wake of scandal or developing economic ruin, the mood around Obama seems 
wistful, elegiac and prematurely nostalgic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fobama-black-pop-culture-art-beyonce-michelle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f2ae2651360118d3f249ac246b3ecf5f56d5a8e%2F0_29_3738_2243%2F3738.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cooler%20than%20all%20of%20us%3A%20how%20the%20Obamas%20upheld%20African%20American%20pop%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fobama-black-pop-culture-art-beyonce-michelle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cooler%20than%20all%20of%20us%3A%20how%20the%20Obamas%20upheld%20African%20American%20pop%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fobama-black-pop-culture-art-beyonce-michelle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f2ae2651360118d3f249ac246b3ecf5f56d5a8e%2F0_29_3738_2243%2F3738.jpg>
 Beyoncé with Barack Obama at his swearing-in ceremony. Photograph: Brooks 
Kraft/Corbis via Getty Images 
For the black community, he represented the possibility that we had finally 
made good on the promises of the civil rights movement of the 1960s, that a dam 
of multiculturalism had broken. That it didn’t and we’ve collectively woken up 
to the reality that our nation is more divided than it’s been in the last 100 
years hasn’t rendered his presidency any less meaningful for black folk. It’s 
just that the meaning behind it now feels more like the end of something, some 
impossible illusion, rather than the start of anything beautiful.

Obama’s run in the White House had all the superficial trappings of a hip-hop 
remix of Kennedy’s Camelot. Jay Z and Beyoncé performed at his second 
inaugural, a symbol not only of Obama’s connection to the dominant music of his 
culture, but also a sign of how far that music had risen in popular esteem. 
Later, he’d dropSpotify playlists 
<https://play.spotify.com/user/thewhitehouse/playlist/4RGLH5YuS6ldp7aCKaTWas?play=true&utm_source=open.spotify.com&utm_medium=open>
 of his favorite hip-hop songs and name-check rappers.

More than 'mom-in-chief': Michelle Obama bows out as dynamic first lady
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/michelle-obama-legacy-first-lady>
The Obama White House opened its doors 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/inside-prince-and-stevie-wonders-top-secret-white-house-show-20150619>
 to black artists such as Queen Latifah, Prince and Stevie Wonder. It’s hardly 
uncommon for African American musicians to be invited to play for the 
president, but this was different. The Obamas gave black America its center and 
its north star. It’s fitting that Hamilton – the musical love letter to the 
nation’s founding and inadvertent valedictory address of the Obama era – had 
its genesis in a performance of its opening song in front of the first family.

There was a flowering that occurred in these last eight years. The brilliance 
ofChance the Rapper <http://chanceraps.com/> and countless other hip-hop 
figures came to the fore during Obama’s tenure in office. The ranks of vital 
black journalists has never felt fuller –Ta-Nehisi Coates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/01/the-beautiful-struggle-ta-nehisi-coates-review>
 andWesley Morris <http://www.nytimes.com/by/wesley-morris> among them. TV 
shows such as Empire and the Issa Rae-starring HBO series Insecure might not 
have been trendy green-lights for their networks in a world without the Obama 
effect.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fobama-black-pop-culture-art-beyonce-michelle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbeaaa12977e7cfa835dfd492fbbf01effd008bd%2F64_283_5268_3161%2F5268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cooler%20than%20all%20of%20us%3A%20how%20the%20Obamas%20upheld%20African%20American%20pop%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fobama-black-pop-culture-art-beyonce-michelle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cooler%20than%20all%20of%20us%3A%20how%20the%20Obamas%20upheld%20African%20American%20pop%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fobama-black-pop-culture-art-beyonce-michelle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbeaaa12977e7cfa835dfd492fbbf01effd008bd%2F64_283_5268_3161%2F5268.jpg>
 Barack Obama stands on stage with the musicians Jay Z and Bruce Springsteen at 
an election campaign rally in Columbus, Ohio. Photograph: Brooks Kraft/Corbis 
via Getty Images 
None of this is going away on 20 January. In truth, all of the art and thought 
from black voices will be even more important in the next four years. What will 
change is the sense that the vista is limitless and that there is something 
better coming.

The police shootings and the rise in hate crimes should have been a sign to 
wake up, but how could we when the dream was so intoxicating? Barack and 
Michelle gave life to the ultimate black fairytale – hard work, education and 
intellect could tear through prejudice, even on the highest levels of the 
American class ladder. It was a dream far more seductive and potent than Martin 
Luther King’s vision of white children and black children being able to share a 
playground.

African American NBA players and pop stars started buying exotic modern art 
pieces, dabbling in fashion and grasping for a different sort of success than 
the one black culture had deemed appropriate or realistic in decades past. The 
ultimate sign that a black person had “made it” became owning a painting by 
Jean Michel Basquiat – an artist who struggled to be taken seriously in the 
lily-white art world only a few decades ago. A real “look at how far we’ve 
come” moment.

Unlike Basquiat, the Obamas strode effortlessly into the mainstream and were 
accepted with enthusiasm. Arguably, Michelle’s defining pop culture moment was 
her “mom dancing” on the Tonight Show with Jimmy Fallon.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_qWuOtP9eZE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_qWuOtP9eZE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_qWuOtP9eZE&media=>
She followed that up later with a spot on James Corden’s Carpool Karaoke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ln3wAdRAim4>. She could be a formidable orator 
with a surplus of gravitas while also tweaking her status as America’s most 
famous matriarch. It’s remarkable that anyone could pull that off, let alone a 
black woman in the US – the land of the odious, harmful welfare queen 
stereotype. We require perfection from Beyoncé, Nicki Minaj and Rihanna, but we 
don’t from Michelle Obama.

Michelle Obama’s 10 best fashion moments - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2017/jan/06/michelle-obama-best-fashion-moments-in-pictures>
Even when feigning awkwardness, the Obamas are cooler than all of us. That 
dance typified a careful balancing act between aspiration and approachability; 
black hipness and the comfortable square quality one might associate with 
traditional white culture. Barack Obama could go fromjoking 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2016/11/president-obamas-5-funniest-jokes-from-the-cleveland-cavaliers-visit-to-the-white-house>
 about LeBron James during the Cleveland Cavaliers’ NBA championship White 
House visit to sliding into a mundaneconversation about nachos 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/12/31/politics/barack-obama-jerry-seinfeld-comedians-in-cars-getting-coffee/>
 with Jerry Seinfeld on Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee. It’s the blueprint of 
the upwardly mobile black couple. It’s what we all envied about them: their 
uncanny ability to be accepted while never compromising their blackness.

The Obamas have many years left to add to their legacy, to continue striving 
for a more just world, but a little bit of their mystique is about to be left 
behind. Where does black America go from here? How do we define ourselves 
without our north star, our perfect illusion? If the rest of America is so 
intent on going back in time, then so must we – back to the struggle, back to 
the determination to overcome. The Obamas gave us a keyhole vision of a 
possible destination filled with material wealth, glamour and fame that just 
isn’t real for most black people in this country. It was a moment of great 
import, but it was merely a moment.

The only question left to resolve with the legacy of Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> is whether his simplistic 
biographical sketch will start with “first black president” or “only black 
president”. Just because this is the end of something doesn’t mean that new 
beginning isn’t still ahead.
 