
Corey Lewandowski, the controversial former campaign manager for Donald Trump, 
announced <https://twitter.com/CLewandowski_/status/811610862926659584> on 
Wednesday that he will not take a job in the next administration, and instead 
will launch a political consulting firm based in Washington.


The venture, Avenue Strategies, will sit steps away from the White House and 
provide consulting services with an eye on advancing Trump’s proposed agenda. 
Barry Bennett, a former Trump adviser, will form the business alongside 
Lewandowski.

The news followed reports that Lewandowski – who despite being fired from 
Trump’s campaign in June had remained in his inner circle – was presented with 
a range of potential posts in the next White House. Lewandowski met with 
Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner on Monday to discuss possible roles in the 
administration, according toPolitico 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/trump-white-house-west-wing-staff-232857>
, but was not offered the job he sought of senior adviser to the president.


Trump manager Corey Lewandowski: the poster boy of a brash new politics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/01/corey-lewandowski-donald-trump-campaign-manager-strategy>
“I will always be President-elect Trump’s biggest supporter,” Lewandowski said 
in a statement on Wednesday announcing the firm. “After considering multiple 
opportunities within the administration, I informed him and his team I think I 
can best help him outside the formal structure of the government. I very much 
look forward to doing that every day.”

Lewandowski was a polarizing force while serving as Trump’s first campaign 
manager. He was charged in May with battery forgrabbing the arm of reporter 
Michelle Fields 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/29/trump-campaign-manager-corey-lewandowski-charged-assault>
 and pulling her back as she tried to ask Trump a question. The incidentwas 
captured on camera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/29/corey-lewandowski-video-allegedly-grabs-michelle-fields-trump-campaign-cctv-footage>
, countering Lewandowski’s claims that he did not lay a hand on Fields, then a 
reporter for Breitbart News.

Lewandowski was subsequently hired as a contributor on CNN, a move that raised 
questions due to his proximity to Trump.

Although he had been ousted as campaign manager, Lewandowski continued to 
travel with Trump on occasion and attend his rallies. Lewandowski also remained 
on Trump’s payroll, which both the campaign and CNN characterized as severance 
payments but were dubbed as “strategy consulting” in official filings with the 
Federal Election Commission.

Lewandowski framed his strategy for Trump while on the campaign as letting 
“Trump be Trump”, which helped him curry favor with the real estate mogul and 
earn his trust. But Lewandowski’s relationship was more fraught with members of 
Trump’s family, particularly his children, and his behavior was described by 
insiders as volatile.

Lewandowski said his new firm will ensure that outside groups remain organized 
as Trump takes office on 20 January. Trump routinely campaigned on “draining 
the swamp”, which his team has said extends to traditional Washington 
consultants, even as the president-elect has filled his prospective cabinet 
with political insiders.

“My goal is to make sure the priorities of the Trump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> become reality,” 
Lewandowski said.

Former House speaker Newt Gingrich, a longtime supporter of Trump and former 
surrogate, suggested on Wednesday that the president-elect “now just disclaims” 
his vow to drain the swamp.

“He now says it was cute, but he doesn’t want to use it any more,” Gingrich 
said in aninterview with NPR 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/12/21/506378085/gingrich-says-trump-must-address-business-conflicts-soon-urges-monitors>
.

Although Trump, as a candidate, called for reducing the influence of lobbyists 
and consultants in Washington, several of those poised to work in his 
administration are former lobbyists and top donors to his campaign.
 