
On the day with the lowest tide of the year, people converge on the river 
banks just upstream ofHalton Quay 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/domesday/dblock/GB-240000-63000/page/14>. Here, 
on the Cornish side by Chapel Farm (reputed to be the site of a religious 
settlement founded by the parish’s patron saint and her brother from Ireland),
holm oaks 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/common-non-native-trees/holm-oak/>
 overhang the stony beach and derelict lime-kiln.

Opposite, by North Hooe, shining mud banks are edged with an expanse of pale 
reeds. Support boats from theCargreen Yacht Club <http://cargreenyc.org/> ferry 
participants across the choppy water of the ebbing tide towards a sandbank that 
is revealed only at extremely low tides. Over there, near to Devon, the 
Wreckers morris side <http://wreckersmorris.yolasite.com/>, in black and gold 
tatters, dance the length of the expanding bank, like a strange flock of 
black-feathered waders in the distance.

A walk of ‘diversified pleasings’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/cornwall-fowey-polruan-south-west-coast-path>
Then comes the cricket match between the opposing teams of Cargreen and Weir 
Quay. Fielders play knee-deep in the shallows, and a special set of rules will 
allow the winners to impose their choice ofDevon-style jam on cream or 
Cornwall’s preference of cream on jam on the scones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/jun/12/how-to-eat-cream-tea-scones-jam>
, served at a celebratory tea, back on shore. Stumps are drawn as a hail shower 
and the flooding tide curtail play.

Nearby, the sheltered tributary towards Dairymill would have been a haven for 
river traffic, centuries before the construction of protective flood banks that 
cut it off from the main channel and restricted the flow of salty water up the 
narrow creek. Now, in an adjoining steep field, masses of full-out primroses 
form yellow drifts; achiffchaff 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/c/chiffchaff/index.aspx>
 sings above the sunken lane where bluebells, stitchwort andalkanet 
<http://www.wildflowerfinder.org.uk/Flowers/A/Alkanet(Green)/Alkanet(Green).htm>
 bloom between the green of dog’s mercury and wild arum.

Clumps of old-fashioned Croesus, White Lady, Horace and Bernardino survive 
from the time when this warm and early land was cultivated with narcissi, 
picked for market downriver atDevonport 
<http://www.devonport.co.nz/Visitor-Guide>, and later, when the railway came to 
the opposite side of the river, sent further away to London and the north. Up 
the hill, arable fields and sheep pastures are windswept and exposed, and a 
rare veteran ash tree was recently toppled by a northerly gale.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>



 