
“I have had several thousand people over the course of the past two years ask 
me some variation of this question,” Shaun King, the New York Daily News writer 
and activist, said. “What else can I do about police brutality? Beyond what 
we’re doing right now, what else can I do?” The inquiry is something he has 
spent months “noodling around in [his] head”, King told the Guardian.

King and others believe the answer could be boycotts, a tool of change wielded 
in recent years against racial injustice and used during the civil rights 
movement of the 1960s. Last week, King revealed plans for what he hopes will be 
a massive and prolonged boycott, slated to begin in December. A few days 
earlier, the actor Isaiah Washington had announced his own,making headlines 
<http://time.com/4507756/actor-isaiah-washington-wants-black-americans-to-boycott-work-on-monday/>
 for his call on African Americans to boycott working, shopping and going to 
school for 24 hours as part of his #StayAtHomeSeptember262016 movement. Like 
the boycotts that came before them, both men are hoping their actions will 
create pressure on policymakers and bring about change.

Washington’s boycott also began with a question. “Imagine if every single 
African American in the United States that was really fed up with being angry, 
sad and disgusted, would pick ONE DAY to simply ‘stay at home’ from every 
single job, work site, sports arena and government office in the United States 
of America,” the actorasked his followers on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/isaiahwashington46/posts/10209222354172526>. “I’m 
very sure that within 72 hours from Wall Street to the NFL … Black Lives Would 
Matter.”


The inspiration for the inquiry, Washington said, came from “my confusion, my 
pain, my distaste of the loss of a friend who was fighting for freedom”, 
meaning Darren Seals, an activist and protest leader from Ferguson, Missouri, 
who wasfound shot dead in a burning car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/08/ferguson-protest-leader-darren-seals-shot-dead-burning-car>
 earlier this month. The deaths of others were also on Washington’s mind –
Terence Crutcher <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/terence-crutcher-shooting>
, an unarmed black man who was killed by a police officer in Tulsa, Oklahoma, 
earlier this month,Keith Lamont Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/keith-scott-shooting>, a black man who was 
shot and killed last week in Charlotte, North Carolina, by police after he was 
mistaken for a wanted man andAlfred Olango 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/28/police-say-black-man-killed-by-officer-near-san-diego-was-holding-e-cigarette>
, who was shot by police on Tuesday.

Can black celebrities shake America out of its racial justice slumber? | 
Syreeta McFadden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/28/can-black-celebrities-shake-america-racial-justice>
Planned with Madelon Blue McCullough, who started her own #Missing24 boycott 
earlier this year, Washington said his “call to action” was intended to “check 
the temperature of the will of the people, to see how many people respond 
immediately and quickly and decisively – just as quickly as these peacekeepers 
have decided to commit extrajudicial killings within seven seconds”.

“My feeling of waiting six to eight weeks, we don’t have the luxury of waiting 
six to eight weeks. We don’t have the luxury to organize,” Washington added. 
His boycott had been criticized for being planned too quickly; King’s is 
planned for three months in the future.

One of their intentions with the stay-at-home boycott, McCullough said, was 
safety. “When we’re out in the streets, and we’re protesting and marching, our 
people are still getting injured, they’re still getting killed, they’re still 
getting incarcerated,” she said. “Our thinking was it doesn’t make any sense 
for us to be out here and protesting, then paying bail. It’s the same as saying 
you’re supporting the same system you’re fighting against.” Of the protests 
that have broken out around the country, many have been peaceful though there 
have been outlying moments . Last week, in North Carolina, one personwas 
fatally shot <http://www.cnn.com/2016/09/21/us/charlotte-police-shooting/> 
during a protest in Charlotte.

On Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/isaiahwashington46/posts/10209300323361707?pnref=story>
, Washington elaborated the event on 26 September was merely “PHASE I”, and 
mentioned there will be a “Business Target” day in October. He advertised a 
second boycott for 7 November, which McCullough explained was planned by a 
group called Moving Forward. They would also be supporting King’s boycott in 
December, McCullough said.

McCullough, who started #Missing24 after the death of Philando Castile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/14/philando-castile-funeral-minnesota-police-shooting>
, said she was inspired by reading about boycotts that happened in Zimbabwe and 
Sudan. In the US, boycotts of the shopping holiday Black Fridaybegan in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/26/ferguson-protesters-police-brutality-black-friday-boycott>
 after the death of Michael Brown, through campaigns or groups like#NotOneDime 
<http://www.notonedimeboycott.com/> or Blackout for Human Rights 
<http://www.blackoutforhumanrights.com/about-blackout.html>, a “Collective of 
Filmmakers, Artists, Activists, Musicians, Lawyers, Tastemakers, Religious 
Leaders and Concerned Citizens”, though it’sunclear if they made an impact 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/your-money/elusive-effects-of-the-black-friday-boycott.html>
. That Black Friday boycottcontinued in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/27/notonedime-black-friday-protest-african-americans-boycott-shopping>
. Groups called for boycotts of businessesin Baton Rouge 
<http://www.wafb.com/story/32401824/group-asks-public-to-boycott-some-baton-rouge-businesses>
 after the death ofAlton Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/alton-sterling-death-ive-been-sick-ever-since-they-murdered-him>
 andin Charlotte 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/video/national/calls-for-charlotte-boycott-after-police-shooting/2016/09/21/339cfb1c-8014-11e6-ad0e-ab0d12c779b1_video.html>
 andAsheville 
<http://www.citizen-times.com/story/news/local/2016/09/26/black-lives-matter-group-calls-economic-protest/91117962/>
, North Carolina, after Scott’s death. Other groups have called for only buying 
from black-owned businesses or keeping money inblack-owned banks 
<http://blackoutcoalition.org/>.

Washington’s original post announcing the boycott received 28,000 shares on 
Facebook, but it’s difficult to determine how many participated. Some expressed 
their support on social media using #StayAtHomeSeptember262016. McCullough said 
people from almost every state participated, most hailing from New York, 
California and Texas. Students at Reed College in Portland, Oregon, peacefully 
held signs and drums as they walked through different buildings on campus in 
solidarity with the movement,KOIN6 News 
<http://koin.com/2016/09/26/reed-college-students-boycott-class/> reported.

Alicia Garza on the beauty and the burden of Black Lives Matter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/02/alicia-garza-on-the-beauty-and-the-burden-of-black-lives-matter>
The boycott also had its critics, with some saying it was too quickly planned 
or that some couldn’t afford to skip work. “If you can’t afford to skip work, 
don’t. Boycott in other ways,” Washington said on Wednesday. “I’m not some 
wealthy jerk who is telling people to lose their jobs.” Others brought up past 
remarks made by the actor, who currently stars on the TV show The 100 and was a 
recurring character on Grey’s Anatomy from 2005 to 2007. The public speculated 
that the controversial remarks caused the actor to be removed from the latter 
show. When asked to address those critics, Washington said, “This is about 
life, liberty and freedom under the constitution of the United States of 
America. It’s not about me.”

King’s boycott was planned with a nod to boycotts of the past, occurring on 5 
December, “the same date that our ancestors began the 381 day long Montgomery 
Bus Boycott. It is going to take that same type of determination and 
organization for us to actually make this boycott count”, he wrote ina message 
<https://www.facebook.com/injusticeboycott/posts/897245660408832> to the more 
than 75,000 people who had signed up thus far. The Montgomery bus boycott began 
in 1955 and ended with a supreme court declaration that segregated buses were 
unconstitutional. He also took inspiration from the treatment of North Carolina 
in light of theirtransgender bathroom law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/01/north-carolina-transgender-bathroom-law>
.

So far, King has released a basic framework for what he hopes his boycott will 
look like, with targeted boycotting of brands, institutions, cities and states 
tied to specific reforms. He hopes millions will eventually participate.

While Washington’s #StayAtHomeSeptember262016 was for one day, King thinks his 
should be in addition to the protests and rallies around the country. He 
intends for it to last indefinitely, until reforms are made, which he 
admittedly thinks will take a while. “The United States right now is very 
resistant to change and very resistant to change on a number of issues, not 
just racial violence and police brutality,” he said.

But that doesn’t mean King doesn’t have hope, both that a boycott will be 
effective and be an answer for those he worries are hopeless, wondering what 
they can do.
 