
Ball one: Ollie Rayner regal at Lord’s come mid-August

Nobody thinks scheduling matches is easy, but the ECB might have chosen a 
better week than the one between the opening of the Premier League and the 
closing of the Olympics to stage crucial matches in all three domestic 
competitions – but they didn’t. Middlesex enjoy a 26-point lead at the top of 
Division One after seeing off Durham by an innings in a rare positive result at 
Lord’s. The home side’s two Nicks at the top of the order, Gubbins and Compton, 
both made decent hundreds and Toby Roland-Jones, seldom out of a game for long, 
applied the long handle just before the declaration with a lead of 332. But 
Middlesex had Ollie Rayner, off spinner, affable chap and late-season 
specialist, to thank most for their win, the tall man returning figures of 4-17 
in the first innings and 5-85 in the second. Spinners earn their corn in the 
Championship run-in and, if Rayner can repeat his trick from 2013 – taking 23 
wickets in three late August/early September matches,Middlesex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> will fancy their chances of 
staying top.

Ball two: CC for HH as Andrew Gale refuses to unleash a whirlwind

The life of Alfred Mynn, cricket’s first colossus and a master of single-wicket
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket-the-old-batsman-blog/2016/aug/08/the-meaning-of-cricket-jon-hotten-book>
There are six other counties who could yet make a run for the pennant, led by 
its current holders,Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire>, 
who have a game in hand and plenty of know-how in the bank. So it was 
surprising to see the White Rose settle for what turned into a tame draw at Old 
Trafford, hands shaken on the field as Lancashire’s always fatalistic 
supporters wiped the sweat from their palms. After Haseeb Hameed had added to 
both his reputation and list of records with two centuries compiled over nearly 
eight hours at the crease against the best attack in English domestic cricket, 
Adam Lyth and Alex Lees were still together when the draw was agreed, the 
visitors with all 10 wickets in hand. The target of 367 in 71 overs on a pitch 
that was said to have made scoring quickly difficult, was not chased despite 
Day Four bringing 350 runs for the loss of three wickets. Jason Gillespie and 
Andrew Gale have won more County Championships than I have, but I was not alone 
in being puzzled by their tactics and in wondering if their risk aversion may 
prove critical in the final reckoning.

Ball three: Brad Wheal and Mason Crane can lift Hampshire

At the bottom of Division One, Hampshire beat Nottinghamshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nottinghamshire> to give themselves a 
lifeline and leave the home side with a lot to do in the last four matches if 
they are to avoid the drop. Hampshire led by 74 on first innings and a 160 runs 
stand between Jimmy Adams and Tom Alsop, who both fell in the 90s, took defeat 
out of the question, but there was still a lot to do to secure the win. Highly 
rated teenage leg-spinner Mason Crane had four sessions to spin Notts out and 
his 3-95 showed again that he has real potential in cricket’s most difficult 
art. But he was upstaged by another teenager, Scotland’s Brad Wheal, whose 
seam-up at fourth change brought figures of 19-4-51-6. Hampshire might yo-yo 
into Division Two next month, but these two young bowlers have shown that they 
can take wickets and can only improve with time in the middle.

Ball four: Ravi Bopara shines away from the limelight

Essex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essex>, without a win since early 
July, extended their lead at the top of Division Two to the 23 points they 
picked up in the win over Derbyshire, rock bottom and winless in a miserable 
season. Nick Browne’s epic nine hour 229* set up the victory but the craft and 
nous of Graham Napier and Ravi Bopara took 13 of the 20 wickets required for 
just 132 runs between them. Bopara hasn’t registered three figures with the bat 
in red ball cricket in 2016, but averages a tick under 40 which speaks of his 
consistency. With the ball, his 37 wickets at 20 have compensated perfectly for 
the lack of output from Jesse Ryder, whose different version of nagging medium 
pace has been effective in recent seasons. Of course, few areas of national 
sport are more under the radar than Division Two County Championship cricket, 
but Bopara has dug in for his home county and has shown no sign of sulking now 
his international career appears over – something for which he deserves much 
credit.

Ball five: Kumar Sangakkara is as cool and ruthless as Andrea Pirlo

The winners of the Royal London One Day Cup quarter-finals were Yorkshire, who 
will play Surrey at Headingley and Warwickshire, who will play Somerset at 
Edgbaston, the matches sympathetically scheduled over the Bank Holiday weekend. 
The match of the round was won by the shot of the round, maybe of the season, 
as Kumar Sangakkara, needing 12 off the last over, squatted, crouched and 
lifted Azharullah straight over the keeper’s head and the boundary for a six 
<http://lankahotvideos.info/watch.php?vid=cf6502281>. Rather like Andrea Pirlo 
(another veteran icon of world sport) with his Panenka-ed penalty in Euro 2014, 
Sangakkara knew the shot was worth more than merely what was recorded on the 
scoresheet with its impact on his opponents, and, sure enough, he got Surrey 
home off the last ball, his share 130*. Northamptonshire recalibrated their 
sights from 50 overs to 20.

Northamptonshire overcome litany of problems with inspirational team spirit | 
Will Macpherson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/21/northamptonshire-team-spirit-t20-trophy-wantage-road>
Ball six: Northants beat Durham to win NatWest T20 Blast trophy

And they didn’t have to wait long for redemption, as they dodged the showers 
to lift theNatWest T20 Blast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/natwest-t20-blast> trophy with a 
comprehensive win over Durham in the Birmingham gloom. After Ben Duckett’s 
bravado and Alex Wakely’s accumulation had set a target of 162 (worth 20 more 
in better batting conditions), Nottinghamshire were only really in the chase 
when they hit 34 off the 10th and 11th overs and fell eight runs short, 
completing a difficult week. Enjoying the longer break afforded to the first 
semi-finalists, Northamptonshire’s pace-off sextet of bowlers and superb 
catching held all but Durham’s in-form opener, Keaton Jennings in check and 
could count themselves somewhat unfortunate to be chasing as many as 154. But 
Wakely, on the field for all but nine of the 80 overs comprising the two 
matches, was accumulating again, and found a different partner to blast away at 
the other end, as Josh Cobb hit the ball all round Edgbaston. Cobb left the 
crease with his team six runs short of victory which, after a bit of nervous 
prodding and panicky running, duly arrived in the last over. In T20, 
Northamptonshire so often punch above their weight, even when their finances 
appear as shot as some of their fans in the Hollies Stand after a long day on 
the beers. The first silverware of the season is deservedly theirs.

• This article appeared first on The 99.4 Cricket Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> on Twitter
 