
A federal appeals court has issued a stinging ruling dismissing as “nightmare 
speculation” Indiana governor Mike Pence’s attempt to deterSyrian refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/refugees-drc-congo-us-syria> 
from settling in the state because of terrorism fears.

The decision by the seventh circuit on Monday was the latest legal setback to 
efforts launched by Donald Trump’s running mate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/01/indiana-syrian-refugees-resettlement-blocked>
 in the wake of last November’s Paris terrorist attacks to stop Syrian refugees 
from coming to Indiana by denying them aid.

Like many other states, Indiana <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/indiana> 
receives money from the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement and contracts 
with humanitarian groups to provide local welfare services to refugees. Under 
federal law, such help must be provided “without regard to race, religion, 
nationality, sex, or political opinion”.

Connecticut welcomes Syrian refugee family after Indiana governor says no
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/19/connecticut-welcomes-syrian-refugee-family-indiana-governor-says-no>
The Republican vice-presidential candidate, though, specifically attempted to 
exclude refugees originating fromSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>
 on the basis that they might be terrorists. He ordered the state not to 
reimburse groups for the costs of providing aid to Syrians. According to the 
court, 174 Syrian refugees came to Indiana in the past fiscal year.

While this hardline stance may have chimed with the views of Trump, whose 
immigration policies have included proposing a temporary ban on Muslims 
entering the US, it was rejected by the three-judge appeals court panel in a 
six-page ruling that echoed a lower court’s decision earlier this year.

“The governor of Indiana believes, though without evidence, that some of these 
persons were sent to Syria by ISIS to engage in terrorism and now wish to 
infiltrate the United States in order to commit terrorist acts here. No 
evidence of this belief has been presented, however; it is nightmare 
speculation,” Judge Richard Posner wrote in theopinion 
<http://media.ca7.uscourts.gov/cgi-bin/rssExec.pl?Submit=Display&Path=Y2016/D10-03/C:16-1509:J:Posner:aut:T:fnOp:N:1838881:S:0>
.

“[Pence] provides no evidence that Syrian terrorists are posing as refugees or 
that Syrian refugees have ever committed acts of terrorism in the United 
States. Indeed, as far as can be determined from public sources, no Syrian 
refugees have been arrested or prosecuted for terrorist acts or attempts in the 
United States. And if Syrian refugees do pose a terrorist threat, 
implementation of the governor’s policy would simply increase the risk of 
terrorism in whatever states Syrian refugees were shunted to.”

The opinion adds that Pence’s claim that he is not discriminating based on 
nationality but purely acting based on safety concerns is “the equivalent of 
his saying (not that he does say) that he wants to forbid black people to 
settle in Indiana not because they’re black but because he’s afraid of them, 
and since race is therefore not his motive he isn’t discriminating. But that of 
course would be racial discrimination, just as his targeting Syrian refugees is 
discrimination on the basis of nationality.”

The outcome was expected after Indiana’s plan was received less than warmly in 
court during oral arguments last month. Courthouse News reported that Judge 
Frank Easterbrooksaid 
<http://www.courthousenews.com/2016/09/14/indiana-ban-on-syrian-refugees-draws-mockery-from-7th-circuit.htm>
: “When a state makes an argument that’s saying we’re differentiating according 
to whether somebody is from Syria, but that has nothing to do with national 
origin, all it produces is a broad smile.” Posner asked: “Are Syrians the only 
Muslims that Indiana fears?”

Ken Falk, legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Indiana, 
said in a statement: “The Court of Appeals’ decision underscores what we have 
said throughout this litigation … Governor Pence may not constitutionally or 
legally discriminate against a particular nationality of refugees that are 
extensively vetted by the federal government.” The ACLU represented Exodus 
Refugee Immigration, a not-for-profit agency that brought the lawsuit.

With immigration and battling Isis key issues in the forthcoming presidential 
election, leading Republican politicians have accused the federal government of 
failing to adequately screen refugees and several states have tried to exert 
more control over who is resettled inside their borders, though immigration is 
a federal matter.

Last Friday, Texas became the latest state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/30/texas-withdraws-federal-refugee-resettlement-program-syrians>
 to opt out of the federal refugee resettlement programme, following New Jersey 
and Kansas earlier this year.

But the move will not stop the arrival of refugees from Syria or anywhere else 
in the Lone Star state. The federal government and aid agencies will instead 
work to formulate an arrangement that circumvents the state’s administration of 
the process.

The Obama administration has pledged to increase the number of refugees 
arriving in the US from Syria and other nations. The presidentannounced last 
month 
<http://www.voanews.com/a/us-narrowly-misses-refugee-limit-for-2016/3533782.html>
 that the US would accept 110,000 in fiscal year 2017 – up from 85,000 in 2016, 
of which more than 12,500 were Syrian.

Pence faces off against Tim Kaine, his Democratic opponent, in the 
vice-presidential debate in Virginia on Tuesday.
 