
He was waiting for me in his office. That’s how I remember it. I had known 
he’d be bitter and jaded, and would run Slough House as if it was his personal 
fiefdom – “I don’t think of you as a team, I think of you as collateral damage” 
– but I hadn’t known he’d be so brutal, so adept at probing people’s 
weaknesses. Or that his personal habits would be so unhygienic. Nor had I 
imagined he’d be frighteningly easy to channel, given how gross he is. But then 
I’m a London-bound commuter and an open-plan-office worker, and anyone who’s 
been either of these things knows that bile and venom are only ever a 
hair’s-breadth away. So maybe he hadn’t suddenly appeared fully formed, 
squatting in his attic room in the shadow of the Barbican; maybe Jackson Lamb 
had been lurking inside me all along.


When I was dreaming up the first book in the series, I had an idea that its 
ending would involve Jackson Lamb on the lam

Which isn’t to say that I was unaware of his literary antecedents. The most 
obvious of these, to my mind, is Reginald Hill’s Andy Dalziel. Fat Andy – whose 
gargantuan appetites allowed him to swallow whole every scene in which he 
appears – is crime fiction’s Falstaff, a glorious Rabelaisian monster. Hill was 
a master of the form, and his Dalziel, however larger than life he seemed on 
first appearance, grew in stature with every book, becoming as human and fully 
rounded as any literary creation has been. Similar growth isn’t in Lamb’s 
future, even if I were half the writer Hill was. Instead, Lamb is the tent pole 
figure, the one keeping everything else up, and doesn’t appear to need a 
backstory; just snippets here and there that hint at the messy compromises and 
bleak insecurities of an undercover agent’s life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmick-herron-slow-horses-series-jackson-lamb-paperback-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42c16379e637fbf92de33ecfc91fe5baeb936ea6%2F0_136_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%20writer%20Mick%20Herron%3A%20'I%20don't%20know%20my%20hero's%20backstory%20yet'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmick-herron-slow-horses-series-jackson-lamb-paperback-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime%20writer%20Mick%20Herron%3A%20%27I%20don%27t%20know%20my%20hero%27s%20backstory%20yet%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmick-herron-slow-horses-series-jackson-lamb-paperback-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42c16379e637fbf92de33ecfc91fe5baeb936ea6%2F0_136_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Crime fiction’s Falstaff … Warren Clarke as Andy Dalziel. Photograph: BBC 
But maybe all that means is, I don’t yet know what his backstory is. A comment 
that his colleague Catherine Standish makes in Real Tigers – that “when they 
pulled the Wall down he built himself another, and he’s been living behind it 
ever since” – is perhaps the biggest clue I’ve been allowed to his real nature: 
that everything he is, or appears to be, is just another cover.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmick-herron-slow-horses-series-jackson-lamb-paperback-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8857ac53bda71e59c5c8605e4d0cc9a35585719c%2F0_0_781_1200%2F781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%20writer%20Mick%20Herron%3A%20'I%20don't%20know%20my%20hero's%20backstory%20yet'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmick-herron-slow-horses-series-jackson-lamb-paperback-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime%20writer%20Mick%20Herron%3A%20%27I%20don%27t%20know%20my%20hero%27s%20backstory%20yet%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmick-herron-slow-horses-series-jackson-lamb-paperback-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8857ac53bda71e59c5c8605e4d0cc9a35585719c%2F0_0_781_1200%2F781.jpg>
When I was dreaming up Slow Horses 
<http://mickherron.com/novels/slow-horses.html>, the first book in the series, 
I had a vague idea that its ending would involve Lamb on the lam: there’d be a 
final scene with him leaning against the railing of a Europe-bound ferry, 
watching England disappear in the dark. That didn’t happen, but something like 
it might, one day. And if it does, I can see him disappearing into another 
role; pulling a cover over himself so completely that he becomes 
unrecognisable. As to what happens to him then, well, I only hope I’m still 
around to find out.

In the meantime, Lamb is on firmer ground than ever here in the UK, with a new 
livery for a new set of paperbacks, issued by John Murray. Instead of lurking 
in his darkened room, there he is with his name on the spine: Jackson Lamb 
Thriller 3, reads the new one. I think I know what his reaction to that would 
be. But I don’t think I should spell it out here.

Extract

It was still hot as hell when Jackson Lamb emerged from Slough House into the 
backyard and, fiddling in his pocket for his lighter, found his mobile phone 
instead, and noticed he had two missed calls – Standish. Missed calls. A 
stationery delivery gone astray, or a complaint about a printer not working. 
Standish persisted in laying such issues at his door, no matter how many times 
he outlined department policy, which was that he didn’t give a toss. Cigarette 
smouldering in hand, he shambled into the lane, a coronet of smoke lingering in 
the air behind him, like an image of a wandering spirit …

Which lasted but briefly, though in the moments before its passing swelled 
outward, as though pregnant with impressions of the building’s inhabitants, 
weighed down as they were with grief and gambling debts, with drug habits and 
self-involvement; unburdening themselves to the comatose, squabbling in pubs, 
hunting oblivion in strangers’ beds, or else grown lazy, fat and complacent – 
sifting through all these as if somewhere among them lay the answer to a 
question posed recently, quite some distance away:Which of your colleagues 
would you trust with your life?

And then the air shifted, and the smoke was gone.

More about Real Tigers

… Mick Herron takes a different approach from most other espionage writers. 
Real Tigers is the third novel in his Slow Horses series. Its predecessor, Dead 
Lions, won the CWA Goldsboro Gold Dagger as the best crime novel of the year. 
The Slow Horses are a department made up of MI5 rejects – officers who have 
committed gross errors of judgment or made enemies of powerful figures in the 
organisation …

Many episodes have a cartoonish improbability. There’s one scene, for example, 
when Jackson Lamb tries carol-singing and the nerd uses a double-decker bus as 
an offensive weapon. But it doesn’t matter; Herron, like all good novelists, 
manufactures his own form of reality and persuades his readers to subscribe to 
it … – Andrew Taylor, the Spectator

Read the full review. 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/02/if-you-read-one-spy-novel-this-year-read-real-tigers/>

Buy the book

Real Tigers is published by John Murray at £7.99 and is available from the 
Guardian Bookshop for £6.55. 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413921/>
 