
I sit by the window and wait for her to finish her story. She has the posture 
of a ballerina. Her honey-colored eyes against her hot magenta headscarf offer 
a striking contrast. We are on a bus at the Bethlehem checkpoint en route to 
Jerusalem. The anthology of Arabic verse I’m carrying inspired the exchange. 
She tells me that each time she enters Damascus Gate she recreates the day that 
changed her forever. Then adds that she has eleven versions so far. I don’t 
know what she is speaking about and for a second the sky’s paleness distracts 
us. She explains:

I memorize. I’m addicted to memorizing. I memorize the exact pitch in the 
voice of the kaak seller, the gleam in my sister’s eyes when she meets the sun 
by the window, the circumference of the circular window. I memorize 
Al-Mutanabbi. I just memorized the face in the red Toyota Corolla that passed 
by us. I memorize street numbers, abandoned neckties, books. I memorize him. 
His charcoal eyes. His full lips. Square chin. White teeth. I forget him. I 
keep re-memorizing him. Together we wrote poetry. Threw the fear in the 
mountains we never could get to.

I forget he memorized with me. Once we memorized Jabra Ibrahim Jabra’s work, 
and as we started Ghassan Kanafani’s stories, the half-moon insisted we 
memorize it first. We were happy in our craziness. We ached. I memorize the way 
my hands get cold and my heart beats aimlessly as if it’s broken. I forget I 
remember him. And his Lifta. Forget the rain caught in the yellow light of 
night. I forget the pen he gave to me. The one I left with him so that he could 
keep giving it to me each time we met. I forget I never saw him again. Forget 
why he didn’t memorize the world and stayed with me—a strange soul who 
memorizes to keep the empty rooms in every blank page of my notebook away.

I just memorized the twenty-three cars that passed by us since we started this 
bus ride. I won’t bore you with their colors or the expressions on their faces. 
I’m not speaking of the drivers or passengers. The faces beneath the faces. 
Everyone here is a grave. And a pulse.

Once we get to Damascus Gate, I will begin a new version. I will forget the 
version when I walked by the vendor selling grape leaves and radios, dates and 
multi-cultured spices. When the merchandise dangling above was like the 
colorful pages of books of all sizes, when two girls were playing with their 
ponytails and a boy was holding his father’s hand. When a man with a beaten 
wooden cart of lemons was heading out as I moved towards the fork in the 
street. I will forget that version. The version when he didn’t come. And the 
clouds clustered together were a reflection of the bodies beneath them. I will 
forget that version. I will memorize only the versions that came after that one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449236979950%2Fc0c2b506-3b1a-48ed-b255-c47d2f220030-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crucifixion%3A%20Nathalie%20Handal%20on%20being%20Palestinian%2C%20writing%20and%20enduring%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crucifixion%3A%20Nathalie%20Handal%20on%20being%20Palestinian%2C%20writing%20and%20enduring%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449236979950%2Fc0c2b506-3b1a-48ed-b255-c47d2f220030-1020x765.jpeg>
 ‘Can writers create in such a ceaseless twister of interruptions, barricades 
and heartaches?’ Photograph: Nathalie Handal 
A year later. Four o’clock. Another blaze in the distance. My eyes unable to 
shut. It’s unbearable to keep re-seeing the ruins of small bodies. A roar under 
a cry. A sea beyond a heart. Shadows beneath shadows. Boots pressing the air 
out of rooftops. The threat is everywhere, even in the stack of papers in front 
of me. I can’t sleep because the fear combined with the interminable vigor to 
resist it leaves me no time for caution; and time is outside of time here. We 
find unusual ways to survive each scar as night tries to escape the death it 
will awake to. The girl on the bus comes back to me–she reminds me to wait for 
theadhan, the call to prayer. The sun to rise. The church bells to ring. I’m in 
Bethlehem.

Jesus was born here. But I haven’t seen Jesus for a while, something to do 
with not having a permit. It’s summer 2014. The third Israel-Gaza war in six 
years is going on. We want one minute to stop our hearts from racing. Just one 
minute. But here, one minute is a lifetime. No one can reach grief on time to 
grieve properly. I’m sitting by the window where I’ve been sitting for hours. I 
lose track of how many. The stack of papers on the table in front of me is 
untouched. I feel what I once felt standing in the middle of a grove in Jaffa, 
holding two oranges, one in each hand: a sensation that turned into a voice, a 
voice that mapped a past. From the corner of my eyes, I glimpse the cloud 
flirting with the sun, on and off of my face. I start writing about Lifta.

It’s one of my favorite places, and one of the most stunning pre-1948 
Palestinian villages in the District of Jerusalem. Lifta’s inhabitants were 
either expelled, or they fled. Earlier in the summer, before the Israel-Gaza 
war began, I asked a few writers and theatre makers to meet me there so we 
could ruminate on a play about the pre-1948 Palestinian village. What remains 
of the village is under constant threat of being razed.

Not long before our meeting, one of the Palestinian writers, currently 
residing in London, was denied entry into the country. No reason given. Then 
the one living in Haifa but originally from the hilltop village of Iqrit, in 
northern Galilee, had clashes to deal with. For a few years now, Iqrit 
descendants have been trying to reclaim their ancestral village. They confront 
a colony of jarring obstacles. Iqrit’s inhabitants were forced to leave their 
homes in 1948 when the new Israeli army alleged the area was dangerous. They 
were never permitted to return. Today, descendants are still not allowed back, 
even those who are Israeli citizens.

This left one other person in Jerusalem. On my way to Lifta, I got a call 
saying that there were clashes in East Jerusalem preventing her from joining 
me. This is common in Palestinian life. I’ve written about it before. There is 
no easy way to explain. The restrictions on freedom and movement are 
interminable: checkpoints, the Green Line, Areas A, B, and C, or whatever 
identity card or passport they hold. Gazans aren’t permitted into the West Bank 
or anywhere. West Bank residents can’t go to the 1948 territories unless given 
a special permit, and those are rare. Palestinians with Israeli citizenship 
can’t live in the West Bank, and Palestinians in the diaspora are refugees and 
can’t live in Israel, the West Bank, or Gaza due to Israeli laws. And Jerusalem 
blue-card holders are under constant threat of losing their residency. Wherever 
Palestinians are dispersed inIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, 
the West Bank, Gaza, in refugee camps in the Arab world, or displaced 
worldwide, they are confined to the particularities of whatever 
boundaries—national or physical, psychological or emotional—they were dealt 
after 1948. Can writers create in such a ceaseless twister of interruptions, 
barricades and heartaches? For nearly seven decades, Palestinian writers’ 
oeuvres have contributed to Palestinian, Arabic, and other letters, and left 
notable and cherished poetry collections, novels, plays, and memoirs. But I 
can’t help imagining how much more they could have created.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449237085104%2F81e04bf2-7ffc-482f-9584-ba9ce045a67c-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crucifixion%3A%20Nathalie%20Handal%20on%20being%20Palestinian%2C%20writing%20and%20enduring%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crucifixion%3A%20Nathalie%20Handal%20on%20being%20Palestinian%2C%20writing%20and%20enduring%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449237085104%2F81e04bf2-7ffc-482f-9584-ba9ce045a67c-1020x765.jpeg>
 ‘This is where I understand myself best, amidst these limestones, these 
slender streets, in these hoshs, in these hundred stairs of the old city, under 
these arches, with Jerusalem before me and this person beside me.’ Photograph: 
Nathalie Handal 
I don’t make it to Lifta until the following year, when I hike the steep 
slopes with my friend from Jerusalem. We allow the stones, like cascades of 
stars, to guide us. We stay silent. What could be said amidst such beauty, such 
horror, such grief, such love. The wild flowers speak to us. The jasmine and 
lavender speak to us. The empty old stone houses, gems of our heritage, 
identity and culture, speak to us. The olive trees speak to us. The mill speaks 
to us. The ancient spring speaks to us. The ghosts roaming the village speak to 
us. The bride and the groom from 1947, who haven’t aged a day, speak to us. And 
we listen. We mostly listen. What we hear: although there isnothing more to lose
 
<https://www.guernicamag.com/daily/kareem-james-abu-zeid-a-search-for-justice-and-expansive-identities/>
, no power has ever been able to steal memory.

Writers safeguard memories. We spot a Palestinian sunbird. It has orange tufts 
at the sides of the breast. My friend tells me as a child she would look for 
them, and that this one is a male sunbird, because its black feathers are 
lustrous blue in the sunlight. A blue so electric it mystifies us like a poem 
does when it mysteriously appears on the page. We sit under one of the arches 
of the old houses; we lean on the stones, cooling. The village is a perfect 
symphony of mystical green. The dry patches in between like sheets of hay, 
rough and songful. And the girl on the bus comes to guide me as I memorize 
Lifta.

My mind veers. I think of the expropriated Jerusalem houses not far away, in 
the neighborhoods of Talbiyah, Qatamon and Musrara, the ones that my sister so 
painfully researched and powerfully unfurled in her interactive web documentary 
art,“Dream Homes Property Consultants” 
<http://www.dreamhomespropertyconsultants.com/>.

Then I stop. Beauty is a scar. History is a room. Longing is a gale.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449237239822%2Fa2b88658-6bcd-4e4c-848d-b58a3851ff20-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crucifixion%3A%20Nathalie%20Handal%20on%20being%20Palestinian%2C%20writing%20and%20enduring%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crucifixion%3A%20Nathalie%20Handal%20on%20being%20Palestinian%2C%20writing%20and%20enduring%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449237239822%2Fa2b88658-6bcd-4e4c-848d-b58a3851ff20-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘It’s one of my favorite places, and one of the most stunning pre-1948 
Palestinian villages in the District of Jerusalem.’ An image of Lifta. 
Photograph: Nathalie Handal 
Was I really a young girl when I saw absence and recognized its broken lyric, 
now more riven? Was I really in my twenties in 1997 when Mahmoud Darwish asked 
me to interview Allen Ginsberg for his journalal-Karmel. The American beat poet 
spoke about being offended as a Jew at violent Zionists, and said, “The 
Israelis have fucked up with Netanyahu. They won’t have peace unless they have 
peace.” Is it 2015 and Netanyahu is still around? But would it make a 
difference if he weren’t? Would that stop Palestinians in the West Bank from 
being subjected to what theUnited Nations Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) calls 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/annual_humanitarian_overview_2014_english_final.pdf>
 a “complex system of physical and administrative” control that includes 
“physical obstacles” (the Barrier, checkpoints, roadblocks, earth mounds, 
ditches) and “bureaucratic constraints” (permits, Area C, military zones), 
which “impede access to services and resources, disrupt family and social life, 
undermine livelihoods and compound the fragmentation of the [West Bank]”? Would 
the Mediterranean Sea be open to Palestinians, North to South, East to West? 
For now, the sea will continue to miss us.

Five o’clock. Summer 2015. A year has passed since the 50-day Israel-Gaza war 
and Israel’s annexation, only a few days after the Gaza ceasefire, of nearly 
1,000 acres of West Bank land in a Jewish settlement bloc near Bethlehem, which
the international press called 
<http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21615644-binyamin-netanyahu-orders-biggest-land-grab-generation-another-thousand>
 “the biggest land grab in a generation.” The telephone rings, the voice says, 
“Look outside of your window.” I do. “Look down,” he adds. It could have been a 
Romeo and Juliet scene except the tired curves on his face tell me he can’t 
entertain even the illusion of our hearts. Who can, when seven miles is a long 
distance journey? The once sister cities, Bethlehem and Jerusalem, are now 
separated by a wall and love needs a permit issued by an occupying power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449237391795%2Fa7a2ebd0-d65f-41aa-9169-b7d184131a28-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crucifixion%3A%20Nathalie%20Handal%20on%20being%20Palestinian%2C%20writing%20and%20enduring%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crucifixion%3A%20Nathalie%20Handal%20on%20being%20Palestinian%2C%20writing%20and%20enduring%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fthe-writing-life-around-the-world-by-electric-literature%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Fcrucifixion-nathalie-handal-on-being-palestinian-writing-and-enduring-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449237391795%2Fa7a2ebd0-d65f-41aa-9169-b7d184131a28-680x1020.jpeg>
 ‘The girl on the bus comes back to me–she reminds me to wait for theadhan, the 
call to prayer. The sun to rise. The church bells to ring. I’m in Bethlehem.’ 
Photograph: Nathalie Handal 
We manage to smile and drive through the old city before it awakes. We pass 
through my mother’s quarter, Harat Al-Tarajmeh. I see my grandmother’s school, 
the former ateliers of the mother-of-pearl artisans, and the stone houses of 
close and extended families. This is where I understand myself best, amidst 
these limestones, these slender streets, in thesehoshs, in these hundred stairs 
of the old city, under these arches, with Jerusalem before me and this person 
beside me.


We end up where we often do, having a conversation by the Nativity Church. 
Casa Nova, to be precise. Not long afterwards, we exit our hearts as we exit 
our bodies. We never reach our wounds nor get to our words on time. I memorize 
his hand instead of saying goodbye.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
It’s now December. Every year, Christians worldwide celebrate Christmas. Some 
will come to Bethlehem. They will be told not to buy anything in the birthplace 
of Jesus because the natives are dangerous and untrustworthy—even best to leave 
their wallets altogether. While they pray, the natives will apply for permits 
to enter religious sites. Few visitors will discover whatOCHA reports 
<https://www.ochaopt.org/documents/ocha_opt_bethlehem_factsheet_03_02_2015_english.pdf>
: that “more than ‘85% of Bethlehem governorate is designated as Area C, the 
vast majority of which is off limits for Palestinian development, including 
almost 38% declared as ‘firing zones,’ 34% designated as ‘nature reserves,’ and 
nearly 12% allocated for settlement development.” That Bethlehem along with 
Beit Jala and Beit Sahour are surrounded on three sides by the segregation 
wall. That “farmers in at least 22 communities across the governorate require 
visitor permits or prior coordination to access their privately owned land 
located behind the Barrier or in the vicinity of settlements.” That “over 
100,000 Israeli settlers reside in 19 settlements and settlement outposts 
across the governorate, including in those parts de facto annexed by Israel to 
the Jerusalem municipality.” While they pray the systematic and discriminatory 
policy ofrevoking the residency of Palestinians in Jerusalem 
<http://www.hamoked.org/Document.aspx?dID=Updates1483> will continue. While 
they pray, writers will warn. Hearts will hurt. Rivers will be ruins. Words 
will be wounds. While they pray, love will ask the Song of Songs for love. 
While they pray, the daily, painful execution will continue. While they pray.

Comments will be opened on this piece on Saturday 5 December.
 