
In the end, it took less than 24 hours for Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> to start making nice 
with President-elect Donald Trump.

For a full year, the tech industry had collectively railed 
<https://www.wired.com/2016/07/open-letter-tech-leaders-donald-trumps-presidential-bid/>
 against the xenophobic, bigoted, and anti-science tenor of candidate Trump, 
displaying a political consensus so strong that the only public outlier – 
PayPal co-founder Peter Thiel – became the target of ashunning campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/project-include-y-combinator-donald-trump-peter-thiel>
 from industry insiders. Even the generally apolitical Facebook CEO Mark 
Zuckerbergrebuked Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/mark-zuckerberg-facebook-donald-trump-f8>
 and his supporters’ “fearful voices talking about building walls”.

Peter Thiel faces Silicon Valley backlash after pledging $1.25m to Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/project-include-y-combinator-donald-trump-peter-thiel>
But on Wednesday night Zuckerberg had a new message. “Feeling hopeful,” read 
the tag on aphotograph 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10103245877492281&set=a.529237706231.2034669.4&type=3&theater>
 Zuckerberg shared of himself and his infant daughter watching the election 
returns. In the caption, he wrote that “creat[ing] the world we want for our 
children” was “bigger than any presidency”. The accompanying emoji displayed 
wide, happy eyes and an eager grin.

Zuckerberg was not alone in his change of tune.

“We in the tech community are willing to work with President-Elect Trump to 
help those Americans who need it most,”tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/sacca/status/796445435162345472> venture capitalist and 
erstwhile Trump critic Chris Sacca. “The door is open.”

Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos, who said in October that Trump’s behavior “erodes 
democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/20/jeff-bezos-donald-trump-criticism-amazon-blue-origin>
”, chimed in with a note ofconciliation 
<https://twitter.com/jeffbezos/status/796729498075099136>: “Congratulations to 
@realDonaldTrump. I for one give him my most open mind and wish him great 
success in his service to the country.”

Perhaps Silicon Valley can do business with a businessman in the White House 
after all.

Immigration, trade and regulation

Trump made various statements during the campaign that suggested a Trump 
presidency would pose a direct threat at the tech industry. For an industry 
reliant on immigrant talent, his xenophobia wasanathema 
<https://medium.com/@sundar_pichai/let-s-not-let-fear-defeat-our-values-af2e5ca92371#.6nq9ee9fi>
. Hecalled out Zuckerberg 
<http://money.cnn.com/2015/08/17/news/companies/donald-trump-mark-zuckerberg-immigration/>
 over the industry’s hiring of foreign workers on H-1B visas. He told Apple 
that it would have tobuild its products 
<http://fortune.com/2016/01/18/donald-trump-says-hell-make-apple-stop-making-iphones-in-china/>
 in the US, thencalled for a boycott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/19/donald-trump-apple-boycott-fbi-san-bernardino>
 when the company stood up to the FBI in its quest to force the company to 
unlock one of the San Bernardino shooters’ iPhones. He hinted that he might go 
after Amazon for its growing monopoly in online retail, tellingFox News 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2016/05/13/trump-says-washington-post-owner-bezos-has-huge-antitrust-problem.html>
 that Bezos has “a huge antitrust problem”.

He vehemently opposed the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which was supported by a 
large coalition of tech industry lobbying groups, who wrote in aletter to 
congressional leaders 
<https://www.semiconductors.org/clientuploads/Trade%20and%20IP/TPP%20tech%20letter%20sept%202016.pdf>
 that the trade deal would “keep borders open to the free flow of data, provide 
a strong and balanced intellectual property framework, prohibit data 
localization requirements and other barriers to digital trade, and protect 
trade secrets, among many other benefits”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-donald-trump-critics-tech-reactions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00af54349859a56db388c928669727a696b29859%2F0_266_3984_2390%2F3984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ctrl%2BZ%3A%20Silicon%20Valley%20leaders%20U-turn%20on%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-donald-trump-critics-tech-reactions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ctrl%2BZ%3A%20Silicon%20Valley%20leaders%20U-turn%20on%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-donald-trump-critics-tech-reactions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00af54349859a56db388c928669727a696b29859%2F0_266_3984_2390%2F3984.jpg>
 Donald Trump has told Apple that it would have to build its products in the 
US. Photograph: Joel Carrett/EPA 
He also displayed signs of a dismayingly poor understanding of how technology 
actually works, with bizarre debate comments oncyber warfare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/trump-debate-transcript-issues-facts>
 and hisstatement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
 that the FBI “can’t review 650,000 emails in eight days”. (You can, with 
software.)

Yet despite his antagonistic exchanges with the technology world, Trump has 
also put forward decidedly pro-business ideas that could be quite welcome in 
techno-libertarian Silicon Valley.

Trump’s transition website states 
<https://www.greatagain.gov/policy/regulatory-reform.html> that “regulatory 
reform is cornerstone [sic] of the Trump administration” and promises a 
moratorium on new regulations, a review of old ones, and the cancellation of 
many executive orders. He has also promised to lower the corporate tax rate 
from 35% to 15%.

What’s not to like for corporations?

Rebecca Smith, deputy director of the National Employment Law Project, 
suggested Trump should fulfill his “signature campaign promise” to assist 
working people by taking on “corporations passing risk away from themselves and 
onto the back of workers and illegally calling them self-employed or 
independent contractors” – a practice at the core of of successful gig economy 
companies like Uber and Handy.

But that approach – which would involve serious regulatory action by the 
Department of Labor – does not seem likely from any Republican administration, 
Trump’s rhetoric notwithstanding.

They’re all white men who are saying that. They have nothing to lose
Leslie Miley, Slack's director of engineering 
“Under the Trump administration, the argument of contractor v employee falls 
more on the Uber side than it does under a Clinton administration,” said Tim 
Wilson, a venture capitalist with Artiman.

Wilson anticipated both opportunity and potential danger under a Trump 
administration. Trump’s apparent eagerness to set off a trade war with China 
could be damaging to consumer electronics companies like Apple, which rely on 
China’s manufacturing infrastructure and workplace, as well as the global 
supply chain of minerals.

“Apple can’t manufacture a phone overnight in the United States,” he said. 
“This is a dangerous game to play.”

New tech opportunities?

Still, other Trump promises might create new markets ripe for Silicon Valley’s 
favorite form of disruptive innovation, such as his plan to deport millions of 
undocumented immigrants, some of whom form the bulk of the country’s 
agricultural labor force. That might create opportunity for the “agtech” 
sector, Wilson said.

“If they really are serious and farm labor gets threatened, then anything that 
automates labor is something that is going to uptrend,” he said.

Clean energy technology may be a loser, though, Wilson said, given Trump’s 
enthusiasm for fracking, coal, and fossil fuels. “The value proposition of 
anyone trying to reduce carbon dioxide is going to be hurt,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-donald-trump-critics-tech-reactions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab2d73fc07f0de810d8a5c834c9448843b252ab6%2F0_233_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ctrl%2BZ%3A%20Silicon%20Valley%20leaders%20U-turn%20on%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-donald-trump-critics-tech-reactions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ctrl%2BZ%3A%20Silicon%20Valley%20leaders%20U-turn%20on%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-donald-trump-critics-tech-reactions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab2d73fc07f0de810d8a5c834c9448843b252ab6%2F0_233_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Donald Trump’s campaign stops in liberal California were met with protests 
during the election. Photograph: Stephen Lam/Reuters 
Even if Trump ends up being good or at least tolerable, for the tech industry, 
many people who work in the industry are feeling less sanguine about the future.

Catherine Bracy, a former director of Code for America and co-founder of the 
TechEquity Collective, questioned how people in the realm of “civic technology” 
could continue doing their work under Trump.

“What does it mean to be building tools that make an authoritarian dictator 
government more efficient?” she asked. “How do you continue to do your work to 
make it easier for people to do their immigration paperwork when Trump is 
threatening to deport DREAMers [children of undocumented immigrants]?”

‘It means they don’t care about us’

Bracy expressed dismay at the new, conciliatory tone of tech industry leaders, 
as did Leslie Miley, the director of engineering at Slack. “Chris Sacca is 
striking a softer tone,” he said. “Well – you don’t have to worry about stop 
and frisk, you don’t have to worry about being deported, you don’t have to 
worry about being Muslim.”

“They’re all white men who are saying that,” he added. “They have nothing to 
lose.”

Miley, who is black, suggested that the Trump presidency might cause Silicon 
Valley to lose highly skilled workers – not only by stopping them from 
immigrating here, but by causing some to emigrate elsewhere.

Silicon Valley investors call for California to secede from the US after Trump 
win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/09/trump-win-california-secede-calexit-silicon-valley>
“For myself, I am reconsidering what my role is in the United States,” he 
said. “I am exploring all of my options because I don’t like living in fear, 
and right now I am living in fear. Living in a country that I’m afraid of is 
not something I want to do. Maybe that feeling will subside, maybe it will 
change, but today, that’s how I feel.”

Of course, in addition to highly skilled H-1B visa immigrants, the tech 
industry also relies on an industry of service sector workers, many of whom are 
immigrants as well.

“My whole team is worried,” said Adriana Floros, a 35-year-old Mexican 
immigrant who works in the cafeteria at Intel. “[Trump] is going to make things 
horrible for all the Latinos. I’m a resident, but I’m worried that if something 
happens they will take it away.”

Floros said said that she had overheard several Intel employees cheering the 
Trump victory at work. “They were really happy and I felt terrible,” she said, 
“because what it means for me is that they don’t care about us.”
 