
Poor retention of staff and high turnover rates are two of the biggest issues 
affecting the social care sector in the UK. The problems are well documented: 
the turnover rate in adult social care is around25% a year 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/sites/default/files/20151221_cqc_state_of_care_report_web_accessible.pdf>
 (pdf), compared with 15% across all sectors. And while the average working 
life for a doctor is 25 years, for social workers it is justseven and a half 
<https://www.kcl.ac.uk/sspp/policy-institute/scwru/pubs/2013/reports/baginsky13retaining.pdf>
 (pdf). One of the reasons behind this, particularly for social work, seems to 
be high levels of stress and too much time spent working. In a recentGuardian 
survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/08/social-workers-survey-not-child-snatchers-love-jobs-leave-sector>
, social workers said that work-life balance was the most important factor when 
considering a new role.

Maris Stratulis, England manager at the British Association of Social Workers 
(BASW), says having a balance between work and life is a critical factor for 
social workers. At the moment, she says, some social workers are telling BASW 
that they are having difficulty taking time off in lieu of overtime: “Because 
of their work demands taking time off in itself can be challenging.”


One way employers and the government are trying to address work-related stress 
across all industries is through flexible working. One social care employer 
that has tried it is the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service 
(Cafcass).

“Several years ago we did a time recording survey, and realised that we had an 
awful lot of down time with travelling or waiting about in court,” says Sandie 
Hayes, service manager at Cafcass. “It just wasn’t productive time.” This 
coincided with the period shortly after the death of Baby P, when children’s 
services were facing increased demand at a time of reduced resources. So 
Cafcass decided to focus on allowing staff to work flexibly, whether that meant 
working remotely, on the move or at home. Now, Hayes says, 94% of staff work 
away from the office at least once a month.


Hayes thinks that allowing flexible working has reduced the amount of time 
people take off sick: “Particularly for those with young families, if children 
are sick the flexibility is there for them to work at home, whereas before they 
might have had to take the day off.” This is key, as the social care workforce 
is dominated by women –84% of care workers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34103302> are female, along with three-quarters 
of social workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/jul/25/why-so-few-male-social-workers>
. And it is women who often bear the brunt of caring responsibilities, whether 
for children or elderly parents. For social care employers, therefore, allowing 
staff to combine work with other responsibilities is key to ensuring they 
retain talented workers.


One council worker, Alice*, has been working flexibly for several years in the 
social care sector. She works four days, then has three days off, and says it 
definitely helps her work-life balance. “As weekends can tend to be busy in a 
full working life, it created an extra day when I could turn my attention to 
other activities that I enjoy and help me to be more mindful and relax,” Alice 
says. “It also helped me to be more focused when I’m working.”


“Flexibility is something that councils are looking at more and more in terms 
of being able to provide a better work-life balance for employees,” says 
Clarence Barrett, deputy chairman of the Local Government Association’s (LGA) 
resources board and leader on workforce issues.


The LGA is running workshops with local authorities, starting in the North 
West this month, to look at how flexibility in social care can help with 
recruitment and retention of staff, and what employers can do to meet 
employees’ needs.


“When we’ve worked with [social workers] they have said that what they’d like 
most is to be able to have some flexibility,” says Barrett. “So whether that’s 
a job rotation, or whether it’s a ‘I’ll work for eight weeks and have two weeks 
off to recuperate’ … it’s more about listening to employees.”


This could help in high-stress jobs, such as child protection social work, 
where the work is emotionally draining and there is a risk of burnout. “You 
have a bit of down time to be able to recharge your batteries and be more 
resilient and more effective in your role,” Barrett adds.


With already councils dealing with funding cuts and care companies struggling 
in a difficult market, focusing on flexible working may seem a stretch too far 
for organisations just trying to keep afloat. Certainly, some flexible working 
measures, such as hotdesking, have not been well received, with social workers 
reporting that they areunable to find a desk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jan/29/social-work-hotdesking-tips>
 or somewhere to have a confidential discussion with a client.


Hayes says there have been challenges around flexible working; training was 
crucial so that all staff were comfortable with new IT systems used to work 
remotely, and maintaining a team ethos when staff aren’t in a shared office 
takes work. They now have regular team meetings and practice workshops to bring 
staff together, and there are social secretaries who arrange group activities. 
And, as Hayes says, “There are people who will still come into an office every 
day because that’s what they want to do”. What’s important is giving staff the 
choice.

*Alice is a pseudonym to protect their identity













Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 