
In 2016 cyber hacking repeatedly made the front page: from the revelation that 
hackers hadstolen personal information associated with half a billion Yahoo 
accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/23/yahoo-questinos-hack-researchers>
, to Donald Trumpasking Russia to hack Hillary Clinton’s email 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/28/us/politics/donald-trump-russia-clinton-emails.html?_r=0>
.


So, was it chance that Alex van Someren set up Europe’s first accelerator 
focused on cyber security in 2015? “How do I give a non-smug sounding answer?” 
he laughs. “No of course it wasn’t chance. My co-founders and I have been 
working in this domain for a long time. I’m not ashamed to say that we 
successfully anticipated what turned out to be a particularly intense year in 
the cyber security world.”


I don’t invent cures for cancer, but I know something about IT security.
Alex van Someren 
He points out that he started his own cryptography business 17 years ago. 
“It’s just something I’ve been doing for a long time. I’m no good at baking 
cakes, I don’t invent cures for cancer, but it happens I know something about 
IT security.”


It is an area where the UK has excellent research credentials but few major 
companies. Van Someren says: “In terms of commercialising the intellectual 
capability of the UK, we’re probably underachieving slightly. That’s the 
original impetus behind establishingCylon <https://cylonlab.com/>. We felt 
there was this latent capability not being brought to market as quickly or 
easily as it should be.”


The accelerator was set up with funding from corporate sponsors, including BAE 
Systems and investment firm Winton, which provides the office space where it 
takes place. Cylon invests £15,000 in each of the companies that takes part in 
the programme, in exchange for a 3% stake.

Cyber security is a tough area for startups to enter because target customers 
are often wary of testing new products. Kerri-Lynn Hauck is the founder of 
Fabric, a secure, internal, communications system for large organisations, and 
took part in Cylon’s second programme, which finished in March last year.


“You can’t put a product in use which is 98% secure,” she says. In other 
areas, companies might try out a number of different products while deciding 
which one to use, but that doesn’t work in cyber security. “So there is a 
hurdle in cyber security, that of proving a product.”

 Kerri-Lynn Hauck, founder of Fabric. 
Fabric had developed a minimum viable product before applying to Cylon and 
Hauck says she benefited most from connections made during the programme. “It 
gave us a lot more interaction with a lot more customers early, in order to 
refine our product and market fit in an area where it would have taken a long 
time to gain access to those potential customers and partners.”


Fabric has raised just over £700,000 from angels and investors since inception 
in 2013. Hauck, a seasoned entrepreneur, is full of praise for Cylon but says 
the programme could have educated their cohort better with regards to 
fundraising.


“Everyone has this expectation that demo days are the be all and end all. 
Funding relationships are far more complex and nuanced. There is a lack of 
skillset, usually, in the companies that go through fundraising. That’s 
something [accelerators] can help with; all different classes of investors and 
timelines of different investors.”


Raising money for cyber security companies is particularly difficult. Van 
Someren, who is managing partner at venture capital firm Amadeus Capital 
Partners, says: “Investors generally try to make sure they have some reasonable 
degree of understanding, in good conscience, of what they are investing in. The 
number of people who have experience of working in cyber security, and who are 
also investors, is small.”


But things are changing, he says. “We are starting to see another generation 
of investors emerge who have a perfectly good maths degree or have worked in 
other parts of IT and are interested and capable.”


Cylon is one of a host of new accelerators tackling a niche area. Tim Sadler, 
chief executive ofCheck Recipient <http://checkrecipient.com/>, which took part 
in the programme last year, says that specialisation is helpful for the 
startups involved.


Sadler says dedicated accelerators allow participants to collaborate more 
effectively, sharing their network and experience. “You are all trying to sell 
to the same people. The challenges you face are far more similar than if you 
were part of [a more generalist accelerator] when you might have a handful of 
B2C companies building apps for millennials, and a handful of B2B companies who 
are trying to sell to FTSE 100 companies.”

Related: Is Manchester about to become a global digital leader? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/sep/30/is-manchester-about-to-become-a-global-digital-leader>

Check Recipient has developed technology to ensure employees do not mistakenly 
send confidential data to the wrong address. Launched in 2013, it already had a 
product and paying customers before entering the accelerator, making it one of 
Cylon’s later stage companies. Sadler says he too benefited most from the 
connections he made through the programme.


“Having that affiliation with Cylon means that entering into conversations 
with new potential customers is just far more frictionless. So it’s credibility 
and then also the introductions and the networks that it brings.”


What was lacking from the programme was a tangible success story, he says. 
“Something I find the biggest driver and motivator is looking at other 
entrepreneurs and companies that have successfully navigated the market. The 
challenge Cylon has is it is such a new programme, it doesn’t have the 
blockbuster success stories of other accelerators.”


He says the result is that mentors on the programme were either investors or 
potential customers. “That missing link for me was the connection with 
entrepreneurs who have walked in your footsteps.”


Sadler is something of an expert, having been through three accelerators. “We 
are often invited to apply because accelerators want to have the most 
high-profile companies and the companies they think will be breakout 
successes.” Accelerators are, after all, investors. “They are there to take 
small equity stakes in lots of companies that will give a strong return.” Check 
Recipient has turned other accelerators down and says entrepreneurs should 
evaluate how much time a programme will take up. “Ultimately you’ve got the 
company to run, you can’t just plough everything into the accelerator.”

He says Cylon is pragmatic so companies are not required to attend every 
session. “Some other accelerators have a more strict approach where you are 
expected to attend everything. That can actually be a problem. It can really 
detract from what you’re trying to do.”


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 