
A recent request by a man on Tinder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/26/tinder-users-are-sharing-what-they-really-look-like>
 I’d never met left me with a mixed set of feelings and reactions. I’d been 
chatting to him for a few days. We hadn’t spoken on the phone but over the 
to-ing and fro-ing of texts, I’d gathered he was in his early 50s, divorced and 
with three grownup children.

I’d been about to go on holiday so we’d agreed it was best to leave meeting 
until my return. He suggested that we keep in touch on WhatsApp rather than 
Tinder, so that I could send some holiday snaps (I’d been raving about my 
travels to come). This was a kind of postcard equivalent I took at face value. 
Perhaps I should have been concerned that he’d referred jokingly toWhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/20/facebook-why-ive-been-using-whatsapp-for-years>
 as a crucial part of the “dating arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/21/rejection-online-dating-politeness-christmas>
”. I’d always felt that a meeting in person was the only “arsenal” that counted 
but I’d not paid it much attention.

Rejection is built into online dating. Politeness should be too | Keren Levy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/21/rejection-online-dating-politeness-christmas>
A week later, in the buoyant mood that can come from being in a spectacularly 
beautiful place, I’d sent a chatty message and two photos. They were pretty 
standard: one was a beach view and the other was of me standing on the deck of 
a boat in a T-shirt and shorts. There was nothing suggestive about either. They 
were holiday-happy moments to give a sense of how much I loved where I was.

Seconds later, his return text asking “how about cybersex?” appeared on my 
screen. To say it hadn’t been the response I had anticipated would be an 
understatement. I was completely thrown.

Still, I found myself thinking it best to be light-hearted in my initial 
response. “I went with: ‘That’s a suggestion that tends to work better once 
you’ve met the person.’” But I’d felt defensive in sending it.

He came back to explain that “No, no,” it didn’t work in that order. We needed 
to see first if we entertained each other on screen or phone and then, based on 
that, to decide whether to meet. Any doubt I’d had that this was a joke fell 
away with the realisation that it was not humour but his criterion for meeting 
at all. I was horrified, then horrified to be horrified. I didn’t want to be 
that outraged person, either.

I’m pretty broad-minded. My friends would agree I’m the last person to be 
prudish. I like men. I like confident men. Sometimes I like those who risk 
pushing boundaries in this careful age. But I deleted this one and our 
correspondence. The notable thing was how uncomfortable I felt about doing so.

Tinder: the shallowest dating app ever?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/nov/23/tinder-shallowest-dating-app-ever>
Several of the single female friends I told echoed my scenario. Three or four 
of them, all in their 40s, came up with related if not identical examples, one 
saying she was always being asked, though not necessarily as the criterion on 
whether to meet. Another had been prompted with: “How can we spice things up a 
bit?”, before an agreed (first) meeting the following week. The intimation was 
clear.

It’s a criticism of Tinder that it’s geared to one-night stands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/nov/23/tinder-shallowest-dating-app-ever>
. But my experience is that the faces on the app are often of people using 
dating sites. It’s no better or worse in this respect. I can’t blame this on a 
specific app.

I mentioned it to long-married friends of the same age and got a “WTF is 
cybersex?” response that made me feel apologetic for the soulless, sordid stuff 
of the single life.

I still wondered, “Is it my age?,” as I asked myself whether this man who had 
seemed to me to be “normal” thought this normal? Were there numerous women who 
would have obliged? I was thinking in ways I didn’t recognise. I’ve never used 
words like objectified, or even felt them. But the assumption and presumption 
of this episode meant it was how I felt now.

My consternation was increased by the fact that Tinder directs its users, 
often, to friends of friends. This man had been in that category. Knowing that 
someone we know knows the person had given me a misplaced sense of security.

The request by a stranger of my own generation felt in its way more shocking, 
though I am not sure it is

A lot has been made of the dangers among generations X and Y of sharing images 
that are explicitly short-lived and self-deleting. The mechanism can heighten 
the pressure on what to depict.Sexting is so widespread it no longer needs 
inverted commas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/10/sexting-becoming-the-norm-for-teens-warn-child-protection-experts>
.

But the request by a stranger of my own generation felt in its way more 
shocking, though I am not sure it is. Is it right to expect anything different 
from a member of a generation not brought up with it?

Wikipedia says cybersex encounters can be “within the context of 
relationships, eg among lovers … or among individuals who have no prior 
knowledge of one another and meet in virtual spaces”. I wonder whether, in 
middle age, my online route to dating is for others an end in itself. There is 
no need to meet.

It feels important to say how unsexy I found the whole request. It spoke of 
not venturing beyond a computer, or depressingly of using that fact to justify 
their behaviour.

I’m sure there’s a moral to the story. But, having removed the man from my 
dating search, I’m still working out what I’ve learned about myself.

Louise Bridge is a pseudonym
 