
Route information

Length: 16 miles

Duration: 1-2 hours

Start: Axminster/Bridport

Finish: Axminster/Bridport

Classification: Moderate

Terrain: Road, occasional hills/steep descents

Good for: a day out with partners or friends, or families with older kids. Not 
recommended for beginners.

Map: OS Map: Landranger 193 
<https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/shop/landranger-map-taunton-lyme-regis.html>

The Tour de Manche route

One of the beauties of this backwater route is the lack of traffic. On a 
Saturday morning pedal, I saw one tractor, a party of horse-riders and several 
other cyclists but no more than a dozen cars. At one point, I stopped to let a 
flock of sheep crowd into the lane while a farmer and his dog shepherded them 
 from one field to another – but otherwise it was all birdsong, farmyards and 
cider orchards, and a far cry from the busy A35 coast road that runs more or 
less parallel to this meandering trail of quiet, undiscovered country lanes.

This trail – on a stretch of the National Cycle Network's Route 2 
<http://www.sustrans.org.uk/ncn/map/route/route-2>, and featured as part of the 
Tour de Manche <http://en.tourdemanche.com/> – is well signposted; I didn't 
take a map and I didn't get lost.

The narrow, wiggly backroads are somewhat challenging in places with a couple 
of long, steep climbs followed by rather hairy descents, but your hard work 
will be rewarded by heart-stopping views and pretty landscapes.

The route begins (or ends) in Axminster, a small market town in Devon's "River 
Cottage <http://www.rivercottage.net/> Country" (Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's 
HQ is three miles away). It's right on the county border and, once clear of the 
town, you are in proper Dorset within minutes.

Beyond wildflower hedges and clumps of oak trees, I spotted Lewesdon Hill 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/lewesdon-hill/> and Pilsdon Pen. At the top 
of the first mighty hill, I caught a glint of Lyme Bay and theJurassic Coast 
<http://jurassiccoast.org/> and, below, the patchwork fields of Marshwood Vale 
– a place described by Sir Frederick Treves as: "A somewhat sullen hollow, 
shunned by man, for there is hardly a habitation in it."

Treves was an Edwardian travel writer who cycled around the county to research 
his guide book, Highways and Byways of Dorset. I doubt much has 
changed around here since it was published in 1906, but there are habitations: 
farms, barns, thatched cottages and a string of tiny villages (Monkton Wyld, 
Wootton Fitzpaine, Shave Cross – they all sound like characters from a Thomas 
Hardy novel).

Along the route, numerous footpaths veer off into woodland, along streams and 
across meadowy fields; and if you want a longer ride, choose a detour: heading 
five miles downhill to, say, Lyme Regis or a mile uphill to Coney's Castle, an 
iron age hill fort that has amazing views across the Vale to the coast and, in 
the spring, a carpet of bluebells.

Saintly stopoff
Keeping to the route, I stopped for a nose around the Church of St Candida and 
Holy Cross <http://www.cathedralofthevale.co.uk/> at Whitchurch Canonicorum: 
the so-called capital of Marshwood Vale. Surprisingly large for such a small 
village, it's the only church in England (other than Westminster Abbey) to 
house the relics of a saint. The shrine to the obscure medieval healer, Saint 
Wite, is built into a wall on the north transept and has been a place of 
pilgrimage for centuries. Worth noting, perhaps, that the ashes of Sir Robin 
Day are buried in the churchyard.

Five miles short of Bridport, I stopped at the atmospheric Shave Cross Inn 
<http://www.theshavecrossinn.co.uk/> for a quick drink in its uncommonly pretty 
freehouse garden. I then made the final steep climb out of Broadoak and began 
the descent into Bridport – just in time to catch the town centre's lively 
Saturday street market, which has colourful stalls lining wide Georgian streets 
designed for making rope. One more mile, and I ended the ride on the Jurassic 
Coast West Bay. Fish and chips on the harbour; a walk on the beach.

Other ride options
The hilly terrain of Dorset's Jurassic Coast presents some challenging cycling 
and attracts serious roadies looking for  training-level gradients. Try 
slogging uphill to Hardy's Monument (250 metres above the Fleet Lagoon on 
Chesil beach) or whizzing down the precipitous slope that plunges into 
Abbotsbury on the coast road between West Bay and Weymouth.

Even the gentler hills around the Isle of Purbeck require stamina. But within 
theDorset area of outstanding natural beauty <http://www.dorsetaonb.org.uk/>, 
the region's map of diverse landscapes offers up dozens of options, including 
off-road trails and sedate family-friendly rides.

Of the seven mainly on-road rides around Purbeck, five are graded easy or 
moderate. A good one to try is theNorthport Greenway and Sika Trail 
<https://www.dorsetforyou.com/396577> from Wareham Quay – a two-hour ride that 
takes in a seven-mile off-road loop around Wareham Forest. The longer 
Castle Ride covers 11 miles of Purbeck countryside including beautiful Corfe 
Castle (where you can board a steam train to the coast on the Swanage Railway).

Off-road routes
Disused railways form two other off-road routes. The Rodwell Trail 
<https://www.dorsetforyou.com/411203> is an easy ride through Weymouth, along 
the coast to Sandsfoot Cove and on to the Ferry Bridge at the gateway to the 
Isle of Portland. Or follow the child-friendlyNorth Dorset Trailway 
<http://www.northdorsettrailway.org/> from Sturminster Newton to Spetisbury on 
a section of the old Somerset and Dorset Railway.

The Moors Valley country park <http://www.moors-valley.co.uk/> represents 
a great option for younger children, with miles of safe, way-marked forest 
trails to explore (bring your own mountain bike or hire one on site – and that 
includes child bikes and tag-alongs). The country park also has a challenging 
Pump Track for experienced cyclists.

Useful information

Where to stay
In Axminster is Hedgehog Corner <http://hedgehogcorner.co.uk> (01297 32036, 
one-bed cottages from £90 a night B&B, minimum stay two nights).Copse Gate Farm 
<http://copsegatefarm.co.uk> (01297 489282, doubles from £90 B&B) at Whitchurch 
Canonicorum has five-star farmstay rooms. The traditional thatched farmhouse at
Colly Farm <http://collyfarmbridport.co.uk> (01308 422978, doubles from £75 
B&B) is en route at Dottery, near Bridport. In Bridport, theBull Hotel 
<http://thebullhotel.co.uk> (01308 422878, doubles from £125 and two-bedroom 
family rooms from £185) gastro-pub has glamorous rooms.

Brig's Farm <http://brigsfarmcamping.co.uk> (01297 561267, adults £7.50 a 
night, kids under 14 £5) in Wootton Fitzpaine offers "wild" camping on a 
12-acre smallholding in a beautiful rural setting. On the coast,Eype House 
<http://eypehouse.co.uk> (01308 424903, from £14 in low season) has cliff-top 
camping above Eype beach.

How to get there
South West Trains <http://southwesttrains.co.uk> runs services from London 
Waterloo to Axminster, Dorchester or Weymouth.

Things to check out
For some of the best views in the county, walk to the National Trust's Golden 
Cap <http://nationaltrust.org.uk/golden-cap>, one of the highest points on the 
south coast. Head for theCharmouth Heritage Centre <http://charmouth.org>, for 
dinosaur info and fossil hunting.Bridport's local history museum 
<http://bridportmuseum.co.uk> tells the story of its rope industry; and its 
1920sElectric Palace Cinema <http://electricpalace.org.uk> (01308 424901) 
presents a programme of live shows, screenings and events.

Bike hire
Dorset e-bike Centre <http://dorsetebikecentre.co.uk>; BikeNutz in Axminster 
<http://www.bike-nutz.co.uk>; Lyme Regis Cycles 
<http://lymeregiscycles.wix.com/lymeregiscycles>.

For more information on holidays in England, go to VisitEngland.com 
<http://www.visitengland.com/>
 