
Route information

Length: 66 miles

 Duration: Four days and nights if you're relaxing, stopping for bites and 
sleeping on the circuit

Start/Finish: East Cowes 

Classification: Easy-to-moderate 

Who's it good for?: Families with older kids, those who want a tranquil 
holiday with friends, or for couples seeking  a cycling holiday – as opposed to 
half a day on hired bikes

Map: For the Taste Round the Island route, see the Bicycle Island pages of 
visitisleofwight.co.uk <http://www.visitisleofwight.co.uk>. 

OS Landranger Map sheet 196 
<https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/shop/landranger-map-the-solent-isle-of-wight.html>
 The Solent and Isle of Wight

Getting a taste for adventure

With its reputation for yachties, white-washed villages and one of 
Jimi Hendrix's last major performances, the Isle of Wight is a part of England 
often visited for its music festivals, or just relaxation. The island is, 
however, also developing its appeal to cyclists. Leisure cyclists have long 
appreciated the island's traffic-free routes, and now phrases such as "Drive 
less, see more" and "bicycle island" are appearing on promotional material.

Destination bike
Once a destination where people might hire bikes for half days, families are 
being encouraged to try week-long cycling tours, staying at bucolic B&Bs or 
yurt sites en route.

Tom Ransom, the tourist board's man responsible for promoting sustainable 
transport here, is on a mission to build up the bicycle island theme. Also our 
guide today, he gives us a taster of the eastern leg of his newly devisedTaste 
Round the Island cycle route 
<http://www.visitisleofwight.co.uk/bicycle-island/taste-round-the-island-route>
, a 66-mile circuit with stops at local producers and eateries.

"We want to attract families who might normally go on the Danube trail or 
visit canals in France," he says. "The 100 miles of waymarked cycle routes, the 
stunning coastal views and the great local food providers, offer so many 
possibilities for them," he says.

Indeed, almost half the island has been designated as an area of outstanding 
natural beauty 
<http://www.aonb.org.uk/wba/naaonb/naaonbpreview.nsf/Web%20Default%20Frameset?OpenFrameSet&Frame=Main&Src=%2Fwba%2Fnaaonb%2Fnaaonbpreview.nsf%2F%24LU.WebHomePage%2F%24first!OpenDocument%26AutoFramed>
, and with the sun glinting it feels distinctly like the start of an adventure 
when getting off the ferry at East Cowes, where our two-wheeled circuit starts. 
The sea is busy with boats, the white masts looking more Côte d'Azur than sur 
la Solent. Leaving East Cowes, the circuit takes in sleepy lanes, and I 
immediately notice there's no constant hum invading nature: the island has no 
motorways.

We fly down hills and past slogans such as "Island roads are different", and 
"So far behind we're ahead …" aimed at drivers.

Ryde, a town with an army of independent shops about seven miles from East 
Cowes, is worth a diversion. For little pedallers or tired-legs, you can 
shorten the Taste circuit here: April saw the unveiling of "Coaster" bike buses 
<http://islandbreezers.islandbuses.info/island-coaster> that can stow six 
bicycles and, up to 12 times a day, go around the southern coast of the island 
from Ryde to Freshwater – near the Taste cycle route.

Not for us, though – we drift on past Ryde's 19th-century esplanade with its 
souvenir shops. It leads to sandy beaches so ideal for kids that you could lose 
a day here, but we pedal on and two miles later enter pretty Seaview village 
where we stay at Seaview Hotel, a Taste Round the Island destination. For 
aperitivo, I eat a local favourite, Minghella's sorbet, on the seafront, before 
the hotel's dinner of creamy white cod and onion bhaji and its signature, local 
crab in a ramekin, hit the spot.

The next day, the ride heads inland and climbs through windy roads to 
Adgestone vineyard: the oldest surviving vineyard in the UK. The views – which 
include Brading Down – are beautiful. We eat fresh tomato soup, followed by a 
platter of pâté, olives and cheese but the highlight is the wine. Winemakers 
Russ and Sarah Broughton stopped working at the docks in Southampton and 
started a new life tinkering with the 10 acres of vineyard. They currently 
produce a dry white, a mellow red, made mainly from Rondo grape … and more. MP3 
tours are available of the cellars but most exciting is the tasting (£7.50 for 
the tour, tasting and a teaching).

Another 20 minutes' riding brings us to the 60-acre garlic farm at Langbridge. 
Colin Boswell, the ebullient foodie who runs it, has trotted the globe looking 
for unusual garlics. I fall for his "allium cafe" and its garlic ciabatta, 
£2.25.

The circuit continues with a 23-mile ride around the coast to Freshwater Bay. 
Chale, in the south, is the steepest part but has the best coastal views. 
Should you hit Freshwater Bay, Dimbola Lodge, now a photography museum and tea 
room, has a statue of Hendrix commemorating the 1970 festival held at nearby 
Afton Farm and Down.

Ice-cream dream
The Dairy Deli, a farm (with shop), is next on the Taste route in Shalfleet, 
enticing cyclists with clotted cream ice-cream heaving with honeycomb or 
chocolate and treats such as cherry and almond cake. Another notable stop on 
the taste trail is The New Inn in Shalfleet, named Isle of Wight dining pub of 
the year; it does a fine line in locally caught seafood.

Alas, our taster is over. There's twice as much again to explore. It's a shame 
to have missed it but we'll be back for more. Our corpulent bags, fragrant with 
fancy Isle of Wight garlic, inspire happy memories.
visitisleofwight.co.uk/bicycle-island <http://www.visitisleofwight.co.uk/>

Isle of Wight by numbers

1970 The year Jimi Hendrix played at the Isle of Wight music festival

25,000 The estimated number of people who visit the island's annual garlic 
festival (held this year in August)

100 miles of way-marked cycle routes on the Isle of Wight

Useful information

How to get there
Take the Red Funnel Ferry <http://www.redfunnel.co.uk> (0844 844 9988) from 
Southampton to East Cowes/Cowes.Wightlink <http://www.wightlink.co.uk> runs 
services from Lymington to Yarmouth and Portsmouth to Fishbourne/Ryde.
Hovertravel <http://www.hovertravel.co.uk> runs from Southsea to Ryde.

Where to eat and drink
For seriously fresh crab, head to the Crab Shed <http://www.bit.ly/1huFaz7>(
01983 855819), one mile beyond Ventnoron Steephill Cove – summer only. In the 
rickety village of Gurnard, near Cowes, isLittle Gloster 
<http://www.thelittlegloster.com> (01983 298776), a B&B with delicious grub. 
Cue dishes like Isle of Wight blue cheese, spring onions and pine nuts and 
fresh fish of the day.The Garlic Farm <http://www.thegarlicfarm.co.uk> (01983 
865378); Adgestone Vineyard <http://www.english-wine.co.uk> (01983 402882); The 
Crab and Lobster Inn <http://www.crabandlobsterinn.co.uk> (01983 872244). The 
Dairy Deli <http://www.calbourneclassics.co.uk>(01983 531 557). The New Inn (
01983 531314, http://thenew-inn.co.uk)

Where to stay
Seaview Hotel <http://www.seaviewhotel.co.uk> in Seaview (01983 612711). At 
Langbridge, there is theGarlic farm's B&B <http://www.mersleyfarm.co.uk> (
mersleyfarm.co.uk). At Chale, try Chale Bay Farm <http://www.chalebayfarm.co.uk>
 (01983 730950) for B&B and self-catering with views west to Freshwater. 
Vintage Vacations' Scout Hall <http://www.vintagevacations.co.uk> offers 
eccentric but beautiful accommodation for a larger party.Compton Farm 
<http://www.comptonfarm.co.uk> (01983 740215) is a secluded campsite atop white 
cliffs, with terrific views of the chalk valleys. Glampers can opt for yurts up 
the road at theReally Green Holiday Company 
<http://www.thereallygreenholidaycompany.com> (07802 678591). Back at Cowes, 
Caledon House B&B <http://www.the-caledon.co.uk>(01983 293599) is "Cyclists 
Welcome" accredited by the Isle of Wight Tourist Board.

Bike hire
Wight Cycle Hire <http://www.wightcyclehire.co.uk> (01983 761800) provides an 
island-wide repair service. Non-hire pedallers are charged £30. You can also 
get amove-my-bag service <http://www.movemybag-isleofwight.com>, if you want to 
ride light (01983 281662).

For more information on holidays in England, go to VisitEngland.com 
<http://www.visitengland.com/>
 