
One Sunday in spring 2013, when the David Bowie is 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/david-bowie-is/> exhibition was 
showing at the Victoria and Albert Museum, a series of films was screened 
in lecture rooms around the building to help represent his curious spirit and 
history. The main attraction was Bowie himself, cavorting inLabyrinth – a 
myth-mad mid-80s collaboration betweenGeorge Lucas of Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas>, Jim Henson of The Muppets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/the-muppets> and Terry Jones of Monty 
Python <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/terryjones>, in which Bowie 
effortlessly playedJareth the Goblin King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/12/how-labyrinth-led-me-to-david-bowie>
 as a cross between a spoilt, spiteful big kid used to getting his own way and 
an evil clown in a fright wig and spectacularly tight leggings.

Bowie had the distorted timing of a clown; the mesmerising, time-travelling 
charisma of a crazily ambitious pop star

By way of warm-up was Salvador Dalí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/dali> and Luis Buñuel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/luisbunuel>’s revolutionary 1929 silent film 
Un Chien Andalou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,4267,1146569,00.html>
, which Bowie used as the support act, or guest spot, on his 1976 Isolar tour. 
Twenty minutes later, there was dadaistHans Richter 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/426776/>’s 1947 
hypnotic avant-garde mixture of film and psychiatry,Dreams That Money Can Buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/aug/18/popandrock.edinburgh2006>. And 
then cameLabyrinth, and the spectacle of Bowie slyly smuggling sex and brains 
into what many thought of as the silliest side of Lucas – the most blatant 
example of how Bowie could be both an amiable family entertainer and a 
far-fetched experimental pop star. Only Bowie could take you from the gleeful 
abandonment of linear time, via a film about a poetic vagabond who has the 
power to create dreams and sell them, to a slightly jaded gothic glitter-goblin 
who juggles crystal balls and can shape-shift into a barn owl.

Bowie had the strange, distorted timing of a clown; the mesmerising, 
time-travelling charisma of a crazily ambitious pop star; and the optimistic 
mind of a surrealist who believes in making the most of reality, however 
disappointing and frustrating it can be. He sincerely believed that art could 
transform the world, and he was as influenced by surrealism as he was by pop, 
and the rock history rapidly forming around him. His inspirations were Dalí,
René Magritte <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/magritte> and Marcel 
Duchamp <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/duchamp> as much as Little 
Richard <https://www.theguardian.com/music/little-richard>, the Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/who> and the Velvet Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/velvetunderground?page=2>. His creative 
endeavour was always motivated by the desire to know more, not to constantly 
prove to others what he already knew – hence the constant, exciting, often 
astonishing changes in his music and appearance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fdavid-bowie-surrealist-inspired-dali-duchamp-dr-caligari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa188ed446f454172605c94076f7ea98010d4c687%2F0_0_2715_1839%2F2715.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dal%C3%AD%2C%20Duchamp%20and%20Dr%20Caligari%3A%20the%20surrealism%20that%20inspired%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fdavid-bowie-surrealist-inspired-dali-duchamp-dr-caligari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dal%C3%AD%2C%20Duchamp%20and%20Dr%20Caligari%3A%20the%20surrealism%20that%20inspired%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fdavid-bowie-surrealist-inspired-dali-duchamp-dr-caligari%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa188ed446f454172605c94076f7ea98010d4c687%2F0_0_2715_1839%2F2715.jpg>
 Salvador Dalí and Luis Buñuel’sUn Chien Andalou (1929). Photograph: Allstar 
Bowie’s later-life interest and belief in the provocations and consolations 
of surrealism and dadaism are obvious from the content of his private art 
collection, now up for a sale, but he first came across the sensibility through 
music, television and film. As he was growing up, subversive, savagely original 
ideas often rooted in the avant garde and surrealism were making their way into 
the mainstream via the rapidly blooming popular culture – from the more 
adventurous films showing at the local cinema, through radio and emerging 
television – upsetting settled habits, challenging moral, aesthetic and ethical 
values, changing everything.

For young David Jones, growing up in the 1950s in Bromley, south London, his 
family worn down by circumstance and a turbulent history of mental illness, 
life seemed staged and restrictive. His response, as a feisty, idiosyncratic 
schoolboy was to set out to rearrange reality. Whatever boundaries there seemed 
to be, emotionally and intellectually, were set in place by your own 
imagination; you could break through them by how you responded to reality, how 
you accepted or rejected it. He was, in this sense, a surrealist before he even 
knew what surrealism was.

Influenced by one of his most important educators, his intermittently unstable 
half-brother Terry, the young Bowie’s listening habits slipped from everyday 
trad jazz into the free-er jazz ofJohn Coltrane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-coltrane> and Charles Mingus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/sep/03/charles-mingus-black-saint>
, where reality is not just departed from but transcended. For a tender, jumpy 
mind, such music could seem soothing, making sense through how it circles and 
chases and sometimes catches up with the crazy meaning of things.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fdavid-bowie-surrealist-inspired-dali-duchamp-dr-caligari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F132cafccfed997d14b2d68d8fbafe838546424c7%2F0_0_3738_4370%2F3738.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dal%C3%AD%2C%20Duchamp%20and%20Dr%20Caligari%3A%20the%20surrealism%20that%20inspired%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fdavid-bowie-surrealist-inspired-dali-duchamp-dr-caligari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dal%C3%AD%2C%20Duchamp%20and%20Dr%20Caligari%3A%20the%20surrealism%20that%20inspired%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fdavid-bowie-surrealist-inspired-dali-duchamp-dr-caligari%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F132cafccfed997d14b2d68d8fbafe838546424c7%2F0_0_3738_4370%2F3738.jpg>
 Bad influence? … Anthony Newley. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
This was one route for Bowie into the other spaces of surrealism, where 
artistically creative expressions can denote salvation and liberation. Oddly, 
so too was the British actor, singer and writerAnthony Newley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/apr/16/guardianobituaries1>, often 
derided as a corrupt, trivialising influence on Bowie.

When Bowie said later that he was inspired by the “space mysticism” of Syd 
Barrett <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/jul/11/sydbarrett.pinkfloyd>’s
Pink Floyd <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pinkfloyd>, as well as by Newley, 
anyone who had come across the latter’s absurdist and surreal 1960 ITV series
The Strange World of Gurney Slade would conclude that of the two, Newley was 
actually the more psychedelic. He was an influence on Bowie as much for his 
unconventional eclecticism and misshapen Englishness as for his loopy vocal 
showmanship, his ability to zip together easy listening and an uneasy mental 
state.

An agitated comedy about displacement and disorientation in the early media 
age, the ultimate aim of Newley’sGurney Slade was to resist the predictable and 
lacerate an audience’s complacency. For 13-year-old Bowie, stuck in Bromley, 
watching this vivid, wonky deconstruction of the suburban atmosphere would have 
been like taking LSD. It would have prepared him for what came next.

In 1961, he watched Robert Wiene’s silent classic The Cabinet of Dr Caligari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/28/the-cabinet-of-dr-caligari-film-review>
, one of the founding creations of German expressionist film, influenced by 
German expressionist painting and itself an influence on the horror genre all 
the way toDavid Cronenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/davidcronenberg> 
and Lynch. Bowie would have seen in this movie a world that is warped, confused 
and unbalanced.

He never forgot Dr Caligari – the mysterious, menacing Carnival man, the 
drunkenly askew streets and buildings, the makeup of the sleepwalking fortune 
teller, the unnerving predictions of death. Perhaps he saw it too young, 
perhaps he saw it at exactly the right time, when he was looking for answers to 
questions about mental health and identity. Either way, flashbacks ofGurney and 
Caligari would occur for the rest of his life, represented through the mutant 
characters he played, the art and entertainment he designed and enacted, the 
unconventional life he lived. He never escaped their shadows, and the light 
they threw on the darkness of the mind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fdavid-bowie-surrealist-inspired-dali-duchamp-dr-caligari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5ffff1b75ccc07b93c941f59843a52080c6decc%2F0_0_2200_1619%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dal%C3%AD%2C%20Duchamp%20and%20Dr%20Caligari%3A%20the%20surrealism%20that%20inspired%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fdavid-bowie-surrealist-inspired-dali-duchamp-dr-caligari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dal%C3%AD%2C%20Duchamp%20and%20Dr%20Caligari%3A%20the%20surrealism%20that%20inspired%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fdavid-bowie-surrealist-inspired-dali-duchamp-dr-caligari%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5ffff1b75ccc07b93c941f59843a52080c6decc%2F0_0_2200_1619%2F2200.jpg>
 Robert Wiene’s The Cabinet of Dr Caligari (1920). Photograph: Allstar 
Mixing and merging pop energies and the free-associating dreams and actions of 
surrealism, Bowie announced at the beginning of the early 1970s that the future 
was now. All you had to do – his attitude influencing the punks and post-punks 
that were soon to follow – was eliminate obstacles getting in the way.

The Age of Bowie by Paul Morley review – the true importance of a pop master
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/14/the-age-of-bowie-by-paul-morely-review>
Bowie was an important teacher, an evangelistic one, naturally attracted to 
outrage and excess, and he introduced fans like me to the existence and 
exhilarations of surrealism, revealing an experimental, nonconformist 
mentality. An early 70s Bowie interview in the Melody Maker or New Musical 
Express would open up new worlds – his recommendations of artists, poets or 
films as much a mind-expanding drug as his songs, albums or outfits. He 
expressed how the imagination escapes the confines of the familiar to create 
an enriched, expanded view of reality, which was what you wanted from a teacher 
and mentor. And from a pop star; Bowie believed musicians should propose 
alternative realities.

He was the greatest entertainer of his age, fun for all the family, but also 
enlightenment for the isolated, lonely outsiders, because he had become 
an expert in the tricks that the mind can play, in making fantastic connections 
between the strangest things. Right to the very end, to “Lazarus” 
and “Blackstar”, the performances of a lifetime, his mind frantically alive 
even as his body was failing, he was still trying to make sense of the world. 
He saw surrealism not as cryptic and disorientating, but as a source of 
reassurance, the very best way to find meaning when all seems lost and chaos 
comes calling.

• The Age of Bowie 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/age-of-bowie.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Paul Morley is published by Simon & Schuster.
 