
One spring day in 1936, Salvador Dalí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/dali> visited a diving shop in the 
south east of England and asked to be fitted for a deep sea diving suit. When 
the salesman enquired how deep he intended to venture, the Spaniard replied 
that his dive was to be into the depths of the human subconscious – and he 
hoped to encourage the British public to make the journey with him.

Dalí’s diving suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/quiz/2009/jan/23/salvador-dali-anniversary-quiz>
 was the pièce de résistance of an exhibition that exploded on to the London 
arts scene 80 years ago. The show, the International Exhibition of Surrealism, 
brought together many of the finest names in 20th century art, among them Pablo 
Picasso, René Magritte, Max Ernst,Alexander Calder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/09/alexander-calder-performing-sculpture-tate-modern-london-review-art>
,Giorgio de Chirico <https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2003/jan/26/1>, 
Marcel Duchamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/14/ed-ruscha-marcel-duchamp-retrospective-los-angeles>
, Alberto Giacometti, Paul Klee,Joan Miró 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/mar/18/joan-miro-magic-animals-antony-penrose>
, Henry Moore, Paul Nash, Meret Oppenheim, Man Ray, Graham Sutherland, Francis 
Picabia and, of course, Salvador Dalí. On its opening day – 11 June 1936 – it 
stopped the traffic on Piccadilly due to the swell of the crowds and, over the 
weeks that followed, it stopped the British arts establishment in its tracks, 
forcing it to reappraise what art actuallywas as well as what an exhibition 
could be.

An A-Z of surrealism
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/sep/18/artsfeatures.arts>
Memories of those weeks in 1936, and their impact onBritish art, will be very 
much to the fore at a new show about to open in Edinburgh. Surreal Encounters: 
Collecting the Marvellous draws from four collections directly linked to the 
exhibition 80 years ago and includes works from the London show; it also aims 
to reappraise the sometimes undervalued place of surrealism in Britain.

The 1936 exhibition was designed to put surrealism on the map in the UK. Had 
it not been for the gathering storm clouds of war in Europe, it might have gone 
on to achieve far more. But even though surrealism in Britain was never the 
forceit was in France, Germany, Czechoslovakia and later the US (where it 
became the basis for abstractionism), it still had a far-ranging, if subtle, 
effect.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbe06551ca6fa1fe469ea40c9b7ffe540ce9ec84%2F0_43_5709_3425%2F5709.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dal%C3%AD%20in%20a%20diving%20helmet%3A%20how%20the%20Spaniard%20almost%20suffocated%20bringing%20surrealism%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dal%C3%AD%20in%20a%20diving%20helmet%3A%20how%20the%20Spaniard%20almost%20suffocated%20bringing%20surrealism%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbe06551ca6fa1fe469ea40c9b7ffe540ce9ec84%2F0_43_5709_3425%2F5709.jpg>
 Salvador Dalí’s Couple with their Heads Full of Clouds, 1936, which will 
appear in the show. Photograph: Salvador Dali, Fundació Gala-Salvador Dalí/DACS 
“Britain was, in many ways, a natural home for surrealism,” says Keith 
Hartley, curator of the Edinburgh show. “The 1936 exhibition proved very 
popular, and I think its popularity was down to its quirkiness. British people 
love that sort of thing. It’s hard to imagine Britain today without the 
influence of surrealism: you only have to think of advertising orMonty Python 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/monty-python> – the dead parrot sketch, 
the ministry of funny walks. It’s all related to surrealism.”

The 1936 show had its origins in a chance meeting that took place the previous 
year on the Rue de Tournon on the Parisian left bank, which was the centre of 
the surrealists’ world. The movement has its origins in Dadaism: it grew from a 
deep dissatisfaction with bourgeois values that the surrealists believed 
caused, among other outrages, the first world war. It claimed humankind would 
be in a better place if more emphasis was placed on unconscious rather than 
rational conscious thought.

As a word, surrealism dates back to 1917, when it was first used in a play by 
the poet Guillaume Apollinaire. Although in Britain it is known mostly as an 
art movement, in Europe it was far more wide-ranging, encompassing writing and 
poetry as well as political thought. It was a force for change, and its leader 
was the writerAndré Breton <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2004/jun/16/1>, 
who was known as the pope or the high priest of Surrealism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55058a0057046326c1b998eb0c61166ef7bb3bef%2F0_273_3935_4917%2F3935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dal%C3%AD%20in%20a%20diving%20helmet%3A%20how%20the%20Spaniard%20almost%20suffocated%20bringing%20surrealism%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dal%C3%AD%20in%20a%20diving%20helmet%3A%20how%20the%20Spaniard%20almost%20suffocated%20bringing%20surrealism%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55058a0057046326c1b998eb0c61166ef7bb3bef%2F0_273_3935_4917%2F3935.jpg>
 René Magritte’s Le Modèle rouge III. Photograph: Museum Boijmans Van 
Beuningen, Rotterdam (Formerly collection of E. James), 
As Breton, Ernst, Dalí, Duchamp and others milled around the cafes of Paris, 
its main flag bearer in Britain wasRoland Penrose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/aug/22/picasso-lee-miller-tony-penrose>
, a wealthy young artist. The meeting on the Rue de Tournon took place between 
him and a precocious young poet called David Gascoyne, who had become 
passionate about surrealism, and had just completed a book about it. The two 
men got talking about how extraordinary it was that, while Paris was undergoing 
a seismic art revolution, a few hundred miles away in London no one knew 
anything about it. They decided to change all that, with a show to jump-start 
the British imagination.

Marcel Duchamp: a riotous A-Z of his secret life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/07/marcel-duchamp-artist-a-z-dictionary>
In the end, some 392 paintings and sculptures were assembled at the New 
Burlington Galleries. True to the surrealist notion of “objective hazard” (a 
random but ultimately fortuitous happening), the show was beset by problems 
which, added to the planned surprises, made it a veritable festival of the best 
that surrealism had to offer. First, there was the business of transporting the 
art: two days before the opening, a consignment was seized by Customs and two 
pieces – one by Wilhelm Freddie showing the naked bodies of dead soldiers, 
another by the Argentinian Leonor Fini showing young men dancing naked in the 
twilight – were turned back on grounds of decency.

Next came the hang – or rather the rehang, which happened with just hours to 
go after the collector ELT Mesens arrived and found it hopelessly 
unimaginative. The whole point of a surrealist show, he explained, was to make 
surprising links and to juxtapose works so they were in an unlikely setting. He 
rearranged things to ensure discord, rather than harmony.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F612a44f268eae2000f02e2e298daf5aa4eddfd62%2F0_17_2202_2751%2F2202.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dal%C3%AD%20in%20a%20diving%20helmet%3A%20how%20the%20Spaniard%20almost%20suffocated%20bringing%20surrealism%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dal%C3%AD%20in%20a%20diving%20helmet%3A%20how%20the%20Spaniard%20almost%20suffocated%20bringing%20surrealism%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F612a44f268eae2000f02e2e298daf5aa4eddfd62%2F0_17_2202_2751%2F2202.jpg>
 Maternité by Joan Miro, 1924. 
The show opened on a stiflingly hot day, but the painter Sheila Legge – 
sometimes called the surrealists’ mascot – arrived bearing a pork chop, which 
quickly went off. Legge, who was dressed in a long, white satin gown, her face 
obscured by roses and covered with ladybirds – had to discard it and hold an 
artificial leg wearing a silk stocking instead.

As guests arrived to look round, the poet Dylan Thomas offered them teacups 
full of boiled string, asking: “Do you like it weak or strong?” Breton, 
meanwhile, gave his opening speech dressed entirely in green – even the pipe he 
was smoking was green – and his wife Jacqueline Lamba’s hair was dyed to match. 
The show continued with similar unexpected events: at one point the composer
William Walton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/apr/01/symphony-guide-william-walton-first>
 pinned a kipper on to one of Miró’s paintings, but the artist Paul Nash 
removed it because it smelled too strong.


 The show mesmerised the press and captivated the public: 30,000 people 
visited during its brief, three-week run. And for all its eccentricities, its 
architects were deadly serious about surrealism and its ambitions. “Do not 
judge this movement kindly,” wrote Herbert Read, one of the organisers,in the 
catalogue <http://www.romanianculture.org/downloads/Surrealism%20Catalogue.pdf>
. “It is not just another amusing stunt. It is defiant – the desperate act of 
men too profoundly convinced of the rottenness of our civilisation to want to 
save a shred of its respectability.” So far, artists had only interpreted the 
world, he said, “the point, however, is to transform it”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55ff96fce8ea2cfe562c5546e93da98dd870342c%2F230_0_2988_2986%2F2988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dal%C3%AD%20in%20a%20diving%20helmet%3A%20how%20the%20Spaniard%20almost%20suffocated%20bringing%20surrealism%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dal%C3%AD%20in%20a%20diving%20helmet%3A%20how%20the%20Spaniard%20almost%20suffocated%20bringing%20surrealism%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55ff96fce8ea2cfe562c5546e93da98dd870342c%2F230_0_2988_2986%2F2988.jpg>
 Alberto Giacometti’s Disagreeable Object, To Be Thrown Away, 1931. Photograph: 
Bridgeman Art Library/Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art 
 The ramifications were far-reaching. After the show ended, Penrose and Read 
hatched a plan to set up a museum of modern art in London, of the type that 
already existed in New York. They soon realised, however, that there wasn’t the 
money to do anything comparable, and the wealthy collector Peggy Guggenheim, 
whom they recruited to help, wanted too much control. They did, however , go on 
to found theInstitute of Contemporary Arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ica>. 

Guggenheim set up her gallery, Guggenheim Jeune, and the London Gallery was 
also reinvented to devote itself to surrealism. Later Peggy transferred her 
collection to Venice, where it was seen by Gabrielle Keiller, who was moved to 
shift the focus of her collection – which forms an important part of the 
Edinburgh show – to surrealism.

Sightseeing: the most dazzling art and design of summer 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/03/summer-art-photography-design-architecture-what-to-see>
But back to 1936 and that diving suit. Dalí’s idea was to give a lecture while 
wearing it. For good measure, he held two dogs on leads in one hand, and had a 
billiard cue in the other. During the course of the lecture, however, it became 
apparent that he was slowly suffocating inside his helmet, and it had to be 
prised off with the billiard cue. Dalí recovered and went on to finish his 
presentation with a slide show. The slides, it almost goes without saying, were 
presented upside down.

 * Surreal Encounters: Collecting the Marvellous 
<https://www.nationalgalleries.org/whatson/on-now-coming-soon/surreal-encounters/>
 is at the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh, 4 June to 11 
September. Joanna Moorhead is writing a biography of the surrealist artist 
Leonora Carrington.
 