
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has confirmed 
the former Indiana senator Dan Coats as his nominee to be director of national 
intelligence, promising “ceaseless vigilance against those who seek to do us 
harm”.

US intelligence report: Vladimir Putin 'ordered' operation to get Trump elected
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
The nomination, which was reported widely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/dan-coats-trump-national-intelligence-director>
 this week, came a day after Trumpmet agency chiefs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
 including current director of national intelligence James Clapper to discuss 
the conclusion that Russia interfered in the US election in favour of the 
Republican candidate.

The agencies released a heavily redacted report 
<https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/ICA_2017_01.pdf> detailing their 
conclusions, in which they said Russian president Vladimir Putin “ordered” the 
operation to help get Trump elected.

Senior congressional Democrats seized on the report to demand further 
bipartisan investigation and condemn Trump’s response.

The president-elect did not endorse the agencies’ findings and complained to 
the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/06/us/politics/donald-trump-wall-hack-russia.html?_r=0>
 prior to the meeting of a “political witch-hunt” against him.

On Saturday, true to unrepentant form, Trump used Twitter to issue comment.


“Intelligence stated very strongly there was absolutely no evidence that 
hacking affected the election results,”he wrote 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817703208567078913>. “Voting 
machines not touched!

“Only reason the hacking of the poorly defended DNC is discussed is that the 
loss by the Dems was so big that they are totally embarrassed!”

Trump beat Hillary Clinton in the electoral college, by 304 votes to 227. 
Clinton won the popular vote by nearly 3m ballots.


During the campaign Trump alleged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-fact-check-rigged-election-voter>
, without evidence and to refutation by electoral experts, vast voter fraud in 
favour of the Democrat. Since the election, he has repeated such charges and 
said that if he had wantedto win the popular vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-scam-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton>
 he would have campaigned harder in the larger states.

Trump has also consistently spoken favourably of Putin and urged a closer 
relationship with Russia.

On Saturday, he added 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817748207694467072>: “Having a good 
relationship with Russia is a good thing, not a bad thing. Only ‘stupid’ 
people, or fools, would think that it is bad! We have enough problems around 
the world without yet another one.

“When I am president, Russia will respect us far more than they do now and 
both countries will, perhaps, work together to solve some of the many great and 
pressing problems and issues of the WORLD!”

It had been reported that Trump could scrap or limit the powers 
<http://thehill.com/policy/national-security/306767-trump-weighs-dismantling-top-spy-agency-report>
 of the director of national intelligence. Amid such reports, the NSA director, 
Adm Mike Rogers,told a Senate committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/dan-coats-trump-national-intelligence-director>
 this week staff might “walk” if they perceived a lack of support from the 
White House.


In a statement regarding Coats, Trump said: “[Coats] will provide unwavering 
leadership that the entire intelligence community can respect, and will 
spearhead my administration’s ceaseless vigilance against those who seek to do 
us harm.”


Coats said: “A robust and responsible intelligence infrastructure is essential 
to our homeland security, and if confirmed I will ensure our national security 
decision-makers have every piece of information they need to protect the 
American people from the threats facing our nation.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Biden%20to%20Trump%3A%20%E2%80%98Grow%20up%2C%20Donald.%20Time%20to%20be%20an%20adult%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Biden%20to%20Trump%3A%20%E2%80%98Grow%20up%2C%20Donald.%20Time%20to%20be%20an%20adult%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video&media=>
Biden to Trump: ‘Grow up, Donald. Time to be an adult’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/06/joe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video>
Coats is a former US representative and ambassador to Germany who retired from 
the Senate this year. Like the influential vice-president elect, Mike Pence, he 
isa strong social conservative 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/outward/2017/01/05/dan_coats_trump_s_pick_for_head_of_national_intelligence_is_virulently_anti.html>
 from Indiana.

Pence, a former US representative, is much more closely tied to congressional 
Republicans than Trump and will operate offices on Capitol Hill.

Young Russian denies she aided election hackers: ‘I never work with douchebags’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/russian-hacker-putin-election-alisa-shevchenko>
Coats has held views on intelligence and foreign policy that do not tally with 
those expressed by Trump and close advisers such as national security pick 
Michael Flynn.

In a November 2015 Senate speech, for example, Coats said the fight against 
Islamic State militants should include “Islamists who believe that their faith 
and their culture is being perverted brutally by Isis”.

He does, however, align with the president-elect on keeping open the US 
military prison at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba, the subject of intense international 
pressure over alleged human rights abuses and which the Obama administration 
has sought to close.

In 2016, Coats called Guantánamo “a valuable tool in our counter-terrorism 
efforts”.

In 2015, Coats voted against the USA Freedom Act, which curtailed mass 
domestic surveillance by US agencies as revealed by the leak of National 
Security Agency files by Edward Snowden.
 