
Daniel Clowes <https://www.theguardian.com/books/daniel-clowes> writes either 
the funniest sad comics or the saddest funny comics in the world. He’swon a PEN 
award for his body of graphic work 
<http://www.fantagraphics.com/?option=com_myblog&show=Daniel-Clowes-wins-PEN-Literary-Award.html&Itemid=113>
and an Oscar nomination for the screenplay toGhost World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/aug/13/1>, but none of that would exist 
withoutEightball <http://www.danielclowes.com/eightball.html>, Clowes’s ongoing 
series that graced less reputable newsstands from the late 1980s onward.

Eightball is where the Ghost World stories first ran, where Art School 
Confidential (the source material for hissecond feature film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9g_EheqtAOw>) first appeared, and where his 
graphic novels Ice Haven, David Boring and The Death Ray were serialised. Now, 
the lion’s share of that old material, from the religious tract parody to 
Clowes’ jokey ad for “hand-painted girlie ties” (which heactually honoured 
<http://www.comicartfans.com/gallerypiece.asp?piece=375012>, if you sent him a 
hundred bucks) is getting the oversized, slipcased treatment from Fantagraphics.
The Complete Eightball <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qA3q_PqVosw> is out 4 
July.

Hi, are you free to talk? I’m not surprising you or anything?

Yes! I’m free. I think the worst moment of my life was once I was on a book 
tour and dead asleep and the phone rings. And I picked it up and it was a radio 
DJ who said: “Are you ready to go on the air in 30 seconds?” It was an AM 
American radio show and he was like “So! you do comics!” I was completely still 
in a dream world.

What’s it like looking through all this material from 25 years ago?

Luckily it’s been long enough that I don’t look at it and go: “Oh my god, I 
wish I’d fixed that face or rewritten that line of dialogue.” There was 
actually a typo that after all these years that no one had noticed. Multiple 
reprintings and it’s just always been there.

Woody Harrelson and Laura Dern set for Daniel Clowes' Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/28/woody-harrelson-laura-dern-wilson-daniel-clowes>
One thing I always stop on going through Eightball back issues is Devil Doll, 
the stapled-in parody ofJack Chick’s famous Christian mini-comic tracts 
<https://www.chick.com/>.

When I was growing up you would see those lying around. You don’t really think 
of those as being part of the official canon of effective comics. And one day I 
sort of changed my mind. I thought: “These are really compelling and I’d rather 
read these than pretty much anything else published in 1985.” So I made a long 
trek out to a Christian bookstore in Queens and I bought every single one, 
which totaled I think $3 – they were each 10 cents. And I went home and read 
them all in one sitting, and it was maybe the most devastating comics-reading 
experience I’ve ever had. I really felt like he’d almost won me over by the 
end. I knew every single one of them almost by heart by the time I did that 
story. I was so obsessed.

It’s such an effective evocation of them that I’ve occasionally wanted to just 
buy an old issue of Eightball and just slip it into the rack in the Times 
Square subway station where the guy hands them out.

A couple of people had the gumption to actually redo that story as a Chick 
tract and I only wish I had a thousand of them, because that would be really 
fun to leave in the laundromat.

Are there any characters in these stories that you miss? Dan Pussey 
<https://www.tumblr.com/search/dan%20pussey>, the guy who tragically makes it 
big in superhero comics, or the misanthropicLloyd Llewelyn 
<http://danielclowes.com/LLLL.html>?

I feel like Dan Pussey could have just gone on and on as the world changed. He 
would be running one of the movie studios right now. I think about Lloyd 
Llewelyn all the time. He was like the big actor that peaked too soon and 
became a has-been and is doing infomercials or something, and there’s something 
much more interesting about that than the successful character that takes off. 
I’ve thought about doing the Ghost World girls as adults. I think one day I may 
just revisit all the characters. I may do something where they get together in 
some way, just to see what would happen.

It’s funny how short the Art School Confidential story is. Four pages long, 
and it’s been made into a feature film.

The only reason I allowed it to be [marketed] as though it’s based on that 
story was because I would get money from being the author of the original 
material. But really we wanted to do an art school story. I always thought we 
should have changed the name, but nobody else agreed with me, so it stayed with 
it.

Do you want to keep on making movies?

It looks like there’s going to be a Wilson movie coming up this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/28/woody-harrelson-laura-dern-wilson-daniel-clowes>
, I wrote the screenplay for that, but I have to say ... I don’t know. It was a 
fun thing to do for 10 years or so, to write the screenplays. But now, really, 
all I want to do is sit at the drawing board. I’m newly inspired to get back to 
comics full-time and not do anything else. I’m cranking out the comics.

How do you preserve an observation that inspired you after you’ve reworked it 
a hundred times?

I’ve devised various ways to keep it loose while still plotting it out so that 
I don’t get trapped. A lot of it has to do with not writing any of the captions 
or dialogue until I’m really feeling the pressure. I’ve actually found over the 
years that when I’m using the pen and doing the comic book lettering, at that 
moment my brain is really freed to know what’s going to sound right. I’ll wind 
up making drastic changes while I’m lettering that have a sort of clarity to 
them I can’t have at any other time. It’s a very interesting process.

I’ve never understood how jokes in particular survive any of this.

By the time you’re actually drawing the thing, no matter how spontaneous you 
keep it, the joke is already worked out. OncePeter Bagge 
<http://www.peterbagge.com/>’s wife told me she could hear him through the 
heating grate in the floor where he had a studio in the basement, cackling at 
his own comics. And I thought: “I’ve never laughed at one of my own comics.” 
Going back and rereading the Eightballs, I laughed at a couple of my own jokes. 
It was cool.

What else makes you laugh?

There’s so much good comedy in the world you almost take it for granted. That 
Mike Judge showSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/06/silicon-valley-mike-judge-sitcom>
 always makes me laugh because we’re [living] right in that area [northern 
California], and he’s so great at cataloguing different types of assholes. 
Every week there’s a new type of asshole! And you’re like: “Yes. That is one of 
them.”

Given how respectable comics have gotten in the past 20 years, where is there 
still to go? What would you like to see more of?

I’d like to see more people who can draw really well also figuring out how to 
tell stories. Because I feel like there are a lot of really beautiful-looking 
comics that aren’t that interesting to read. And there are certainly a lot of 
people who could potentially write good comics, but writing for comics is a 
very, very difficult thing. I think it’s only really done perfectly when it’s 
the same person doing both, or at least having a great control over the 
visuals. I’d just like to have more things to actually read. I have a lot of 
things I can look at. Even the most average, bland Hollywood movie has to be 
worked out to such a degree that there’s a certain pleasure to watching it, 
knowing that it’s going to play out in a way that has some structure to it. 
Just to get to that point would be a big step.

The cover and logo of Eightball get redesigned practically every issue – were 
you just bored and mixing it up, or were you trying to find something that 
worked?

No, I think that’s a very clear sign I was trying to find something. You can 
see in the first two issues I use the same logo. In the third issue that logo 
didn’t quite work, and then I’m just restlessly moving from one thing to 
another, and by the end it was these big, full-colour paintings that I was 
spending weeks on. It’s something I never quite got, and at the time I felt 
once I have the perfect format, I’ll just stick with that. But I now look back 
and see that it’s a good thing I never felt comfortable with that. And I still 
never do! I’m still looking for ways to work that will be, you know, The Way.
 