
Darren Lehmann has put more than half of Australia’s Test XI on notice 
following a series defeat to South Africa, guaranteeing there will be changes 
for next week’s day-night Test.

Lehmann, who sits on the selection panel chaired by Rod Marsh, noted the 
Sheffield Shield round that starts on Thursday will help shape selectors’ 
thoughts at what could be a time of generational change.

No hiding place for Australia's embarrassment after latest batting shambles | 
Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/no-hiding-place-for-australias-embarrassment-after-latest-batting-shambles>
The entire Test side, with the exception of pacemen Mitchell Starc, Josh 
Hazlewood and Joe Mennie, have been sent back to Shield cricket. Lehmann 
wouldn’t be drawn on how many changes there could be for the dead rubber but 
unsurprisingly ruled out the prospect of an unchanged XI.

Starc, Hazlewood, Steve Smith and David Warner appear the only automatic 
selections. “There’ll definitely be change,” Lehmann said. “We’ve got to stop 
the rot, we’ve got to work out what’s the best XI.

“Hazlewood was great, Starc’s getting back to his best and then you’ve got 
Smith and Warner. Outside of that everyone’s got to make some runs and take 
some wickets. It’s a really important four days of Shield cricket. You’ve got 
to have an eye to the future as well.”

There have been calls for chairman of selectors Marsh to usher in the next 
generation of batsmen, with Kurtis Patterson and Peter Handscomb among the 
uncapped contenders hoping to receive a call later this week.

But the fact is Patterson and Handscomb haven’t been churning out first-class 
runs and tons as consistently as they or selectors would like. No Australian 
batsman has.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsteve-smith-searches-for-answers-after-australia-loses-test-series-to-south-africa-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Smith%20searches%20for%20answers%20after%20Australia%20loses%20Test%20series%20to%20South%20Africa%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsteve-smith-searches-for-answers-after-australia-loses-test-series-to-south-africa-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Smith%20searches%20for%20answers%20after%20Australia%20loses%20Test%20series%20to%20South%20Africa%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsteve-smith-searches-for-answers-after-australia-loses-test-series-to-south-africa-video&media=>
Steve Smith searches for answers after Australia loses Test series to South 
Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/15/steve-smith-searches-for-answers-after-australia-loses-test-series-to-south-africa-video>
“We need guys to step up and jump out of the pack, I don’t think there’s 
anyone doing that at the moment who is averaging 55-60, things like that,” 
skipper Smith said. “I’m disappointed. 

“We need to do things a lot better than they are [at Shield and Test level]. 
After losing five Test matches, everything is going to be talked about. I dare 
say the selectors are going to be getting together and on a bit of a mission to 
change what’s been happening ... rightfully so.”

Adam Voges’ Test career is hanging by a thread. The mode of his dismissal on 
Tuesday, coupled with a recent lean trot with the bat, suggests he headlines 
the list of incumbents facing the axe. Joe Burns and Callum Ferguson were 
likewise unconvincing in the second Test.

Offspinner Nathan Lyon’s form has mirrored Australia’s in a five-Test losing 
streak, although he has suffered from the side’s batting woes, and former Test 
opener Chris Rogers tipped it wouldn’t be “anywhere near the same side for the 
next Test”.

“It’s unbelievable that these collapse keep happening. You expect fight and 
it’s just not happening,” Rogers said on ABC Radio. “There will be some 
reactions here. I know some will say you’ve got to give them more than one Test 
[but] I know some very good one-Test players.”
 