
A data mining company that helped Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> win the presidency is in 
early talks to snare two potentially lucrative new contracts, one to boost the 
incoming Trump White House’s policy messaging and the other to help the Trump 
Organization expand its sales, the Guardian has learned.

Trump disavows the white nationalist 'alt-right' but defends Steve Bannon hire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-steve-bannon-alt-right-white-nationalist-disavow>
Cambridge Analytica, a data company that uses personality profiling and boasts 
billionaire Trump backer Robert Mercer as a key investor, is in discussions 
about potential deals with the Trump Organization and Steve Bannon, the CEO of 
the campaign and now Trump’s senior counselor andchief strategist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/stephen-bannon-jared-kushner-reince-priebus-trump-administration>
, according to a conservative digital strategist familiar with Cambridge. 
Despite his apparent role in the talks as a representative of Trump’s incoming 
White House team, Bannon is also on the board of Cambridge Analytica, the 
source said, an assertion alsoreported 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/trump-builds-clinton-profile-debate-228578>
 elsewhere. Mercer’s daughter Rebekah, who ran a pro-Trump Super Pac that 
plowed $2m into digital ads and other efforts backing Trump, and Alexander Nix, 
chief executive of Cambridge, are playing lead roles in the talks with the 
Trump Organization and with Bannon, the digital source said.

Historically, the Republican National Committee has picked up the tab for 
White House communication and messaging consultants, which means that Bannon – 
who hassaid he will step down 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/353c4cb6cb4f432cbfd31bd2f3934046/editor-breitbart-plans-be-best-place-news-trump>
 from his job as executive chairman of the far-right Breitbart News when he 
starts his White House job – would have to get the RNC to approve such a deal.

Alternatively, there has been discussion about possibly creating an outside 
advocacy group that would focus on messaging and communications to support 
White House goals, which Cambridge might work for, according to the source.

The talks with the Trump Organization and Bannon underscore the rising 
influence of the reclusive Mercers as mega-donors on the right, and their tight 
ties to Trump’s inner circle. Rebekah Mercer, who oversees much of the family’s 
political philanthropy, is on the 16-person Trump transition executive 
committee.

If the deals in discussion come to fruition, some outside watchdogs say they 
could create new controversies over conflicts of interest for Trump.

“The web of potential conflicts between President Trump and the Trump 
Organization will only be made stronger and more difficult to untangle” if 
Cambridge winds up working for the president’s business interests and crafting 
messages to push the White House’s agenda, said Larry Noble, the general 
counsel for the nonpartisan Campaign Legal Center.

For both the Trump Organization, which has already been criticized for a visit 
to the president-elect by business partners from India 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/us/politics/donald-trump-pauses-transition-work-to-meet-with-indian-business-partners.html>
, and for generating support for Trump’s policy goals, Cambridge Analytica 
could prove useful. The London-based company claims it has key marketing and 
psychological data on some 230 million Americans, information that might help 
increase the size and value of a real estate empire, or build backing for 
Trump’s policy agenda.

Cambridge’s data could be helpful in both “driving sales and driving policy 
goals”, said the digital source, adding: “Cambridge is positioned to be the 
preferred vendor for all of that.”


Cambridge and the Trump Organization both declined requests for comment. A 
spokesman for the Trump transition said Cambridge would not be working for the 
White House, but did not address whether it might work for the RNC or an 
outside group to help the new president.

The potential windfall for the company comes after the Mercers and Cambridge 
played key roles in Trump’s victory. Cambridge Analytica was tapped as a 
leading campaign data vendor as the Mercers, who originally backed Senator Ted 
Cruz in the presidential race, flexed their muscle after endorsing Trump. The 
Mercers reportedly pushed for the addition of a few top campaign aides, 
including Bannon and Kellyanne Conway, who became campaign manager. In 
September alone Cambridge was paid $5m by the Trump campaign for its services.

Trump did not ask Argentina's president for business favor, spokesman says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/mauricio-macri-donald-trump-buenos-aires-office>
Robert Mercer, his wife and his daughter have donated more than $40.1m to 
political committees and Super Pacs since the start of 2012 presidential 
election cycle, according to the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics. 
This year, the Mercers gave $13.5m to a pro-Cruz Super Pac run by Conway and 
then $2m to Make America Number 1, the pro-Trump Super Pac led by Rebekah 
Mercer.

Bannon and the Mercers have deep ties: Robert Mercer has reportedly donated 
$10m to Breitbart News 
<http://www.newsweek.com/2016/12/02/robert-mercer-trump-donor-bannon-pac-523366.html>
. And this year, Bannon was in London at least once and met with Cambridge 
Analytica top brass, according to the digital source who noted that Bannon was 
on the company’s board. (Before Cambridge secured office space in Virginia it 
worked out of a Bannon office on Capitol Hill, the source said.)

Make America Number 1 paid Glittering Steel, a film company that Bannon heads 
which made an anti-Clinton film, $187,000 in October and November while Bannon 
served as Trump’s campaign CEO, unpaid.

“These payments appear to be clear evidence that the Super Pac was subsidizing 
Bannon’s work at the campaign,” the Campaign Legal Center’s Noble said. Super 
Pacs are not allowed to coordinate their spending with campaigns.
 