
I wrote my book, an instant account of the 2016 London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayor election campaign, for three 
reasons: one, I’d have been narked if someone else had done it; two, it was a 
chance to explore self-publishing; three, it was a story I thought needed to be 
told in a short-order, back-pocket volume that would sell for a fiver.

The idea grew in the course of my covering the mayoral race for the Guardian. 
This dominated my working life for a year, beginning as the capital’s Labour 
politicians dragged themselves back to their feet after 2015’s general 
election, flattening and ending in early May when an Artful Dodger from Tooting 
stepped up to a lectern in Southwark cathedral and said: “My name isSadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> and I’m the mayor of London.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmy-name-is-sadiq-khan-and-im-the-mayor-of-london-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='My%20name%20is%20Sadiq%20Khan%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20mayor%20of%20London!%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmy-name-is-sadiq-khan-and-im-the-mayor-of-london-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27My%20name%20is%20Sadiq%20Khan%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20mayor%20of%20London%21%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fmy-name-is-sadiq-khan-and-im-the-mayor-of-london-video&media=>
‘My name is Sadiq Khan and I’m the mayor of London!’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/07/my-name-is-sadiq-khan-and-im-the-mayor-of-london-video>
In the end, the Labour man who never tired of telling us he was a bus driver’s 
son who grew up in a council flat, crushed his chief rivalZac Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith>, a filthy rich 
Conservative dreamboat from Richmond – but not before enduring some of the 
nastiest negative campaigning from the Tories and their press allies that this 
country has ever seen. It was a harsh, illuminating and ultimately cheering 
battle, fought out against the backdrop of London’s rapid change, soaring 
growth and anxieties about Islamist terror, which the Goldsmith campaign tried 
to exploit at the Muslim Khan’s expense.

I wrote the book in parallel with my Guardian reports, sometimes refashioning 
and augmenting the journalism to fit the book’s long-form flow, but mostly 
writing fresh material that wouldn’t have been right for my columns. The more I 
wrote, the more I felt the book should be a fast, easy read of around 50,000 
words that put narrative before analysis.

It seemed to me that the story’s meanings became evident mainly through the 
telling. Simply describing the events, the settings and the contrasting 
characters, together with the atrocious output of some in the media, largely 
provided its own commentary. There wasn’t much need for me to explain things. 
Although I witnessed, and often participated in, every scene that I described, 
I purged the first person singular.

Lacking the time or expertise to design it myself, I asked I Am Self-Publishing
 <https://www.iamselfpublishing.com/> – what it says on the tin, etc – to turn 
the text around for me as fast as possible, first as an ebook and then a 
paperback. They were patient with my serial post-submission tweaking and have 
enabled me to fix my smattering of proofing errors in the initial ebook 
version, the majority resulting from too much late-night haste.

I’ve learned a lot about self-publishing, mostly from making lots of mistakes: 
I delivered my manuscript 10 days after the election, but would have saved time 
in the end by giving myself 20; I discovered that if I set a recommended retail 
price of £5, as planned, I would actually lose money each time someone bought 
one through Amazon (which is why it’s ended up at £6). Only now am I grasping 
the bleeding obvious relationship between the size of the book’s font and its 
production cost.

These errors have had no deterrent effect. Having contrived the imprint name 
Double Q Books – it’s a play on my east London postcode – I seem to have 
started work on another short volume, exploring Boris Johnson’s legacy as 
mayor. This time, I’ll need to do the numbers with more care. I’ve never 
expected to make money from Zac versus Sadiq, at least in the short term, but 
it would be nice not to make too much of a loss.

100 days of Sadiq Khan: 'I feel a sense of relief that we have a sensible 
mayor'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/16/100-days-of-sadiq-khan-london-mayor>
It will be clear by now that as a business enterprise, Zac versus Sadiq has 
been, to put it mildly, haphazard. As a creative one, though, it has given me 
both the job satisfaction I was after and the hope that it will, in its small 
way, live on as piece of immediate writing that captures something of the mood 
of my extraordinary home city in these extraordinary political times.

Extract

Khan and Goldsmith went to the Copper Box indoor arena on the Queen Elizabeth 
Olympic Park to take part in the London Citizens’ Mayoral Accountability 
Assembly, one of the great occasions of every London mayor campaign. London 
Citizens is a multi-faith social action group, originating in the East End. The 
fervour and high emotion of the Mayoral Assembly can both exhilarate and 
unnerve even seasoned politicians, as formidable clerics and youthful idealists 
politely but sternly invite them to sign up to the Citizens’ goals and work 
with them to see they are achieved.

It was an occasion made for Khan. The 6,000 mostly young people banked round 
the hall gave him a big welcome as he mounted the stage constructed at its 
centre and added a Muslim greeting to his general big hello. The Citizens’ 
Assembly offer is one that candidates refuse at the cost of a polite but very 
public dressing down. Khan’s 50% affordable policy on housing and his stridency 
on low pay fitted his hosts’ list of requirements more precisely than those of 
Goldsmith, who had no option but to finesse his less compliant policies as best 
he could.

After young refugees had spoken of their yearning to remain in the city where 
they had grown up, Khan said to loud cheers that in his role as Tooting MP he 
had just the other night helped try to change the government’s Immigration Bill 
so that Britain could help more unaccompanied young refugee children stranded 
in mainland Europe. That was the reason given for his missing an important 
National Housing Federation hustings held on the same evening as the Commons 
vote. Goldsmith hadn’t been at the housing debate either, but his excuse, 
according to his stand-in, was that he had to meet someone in Hillingdon.

At the end, Goldsmith left quietly in the company of [his campaign chair] Nick 
de Bois and almost no one else. He had the air of lost stork trying to find its 
way back to Kew. Meanwhile, on the other side of the venue, the diminutive Khan 
disappeared into a crush of well-wishers, camera crews and selfie-seekers. He’d 
empathised. He’d rocked the house.

Buy the book

To order a copy of Zac Versus Sadiq by Dave Hill 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/zac-versus-sadiq.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 for £6, go tobookshop.theguardian.com <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or 
call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. 
p&p of £1.99.

You can also purchase a signed copy by emailing doubleqbooks@outlook.com 
<mailto:doubleqbooks@outlook.com>, or from London independent bookshops Pages 
of Hackney <http://pagesofhackney.co.uk/>, Newham Bookshop 
<http://www.newhambooks.co.uk/> or Highbury’s Ink@84 
<http://www.ink84bookshop.co.uk/>.
 