
A David Warner century powered Australia to a 116-run one-day win over New 
Zealand in Canberra, the home side regaining the Chappell-Hadlee Trophy in the 
process. After Australia set a mammoth target of 379, the Black Caps were never 
really in the hunt with Warner’s brilliant 119 off 115 balls the difference.

Australia beat New Zealand by 116 runs in second ODI – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/06/australia-v-new-zealand-second-odi-live>
Black Caps captain Kane Williamson’s gamble to bowl first on the 
batting-friendly Manuka Oval wicket was punished by Australia as was the Kiwis’ 
sloppy work in the field.

Warner continued his sensational form, bringing up his sixth ODI century of 
2016, as Australia posted their highest ODI total at home and their third 
biggest overall. The Black Caps’ run chase petered out as they were bowled out 
for 262 in the 48th over in front of a 9,173-strong crowd.

After his brilliant 164 in Sydney, skipper Steve Smith smashed 72 off 76 balls 
to play the perfect foil to Warner. The pair came together at 68-1 and put on 
145 for the second wicket before Warner was removed by a sharp, low catch by 
Williamson at cover.

The visitors elected to bowl and were hoping to take advantage of some early 
movement due to rain during the day, however Warner soon looked settled and was 
rarely troubled as he smashed 14 fours and one six.

Travis Head (57 off 32) repaid coach Darren Lehmann’s faith to bump him up the 
order to No4, making his second consecutive half century. Head was given a life 
when he was caught off the bowling of Matt Henry before it was called back 
because of a waist-high no ball.

Mitchell Marsh finished off the innings with an unbeaten 76 off 40 balls, 
belting Henry for three consecutive sixes, as the Australians piled on 126 in 
the final 10 overs.

Fresh off a century in Sydney, Martin Guptill (45 off 33), made a promising 
start to the run chase before he became another of Pat Cummins’ victims (4-41).

Jimmy Neesham (74 off 83) made a solid contribution but by the time he skied 
Josh Hazlewood (2-42) to Mitchell Starc in the 31st over with his side at 
177-3, the required run rate was up over 10-an-over.

Williamson did his best to anchor the run chase but when his innings came to 
an end on 81 at the hands of Starc, the game was as good as done.

The Australians elected to leave out controversial allrounder Glenn Maxwell 
and Adam Zampa, leaving Head as their main spin option. He responded by tying 
down an end and finished with figures of 0-31 from seven overs.
 