
A few years ago David Graeber’s mother had a series of strokes. Social workers 
advised him that, in order to pay for the home care she needed, he should apply 
for Medicaid, the US government health insurance programme for people on low 
incomes. So he did, only to be sucked into a vortex of form filling and 
humiliation familiar to anyone who’s ever been embroiled in bureaucratic 
procedures.

At one point, the application was held up because someone at the Department of 
Motor Vehicles had put down his given name as “Daid”; at another, because 
someone at Verizon had spelled his surname “Grueber”. Graeber made matters 
worse by printing his name on the line clearly marked “signature” on one of the 
forms. Steeped in Kafka,Catch-22 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catch-22-7.html> and David Foster Wallace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-foster-wallace>’s The Pale King 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/pale-king.html>, Graeber was alive to all the 
hellish ironies of the situation but that didn’t make it any easier to bear. 
“We spend so much of our time filling in forms,” he says. “The average American 
waits six months of her life waiting for the lights to change. If so, how many 
years of our life do we spend doing paperwork?”

The matter became academic, because Graeber’s mother died before she got 
Medicaid. But the form-filling ordeal stayed with him. “Having spent much of my 
life leading a fairly bohemian existence, comparatively insulated from this 
sort of thing, I found myself asking: is this what ordinary life, for most 
people, is really like?” writes the 53-year-old professor of anthropology in 
his new bookThe Utopia of Rules: On Technology, Stupidity and the Secret Joys 
of Bureaucracy. “Running around feeling like an idiot all day? Being somehow 
put in a position where one actually does end up acting like an idiot?”

“I like to think I’m actually a smart person. Most people seem to agree with 
that,” Graeber says, in a restaurant near his London School of Economics 
office. “OK, I was emotionally distraught, but I was doing things that were 
really dumb. How did I not notice that the signature was on the wrong line? 
There’s something about being in that bureaucratic situation that encourages 
you to behave foolishly.”

But Graeber’s book doesn’t just present human idiocy in its bureaucratic form. 
Its main purpose is to free us from a rightwing misconception about 
bureaucracy. Ever since Ronald Reagan said: “The most terrifying words in the 
English language are: I’m from the government and I’m here to help”, it has 
been commonplace to assume that bureaucracy means government. Wrong, Graeber 
argues. “If you go to the Mac store and somebody says: ‘I’m sorry, it’s obvious 
that what needs to happen here is you need a new screen, but you’re still going 
to have to wait a week to speak to the expert’, you don’t say ‘Oh damn 
bureaucrats’, even though that’s what it is – classic bureaucratic procedure. 
We’ve been propagandised into believing that bureaucracy means civil servants. 
Capitalism isn’t supposed to create meaningless positions. The last thing a 
profit-seeking firm is going to do is shell out money to workers they don’t 
really need to employ. Still, somehow, it happens.”

Graeber’s argument is similar to one he made in a 2013 article called “On the 
Phenomenon of Bullshit Jobs” <http://strikemag.org/bullshit-jobs/>, in which he 
argued that, in 1930, economistJohn Maynard Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-maynard-keynes> predicted that by the 
end of the century technology would have advanced sufficiently that in 
countries such as the UK and the US we’d be on 15-hour weeks. “In technological 
terms, we are quite capable of this. And yet it didn’t happen. Instead, 
technology has been marshalled, if anything, to figure out ways to make us all 
work more. Huge swaths of people, in Europe and North America in particular, 
spend their entire working lives performing tasks they believe to be 
unnecessary. The moral and spiritual damage that comes from this situation is 
profound. It is a scar across our collective soul. Yet virtually no one talks 
about it.”

Which jobs are bullshit? “A world without teachers or dock-workers would soon 
be in trouble. But it’s not entirely clear how humanity would suffer were all 
private equity CEOs, lobbyists, PR researchers, actuaries, telemarketers, 
bailiffs or legal consultants to similarly vanish.” He concedes that some might 
argue that his own work is meaningless. “There can be no objective measure of 
social value,” he says emolliently.

In The Utopia of Rules, Graeber goes further in his analysis of what went 
wrong. Technological advance was supposed to result in us teleporting to new 
planets, wasn’t it? He lists some of the other predicted technological wonders 
he’s disappointed don’t exist: flying cars, suspended animation, immortality 
drugs, androids, colonies on Mars. “Speaking as someone who was eight years old 
at the time of the Apollo moon landing, I have clear memories of calculating 
that I would be 39 years of age in the magic year 2000, and wondering what the 
world around me would be like. Did I honestly expect I would be living in a 
world of such wonders? Of course. Do I feel cheated now? Absolutely.”

But what happened between the Apollo moon landing and now? Graeber’s theory is 
that in the late 1960s and early 1970s there was mounting fear about a society 
of hippie proles with too much time on their hands. “The ruling class had a 
freak out about robots replacing all the workers. There was a general feeling 
that ‘My God, if it’s bad now with the hippies, imagine what it’ll be like if 
the entire working class becomes unemployed.’ You never know how conscious it 
was but decisions were made about research priorities.” Consider, he suggests, 
medicine and the life sciences since the late 1960s. “Cancer? No, that’s still 
here.” Instead, the most dramatic breakthroughs have been with drugs such as 
Ritalin, Zoloft and Prozac – all of which, Graeber writes, are “tailor-made, 
one might say, so that these new professional demands don’t drive us 
completely, dysfunctionally, crazy”.

His bullshit jobs argument could be taken as a counterblast to the 
hyper-capitalist dystopia argument wherein the robots take over and humans are 
busted down to an eternity of playingMinecraft. Summarising predictions in 
recent futurological literature,John Lanchester has written 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v37/n05/john-lanchester/the-robots-are-coming>: “There’s 
capital, doing better than ever; the robots, doing all the work; and the great 
mass of humanity, doing not much but having fun playing with its gadgets.” 
Lanchester drew attention to a league table drawn up by two Oxford economists 
of 702 jobs that might be better done by robots: at number one (most safe) were 
recreational therapists; at 702 (least safe) were telemarketers. 
Anthropologists, Graeber might be pleased to know, came in at 39, so he needn’t 
start burnishing his resume just yet – he’s much safer than writers (123) and 
editors (140).

Graeber believes that since the 1970s there has been a shift from technologies 
based on realising alternative futures to investment technologies that favoured 
labour discipline and social control. Hence the internet. “The control is so 
ubiquitous that we don’t see it.” We don’t see, either, how the threat of 
violence underpins society, he claims. “The rarity with which the truncheons 
appear just helps to make violence harder to see,” he writes.

In 2011, at New York’s Zuccotti Park, he became involved in Occupy Wall 
Street, which he describes as an “experiment in a post-bureaucratic society”. 
He was responsible for the slogan “We are the 99%”. “We wanted to demonstrate 
we could do all the services that social service providers do without endless 
bureaucracy. In fact at one point at Zuccotti Park there was a giant plastic 
garbage bag that had $800,000 in it. People kept giving us money but we weren’t 
going to put it in the bank. You have all these rules and regulations. And 
Occupy Wall Street can’t have a bank account. I always say the principle of 
direct action is the defiant insistence on acting as if one is already free.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fbooks-interview-david-graeber-the-utopia-of-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426786662928%2F014c0eeb-7ee8-4edc-83b8-daeef1b4b258-2060x1551.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Graeber%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98So%20many%20people%20spend%20their%20working%20lives%20doing%20jobs%20they%20think%20are%20unnecessary%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fbooks-interview-david-graeber-the-utopia-of-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Graeber%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98So%20many%20people%20spend%20their%20working%20lives%20doing%20jobs%20they%20think%20are%20unnecessary%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F21%2Fbooks-interview-david-graeber-the-utopia-of-rules%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426786662928%2F014c0eeb-7ee8-4edc-83b8-daeef1b4b258-2060x1551.jpeg>
 Occupy Wall Street protests in New York in 2011. Photograph: KeystoneUSA-ZUMA 
/ Rex Features 
He quotes with approval the anarchist collective Crimethinc 
<http://www.crimethinc.com/>: “Putting yourself in new situations constantly is 
the only way to ensure that you make your decisions unencumbered by the nature 
of habit, law, custom or prejudice – and it’s up to you to create the 
situations.” Academia was, he muses, once a haven for oddballs – it was one of 
the reasons he went into it. “It was a place of refuge. Not any more. Now, if 
you can’t act a little like a professional executive, you can kiss goodbye to 
the idea of an academic career.”

Why is that so terrible? “It means we’re taking a very large percentage of the 
greatest creative talent in our society and telling them to go to hell … The 
eccentrics have been drummed out of all institutions.” Well, perhaps not all of 
them. “I am an offbeat person. I am one of those guys who wouldn’t be allowed 
in the academy these days.” Indeed, he claims to have been blackballed by the 
American academy and found refuge in Britain. In 2005, he went on a year’s 
sabbatical from Yale, “and did a lot of direct action and was in the media”. 
When he returned he was, he says, snubbed by colleagues and did not have his 
contract renewed. Why? Partly, he believes, because his countercultural 
activities were an embarrassment to Yale.

Born in 1961 to working-class Jewish parents in New York, Graeber had a 
radical heritage. His father, Kenneth, was a plate stripper who fought in the 
Spanish civil war, and his mother, Ruth, was a garment worker who played the 
lead role inPins and Needles, a 1930s musical revue staged by the international 
Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union.

Their son was calling himself an anarchist at the age of 16, but only got 
heavily involved in politics in 1999 when he became part of the protests 
against the World Trade Organisation meeting in Seattle. Later, while teaching 
at Yale, he joined the activists, artists and pranksters of the Direct Action 
Network in New York. Would he have got further at Yale if he hadn’t been an 
anarchist? “Maybe. I guess I had two strikes against me. One, I seemed to be 
enjoying my work too much. Plus I’m from the wrong class: I come from a 
working-class background.” The US’s loss is the UK’s gain: Graeber became a 
reader in anthropology at Goldsmiths, University of London, in 2008 and 
professor at the LSE two years ago.

His publications include Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/fragments-of-an-anarchist-anthropology.html> 
(2004), in which he laid out his vision of how society might be organised on 
less alienating lines, andDirect Action: An Ethnography (2009), a study of the 
global justice movement. In 2013, he wrote his most popularly political book 
yet,The Democracy Project 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/democracy-project.html>. “I wanted it to be 
called ‘As if We Were Already Free’,” he tells me. “And the publishers laughed 
at me – a subjunctive in the title!” But it wasDebt: The First 5,000 Years 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/debt.html>, published in 2011, that made him 
famous and has drawn praise from the likes ofThomas Piketty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomas-piketty> and Russell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/russell-brand>. Financial Times journalist 
and fellow anthropologist Gillian Tett argued that the book was “not just 
thought-provoking but exceedingly timely”, not least, no doubt, because in it 
Graeber called for a biblical-style “jubilee”, meaning a wiping out of 
sovereign and consumer debts.

At the end of The Utopia of Rules, Graeber distinguishes between play and 
games – the former involving free‑form creativity, the latter requiring 
participants to abide by rules. While there is pleasure in the latter (it is, 
to quote from the subtitle of the book, one of the secret joys of bureaucracy), 
it is the former that excites him as an antidote to our form‑filling red-taped 
society.

Just before he finishes his dinner, Graeber tells me about the new idea he’s 
toying with. “It’s about the play principle in nature. Usually, he argues, we 
project agency to nature insofar as there is some kind of economic interest. 
Hence, for instance,Richard Dawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/dawkins>’s The Selfish Gene 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/selfish-gene.html>. I begin to understand the 
idea better– it’s an anarchist theory of organisation starting with insects and 
animals and proceeding to humans. He is suggesting that, instead of being 
rule-following economic drones of capitalism, we are essentially playful. The 
most basic level of being is play rather than economics, fun rather than rules, 
goofing around rather than filling in forms. Graeber himself certainly seems to 
be having more fun than seems proper for a respected professor.

• The Utopia of Rules 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/291871/> is published 
by Melville House

This article was amended on 21 March 2015, to correct a spelling error in the 
headline.

 