
David Hockney <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney> once said 
that art comes in three kinds – landscapes, portraits and still-lifes. This 
mischievous pronouncement was directed with a wry smile at the high priests of 
the contemporary art world, where the smart money is on conceptual art, 
installation, performance, video, and digital art. In a career spanning more 
than six decades, Hockney has experimented with photography and collage; he was 
a pioneer in the use of digital media and is a virtuoso of the iPad. Yet at the 
core of his practice lie the most traditional categories of British painting: 
landscape and portraiture, with an occasional still‑life thrown in for light 
relief.

In 2005, Hockney moved from California, where he had spent much of his adult 
life,back to live in Bridlington 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/art/9940529/Like-every-great-artist-David-Hockney-needs-his-circle.html>
 and the house where his mother, Laura, lived until her death, at 98, in 1999. 
When the prodigal son returned to his native Yorkshire, the results were 
electric. He produced a vast, euphoric body of landscapes employing a saturated 
palette of colours tinged with memories of the sunshine of the Hollywood Hills. 
A hugely successful exhibition at the Royal Academy in 2012, titledA Bigger 
Picture 
<http://www.yorkshire.com/inspiration/culture/david-hockney-a-bigger-picture>, 
placed the seal of public – if not unanimously of critical – approval on this 
rich new vein of creativity. The Yorkshire paintings suggested that Hockney, 
likeTitian <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/titian> or Picasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pablo-picasso>, had developed a late 
style, arriving at a culminating mastery of his materials. The show cemented 
his status as a living national treasure, a successor toTurner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jmw-turner> and Constable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/constable>, but one who, against all 
the odds, retained the cheeky irreverence of the bleached-blond celebrity of 
the swinging 60s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-hockney-82-portraits-and-1-still-life-exhibition-royal-academy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61a4a2cb357089bac809be1946dba332041eea71%2F0_0_2435_3222%2F2435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Hockney%20among%20friends%3A%20a%20triumphant%20return%20to%20portraiture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-hockney-82-portraits-and-1-still-life-exhibition-royal-academy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Hockney%20among%20friends%3A%20a%20triumphant%20return%20to%20portraiture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-hockney-82-portraits-and-1-still-life-exhibition-royal-academy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61a4a2cb357089bac809be1946dba332041eea71%2F0_0_2435_3222%2F2435.jpg>
 Lord Jacob Rothschild (2015). Photograph: Richard Schmidt/David Hockney 
In 2013 Hockney suffered a minor stroke, and it seemed possible that his 
career, subject to so many reinventions over the years, might be entering its 
twilight; in the spring of that year, moreover, personal tragedy intervened 
with theaccidental death of a studio assistant, Dominic Elliott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/aug/29/david-hockney-assistant-bleach-inquest>
. This cast a profound shadow over Hockney’s close-knit, quasi-familial studio 
team. Deeply affected, Hockney found himself unable to paint or draw for 
several months. He moved back to California, abandoning the Bridlington studio 
and ending the landscape project it had nurtured.

In the depths of this artistic and personal crisis, Hockney suddenly produced 
a portrait of Jean-Pierre Gonçalves de Lima, his trusted studio assistant and 
amanuensis over many years. Head in hands, J-P (as Hockney calls him) appears a 
broken man, touched as strongly as the artist himself by the death of their 
young friend and collaborator. For Hockney the painting is “almost a 
self-portrait”: there is no mistaking the gravity of shared feeling that links 
old master and trusted lieutenant.

At moments of personal crisis, portraiture has provided him with solace, an 
opportunity to gather friends together

The portrait might have been allowed to stand alone as an elegy, a meditation 
on the fragility of life. But Hockney’s response was characteristically 
contrarian. Rather than an ending, it became a beginning. The upright format, 
its bright Californian colours contrasting painfully with the brooding quality 
of the figure, sparked new possibilities in the painter’s mind. From this 
personal, confessional utterance, there emerged a new project, grand in scale, 
public in scope. Portraits began to appear, each on an upright canvas 48 x 36 
inches in size, tumbling out of Hockney’s Los Angeles studio in a headlong rush 
of productivity. Eventually the comprehensive portrait gallery of his wide 
circle of friends and acquaintances became the exhibition82 Portraits and 1 
Still‑life <https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/david-hockney-portraits>
, which opens at the Royal Academy in London on 2 July.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-hockney-82-portraits-and-1-still-life-exhibition-royal-academy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05788990335954e8c7480ada8c5bdc412f73434f%2F0_0_4928_3264%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Hockney%20among%20friends%3A%20a%20triumphant%20return%20to%20portraiture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-hockney-82-portraits-and-1-still-life-exhibition-royal-academy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Hockney%20among%20friends%3A%20a%20triumphant%20return%20to%20portraiture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-hockney-82-portraits-and-1-still-life-exhibition-royal-academy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05788990335954e8c7480ada8c5bdc412f73434f%2F0_0_4928_3264%2F4928.jpg>
 ‘I could go on for the rest of my days’ … David Hockney paints Rufus Hale in 
Los Angeles, November 2015 © David Hockney. Photograph: Jean-Pierre Gonçalves 
de Lima 
These new portraits bring to fruition a project begun in Hockney’s adolescence 
and pursued ever since. His first portraits were, inevitably, of subjects near 
at hand. An early self-portrait sees the teenage artist in 1954 with a 
pudding-bowl haircut, sitting on a chair and staring awkwardly into the mirror. 
The only hint of incipient dandyism is a pair of flamboyantly striped trousers 
and a matching tie, whose pattern is wittily echoed in the yellow wallpaper.

Throughout his career, Hockney has repeatedly portrayed the same sitters – his 
parents (and especially his mother), friends, lovers, studio assistants – 
producing a family album in which a wide public can share. At moments of 
personal crisis – the collapse of major relationships, or the Aids epidemic of 
the late 80s – portraiture has provided him with solace, an opportunity to 
gather friends together, as well as technical exercise of the utmost 
difficulty. Hockney turns to portraiture as a great pianist may turn to Bach: 
it is the centre of his art and of his being.

Hockney made a splash from his student days: indeed, his professional debut 
has become the stuff of legend. Anxious to overturn convention, at this time he 
professed to be wary of the portrait as a genre. Nonetheless, inDollBoy 
<https://theartstack.com/artist/david-hockney/doll-boy> (1961) a student work 
of exceptional originality, he created a coded celebrity portrait, queering and 
subverting the medium in the process. Flowing from his crush onCliff Richard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/02/cliff-richard-review-funny-poignant-show-from-pops-performing-genius>
, the painting has the improvised and hasty quality of erotic graffiti 
scribbled on a lavatory wall. At a time when homosexual acts were still 
illegal, Hockney found in the portrait a place to celebrate male-male desire.

After periods of doing other things, I always come back to the portrait, and 
have a burst of sanity

By the 70s, Hockney had swerved back into an opulent vein of representational 
art closely linked to photography. His most famous portrait,Mr and Mrs Clark 
and Percy 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hockney-mr-and-mrs-clark-and-percy-t01269> 
(1971), lies in the tradition of the conversation piece, in which leisured 
figures inhabit an interior or landscape. This work derives from personal 
affection: it depicts Hockney’s close friends, the fashion designerOssie Clark 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ossie_Clark> and his wife, the textile designer 
Celia Birtwell <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celia_Birtwell>. We stand where 
the artist stood, the third element in a triangular relationship. All three 
were from the north of England, and were darlings of fashionable society. 
Ossie, who died in 1996, despite international success as a designer drifted 
into a life of substance abuse that destroyed the marriage and left him a 
marginalised, lonely figure. Celia, by contrast,has remained a confidante of 
Hockney’s 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/fashion/features/celia-birtwell-interview-the-designer-on-life-with-ossie-clark-and-being-friends-with-hockney-10315208.html>
 and has sat for him regularly for five decades. Her portrait is among the most 
vibrant works in the present exhibition: a grandmother and in her mid 70s, she 
mesmerises the painter now as always. This is one of his very few close 
relationships with women beyond his family: as he recently remarked, “we just 
laugh and laugh – even though she doesn’t always like the way I paint her”.

Birtwell has become familiar with Hockney’s rigorous portrait practices. The 
sitter arrives at the studio and is seated in a simple dining chair, which is 
raised up on a platform about three feet from the ground. Each sitter wears 
everyday clothes. Once the pose is agreed, one of the artist’s assistants will 
draw an outline around the sitter’s shoes so that work can be resumed with the 
sitter properly placed after breaks. Always working in silence, Hockney spends 
the first hour or so making a charcoal drawing. This establishes a likeness, 
focusing mainly on the face and hands. Drawing, he insists, lies at the core of 
portraiture: “I accept what I’ve drawn, and I get that in the first hour: by 
then, I’ve caught their individuality as they sit in the chair. Everybody sits 
in a different way.”Painting <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/painting>
 then continues over three days, with sessions of up to seven hours per day, 
with a break for lunch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-hockney-82-portraits-and-1-still-life-exhibition-royal-academy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9649af713578b6f8d50341f800f716378e7facdb%2F0_0_2413_3198%2F2413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Hockney%20among%20friends%3A%20a%20triumphant%20return%20to%20portraiture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-hockney-82-portraits-and-1-still-life-exhibition-royal-academy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Hockney%20among%20friends%3A%20a%20triumphant%20return%20to%20portraiture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-hockney-82-portraits-and-1-still-life-exhibition-royal-academy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9649af713578b6f8d50341f800f716378e7facdb%2F0_0_2413_3198%2F2413.jpg>
 Margaret Hockney (2015). Photograph: Richard Schmidt/David Hockney 
A few sitters, such as philanthropist and collector Jacob Rothschild, whose 
schedules did not allow them to stay for the full period, were portrayed more 
quickly. Hockney is not averse to having a little fun with his sitters: 
Rothschild, lanky and quizzical,looks too tall for the chair 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/b2/f9/04/b2f90454b65660c43096f708c8fca0e3.jpg>
;Barry Humphries 
<http://static.standard.co.uk/s3fs-public/styles/story_medium/public/thumbnails/image/2015/09/29/10/hockney-barry-humphries-15.jpg>
 sports a magnificently louche tie and pink trousers, a burlesque facade that 
masks his other identity as an astute patron and critic of art. More simple and 
heartfelt are the representations of Hockney’s family – his sister, Margaret, 
still in Bridlington, and brother John, who emigrated to Australia. A poignant 
absence is that of his mother and father, scrutinised so closely in earlier 
years.

Throughout the exhibition a benign atmosphere prevails, as if the tragedy of 
Elliott’s death can be assuaged only by a celebration of life. Perhaps the most 
significant encounter for Hockney came with a visit to LA by the artistTacita 
Dean <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tacita-dean>, her husband Mathew 
Hale and their 11-year old son, Rufus. Self-possessed and articulate, the boy 
was keenly interested in Hockney’s project and agreed to sit. His precocious 
seriousness was fascinating to Hockney in a world of diminishing attention 
spans. Inspired by this chance meeting, Hockney displays a painterly elan to 
match that of the old masters,capturing ambition and seriousness as well as 
vulnerability and youth 
<http://images2.corriereobjects.it/methode_image/2016/05/20/Cultura/Foto%20Gallery/key%2083%20-%20Rufus%20Hale.jpg>
. Staring at Rufus for many hours, Hockney recalls, his mind turned to his own 
self-portrait, seated in his house in Bradford in 1954. Thus an artist of 
almost 80 forged a largely silent bond with a boy not yet in his teens.82 
Portraits turns out to be a meditation on age, and the most commanding canvas 
in the series is that of its youngest sitter.

Creating these works has brought him a rare sense of artistic and personal 
fulfilment. “After periods of doing other things, I always come back to the 
portrait, and have a burst of sanity,” he says. The exhibition stands at the 
apex of his career, and it seems appropriate that it should be shown at the RA, 
founded nearly 250 years ago byJoshua Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/mar/09/joshua-reynolds-wallace-collection-exhibition>
, a master of the portrait. Yet the work is not concluded. After painting, by 
now, almost 90 portraits in precisely the same format, Hockney’s enthusiasm is 
undiminished: “It’s endless. I’m seeing them clearer and clearer. I could go on 
for the rest of my days.”

• David Hockney: 82 Portraits and 1 Still-life will be published by the Royal 
Academy of Arts on 2 July (£30).The exhibition is at the Royal Academy of Arts 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/david-hockney-portraits>, London 
W1J, 2 July-2 October.
 