
The one item that the Victoria and Albert Museum could not use in its 
blockbuster exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/david-bowie-is-exhibition-review>
 on David Bowie,who has died at the age of 69 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-of-cancer-aged-69-reports>
, was a BakeliteGrafton saxophone 
<http://www.shwoodwind.co.uk/Reviews/Saxes/Alto/Grafton_alto.htm> given to him 
by his father when he was only 13.

The show is currently at the Groninger Museum 
<http://www.groningermuseum.nl/en> in the Netherlands, which was due to be 
closed on Monday, but opened its doors to allow fans to see the exhibition and 
sign a book of condolence. “We see a lot of people crying in our museum today,” 
said a spokeswoman.

V&A curator Geoffrey Marsh revealed that Bowie declined the request to lend 
the saxophone, possibly because it was quite fragile but also because it meant 
so much to him. “It was very poignant. Apart from that, he lent everything we 
asked of him,” said Marsh of the exhibition, David Bowie Is, which has become 
themost successful ever staged by the London museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/david-bowie-is-exhibition-review>
.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-fans-ziggy-stardust-heddon-street-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20fans%20pay%20tribute%20at%20Ziggy%20Stardust%20album%20cover%20location%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-fans-ziggy-stardust-heddon-street-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20fans%20pay%20tribute%20at%20Ziggy%20Stardust%20album%20cover%20location%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-fans-ziggy-stardust-heddon-street-video&media=>
David Bowie fans pay tribute at Ziggy Stardust album cover location – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-fans-ziggy-stardust-heddon-street-video>
More than 1.3 million people have visited the show, which opened at the V&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/v-and-a> in 2013 before going on tour 
to Toronto, São Paulo, Berlin, Chicago, Paris and Melbourne. Last month the 
exhibition opened in the Dutch city of Groningen.

Was David Bowie saying goodbye on Blackstar?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/11/was-david-bowie-saying-goodbye-on-blackstar>
The tour will continue, the V&A said, although it is currently only confirmed 
to travel to Japan in 2017. Marsh said he heard the news of Bowie’s death and 
thought it was a hoax. “It is a huge loss … just for humanity, actually,” he 
added.

Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> offered curators full 
access to his vast, immaculately kept archives but declined to talk to them – 
the show had to be the V&A’s own take on his life. “He was very generous and, 
in a curious way, quite self-effacing,” said Marsh. “I think he was genuinely 
interested in what someone else might make of it all.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-is-exhibition-300-items-13m-visitors-but-no-bakelite-saxophone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3122a205ec62ffa3947760e4154c4445608525a5%2F0_0_5443_3263%2F5443.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20Is%20show%3A%20300%20items%2C%201.3m%20visitors%2C%20no%20Bakelite%20saxophone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-is-exhibition-300-items-13m-visitors-but-no-bakelite-saxophone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20Is%20show%3A%20300%20items%2C%201.3m%20visitors%2C%20no%20Bakelite%20saxophone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-is-exhibition-300-items-13m-visitors-but-no-bakelite-saxophone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3122a205ec62ffa3947760e4154c4445608525a5%2F0_0_5443_3263%2F5443.jpg>
 Let all the children boogie: the costume worn by Bowie on Top of the Pops in 
1972, which was displayed at the V&A. Photograph: Leon Neal/AFP/Getty Images 
The exhibition includes more than 300 objects including album covers, videos, 
drawings, handwritten song lyrics andcostumes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-key-looks-pictures>
, such as the Ziggy Stardust jumpsuit that Bowie wore in 1972, whenhe performed 
Starman on Top of the Pops <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v342TST9tFw>.

After the show’s success in London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, 
where 311,956 people visited, the V&A was inundated with requests from other 
museums. “Everywhere the exhibition has gone it has been phenomenally 
successful,” said Marsh. “Every new generation finds him of interest and I 
think that will continue.

“There are very few performers who engender that kind of love. There are lots 
of bands that people really like and admire, but the intimacy people feel with 
Bowie is something very, very rare. And the fact he kept doing it for 50 years 
is extraordinary.”

David Bowie Is continues at the Groninger Museum 
<http://www.groningermuseum.nl/en>, Netherlands, until 13 March
 