
You might not be familiar with the American artist and activist David 
Wojnarowicz <https://www.visualaids.org/artists/detail/david-wojnarowicz>’s 
name, but if you’re of a certain age, you have probably seen at least one image 
by him. His photograph of buffalo tumbling off a cliff was used as the cover of
U2’sOne <http://www.u2.com/discography/index/album/albumId/4039>, taking his 
art to a global audience a few months before his death in 1992 of Aids-related 
complications.

Wojnarowicz was only 37 when he died, but he left behind an extraordinary body 
of work, particularly considering the uncongenial circumstances of much of his 
short life. A refugee from a violent family, a former street kid and teen 
hustler, he grew up to become one of the stars of the febrile 1980s East 
Village art scene, alongsideKiki Smith 
<http://www.moma.org/interactives/exhibitions/2003/kikismith/>, Nan Goldin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/goldin>, Keith Haring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/11/keith-haring-review-the-political-side-of-a-pop-art-legend>
 andJean-Michel Basquiat <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/basquiat>.

His paintings were what made him famous – livid, densely symbolic visions, a 
kind of 20th-century American Dreamtime. But paint was by no means his only 
medium. His first serious work of art, made in the early 1970s, was a 
compelling series of black and white photographs of a man wearing a paper mask 
of the poetArthur Rimbaud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/01/illuminations-arthur-rimbaud-poetry-review>
. This enigmatic, expressionless figure drifts through the piers and diners of 
New York, a dispossessed flâneur.

In the years that followed, Wojnarowicz worked with film, installation, 
sculpture, performance and writing, making things that testified to his 
perspective as an outsider, a gay man in a homophobic and violent world. One of 
the greatest and most abiding of all these works isClose to the Knives, an 
autobiography-cum-essay collection first published in America in 1991. A memoir 
of disintegration, he called it, alluding both to its chopped up, collaged 
structure and to the landscape it maps: a place of loss and danger, of 
transient beauty and dogged resistance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-wojnarowicz-close-to-the-knives-a-memoir-of-disintegration-artist-aids-activist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb3dd1b5e52f623c26b5b3b774b912c6cc0ccce9%2F86_103_1997_1484%2F1997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Wojnarowicz%3A%20still%20fighting%20prejudice%2024%20years%20after%20his%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-wojnarowicz-close-to-the-knives-a-memoir-of-disintegration-artist-aids-activist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Wojnarowicz%3A%20still%20fighting%20prejudice%2024%20years%20after%20his%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-wojnarowicz-close-to-the-knives-a-memoir-of-disintegration-artist-aids-activist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb3dd1b5e52f623c26b5b3b774b912c6cc0ccce9%2F86_103_1997_1484%2F1997.jpg>
 From the seriesArthur Rimbaud in New York (1978-79). Photograph: David 
Wojnarowicz/Courtesy of the estate of David Wojnarowicz and P.P.O.W Gallery, 
New York 
What does it mean if what you desire is illegal? Fear, fury, yes, but also a 
fertile paranoia

Wojnarowicz was driven to document the undocumented, to record and bear 
witness to scenes that most people never encounter. As a small boy, he and his 
siblings were kidnapped by their alcoholic father. In the suburbs of New Jersey 
they were beaten repeatedly, while neighbours pruned their flowers and mowed 
their lawns. Later, during the plague years, he watched his best friends die 
horribly, while religious leaders pontificated against safe-sex education and 
politicians mooted quarantine on islands.

It filled him with rage, the brutality and the waste. He writes: “I want to 
throw up because we’re supposed to quietly and politely make house in this 
killing machine called America and pay taxes to support our own slow murder, 
and I’m amazed that we’re not running amok in the streets and that we can still 
be capable of gestures of loving after lifetimes of all this.”

Knives opens with a visceral essay about his homeless years: a boy in glasses 
selling his skinny body to the paedophiles and creeps who hung around Times 
Square. He recalls days on broiling Manhattan blocks when he was so exhausted 
and malnourished he began to hallucinate that rats were carrying children’s 
arms and legs in their mouths. As a young man, Wojnarowicz had been inspired by 
the Beats, and that rangy, jagged tone is everywhere in his work, conjuring the 
strident world of the streets with an unflinching energy that recallsJohn 
Rechy’sCity of Night <http://www.johnrechy.com/city.htm> or Jean Genet’s The 
Thief’s Journal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2009/mar/10/digested-read-genet>.

Being homeless was a nightmare that he took years to emerge from, but the 
streets were also a place of wildness and freedom, a source of attraction 
throughout Wojnarowicz’s life. Much of the most beautiful writing here concerns 
cruising on the derelict Chelsea piers, looking for sex in the vast decaying 
rooms that extended out over the filthy Hudson river. “So simple,” he writes, 
“the appearance of night in a room full of strangers, the maze of hallways 
wandered as in films, the fracturing of bodies from darkness into light, sounds 
of plane engines easing into the distance.”

What does it mean if what you desire is illegal? Fear, frustration, fury, yes, 
but also a kind of political awakening, a fertile paranoia. “My queerness,” he 
once wrote, “was a wedge that was slowly separating me from a sick society.”

In an essay entitled “In the Shadow of the American Dream”, he describes what 
it is like to live like this, with the knowledge that “some of us are born with 
the cross-hairs of a rifle scope printed on our backs or skulls”. Out on the 
road, driving across the deserts of Arizona, he picks up a stranger in the 
restroom at Meteor Crater. They drive down a service road to embrace: two 
humans licking each other’s bodies, each with one eye fixed to the windscreen, 
the rear view mirror, watching for the bright spark of a state trooper car in 
the distance; each knowing that their act of desire could lead to a beating or 
prison, even to death.

And then death did come, in the most brutal way imaginable. The blind terror 
of life in the plague years: “the people waking up with the diseases of small 
birds or mammals; the people whose faces are entirely black with cancer eating 
health salads in the lonely seats of restaurants”. One by one, friends die; 
“piece by piece, the landscape is eroding and in its place I am building a 
monument made of feelings of love and hate, sadness and feelings of murder”.

The heart of Knives is the title essay, which deals with the sickness and 
death of the photographerPeter Hujar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jan/06/peter-hujar-black-and-white-photography-21-pictures-fraenkel-gallery>
, Wojnarowicz’s one-time lover, his best friend and mentor, “my brother, my 
father, my emotional link to the world”. Nothing I have ever read matches the 
fury and grief of this writing, the sheer horror of watching a loved one 
flailing against a premature death sentence. There was no reliable treatment 
for Aids back then. Wojnarowicz describes a nightmarish drive with the 
emaciated, furious Hujar to Long Island to visit a doctor who claims to have 
had good results with typhoid shots. He isn’t really a doctor, it turns out, 
though his waiting room is filled with dozens of desperate Aids patients.

Hujar died on 26 November 1987. Unflinching as ever, Wojnarowicz recorded his 
passing, standing by his body to take 23 photographs of “his amazing feet, his 
head, that open eye again”, before raising his hands in helplessness and 
breaking down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-wojnarowicz-close-to-the-knives-a-memoir-of-disintegration-artist-aids-activist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F429748974cb75c8632630fcdd4a1f53aafa1fb45%2F0_0_786_583%2F786.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Wojnarowicz%3A%20still%20fighting%20prejudice%2024%20years%20after%20his%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-wojnarowicz-close-to-the-knives-a-memoir-of-disintegration-artist-aids-activist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Wojnarowicz%3A%20still%20fighting%20prejudice%2024%20years%20after%20his%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-wojnarowicz-close-to-the-knives-a-memoir-of-disintegration-artist-aids-activist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F429748974cb75c8632630fcdd4a1f53aafa1fb45%2F0_0_786_583%2F786.jpg>
 From the seriesArthur Rimbaud in New York (1978-79). Photograph: David 
Wojnarowicz/Courtesy of the estate of David Wojnarowicz and P.P.O.W Gallery, 
New York 
Ragged with grief, he was plunged into a deep confrontation with mortality, 
especially after his own diagnosis a few months later. As a young man, he had 
often engaged in self-destructive behaviour, dabbling with heroin, treating 
himself with reckless disregard. Now he wanted to grapple with those dark 
impulses, to understand their cause.

In the final, gargantuan essay, “The Suicide of a Guy Who Once Built an 
Elaborate Shrine Over a Mouse Hole”, he investigates the suicide of a friend, 
mixing his own reflections with interviews with members of their shared circle. 
Again, the writing is extraordinary: a full-bore, high-stakes facing up to 
death. It closes with an unsparing description of a bullfight in Mérida, 
Mexico. An incantation repeats like a tolling bell: “Smell the flowers while 
you can.” It sounds simple, until you remember the many forces geared against 
health and love, the courage it took to commit to pleasure.

Of all the many voices from the margins, Wojnarowicz is among the most 
commanding, writing at a pitch of white-hot urgency. And yetClose to the Knives 
is not simply a diatribe, let alone anything resembling dry political analysis. 
Instead, it is a kind of intensely alive hybrid: a work of radical honesty that 
uses the most intimate of experiences, particularly sexual, as a way of prying 
open the devastating way in which political systems work to exclude and silence 
the unwanted.

“It is exhausting, living in a population where people don’t speak up if what 
they witness doesn’t directly threaten them,” he writes. Long before the word 
intersectionality was in common currency, Wojnarowicz was alert to people whose 
experience was erased by what he called “the pre‑invented world” or “the 
one-tribe nation”. Politicised by his own sexuality, by the violence and 
deprivation he had been subjected to, he developed a deep empathy with others, 
a passionate investment in diversity. During the course ofKnives he touches 
repeatedly on other struggles, from fighting police brutality towards people of 
colour to standing up to the erosion of abortion rights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-wojnarowicz-close-to-the-knives-a-memoir-of-disintegration-artist-aids-activist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07bc81ee34e532d11ff337bffeb758c67c268072%2F0_0_4552_3387%2F4552.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Wojnarowicz%3A%20still%20fighting%20prejudice%2024%20years%20after%20his%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-wojnarowicz-close-to-the-knives-a-memoir-of-disintegration-artist-aids-activist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Wojnarowicz%3A%20still%20fighting%20prejudice%2024%20years%20after%20his%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-wojnarowicz-close-to-the-knives-a-memoir-of-disintegration-artist-aids-activist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07bc81ee34e532d11ff337bffeb758c67c268072%2F0_0_4552_3387%2F4552.jpg>
 From the seriesArthur Rimbaud in New York (1978-79). Photograph: David 
Wojnarowicz/Courtesy of the estate of David Wojnarowicz and P.P.O.W Gallery, 
New York 
It is 24 years since Wojnarowicz died, and yet his struggle has lost none of 
its relevance. We might like to think that the world he documented ended with 
combination therapy, or with marriage equality, or with any of the other 
liberal victories of the last two decades. But the forces he spoke out against 
are as lively and malevolent as ever. Even his old enemies are back in fashion.

Ted Cruz <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz> is on record praising 
the late senatorJesse Helms <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jul/04/usa>
, a civil rights opposer dedicated to fighting federal funding for work by gay 
artists (Wojnarowicz was a particular target). As forHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, she provoked a furore at 
Nancy Reagan’s funeral by celebrating the Reagans for starting a national 
conversation on Aids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/hillary-clinton-comments-reagan-aids-crisis-backlash>
, “when, before, nobody would talk about it”. As if. In fact, the Reagan 
administration was notable for its long refusal to mention the issue of Aids, a 
silence that had appalling consequences.

As the rallying cry of Aids activists made clear, “Silence = Death”. From the 
very beginning of his life Wojnarowicz had been subjected to an enforced 
silencing, first by his father and then by the society he inhabited: the media 
that erased him; the courts that legislated against him; and the politicians 
who considered his life and the lives of those he loved expendable.

In Knives he repeatedly explains his motivation for making art as an acute 
desire to produce objects that could speak, testifying to his presence when he 
no longer could. “To place an object or piece of writing that contains what is 
invisible because of legislation or social taboo into an environment outside 
myself makes me feel not so alone,” he writes. “It is kind of like a 
ventriloquist’s dummy – the only difference is that the work can speak by 
itself or act like that magnet to attract others who carried this enforced 
silence.”

Clinton apologised for her statement at Nancy Reagan’s funeral, but that 
didn’t entirely quell the anger. Within hours of her comment, a photograph 
began to circulate on social media. It showed a lanky man from behind, wearing 
a denim jacket hand-painted with a pink triangle and the words “IF I DIE OF 
AIDS – FORGET BURIAL – JUST DROP MY BODY ON THE STEPS OF THE FDA” (the US Food 
and Drug Administration, then dragging their feet over Aids research).

It was Wojnarowicz, of course: still finding new ways to be heard, to counter 
untruths. If silence equals death, he taught us, then art equals language 
equals life.

• Olivia Laing’s The Lonely City: Adventures in the Art of Being Alone 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377447/s/the-lonely-city/>
 is published by Canongate. David Wojnarowicz’s Rimbaud photographs feature in
Performing for the Camera 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/performing-camera> at 
Tate Modern, London SE1, until 12 June.
 