
David Suchet likes to think of life as a spider's web. The spider, you see, 
spins his web from behind; he can't see what he's creating. "The only time he 
can check what led to what is when he turns around," says Suchet pensively. "So 
in our life. We don't know what we're spinning, what we touch, what we do…"

It's a philosophy that is particularly on his mind today. Twenty-five years 
ago, Suchet was asked to play Agatha Christie's fussy little Belgian detective,
Hercule Poirot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/23/david-suchet-poirot-tv-great-casting>
, in an ITV drama series set eternally in his late-1930s world. Suchet's brother
John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/oct/15/family-values-john-suchet-broadcaster>
, the ITV newsreader, warned him off the role – "I wouldn't touch it with a 
barge pole," he told him, "It's not you at all" – and Suchet himself hadn't 
read any of the books. But he agreed. And next week, as Poirot solves his final 
case on ITV, Suchet will say adieu to the character who has become the defining 
– and best-loved – figure of his career.

He has solved the ABC Murders 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007527533>
. He has unravelled theMysterious Affair at Styles 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007527496>
. He has witnessedDeath on the Nile 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781405867795>
. In the final series of dramas, surrounded by their typically acute period 
detail, Poirot is ageing, and there is one more death that we know he cannot 
escape. Today, as Suchet looks out on a grey, mizzly skyline from the 14th 
floor of ITV's studios on Southbank, the city is in a suitably sombre mood. "I 
haven't fully mourned him yet," says Suchet gently. "I suppose that will come. 
And I will miss him from my life until I die. But everybody has their time. And 
this is his."

Even without the luxurious moustache and the perfectly brushed homburg, Suchet 
is unmistakable, dressed tidily in a blue shirt, a wine-coloured waistcoat and 
dark jeans. He is, of course, a little leaner than his famous TV creation – 
that famous silhouette is 50% padding – and his voice is far deeper; he is 
capable of an expansive, carrying laugh that would doubtless raise a 
disapproving eyebrow from his fictional counterpart.

A few actors have become, like Suchet, the living embodiment of a literary 
detective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/feb/06/natalie-haynes-detectives-hercule-poirot>
. John Thaw did it withInspector Morse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/jul/30/tv-detectives-inspector-morse>
; Raymond Burr did it with Perry Mason. Jeremy Brett's Sherlock Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/may/14/tv-detectives-sherlock-holmes>
 has his champions, while my mother maintains thatMiss Marple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/jul/09/tv-detectives-miss-marple>
 should have been officially retired from the television after Joan Hickson's 
definitive depiction. But none can claim the longevity of Suchet's Poirot.Morse
, which seemed to run forever, actually consisted of only 33 episodes: when
Curtain 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007121120>
 airs, Suchet will have completed the entirePoirot canon, committing 70 novels 
and short stories to camera. (Christie pedants are welcome to quibble that one 
very short story, theLemesurier Inheritance, and the posthumous Capture of 
Cerberus, went unfilmed.)

Suchet remains in character between takes, in an attempt to inhabit the 
character as fully as he can, and in his new book,Poirot and Me 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780755364190>
, he admits that it became hard, at times, to know where the mustachioed 
detective ended and where he began. And while Poirot is famous for the 
deductive brilliance of his "little grey cells", he is also unique for his 
idiosyncrasies: are there traits in particular that they share?

"Well, I do like to be precise," says Suchet. "I don't like seeing crooked 
pictures. I like seeing things in order; I do like symmetry. I hope, though, 
that I'm not as obsessive as he is."Poirot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poirot> has been known to refuse to 
eat boiled eggs that aren't the same size as each other. "I believe these days 
that would be classed as OCD."

Talk to anyone who has acted with David Suchet and the one word you repeatedly 
hear is "meticulous"; his co-stars marvel at the preparation that enables him 
to memorise the 10-minute-long denouements, in which Poirot painstakingly 
reveals the killer, and perform them in a single take. There is a suggestion, 
in his own book, that Suchet's dedication to the part, his perfectionist 
attention to detail, has not always made him the easiest man to work with. 
There are stories of him refusing to wear certain suits, and an early, decisive 
piece of brinkmanship over the correct way to sit on a bench.

"When it comes to fighting for a role in the way that I want to play it, I'm 
afraid I'm not that easy," he admits. "I have never liked directors telling me 
how to play a role. Ever."

By the later series of the show Suchet was an executive producer, with 
considerable creative power. I can imagine him, I say, being a tough man to 
negotiate with. "I don't wish to cause anybody hurt or harm," he says a little 
penitently, "but I think there will be directors who have had a very difficult 
time with me. And I apologise to them now."
 ‘I was aware, especially with my colouring, I’m not the typical Brit’: David 
Suchet. Photograph: Pal Hansen for the Observer 
Still, you'd have to say that it's been worth it. In my family, where the 
murder mystery is considered pretty much the acme of television, and where 
dinners are regularly punctuated by the horrified screams of some old ham 
discovering a body in the bushes,Poirot has always stood apart for its high 
production values and the calibre of its actors. What other whodunnit can boast
Damian Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/damian-lewis>, Russell Tovey  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/russell-tovey>and Christopher 
Eccleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/may/01/christopher-eccleston-this-much-i-know?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
before they were famous? And you certainly wouldn't seeMichael Fassbender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender> turning in a typically 
nuanced performance – like the one he gave inAfter the Funeral – in Midsomer 
Murders.

Christie's plots, in which death visits the village fete and heiresses lose 
the family jewels, can of course look ludicrously quaint against the modern 
diet of Scandi-noir or the endless slew of American forensics. But in a world 
of angst-ridden, morally compromised crime busters, the robust egotism and 
moral rectitude of Hercule Poirot are almost a comfort. "He has a great 
humanity, which I would like more of," says Suchet. "A love of people. And a 
sense of right. He won't do what he believes is wrong, and I think the audience 
likes that."

The proof is in the fan mail, which Suchet still receives by the bucketload. 
And he answers every letter, something I know to be true from personal 
experience. My mum wrote to him in 1991, when he was playing the title role in
Timon of Athens at the Young Vic; she told him about her two young daughters 
who adored him as Poirot and how she was bringing them to see him in the 
little-known Shakespeare play, even if most of it went over their heads. Suchet 
wrote back with the offer of tea and a chat before the performance. We sat in 
the Young Vic café, my sister and I, overwhelmed by our first brush with fame, 
while he coaxed conversation out of us and left us with the sense that the man 
who played our TV hero was every bit as kind and charismatic, chivalric and 
twinkly as the figure on screen.

Perhaps his special empathy comes from the fact that he like Poirot – a 
foreigner in England – has always felt himself to be an outsider. "Look at me!" 
he says now, pointing at his features. "I was always aware, especially with my 
colouring, I'm not the typical Brit." His paternal family was Russian Jews from 
modern-day Lithuania, chased by pogroms to South Africa; his father, John, 
trained as a doctor and arrived in Britain to become the unnamed lab technician 
who assistedAlexander Fleming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/mar/12/penicillin-fleming-alexander-bacteriology>
 with the discovery of penicillin. And in his later career, as a highly 
regarded Harley Street obstetrician, he deliveredAnthony Horowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-horowitz>, who would go on to write 
thePoirot scripts that cemented David's fame.

With his two older brothers, John and Peter, Suchet enjoyed a boarding-school 
education in which he excelled on the playing fields; he was a swarthy wing 
three-quarters, his thighs so large that he couldn't wear jeans, and he even 
competed in junior Wimbledon ("It was nothing as grand as it is today," he 
adds. "Don't let me show off!"). Choosing drama school over a medical degree 
did not meet with his father's approval – "he thought it very, very beneath him 
to have a son as an actor" – but his mother Joan was his ardent champion. 
Joan's mother had been a music hall artist and Joan herself was a hoofer 
desperate for a stage career. "It was rather tragic," explains Suchet. "She 
went for a small part inAntony and Cleopatra and she got turned down. And it 
broke her heart so much that she gave up."

Suchet's own theatre career belongs to the very top tier. His RSC roles have 
included playing Iago to Ben Kingsley's Othello; his performance in David 
Mamet'sOleanna, directed by Harold Pinter, secured the play's place in modern 
theatre lore; and anyone who saw him in last year's West End production ofLong 
Day's Journey into Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/10/long-day-journey-night-review> 
will know just how intense and powerful a stage presence he is. It's a career 
he wouldn't have had withoutPoirot, he says – or without his wife, Sheila, who 
he fell in love with on sight in 1972, and who sacrificed her own acting career 
to help him pursue his and to look after their two children.

On the Poirot shoots, Sheila would be up at 4.30am to help him learn his 
lines; when he filmed the fiendishly difficult denouement scene onMurder on the 
Orient Express, she was sitting on set, in the adjacent carriage. "I must be 
the most difficult person that she has to live with," he smiles. "But we're 
still there! And we're very aware that time is running out, so we try and make 
the most of what we have together."

That will not include retirement any time soon. After completing a couple of 
documentaries, Suchet will tour Jonathan Church's production ofThe Last 
Confession to Canada, the US and Australia next year, and has a new play being 
written for him in 2015. Next Easter, meanwhile, will see the release of one of 
his most personal projects – an audiobook of the Bible, entire and unabridged, 
that he has been recording for the past two years, dashing into the studio 
whenever he wasn't shooting for TV or performing in the West End. (Being 
Suchet, it wasn't enough to merely turn up and read; he studied the context of 
every Old and New Testament book he read.) Suchet has been a Christian since 
reading a Gideon bible in a hotel room in 1986 and he hopes it will encourage 
people to encounter the Bible for the first time; after all, he chuckles, it's 
the only book that sells more than Agatha Christie, "but peopleread Agatha 
Christie!"

He has said he could be persuaded to return to his portrayal of Poirot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2013/oct/30/itv1-television> 
if ever funding emerged for a big-screen version, but he won't be doing turns 
at home, he assures me. "Although one thing I've inherited from him is that 
when something surprising happens I will go: 'Oh la!'" And while he will miss 
the glorious, glamorous locations – Paris, Egypt, Tunisia – he won't miss the 
padding that was his constant companion in them. A cruise down the Nile, 
trapped in Poirot's body? He wags a finger in a distinctly Belgian way. 
"Impossible! Absolutely impossible!"

Suchet walks me to the door with all the chivalry of his departed friend. "I'm 
an old- fashioned man," he admits. "I think really I was born in the wrong 
century." As he says goodbye, he checks himself – "Delighted to have met you… 
again!" – and smiles, remembering the web. The Spider's Web. It sounds so much 
like an Agatha Christie mystery, I check it out when I get home. She wrote a 
stageplay, in 1954, with the title. I wonder if Suchet knows.

Curtain: Poirot's Last Case is on ITV on 13 November at 9pm. Poirot and Me 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780755364190>
 by David Suchet is published by Headline, priced £20. To order a copy for £16, 
with free UK p&p,click here 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780755364190>
 