
Some books seem to come along at just the right moment, and become so entwined 
with memories of a particular time and place that you revisit them at your 
peril.

PJ Kavanagh’s fine memoir The Perfect Stranger was published to acclaim in 
1966, the year I was born, and reissued in 1991. By then I was pursuing a 
career in acting, which is to say that I was working as a bartender, making 
some of the worst cappuccinos available in London at that time. Occasionally I 
would get an audition, or play a small role in a fringe production but while I 
was always enthusiastic there was a growing realisation, on my part and the 
audiences’, that I couldn’t really do it, and that I’d committed myself to a 
profession for which I lacked not just talent and charisma, but the most basic 
of skills. Moving, standing still – things like that.

Review: Collected Poems by Patrick Kavanagh
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jan/01/poetry> 
My anxiety grew, shading into panic, and a good friend gave me The Perfect 
Stranger, solemnly handing it over like a prescription. “You should read this,” 
he said, and it didn’t take long to understand why. The book is a rite of 
passage, following would-be writer Kavanagh from the “commonplace brutalities” 
of a third-rate boarding school straight out of theMolesworth 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nigel_Molesworth> books, on to a season as a 
moody Redcoat at Butlin’s holiday camp, and through various dead-end jobs in 
postwar Paris, where he dabbles in acting and longs for Hemingway-esque 
“experiences”. Reluctantly, he returns to Yorkshire and Northern Ireland for 
national service and is then posted to Korea. Now an incompetent and 
unenthusiastic officer, he stumbles into the first skirmish of the bloodybattle 
of the Imjin river <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Imjin_River>, 
where he is wounded. Recuperating in Japan, he decides that it’s time for an 
education and returns to study English at Oxford.

Up until this point, the book is a sometimes funny, sometimes painful account 
of youthful pretension and awkwardness, self-righteousness and self-doubt. 
Kavanagh has the props and costume of a writer (“the green corduroy jacket – 
daring, continental garb”) and the requisite volumes ofYeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wbyeats> and Sartre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jeanpaulsartre> and Rimbaud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/feb/11/rimbaudwasnogenius>, 
but little focus, discipline or confidence. Full of self-contempt, he lashes 
out at the conservative, dull, ridiculous institutions in which he finds 
himself but has no idea where he might go instead. Against expectations, he 
enjoys the comradeship of military service, and his brush with death provides 
the spur for action, but something is still missing and it’s here in the second 
half of the book that the tone changes. “Something else happened – the point of 
all this.” At his student digs, Kavanagh hears the sound of footsteps on the 
landing, meets the “perfect stranger” of the title and an account of a rite 
of passage becomes an unashamed love story.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fdavid-nicholls-book-that-saved-him-pj-kavanagh-perfect-stranger-memoir-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432744242898%2F9e7462ef-1ff5-4cdb-964b-9b7781d63d81-1755x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Nicholls%3A%20the%20book%20that%20saved%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fdavid-nicholls-book-that-saved-him-pj-kavanagh-perfect-stranger-memoir-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Nicholls%3A%20the%20book%20that%20saved%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fdavid-nicholls-book-that-saved-him-pj-kavanagh-perfect-stranger-memoir-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432744242898%2F9e7462ef-1ff5-4cdb-964b-9b7781d63d81-1755x2040.jpeg>
 PJ Kavanagh with his wife Sally in Bali in 1958. Photograph: Carcanet 
Sally is smart, direct, optimistic, gregarious – a startling contrast to the 
rather sceptical and doomy Kavanagh. Her mother is the novelist Rosamond 
Lehmann, and her father, Wogan Philipps, a veteran of the Spanish civil war,
manages the trick of being both a baron and a communist 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wogan_Philipps,_2nd_Baron_Milford>. The kindness, 
generosity and grace of this new family provides Kavanagh with a glimpse of 
another way of life, and he embarks on a new round of adventures, scarcely less 
chaotic but this time with Sally by his side. To reveal more would be to give 
too much away, except to say that this second half, is uplifting, romantic and 
deeply affecting.

At least that is how I remembered it. For all its acclaim, the book has been 
out of print for some years and has only now been reissued, and I picked it up 
again with trepidation. Returning to a once-loved book is like meeting up with 
an old school friend; what if the fondness is based entirely on nostalgia? What 
if we no longer have anything in common?

Happily, that’s not the case here. It’s inevitable, I suppose, that a book 
about an uncertain young man should hold a particular appeal for an uncertain 
young man, but if the book’s pertinence has diminished – thank God – then the 
writing remains vivid and detailed, full of concise pen portraits, like that of 
his shabby, genteel father, who for a decade “just sat at home and read, his 
elbows and knees gradually becoming visible through his clothes”. Kavanagh is 
brilliant on the “vague, overwrought longing of youth” that bounces his younger 
self around the world in search of “sights and sensations, acquired like 
beermats”. In 1991, I remember feeling slightly envious of the messy, random 
nature of these postwar lives, and I read books aboutOsborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnosborne>, Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pinter> and Kingsley Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kingsleyamis> with the same fascination. 
They all seemed to be part of a generation that was properly tested and obliged 
to take a stand, and for all the privation and gloom of those years, the 
chauvinism and priggishness, there seemed to be the possibility of change, both 
political and personal; you’d meet a chap in a Fitzrovia bar and end up at the 
Royal Court or the BBC, or at least that’s how it seemed.The Perfect Stranger 
is full of these sudden twists and turns, and as a personal portrait of the 
50s, it’s fascinating.

What remains remarkable, though, is the author’s dazed, almost fearful account 
of falling deeply in love. Like Kavanagh himself, the book springs back to life 
with Sally’s arrival, and it’s hard to think of a memoir by a male author that 
describes the experience with as much honesty, passion and precision. In this 
respect,The Perfect Stranger remains extremely moving, particularly in its 
final chapters. It’s “the story of a recognition and a rescue” and if the 
notion of redemption through love is potentially mawkish and sentimental, this 
is something of which Kavanagh is well aware. “Love is a compendious word 
as limp as a washing-powder slogan – Brand X the Mystery Ingredient. It can 
only be described in terms of action, which I suppose this book is a form of.”

Predictably, my response to the book has changed, but I can still recall 
readingThe Perfect Stranger with a kind of gratitude. Here was a work about the 
messiness of our mid-20s, and if it didn’t offer any particular reassurance of 
a happy ending, it did suggest that the dilemma wasn’t new, that the anxiety 
was as common in 1951 as 1991, and that for all the false starts, the failures 
and thwarted plans, the confusion of that time of life might be a story in 
itself.

• The Perfect Stranger by PJ Kavanagh is published by September Books. Order 
it for £11.99 (RRP £14.99) at bookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282368/> or call 0330 
333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of 
£1.99. David Nicholl’sUs is out in paperpack.
 