
A Japanese spacecraft has achieved orbit around Venus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/venus>, only five years late and on its 
second attempt.

The Venus Climate Orbiter 
<http://global.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/planet_c/index.html>, called Akatsuki after 
the Japanese word for dawn, was launched on 20 May 2010. It arrived at Venus on 
6 December 2010 and began the rocket burn that would place it into a four-day 
orbit around the planet.

Unfortunately, a sticky valve in the engine meant instead of a 12-minute burn, 
the rocket fired for less than three minutes. SoAkatsuki sailed past 
<http://global.jaxa.jp/countdown/f17/index_e.html> the planet and off into 
space again.

Scientists hope Venus will give up the secret of how life evolved on Earth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/14/venus-space-missions-nasa-esa-life-earth>
Spacecraft operators got to work diagnosing the problem and coming up with new 
plans. They found that in five years time, they would be able to manoeuvre the 
craft close enough to the planet to try again. But instead of using the main 
engine this time, they would employ the smaller thrusters used for keeping the 
spacecraft upright.

On Wednesday evening, the Japanese Space Agency, Jaxa, confirmed 
<http://global.jaxa.jp/press/2015/12/20151209_akatsuki.html> everything had 
gone to plan. Akatsuki had been captured by Venusâ€™s gravity and returned its 
first pictures of the planet.

The spacecraft is now on an elliptical orbit that stretches from 400km above 
Venus to 440,000km. It takes 13 days and 14 hours to complete one circuit.

Now the science mission can begin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/14/venus-space-missions-nasa-esa-life-earth>
. When far away from the planet it will look at the global characteristics of 
the atmosphere. When nearby, it will study layers in the atmosphere.

Akatsuki will also be looking for active volcanoes. While their presence on 
Venus has long been suspected, they were not seen by previous spacecraft.
 