
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has less than 
one month left in the White House, and progressive activists are hoping he 
makes the most of it.

While Donald Trump and his cabinet nominees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/trump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn>
 have threatened toundo many of Obama’s signature achievements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-policy-immigration-agenda-healthcare>
, advocates across fields have argued that there are a number of bold, 
irreversible steps the White House could take to protect vulnerable Americans 
from the Republican president-elect.

The outgoing administration’s surprise decision this month to deny a permit to 
the Dakota Access oil pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock>
 has offered a glimmer of hope to liberals, who arepreparing for the worst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/how-to-prepare-for-donald-trump-presidency>
. From immigration to the environment, progressive organizers have offered 
their holiday wishlist for Obama in his final weeks.

Immigration 

Obama has deported more than 2.5 million people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/12/obama-immigration-deportations-central-america>
, a greater number than any other president, and activists are pushing him to 
fix his record by saving hundreds of thousands of immigrants from Trump.


The most widely discussed option is pardoning undocumented immigrants 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-11-17/obama-should-pardon-dreamer-immigrants-house-democrats-say>
, focusing on the more than 750,000 youth who entered the US as children and 
are known as Dreamers. The pardons, supported by someHouse Democrats 
<https://lofgren.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=398112>, 
wouldn’t grant them legal status but would offer deportation protection.

“It would create a very difficult situation for President Trump trying to 
remove somebody from the country who has been pardoned,” added Kevin Johnson, 
dean of the University of California, Davis law school.

Others have argued that Obama could also pardon 100,000 to 200,000 immigrants 
who are legal permanent residents with green cards but have minor criminal 
records and thus could face deportation.

Obama has said these immigrants are not a priority for deportation, but they 
could betargeted by Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-deportation-immigration-criminals>
. Pardons wouldn’t remove the underlying crimes but would make the immigrants 
no longer deportable, according to Peter Markowitz, a Cardozo School of Law 
professor who haswritten on the subject 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/06/opinion/can-obama-pardon-millions-of-immigrants.html?_r=2>
.

“These are people he said it makes no sense to rip out of their American 
families,” he said. “It’s really a moment where we are going to see whether he 
lives up to the commitment to those communities.”

David Leopold, immigration attorney and former president of the American 
Immigration Lawyers Association, said this would protect people convicted of 
low-level offenses, such as misdemeanor marijuana possession.

Advocates have argued that there are hundreds of thousands of additional 
immigrants with legal status who also deserve pardons, even though they were 
convicted of more serious crimes, such as non-violent drug felonies.

 Mass incarceration 

On Monday, Obama commuted the sentences of 153 federal inmates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/barack-obama-commutes-sentences-presidential-pardons>
, the most on a single day by any US president. Some activists are hoping that 
the announcement, which included 78 presidential pardons, is just the start of 
a steady stream of clemency orders.

'This is our chance': will criminal justice reform cease after Obama leaves 
office?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/05/criminal-justice-reform-obama-executive-power>
“The president has untethered clemency power,” said Brittany Byrd, campaign 
director of the#ClemencyNOW initiative <http://www.cut50.org/hopefortheholidays>
. “There’s no limit as to what he could do.”

Byrd’s organization has argued that Obama could adopt a “categorical 
approach”, meaninggranting clemency 
<https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/3227218/Clemency-Letter-to-POTUS-Final.pdf>
 to groups of prisoners who are “extremely low-risk” without doing individual 
reviews of each case. That could include inmates who have not retroactively 
benefited from recent sentencing reforms, meaning they would face lighter 
punishments if convicted today.

If the administration doesn’t aggressively process applications for pardons, 
some older inmates coulddie behind bars under Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-criminal-justice-reform>
.

Corey Jacobs 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/14/opinion/sunday/eric-h-holder-mandatory-minimum-sentences-full-of-errors.html?mtrref=undefined&gwh=7ED0E266FD2B9FE8F47BED3F96318045&gwt=pay&assetType=opinion>
, one of Byrd’s clients who is serving his 17th year of life without parole as 
a non-violent drug offender, was granted clemency this week, but others with 
similar stories are running out of time.


“It’s always bittersweet, because we know there are many more Corey Jacobs 
that are still waiting,” she said.

Political prisoners

Last-minute presidential pardons got a bad name under Bill Clinton, who used 
his final day in office to grant mercy tofugitive tax evader Marc Rich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/26/marc-rich-commodities-trader-fugitive-dies>
. But there are a host of high-profile political prisoners and exiles who merit 
Obama’s mercy on his final day in office, starting with Chelsea Manning.

Manning is currently serving a 35-year prison sentence for leaking documents 
to WikiLeaks. Her treatment by the military before her conviction has been
widely described as “torture” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/10/bradley-manning-legal-scholars-letter>
, and she has since beendenied gender-affirming medical treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/23/chelsea-manning-sues-military-gender-dysphoria-treatment>
 andpunished with solitary confinement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/chelsea-manning-solitary-confinement-suicide-attempt>
 for a suicide attempt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbarack-obama-progressive-wish-list-immigration-prisons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faea9c410afee5d692f8855058b567089403040e8%2F0_73_900_541%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dear%20Obama%3A%20progressives%20share%20what%20they%20want%20done%20before%20president%20leaves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbarack-obama-progressive-wish-list-immigration-prisons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dear%20Obama%3A%20progressives%20share%20what%20they%20want%20done%20before%20president%20leaves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbarack-obama-progressive-wish-list-immigration-prisons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faea9c410afee5d692f8855058b567089403040e8%2F0_73_900_541%2F900.jpg>
 Chelsea Manning is one of the many political prisoners who merit Obama’s 
mercy. Photograph: Uncredited/AP 
The whistleblower’s mistreatment is thrown into sharp relief by the two years 
of probation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/03/david-petraeus-pleads-guilty-classified-information-paula-broadwell>
 meted out to David Petraeus, the former CIA director, for disclosing 
classified information to a lover.

Other dissidents worthy of Obama’s mercy include NSA whistleblower Edward 
Snowden;Oscar López Rivera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/obama-pardon-mandela-puerto-rico-oscar-lopez-rivera->
, the Puerto Rican independence activist who is one of the world’s 
longest-serving political prisoners; andLeonard Peltier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/jul/10/weekend7.weekend1>, who 
has served more than 40 years in prison for the murder of two FBI agents. 
Peltier was a leader of the American Indian Movement, and Amnesty International 
has raisedserious concerns 
<http://www.amnestyusa.org/our-work/cases/usa-leonard-peltier> about the 
fairness of his trial and conviction.

'I'm no threat' – will Obama pardon one of the world's longest-serving 
political prisoners?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/obama-pardon-mandela-puerto-rico-oscar-lopez-rivera->
Environment 

Obama has protected more land and water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/12/obama-doubles-protected-land-california-desert>
 than any other president and has recently cancelled oil and gas leases on
indigenous sacred grounds 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/11/16/obama-administration-reaches-deal-to-cancel-oil-leases-on-lands-tied-to-tribe/?utm_term=.c356eafb495f>
 and banned drilling in largeareas of the Atlantic and Arctic oceans 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/12/20/president-obama-expected-to-ban-oil-drilling-in-large-areas-of-atlantic-and-arctic-oceans/?utm_term=.ea0737de044e>
.

But advocacy groups have argued that there is a lot more he could do to shield 
the environment from the incoming administration, which has veryclose ties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/14/rick-perry-formally-announced-as-trump-pick-for-energy-secretary>
 to theoil industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
.

Activists are eager to see Obama finalize national monument protections in 
three areas in the west 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/24/obama-administration-conservation-public-land-trump>
 – Bears Ears in Utah (considered sacred by surrounding Native American 
tribes); the greater Grand Canyon area (where a designation would bar uranium 
mining); and Gold Butte in Nevada (which has been at the center of the 
high-profile cattle grazing dispute involvingrancher Cliven Bundy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/08/harry-reid-cliven-bundy-nevada-racher-armed-standoff>
).

Those monuments would be permanent, said Aaron Weiss, media director of the 
Center for Western Priorities.

“It would be absolutely unprecedented for a president to try to reverse a 
national monument declaration by a previous president.”

Advocates are also pushing for the Obama administration to finalize a proposed 
oil shale rule 
<https://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/eAgendaViewRule?pubId=201610&RIN=1004-AE28> 
that would increase environmental reporting requirements to better protect air, 
water, wildlife and other resources in commercial development leases.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbarack-obama-progressive-wish-list-immigration-prisons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64b161017b74d7fe4959dd71c4e7270802c9a362%2F0_116_5568_3342%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dear%20Obama%3A%20progressives%20share%20what%20they%20want%20done%20before%20president%20leaves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbarack-obama-progressive-wish-list-immigration-prisons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dear%20Obama%3A%20progressives%20share%20what%20they%20want%20done%20before%20president%20leaves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbarack-obama-progressive-wish-list-immigration-prisons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64b161017b74d7fe4959dd71c4e7270802c9a362%2F0_116_5568_3342%2F5568.jpg>
 Photograph: Pool/Getty Images 
The supreme court

It has been 10 months since supreme court Justice Antonin Scalia died, and 
nine months since Obama nominated a qualified if unexciting replacement, 
Merrick Garland.

The Senate Republicans’ unprecedented intransigence in refusing to allow 
Garland a hearing, let alone a confirmation vote, could be rewarded by allowing 
Trump to fill the seat.

On 3 January 2017, Congress will go into recess, allowing Obama to make recess 
appointments. He can appoint Garland to the supreme court, and even push 
through theother 58 federal judicial 
<http://www.uscourts.gov/judges-judgeships/judicial-vacancies> nominees that 
are pending.

The appointments would only last for one year and would certainly be cause for 
partisan outrage – but so has the Senate’s refusal to consider Garland.

Transparency

As a candidate, Obama pledged that he would run the most transparent 
administration in history. While his eight years in office offered up amixed bag
 
<http://sunlightfoundation.com/2016/09/02/how-should-history-measure-the-obama-administrations-record-on-transparency/>
 of open government reforms and crackdowns on whistleblowers, the outgoing 
president does have an opportunity to finish strong.

On 21 November, a coalition of civil liberties groups, including the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation, sent the Obama administration alist of steps 
<https://www.eff.org/files/2016/11/22/2016-11-21_obama_surveillance_asks.pdf> 
he can take to improve transparency and accountability in his final days in 
office.

These include declassifying and releasing opinions by the foreign intelligence 
surveillance court and ensuring that the Senate’s “torture report” is preserved 
for future administrations.

Have you met the Obamas? Tell us about your experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/have-you-met-obama-share-your-story>
 Muslim surveillance

Trump’s threats to ban all Muslims from entering the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/dec/08/donald-trump-calls-for-complete-ban-on-muslims-entering-the-us-video>
 and to introduce “extreme vetting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/16/donald-trump-extreme-vetting-immigrants-video>
” of newcomers have inspired widespread fears ofunprecedented surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/muslim-americans-donald-trump-hate-crimes-surveillance>
 and aMuslim registry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-muslim-registry-policy-possibility>
.

Obama can’t control his successor’s policies, but he could dismantle the 
National Security Entry-Exit Registration System 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/american-muslims-march-white-house-nseers>
 (NSEERs), an openly discriminatory registry that was introduced in the wake of 
9/11.

The system was used to track people from majority Arab or Muslim countries and 
has been widely criticized as anineffective racial profiling tool 
<https://lofgren.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=398109>. It did 
not lead to a single terrorism conviction.

The president effectively halted the program in 2011, but the NSEERs 
regulatory framework remains in place. If Obamarescinded the system 
<https://action.aclu.org/secure/nseers> altogether, it would make it 
significantly harder for Trump to build a Muslim registry.
 