
In the days before an armed man stormed into a local pizza restaurant looking 
to “self-investigate” fake news reports, several nearby businesses had been 
receiving what they called “disturbing” and “graphic” threats.

“Sometimes they would call 10-15 times an hour saying: ‘We are going to kill 
you!’” said Bradley Graham, the co-owner of Politics and Prose, a popular 
bookstore near Comet Ping Pong, the restaurant at the center of the fake news 
stories that alleged a child sex ring involving the Hillary Clinton campaign.

“They were disgusting, grotesque and violent death threats,” added his 
co-owner, Lissa Muscatine, who also received personal threats on her Twitter 
account.

The calls unsettled the business owners, as the fake news stories mushroomed 
into a rightwing internet conspiracy – one of a hostfabricated reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/facebook-fake-news-satire> that 
proliferated this election season. They grew wary of strange visitors who 
showed up at their stores taking pictures and asking about secret tunnels. They 
wondered if the threats would grow into something bigger, something dangerous.

Then on Sunday afternoon, police say 28-year-old Edgar Welch of Durham, North 
Carolina, showed up in Comet wielding an assault rifle, shooting it three 
times. According tocriminal charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/washington-pizza-child-sex-ring-fake-news-man-charged>
 filed late Monday, Welch told police that he “read online that Comet 
restaurant was harboring child sex slaves and that he wanted to see for himself 
if they were there”. There were no reported injuries and Welch “surrendered 
peacefully when he found no evidence that underage children were being harbored 
in the restaurant”, police said.

Nearby business owners expressed relief on Monday that it wasn’t something 
worse.

Abdel Hammad, the owner of Besta Pizza, located three doors from Comet, found 
his store dragged into the mess when internet conspiraciesdrew a connection  
<https://i.sli.mg/eoWIeB.jpg>to the vague resemblance between his restaurant’s 
logo and a symbol apparently used by pedophiles. Hammad, an Egyptian immigrant 
who barely knows Comet’s owners and did not support Clinton, said he has 
received constant, alarming calls for three weeks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpizzagate-businesses-washington-threats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa02003bf60b0bf896cc0fb1b4aa4956f96954754%2F344_0_1958_2448%2F1958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20threats%2C%20abuse%2C%20then%20a%20gunman%3A%20'Pizzagate'%20businesses%20relive%20ordeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpizzagate-businesses-washington-threats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20threats%2C%20abuse%2C%20then%20a%20gunman%3A%20%27Pizzagate%27%20businesses%20relive%20ordeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpizzagate-businesses-washington-threats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa02003bf60b0bf896cc0fb1b4aa4956f96954754%2F344_0_1958_2448%2F1958.jpg>
 Abdel Hammad, owner of Besta Pizza, said he received death threats at work. 
Photograph: Les Carpenter for the Guardian 
“They were threatening to blow our heads off and blow our store up and blow 
(up) our entire organization,” Hammad said.

At one point, Hammad grew so angry with the calls that he challenged one of 
them to “show up and show his face”.

“He hung up, it was all talk,” Hammad said. “Nobody showed up.”

Then he paused.

“But now someone has,” he said.

He said he reported several of the calls to the police but said “nothing 
happened”. This even after an incident several days ago in which his manager, 
Ibrahima Diallo, confronted two women who had come to the counter asking to see 
the tunnels. When Diallo tried to chase them out, he said they slammed the door 
on his hand, breaking it. Diallo was able to get the plate number off the 
women’s car but when he gave it to police he said he was told: “It’s a civil 
matter, there’s nothing we can do.”

DC police spokeswoman Margarita Mikhaylova said they had “not received reports 
of specific threats” from businesses neighboring Comet Ping Pong.

She added that officers had advised store employees in the area to report 
threats.

“We want to ensure the community that their safety is our priority as we have 
committed additional police resources to that area,” she wrote in an email on 
Monday.

Comet Ping Pong employees said they experienced a similar string of threats in 
the weeks leading up to the shooting. The fake news storyfirst emerged  
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/21/technology/fact-check-this-pizzeria-is-not-a-child-trafficking-site.html?emc=eta1>
in the days before the election when campaign manager John Podesta’s emails 
were hacked andand published on WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
. Online conspiracy theorists found emails to Comet’s owner James Alefantis 
about potential fundraisers. Some online posters scoured Comet’s Facebook and 
Instagram pages pulling photos of children posted by their parents and 
suggested that Comet was actually part of a secret child sex ring run by 
Democrats. They tracked downsigns promoting events at the restaurant 
<https://i.sli.mg/eoWIeB.jpg> and said the artwork depicted child sex scenes. 
They parsed the WikiLeaks emails picking out words like “hot dog” and “cheese” 
and said they werepossible codes <https://i.sli.mg/eoWIeB.jpg> being used by 
pedophiles to set up orgies.

Because John Podesta’s brother Tony is an occasional customer 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/21/technology/fact-check-this-pizzeria-is-not-a-child-trafficking-site.html?emc=eta1>
 at the popular north-west DC pizzeria, direct connections were made and the 
fake allegations dubbed “Pizzagate” blew up onReddit 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/The_Donald/comments/5b1qtf/comet_ping_pong_pizzagate_summary/>
 andFacebook <https://www.facebook.com/pizzagate/>. The threats followed. First 
to Comet, then Besta Pizza and then Politics and Prose, which Muscatine helped 
buy after working as a speechwriter for Hilary Clinton – an association that 
allowedsome to allege 
<http://www.washingtoncitypaper.com/news/article/20842321/the-consequences-of-pizza-gate-are-real-at-comet-ping-pong>
 that underground sex trafficking tunnels were connecting the businesses.

On Monday both Graham and Muscatine, former Washington Post writers, were 
forced to look reporters in the eye and say with a straight face that no 
tunnels existed beneath their store. “Our business is not connected in any 
physical way with any of the other stores,” Graham said wearily. They had 
reported the death threats to their district council representative and 
wondered why it had taken a man with a gun to finally draw interest from the 
police.

Outside the store window sat two police cars. In a late-day meeting Monday 
with business owners who expressed their fears of other violence, police 
officials promised to increase their presence, Graham said. They and the 
mayor’s representatives also told the store owners they would look more at this 
new phenomenon of fake news and see how to better react.

“Eventually, fake news becomes real,” Graham said.
 