
You’ve heard of distracted driving? It causes quite a few auto accidents and 
it’sillegal <http://www.distraction.gov/stats-research-laws/state-laws.html> in 
a majority of states.

Well, this year, a brave New Jersey state senator, a Democrat, took on the 
pernicious problem of distracted walking. Faced with the fact that some people 
can’t tear themselves away from their smartphones long enough to get across a 
street in safety,Pamela Lampitt of Camden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/26/walking-while-texting-distracted-new-jersey-jail-fine-pamela-lampitt>
, New Jersey,proposed a law 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/dr-gridlock/wp/2016/03/28/tickets-for-texting-while-walking-a-new-jersey-lawmaker-wants-to-make-it-so/>
 making it a crime to cross a streetwhile texting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2014/sep/15/china-mobile-phone-lane-distracted-walking-pedestrians>
. Violators would face a fine, and repeat violators up to 15 days in jail. 

Similar measures, says 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/dr-gridlock/wp/2016/03/28/tickets-for-texting-while-walking-a-new-jersey-lawmaker-wants-to-make-it-so/>
 the Washington Post, have been proposed (though not passed) in Arkansas, 
Nevada and New York. This May, abill 
<http://handsfreeinfo.com/distracted-walking-pedestrians-law/> on the subject 
made it out of committee in Hawaii.

That’s right. In several states around the country, one response to people 
being struck by cars in intersections is to consider pre-emptively sending some 
of those prospective accident victims to jail. This would be funny, if it 
weren’t emblematic of something larger. We are living in a country where the 
solution to just about any social problem is to create a law against it, and 
then punish those who break it.

I’ve been teaching an ethics class at the University of San Francisco for 
years now, and at the start of every semester, I always ask my students this 
deceptively simple question: what’s your definition of justice?

As you might expect in a classroom where half the students are young people of 
color, up to a third are first-generation college-goers, and maybe a sixth come 
from outside the United States, the answers vary. For some students, justice 
means “standing up for the little guy”. For many, it involves some combination 
of “fairness” and “equality”, which often means treating everyone exactly the 
same way, regardless of race, gender or anything else. Others display a more 
sophisticated understanding. An economics major writes, for instance,

People are born unequal in genetic potential, financial and environmental 
stability, racial prejudice, geographic conditions, and nearly every other 
facet of life imaginable. I believe that the aim of a just society is to enable 
its citizens to overcome or improve their inherited inequalities.

A Danish student compares his country with the one where he’s studying:

The Danish welfare system is constructed in such a way that people pay more in 
taxes and the government plays a significant role in the country. We have free 
healthcare, education and financial aid to the less fortunate. Personally, I 
believe this is a just system where we take care of our own.

For a young Latino, justice has a cosmic dimension:

My sense of justice tends to revolve around my idea that the universe and life 
are so grand and inexplicable that everything you put into it comes back to 
you. This I can trace to my childhood, when my mother would tell me to do 
everything in life with ‘love, faith, and courage’. Ever since, I believe that 
any action or endeavor that is guided by these three qualities can be 
considered just.

Justice is punishment

The most common response to my question, however, brings us back to those 
street-crossing texters. For most of my students – for most Americans, in fact 
– justice means establishing the proper penalties for crimes committed. 
“Justice, for me,” says one, “is defined by the punishment of wrongdoing.” 
Students may add that justice must be impartial, but their primary focus is 
always on retribution. “Justice,” as another put it, “is a rational judgment 
involving fairness in which the wrongdoer receives punishment deserving of 
his/her crime.”

When I ask where their ideas about justice come from, they often mention the 
punishments (“fair” or otherwise) meted out by their families when they were 
children. These experiences, they say, shaped their adult desire to do the 
right thing so that they will not be punished, whether by the law or the 
universe. Religious upbringing plays a role as well. Some believe in heavenly 
rewards for good behavior, and especially in the righteousness of divine 
punishment, which they hope and generally expect to escape through good 
behavior.

For most of my students – for most Americans – justice means establishing the 
proper penalties for crimes committed

Often, when citing the sources of their beliefs about justice, students point 
to police procedurals like the now elderlyCSI <http://www.cbs.com/shows/csi/> 
andLaw and Order <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_%26_Order_(franchise)> 
franchises. These provide a sanitary model of justice, with generally tidy 
hour-long depictions of crime and punishment, of perps whose punishment is 
usually relatively swift and righteous.

'This is our chance': will criminal justice reform cease after Obama leaves 
office?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/05/criminal-justice-reform-obama-executive-power>
Certainly, many of my students are aware that the US criminal justice system 
falls far short of impartiality and fairness. Strangely, however, they seldom 
mention that this country has 2.2 million people in prison or jail; or that it
imprisons <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_incarceration_rate> the 
largest proportion of people in the world; or that, with 4% of the global 
population, it holds 22% of the world’s prisoners; or that these prisoners are
disproportionately <http://www.prisonpolicy.org/graphs/raceinc.html> brown and 
black. Their concern is less about those who are in prison and perhaps 
shouldn’t be than about those who are not in prison and ought to be.

They are (not unreasonably) offended when rich or otherwise privileged people 
avoid punishment for crimes that would send others to jail. At the height of the
Great Recession 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_crisis_of_2007%E2%80%9308>, their 
focus was on the Wall Street bankers who escaped prosecution for their part in 
inflating thehousing bubble 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/ct-us-deutsche-bank-mortgage-backed-securities-fine-20160916-story.html>
 that brought the global economy to its knees. This fall, for several of them, 
Exhibit A when it comes to justice denied is the case of the former Stanford 
studentBrock Turner <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/People_v._Turner>, recently 
released <http://www.cnn.com/2016/09/02/us/brock-turner-release-jail/> after 
serving a mere three months for sexually assaulting an unconscious woman. They 
are (perhaps properly) outraged by what they perceive as a failure of justice 
in Turner’s case. But they are equally convinced of something I struggle with – 
that a harsher sentence for Turner would have been a step in the direction of 
making his victim whole faster. They are far more convinced than I am that 
punishment is always the best way for a community to hold responsible those who 
violate its rules and values.

In this, they are in good company in the US.

There oughta be a law

Of course, the urge to extend punishment to every sort of socially disapproved 
behavior, including texting in a crosswalk, is hardly a new phenomenon. Since 
the founding of the United States, government at every level has tended to make 
unpopular behavior illegal. Just to name a few obvious examples of past 
prohibitions now likely to stop us in our tracks: at various times there have 
been laws against havingsex outside marriage 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/03/14/state-laws-women_n_4937387.html>, 
distributing birth control <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comstock_laws>, or 
marrying across races (as highlighted in thenew movie 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4669986/> Loving).

In 1919, for instance, a constitutional amendment 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twenty-first_Amendment_to_the_United_States_Constitution>
 was ratified outlawing the making, shipping or selling of alcohol (although it
didn’t last long 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twenty-first_Amendment_to_the_United_States_Constitution>
). You might think that the experience of prohibition, including the rise of 
violent gangs feeding on the illegal liquor trade, would have given us a hint 
about the likely effects of outlawing other mind-bending substances, but no 
such luck.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fus-justice-system-crime-punishment-prison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3921be0b8d7027d1afc3b398e6acff61fa2b1f92%2F0_516_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Defining%20justice%3A%20why%20it's%20time%20to%20rethink%20our%20kneejerk%20response%20to%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fus-justice-system-crime-punishment-prison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Defining%20justice%3A%20why%20it%27s%20time%20to%20rethink%20our%20kneejerk%20response%20to%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fus-justice-system-crime-punishment-prison%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3921be0b8d7027d1afc3b398e6acff61fa2b1f92%2F0_516_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Women turn out in large numbers for the anti-prohibition parade and 
demonstration in Newark, New Jersey, in October 1932. Photograph: AP 
One big difference between the 18th amendment and today’s drug laws is that, 
although prohibition outlawed traffic in alcohol, it didn’t mention 
consumption. No one got arrested for drinking. By comparison, as the Huffington 
Postreported 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/marijuana-arrests-2014_us_560978a7e4b0768126fe6506>
 last year:

Law enforcement officers made just over 700,000 arrests on marijuana-related 
charges in 2014 … Of that total, 88.4% – or about 619,800 arrests – were made 
for marijuana possession alone, a rate of about one arrest every 51 seconds 
over the entire year.

One marijuana arrest every 51 seconds. It should be no surprise, then, that 
drug possession is a major reason why people end up in debt (from court-imposed 
fines), locked up, or both – but hardly the only reason. Punishment is the 
response of choice for all kinds of behavior, including drinking in public 
(which is why people wrap their beer bottles in paper bags and kids who look up 
to them do the same with their soda cans), indecent exposure, “lewd conduct”, 
prostitution, gambling and all kinds of petty theft.

But doesn’t punishing undesirable behavior have a deterrent effect, and 
doesn’t more and harsher punishment increase that effect? This is obviously a 
hard thing to measure, but there is data available suggesting that lighter 
penalties for a particular crime do not necessarily result in more of that 
crime.

Take petty theft. Different states have different thresholds for what counts 
as “petty” and what is the more serious crime of “grand” larceny. Petty theft 
is usually classified as a misdemeanor, a category of crime that carries 
sentences of up to a year in a county jail. Above a certain dollar amount, 
thefts become felonies, which means those convicted serve at least a year – and 
often many years – in state prison. Depending on the state, some felons alsolose
 <http://www.ncsl.org/research/elections-and-campaigns/felon-voting-rights.aspx>
 their voting rights for life. Those convicted offederal felonies 
<https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/pardon/legacy/2006/11/13/collateral_consequences.pdf>
 may not serve on juries, may not be able to work for the federal government, 
and are often not permitted to work for labor unions. A felony conviction is a 
big deal.

The Pew Charitable Trusts wondered 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/2016/02/the-effects-of-changing-state-theft-penalties>
 what would happen if states treated fewer thefts as felonies by raising the 
dollar cutoff for a felony prosecution. Pew asked: Would there be more minor 
theft because the penalties were lower? (Some state felony thresholds were, in 
fact, shockingly low. Until 2001, in Oklahoma, stealing anything worth more 
than $50 would throw you into that category. Even that state’s new limit, $500, 
is still on the low side.)

The Pew researchers examined “crime trends in 23 states” that have raised the 
dollar threshold for felony theft and concluded that it had “no impact on 
overall property crime or larceny rates”. In fact, since 2007, property theft 
has been declining across the country, with no difference between states with 
higher and lower felony thresholds. So at least in the case of petty theft, 
threatening to send fewer people to state prison does not seem to raise the 
crime rate.

What’s the alternative?

In the late 1980s, the United Kingdom’s first female prime minister, Margaret 
Thatcher, adopted the slogan “there is no alternative”, often shortened to 
Tina. In Thatcher’s case, she meant that there was no imaginable economic 
alternative to her campaign to destroy the power of unions, deregulate 
everything in sight, and gut the British welfare state. It’s hard indeed to 
imagine other ways of organizing things when there is – or at least is believed 
to be – no alternative. It’s hard to imagine a justice system that doesn’t rely 
primarily on the threat of punishment when, for most Americans, no alternative 
is imaginable. But what if there were alternatives to keeping 2.2 million 
people in cages that didn’t make the rest of us less safe, that might actually 
improve our lives?

Portugal has tried one such alternative. In 2001, as the Washington Post 
reported 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/06/05/why-hardly-anyone-dies-from-a-drug-overdose-in-portugal/>
, that country “decriminalized 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/18/realestate/fictional-new-york-city-apartments-get-real.html?emc=edit_th_20160917&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=65427895>
 the use of all drugs” and decided to treat drug addiction as a public health 
problem rather than a criminal matter. The results? Portugal now has close to 
the lowest rate of drug-induced deaths in Europe – three overdose deaths a year 
per million people. By comparison, at 45 deaths per million population, the 
United Kingdom’s rate is more than 14 times greater. In addition, HIV 
infections have declined in Portugal, unlike, for example, in the rural United 
States, where a heroin epidemic has the Centers for Disease Control and 
Preventionworried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/31/rural-us-counties-hiv-outbreak-cdc>
 about the potential for soaring infection rates.

All right, but drug use has often been called a “victimless” crime. Maybe it 
doesn’t make sense to lock up people who are really only hurting themselves.

 What about crimes like theft or assault, where the victims are other people? 
Isn’t punishment a social necessity then?

If you’d asked me that question a few years ago, I would probably have agreed 
that there are no alternatives to prosecution and punishment in response to 
such crimes. That was before I metRachel Herzing 
<http://www.truth-out.org/opinion/item/32813-big-dreams-and-bold-steps-toward-a-police-free-future>
, a community organizer who worked for the national prison-abolition group
Critical Resistance <http://criticalresistance.org/> for 15 years. I invited 
her to my classes to listen to my students talk about crime, policing and 
punishment. She then asked them to imagine the impossible – other methods 
besides locking people up that a community could use to restore itself to 
wholeness.

This is the approach taken by the international movement for restorative 
justice <http://restorativejustice.org/>. The Washington DC-based Centre for 
Justice and Reconciliation <http://www.pficjr.org/> describes it this way: 
“Restorative justice repairs the harm caused by crime. When victims, offenders, 
and community members meet to decide how to do that, the results can be 
transformational.”

Similarly, “transitional justice 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transitional_justice>” is the name given to a 
range of measures taken in countries that have suffered national traumas, 
including ethnic cleansing and other extensive human rights violations. 
According to theInternational Center for Transitional Justice 
<https://www.ictj.org/>, such measures to heal a wounded country and deal with 
often terrible crimes do “include criminal prosecutions”, but the emphasis is 
often placed on “truth commissions, reparations programs, and various kinds of 
institutional reforms”, or even, as the Centre for Justice and Reconciliation 
suggests, “meetings between victims, offenders, and other persons” to emphasize 
accountability and make amends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fus-justice-system-crime-punishment-prison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3050ef70bcce94614d2ae1ae739f061e0d8ed729%2F0_0_1540_2040%2F1540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Defining%20justice%3A%20why%20it's%20time%20to%20rethink%20our%20kneejerk%20response%20to%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fus-justice-system-crime-punishment-prison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Defining%20justice%3A%20why%20it%27s%20time%20to%20rethink%20our%20kneejerk%20response%20to%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fus-justice-system-crime-punishment-prison%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3050ef70bcce94614d2ae1ae739f061e0d8ed729%2F0_0_1540_2040%2F1540.jpg>
 Winnie Madikizela-Mandela testifies in the 1997 Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission (TRC) hearing. Photograph: Adil Bradlow/AP 
The most famous of such experiments has undoubtedly been South Africa’s Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truth_and_Reconciliation_Commission_(South_Africa)>
. From 1948 to 1994, South Africa operated under the official policy ofapartheid
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apartheid>, the legal separation of South 
Africans into four different racial categories with four different levels of 
rights. The South African government employed all the usual tools of state 
terrorism – murder, torture, beatings, incarceration and daily repression – to 
keep the oppressed majority out of power. Eventually, international sanctions 
and internal resistance, followed by an extraordinary negotiation between the 
African National Congress leaderNelson Mandela 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nelson_mandela> and the then president, FW De 
Klerk <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F._W._de_Klerk>, brought a peaceful end to 
apartheid.

In 1994, after Mandela had become president and the crimes of that country’s 
white regime were at an end, that Truth and Reconciliation Commission was 
established to confront the country’s history of apartheid atrocities. Behind 
that process was a recognition that there could be no peaceable future without 
a public acknowledgment of the harm that had been done by those who had done 
it. In South Africa, even torturers and murderers under the apartheid system 
were granted amnesties for their crimes as part of a social healing process, 
but only after they had publicly admitted their actions and genuinely asked for 
forgiveness. It was not punishment but the acknowledgment of wrongdoing that 
marked the beginning of justice in that country, and it seemed to work for many 
of those who had suffered grievously under apartheid.

A similar approach might work in the United States. Indeed, it already happens 
all the time on a small scale around the country, throughcommunity mediation 
services 
<http://www.ncrconline.com/mediation-conflict-resolution/community-services/community-mediation>
. These organizations help neighbors settle disputes that might otherwise 
result in a trip to civil courts or the pressing of criminal charges. An 
important aspect of the process is listening to and acknowledging the harm 
others have experienced. It might be possible to expand this kind of mediation 
to address more serious instances of harm to individuals or a community, and to 
work out means of restitution that did not involve prison time.

There are other alternatives to punishment as well. For example, as Critical 
Resistance suggests, instead of training police forces to “deal” with people 
experiencing mental health breakdowns by arresting them and putting themin the 
“justice” system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/solitary-confinement-mentally-ill-prisoners-florida>
, we might begin to treat such events as what they are: health crises. It’s a 
horror that jails and prisons have become the biggest mental “hospitals” in the 
country – with the justice departmentreporting 
<http://www.jaapl.org/content/35/4/406.full> that half of those now 
incarcerated have some form of mental illness.

Mentally ill in solitary: 'We're not addressing the problem, we’re making it 
worse'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/solitary-confinement-mentally-ill-prisoners-florida>
Some communities have also begun to question the wisdom of the “broken 
windows” approach to policing firstproposed 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1982/03/broken-windows/304465/> by 
the criminal justice scholar George Kelling and political scientist James Q 
Wilson. They argued that when the police enforced laws and informal rules 
against nuisance behavior in neighborhoods, reductions in more serious crimes 
followed.

In their seminal 1982 article on the subject in the Atlantic, Kelling and 
Wilson suggested that just as an “untended” building with one broken window was 
eventually likely to end up with all its windows broken, “‘untended’ behavior 
also leads to the breakdown of community controls”. They wrote approvingly of a 
police officer who made a habit of arresting for vagrancy anyone who broke the 
“informal rules” of the neighborhood to which he was assigned – by begging for 
money at a bus stop or drinking alcohol from an unwrapped container or on the 
sidewalk of a major street.

Bill Bratton, New York City’s just-retired police commissioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/02/nypd-bill-bratton-commissioner-resigns>
, championed this “broken windows” approach to policing, including a race-based 
“stop-and-frisk” policy in which police searched New Yorkers on the streets of 
their city 5m times between 2002 and 2015. Nearly 90% of those stopped were,
according <http://www.nyclu.org/content/stop-and-frisk-data> to the New York 
Civil Liberties Union, “completely innocent” of anything and of the remaining 
10%,only one-quarter, 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-newyork-stopandfrisk-idUSBRE9AE00I20131115>
 or 2.5% of all stops, resulted in convictions – most often formarijuana 
possession 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/05/22/stop-and-frisk-race_n_3320355.html>. 
But hundreds of thousands of people, mostly young African American and Latino 
men, lived with the expectation that, at any time, the police might stop them 
on the street in a humiliating display of power. In a landmark 2013 decision, a 
New York federal court found the police department’s stop-and-frisk policy 
unconstitutional.

Here’s another idea: even people of goodwill who are not yet ready to jump on 
any prison abolition bandwagon might agree that we could stop sending people to 
jail for many misdemeanors.

In my state, California, there were 762,002 arrests for misdemeanors 
<https://oag.ca.gov/crime/cjsc/stats/arrests> in 2014 alone. Of these, 92,469 
were for drug possession, 1,265 for glue sniffing (a “crime” of the truly poor 
and desperate), and another 90,061 for being drunk in public. The largest 
single category, however, was driving under the influence, or DUI, with 151,416 
arrests. That’s a total of almost 335,000 people arrested in one state in one 
year for crimes connected with the use of either legal or illegal drugs. Add to 
that the 58,569 people arrested for petty theft, imagine similar figures across 
the country, and you can see how the jails might begin to fill with 
record-setting numbers of prisoners.

Even when never convicted, those arrested often end up spending time in jail 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/02/13/how-bail-punishes-the-poor-for-their-poverty/>
 because they can’t afford bail. And spending time in jail can cost you your 
job, your children, even your home. That’s a lot of punishment for someone who 
hasn’t been convicted of a crime. In August 2016, the US justice department 
filed documents in federal court arguing that holding people in jail because 
they can’t afford to bail themselves out is unconstitutional – a major move 
toward real justice.

So the next time you find yourself thinking idly that there oughta be a law – 
against not giving up your seat on a bus to someone who needs it more, or 
playing loud music in a public place, or panhandling – stop for a moment and 
think again. Yes, such things can be unpleasant for other people, but maybe 
there’s a just alternative to punishing those who do them.

I’ll leave the last words to a student of mine, who wrote: “My definition of 
justice is some sort of restitution and admission of wrongdoing from someone 
who wronged you in the past … My family has influenced my definition of justice 
in teaching me that even if someone does something wrong there should always be 
room for forgiveness and, if they are sincere, forgive them and that is 
justice.”

Now, it’s your turn to define the term – and so our world.

Rebecca Gordon, a TomDispatch regular 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/176150/tomgram%3A_rebecca_gordon,_justice_for_torturers/>
, teaches in the philosophy department at the University of San Francisco. She 
is the author ofAmerican Nuremberg: The US Officials Who Should Stand Trial for 
Post-9/11 War Crimes 
<http://www.amazon.com/dp/1510703330/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20> (Hot 
Books). Her previous books include Mainstreaming Torture: Ethical Approaches in 
the Post-9/11 United States and Letters from Nicaragua.


 <http://www.amazon.com/dp/1510703330/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20>
 