
Paracelsus <http://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/broughttolife/people/paracelsus>, 
a sixteenth century German Swiss philosopher who brought a new approach to 
medical and toxicological theory famously wrote, “The dose makes the poison”; 
in essence, too much is too much. This may seem like stating the obvious, but 
it’s one of those things that needed saying to make people think about it 
properly. Justhow much of something is too much? And, in the season of 
overindulgence, is there anything we should be concerned about?

Obviously, overeating isn’t healthy in the first place, but who can resist 
that extra mince pie or the last roast potato? As the pile of empty sweet 
wrappers grew beside me, and the doors on my chocolate advent calendar told me 
I had apparently achieved time travel and I was living at least two weeks in 
the future, I started to worry. So, I sat down to have a think about Paracelsus 
and some of the more toxic treats available to us atChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>.

What's your poison? Why sparkling cyanide shouldn't be your weapon of choice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2015/dec/17/poisons-sparkling-cyanide-murder-forensics-toxicology>
The most toxic thing you might eat this Christmas is cyanide 
<https://emergency.cdc.gov/agent/cyanide/basics/facts.asp>, in marzipan. Yes, 
it’s true, marzipan contains a source of cyanide, the same stuff you hear about 
in spy’s suicide pills and the pages of murder mystery novels. But before you 
choke on your stollen, or throw the Battenberg in the bin, don’t panic, it’s 
only present in very very tiny amounts. A back-of-the-envelope calculation 
tells me you would have to eat at least 35 kilograms of marzipan in one sitting 
to get a lethal dose of cyanide – at which point it really isn’t the cyanide 
you should be worrying about.

Marzipan is flavoured with almonds – and almonds contain a source of cyanide, 
amygdalin <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1272529/>. Amygdalin 
can be broken down by enzymes in the gut to release hydrogen cyanide, which is 
readily absorbed into the blood and transported to cells where it can stop cell 
respiration in its tracks. This is why cyanide kills: it stops the body being 
able to generate energy and cells die rapidly.

Please note, it’s not that cyanide smells of almonds. Almonds smell of 
cyanide. Bitter almonds contain potentially dangerous levels of amygdalin; a 
few kernels can be lethal, but sweet almonds contain significantly less. Dilute 
these sweet almonds still further by incorporating them into marzipan and you 
should no longer have to worry about cyanide levels in your slice of Christmas 
cake.

Second on the list is nutmeg. For centuries nutmeg has been used as a 
recreational high 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2045778/pdf/procrsmed00847-0043.pdf>
, but before you dive head first into a vat of eggnog in an attempt to achieve 
a euphoric yuletide, there are a few things you should know. You actually need 
to ingest quite a bit of nutmeg to experience its physiological effects: about 
one to one and a half nutmegs grated, but amounts vary between individuals 
(this is in no way a recommendation or a challenge. Seriously: don’t try this 
at home). The amounts of nutmeg normally used in recipes for mince pies and 
Christmas puddings won’t cause you any problems.

The Christmas poisoner who murdered by the book ...
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2015/dec/24/agatha-christie-christmas-poisoner-murdered-by-the-book>
Ingesting large quantities of grated nutmeg is apparently like swallowing 
sandpaper – the particles are so coarse and scratchy – and this is about the 
most fun part of the experience. It will take between one and six hours for 
symptoms to present themselves. These will likely include nausea, dilated 
pupils and dizziness. There may also be hallucinations, both visual and 
auditory – but they won’t necessarily be pleasant. Periods of euphoria are 
followed by the sensation of impending death. The effects are so unpleasant 
that few people return for seconds and I have found only one documented case of
a nutmeg habit 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1293919/pdf/jrsocmed00100-0067.pdf>
.

There have, however, been a number of cases of hospitalisations 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1285340/pdf/archemed00010-0057.pdf>
 due to unconsciousness, delirium and tachycardia brought on by ingesting toxic 
levels of nutmeg. There is no specific antidote and treatment is of the 
symptoms as they present themselves. The effects can take days to wear off. 
Fortunately, deaths from nutmeg poisoning are rare, though not unheard of, 
because vomiting is likely to remove much of the nutmeg and supportive care is 
often enough for the patient to recover.

The toxic component of nutmeg is thought to be myristicin 
<https://naturespoisons.com/2014/03/20/myristicin-trippin-on-nutmeg/>, a 
volatile oil, which can be metabolised in the body to a compound that resembles 
amphetamines. But, amphetamine compounds would not account for all the symptoms 
shown by nutmeg toxicity and, interestingly, synthetic myristicin appears to 
have little or no effect on the body.

Third on the list is mistletoe 
<http://www.thepoisongarden.co.uk/atoz/viscum_album.htm>. Hopefully your 
Christmas holiday won’t be so bad that you are reduced to chewing the 
decorations, but in case you were thinking about it: don’t. Mistletoe, and the 
berries especially, contain phoratoxin, which has similar effects on the body as
digitalis <https://www.drugs.com/npp/digitalis.html>, the heart drug that is 
toxic in surprisingly small amounts. Thankfully, mistletoe poisoning can be 
successfully treated in the same way as digitalis overdoses.

Continuing the decorative theme we come to the poinsettia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/dec/20/paperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas>
. Damage to leaves and stems of the plant causes a milky sap to be exuded, 
which contains diterpene esters that can irritate the skin. Although this won’t 
do you any serious harm, it is still worth thinking about where you place
poinsettias if you have pets or small children 
<http://www.petpoisonhelpline.com/poison/poinsettia/> who might decide to chew 
the leaves.

It is the season of goodwill to all. Save the poisonings for an Agatha 
Christie drama on the telly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/15/kim-cattrall-toby-jones-bbc-agatha-christie-witness-for-the-prosecution>
. If anyone shouldaccidentally ingest any of the above in dangerous amounts 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Poisoning/Pages/Treatment.aspx>, make a note of 
what they have taken and call an ambulance – let medical experts treat the 
patient. Most importantly: eat, drink and be merry this Christmas and have a 
healthy and happy New Year.
 