
Nominating justices to the US supreme court is a responsibility with 
far-reaching consequences – one of the most potent in a president’s armoury. It 
will also be one of the first duties of the incomingTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>.

The liberal-leaning judge Merrick Garland, President Barack Obama’s nominee 
for the vacancy left by the death of Antonin Scalia, was denied confirmation 
hearings by the congressional leadership, so the appointment of a replacement 
will serve as an early test of president-elect Donald Trump’s conservative 
credentials.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fus-supreme-court-nomination-antonin-scalia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F195d2d12e41d44ac6625461761fc6c7d9fe5244b%2F967_651_2763_1658%2F2763.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Democratic%20defeat%20could%20herald%20lurch%20to%20right%20for%20supreme%20court&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fus-supreme-court-nomination-antonin-scalia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Democratic%20defeat%20could%20herald%20lurch%20to%20right%20for%20supreme%20court&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fus-supreme-court-nomination-antonin-scalia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F195d2d12e41d44ac6625461761fc6c7d9fe5244b%2F967_651_2763_1658%2F2763.jpg>
 The liberal-leaning judge Merrick Garland was denied confirmation hearings by 
the congressional leadership. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
The supreme court is currently split evenly between conservatives and 
liberals. As part of Trump’s wooing of conservatives, his campaign published a 
list of 21 potential nominees who would continue the judicial tone of the 
conservative-leaning Scalia. But a fight is brewing, not least over the role of 
the court itself.

Faced with 8,000 petitions a year, the full court of nine justices considers 
around 100 cases a term. With just eight justices currently sitting, several 
recent judgments have been deadlocked 4-4, including one thatblocked Obama’s 
immigration reform efforts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/23/supreme-court-blocks-obama-immigration-plan>
.

Replacing Scalia with a like-minded judge will not shift the complexion 
markedly, but any further appointments will be of far greater importance. Two 
of the serving justices are in their 80s and another is in his late 70s, so 
more appointments are approaching.

While Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> had been 
looking forward to a Clinton-directed liberal renaissance of the supreme court, 
harking back to the civil rights decisions of the mid-1960s, a new period of 
conservative rulings may now follow.

“All of the people on Trump’s list can be said to be conservative 
politically,” said Carl Tobias, professor of law at the University of Richmond, 
“especially on issues like abortion, where he made promises to get the support 
of the evangelical vote.”

Crucially, the court will now probably hear more cases involving the 
separation of church and state. The vice president-elect, Mike Pence, made it 
clear that he wants to see the federal funding of schools with religious 
orientation. Questions about permitting prayer in public places are also likely 
to arise.

“Trump may not be overtly religious,” Tobias added, “but there are many, many 
people who voted for him who believe that’s what he promised to do. 
Evangelicals were central to his victory and they will surely attempt to hold 
him to it.”

Mirroring the divisive political climate, the court has found itself 
increasingly politicised, as seen in several of its most important recent 
decisions, including last year’s same-sex marriage ruling, the contraception 
mandate under Obamacare, compulsory union dues, and the overturning in June of 
a restrictive Texas abortion law.

People who don’t win in legislatures will often try to force an issue on the 
supreme court – if the judges are willing to hear it. But the sense of judicial 
impartiality is being eroded because all the liberal justices now sitting were 
appointed by Democratic presidents and all the conservatives byRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>.

The justices, particularly Chief Justice John Roberts, have made it clear they 
resent politicisation, saying the credibility of the court and its rulings are 
the justices’ chief concern.

“The court doesn’t have the power of the purse or the power of sword, so it 
has to rely on public confidence or it becomes just another political entity,” 
said Tobias.

Legal observers are already discussing which cases in the court’s pipeline are 
likely to disappear as Trump moves to overturn legislation introduced by 
executive order by Obama. One such issue is a dispute overwhich toilets in 
public schools transgender students can use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/06/supreme-court-gloucester-trans-children-school-bathroom-safety>
.

A lower court in Virginia this year took guidance from the US education 
department inruling for Gavin Grimm, a transgender student 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/27/transgender-boy-high-school-bathroom-discrimination-case>
, in a case in which the Virginia school board required students to use 
facilities corresponding to their biological sex, not the gender they identify 
with. The court may not hear that case if Trump rescinds that order.

With Trump now promising to relax laws governing drilling for oil and gas on 
public land and to lift other environmental restrictions, challenges before the 
court could also be dropped.

FLASHPOINTS FOR THE COURT

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will be a lucky 
Potus (President of the United States). Some presidents never get to appoint a 
supreme court judge, but Trump will be able to choose at least one – a 
replacement for the late Justice Antonin Scalia, a conservative.

However, with two liberal members on the court possibly eyeing retirement, 
Trump could also alter the balance of the court so that it is once again a 
predominantly conservative institution. This could be crucial in determining 
the outcome of several long-fought battles.

Abortion

A conservative majority would delight the Christian right, which has lobbied 
hard for a reversal of Roe v Wade, the 1973 ruling that guarantees the right to 
abortion.

Affirmative action

In June, the court voted to uphold a race-conscious admissions programme at 
the University of Texas, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/23/us-supreme-court-upholds-affirmative-action-university-of-texas>
 but this is an issue that will not go away.

Unions

Big business wants the court to overturn a ruling in March upholding the right 
of public-sector unions to collect fees from workers who choose not to join 
them.

Church v state

Laws ensuring the separation of church and state could be eroded by a court 
that agrees there should be greater involvement between religious groups and 
government.

Gun control

Trump’s unequivocal support for the second amendment suggests that laws 
restricting the right to bear arms – such as the need for owners to register 
their weapons – may be overhauled.
 