
The Democratic party failed to retake the US Senate on Tuesday night, 
following losses in Florida, Pennsylvania and Indiana, asRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> delivered Donald Trump a 
Congress firmly in conservative control.

US election 2016: Trump and Clinton watch votes as Florida 'razor close' – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-polls-trump-clinton-live>
On a night of dashed hopes in the presidential election, Democratic morale was 
buoyed slightly by a Senate victory in Illinois, where congresswoman Tammy 
Duckworth beat the Republican incumbent, Mark Kirk. Kirk ran a poor race 
against Duckworth, a veteran who lost both legs when her helicopter went down 
in Iraq, and was forced to apologize last week formocking her family’s Thai 
background 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/republican-mike-kirk-singles-out-asian-heritage-of-iraq-veteran-rival-tammy-duckworth>
.


But other key Senate contests were far closer, with Republican Senate 
contenders outperforming expectations on the coattails of Trump’s surprisingly 
strong showing around the country.

Even before election night, the Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> had given up on hopes of 
recapturing the House of Representatives, after Hillary Clinton’s strong lead 
in October eroded in the final two weeks of the campaign. Only a few hours into 
counting polls on Tuesday night, the chamber was secured for the conservative 
party.

Trump stands poised to make radical changes, especially in his first years in 
office. Republicans held the House and Senate, and will almost certainly be 
able to select a conservative judge for the supreme court, defying Barack 
Obama’s months-long nomination of centrist Merrick Garland for the court’s 
ninth seat, vacant since Antonin Scalia’s death in February.

In the outgoing Congress, Democrats have 44 seats in the Senate and are 
usually supported by two independents, while the Republicans hold 54 seats. 
Clinton would have needed four seats and a presidential victory to regain 
control of the chamber, with the vice-president casting a deciding vote in a 
deadlocked Senate. Clinton lost the presidency and Democrats lost those seats, 
as Democrats suffered staggering defeats across two branches of government.

Tammy Duckworth shows her strength in Senate fight: 'These legs don’t buckle'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/25/tammy-duckworth-senate-race-illinois-profile>
Thirty-four seats were up for grabs, including 24 Republican-held seats that 
featured several closely contested races. In Florida, incumbent Republican 
Marco Rubio won re-election, as expected, over Democratic rival Patrick Murphy. 
The victory kept Rubio’s hopes alive of a possible presidential run in 2020,
despite his failure in the 2016 race against Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/15/marco-rubio-ends-presidential-campaign-trump-wins-florida-primary>
, whom he supported despite calling a “con man” during his run for re-election.

Wisconsin also fell away from Democrats, as Senate candidate Russ Feingold 
failed to unseat Republican Ron Johnson. Around 11pm ET, the Associated Press 
called the race for Johnson, 52% to 45%, after rural regions came out to vote 
strongly for Trump and other Republicans.

In Arizona, 80-year-old Republican senator John McCain shrugged off a 
Democratic challenge from congresswoman Anne Kirkpatrick, who only a few weeks 
earlier had seemed to be strong contender. Late in the electionMcCain rescinded 
his endorsement of Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/john-mccain-donald-trump-sex-boast-tape>
, following the release of a video in which the businessman bragged about 
groping women, setting the party’s 2008 Republican nominee to be a stubborn 
opponent against Trump within Senate ranks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fus-congress-election-results-senate-house-democrats-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d5cc294a15812bba6bfa8a369e46ebe76aa62f5%2F0_25_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Democrats%20fail%20to%20retake%20control%20of%20the%20Senate%20after%20big%20losses%20on%20election%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fus-congress-election-results-senate-house-democrats-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Democrats%20fail%20to%20retake%20control%20of%20the%20Senate%20after%20big%20losses%20on%20election%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fus-congress-election-results-senate-house-democrats-republicans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d5cc294a15812bba6bfa8a369e46ebe76aa62f5%2F0_25_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
 Democratic morale was buoyed slightly by a Senate victory in Illinois, where 
congresswoman Tammy Duckworth beat the Republican incumbent. Photograph: 
Charles Rex Arbogast/AP 
Duckworth’s win was a rare moment of celebration on an otherwise 
nerve-jangling evening. It was a personal triumph for a woman almost killed in 
the Iraq war. “Just as I try every day to live up to the sacrifice my buddies 
made to carry me off that battlefield,” she told supporters after her win, “I 
will go to work in the Senate looking to honour the sacrifice and quiet dignity 
of all those Illinoisans who are facing challenges of their own.

“After all, this nation didn’t give up on me when I was at my most vulnerable, 
needing the most help. I believe in an America that doesn’t give up on anyone 
who hasn’t given up on themselves.”


But Democrats suffered one defeat after another in states they had hoped to 
recapture. Former Indiana senator Evan Bayh failed to make a comeback against 
the Republican incumbent, Todd Young, after a race defined by Bayh’s lobbying 
work in Washington while he was out of office.

And in North Carolina, Senator Richard Burr fought off Democratic challenger 
Deborah Ross, a former state director of the American Civil Liberties Union.

Of the remaining tossup states, the Democrats were playing defense in only 
one, Nevada, on Wednesday night. Just after midnight, the AP called the race in 
Democrats’ favor as Catherine Cortez Masto won re-election.

But to win the Senate, they needed to defend Nevada and win three remaining 
Republican seats, in Pennsylvania, Missouri and New Hampshire, and have Clinton 
win the White House.

In Pennsylvania, Pat Toomey survived a strong challenge from Democrat Kate 
McGinty in what became the most expensive Senate race in American history. 
Toomey left it to after 7pm to reveal who he would support in the presidential 
race. He only admitted to voting for Trump an hour before the polls closed, 
saying it was “a tough call”. He won the race shortly after 1am local time, 
with a tentative victory of 49% to 47%.

In another close race, New Hampshire’s Democratic governor, Maggie Hassan, is 
taking on Republican senator Kelly Ayotte, who has tried to play down her ties 
to Donald Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fus-congress-election-results-senate-house-democrats-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F938437e27e6da1e29f821d46d7b68fdf9ffa7e9d%2F0_171_3522_2114%2F3522.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Democrats%20fail%20to%20retake%20control%20of%20the%20Senate%20after%20big%20losses%20on%20election%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fus-congress-election-results-senate-house-democrats-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Democrats%20fail%20to%20retake%20control%20of%20the%20Senate%20after%20big%20losses%20on%20election%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fus-congress-election-results-senate-house-democrats-republicans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F938437e27e6da1e29f821d46d7b68fdf9ffa7e9d%2F0_171_3522_2114%2F3522.jpg>
 Marco Rubio won re-election to his Florida Senate seat. Photograph: Wilfredo 
Lee/AP 


The election still left question marks over the future of the Republican 
party, largely over whether it continues along his path of appealing to 
working-class whites or tries to widen its appeal to include other demographic 
groups. House leader Paul Ryan, currently the highest elected Republican in 
Washington, now faces a possible revolt from the right wing of his party. Trump 
spent much of the election sniping at Republican leadership – especially Ryan – 
for not supporting him vocally enough, and even in success he appears likely to 
swing the party in whatever direction he sees fit.



Republicans also now have the power to alter the composure of the supreme 
court, where they have blocked Obama’s nomination for months. With a Senate 
majority and a Republican president, the party can now confirm a conservative 
of its choosing, shifting the court to a conservative tilt potentially for 
decades.

A slim majority will not be enough to overcome a Democratic filibuster; that 
would take 60 votes. However, the a Republican majority could seek to change 
the rules, ruling out filibusters for supreme court nominations. That would be 
a hard battle, but Republican success – which Democrats had so recently 
threatened – would further strip the Senate of evpaorating spirit of 
cooperation.
 