
The first day of the Democratic national convention is tied up with a bow. 
Here’s what happened:


 * Supporters of senator Bernie Sanders started with boos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/25/lock-her-up-sanders-trump-clinton-chant>
 and ended in tears as their candidate took the stage and urged them to vote 
for Hillary Clinton, saying she “must become the next president of the United 
States”. 
 * The big question of the night – can the Democrats unify behind their 
candidate? –appeared unresolved at night’s end, with even core Sanders ally 
Elizabeth Warren facing heckles and chants from Sanders backers. 
 * The roiling emotions in the convention hall added to the suspense of 
Clinton’s anticipated speech on Thursday, and what it will mean for the party. 
It appeared possible that the candidate may face waves of booing even as she 
claims the nomination. 
 * But there were highlight moments, notably in a powerfully personal speech 
by first lady Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/michelle-obama-convention-speech-female-president>
 that pointed to a different possibility – to a Democratic party that leaves 
Philadelphia with new energy and something resembling unity. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fsarah-silverman-democratic-convention-bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sarah%20Silverman%20to%20Sanders%20diehards%3A%20'You're%20being%20ridiculous'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fsarah-silverman-democratic-convention-bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sarah%20Silverman%20to%20Sanders%20diehards%3A%20%27You%27re%20being%20ridiculous%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fsarah-silverman-democratic-convention-bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton-video&media=>
Sarah Silverman to Sanders diehards: ‘You’re being ridiculous’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/25/sarah-silverman-democratic-convention-bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton-video>
 * Significant ice in the hall between the Sanders and (much larger) Clinton 
campswas broken by comedian Sarah Silverman, who advised: “To the ‘Bernie or 
Bust’ people,you’re being ridiculous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/25/sarah-silverman-youre-being-ridiculous-democratic-convention-bernie-sanders>
.” 
 * Another notable speech came from Senator Cory Booker, whose optimistic 
refrain “America will rise” pulled the crowd repeatedly to its feet. 
 * Before the marquee speakers took the stage, the convention seemed in danger 
of succumbing to forces of dissent and even scandal. The dissent was embodied 
by pro-Sanders demonstrators in the streets and inside the hall, where they 
interrupted the opening prayer with chanting. The scandal came thanks to the
star-crossed Democratic National Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/25/debbie-wasserman-schultz-booed-dnc-fbi-email-hack>
, whose chairwoman, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, resigned on Sunday in fallout 
from an emails leak that showed top party officials arrayed against Sanders. 
 * Hours before the curtain went up, Wasserman Schultz announced she was also 
abdicating her ceremonial convention duties, and would not gavel the event to 
order. 
 * That wasn’t all bad news. It set up a star turn by fill-in gaveller 
Stephanie Rawlings-Blake, the mayor of Baltimore, who initially forgot to pound 
the gavel and had to run back to the lectern to do so: David Freddoso 
(@freddoso) 
I think this gif has potential to outlast the election season. @NBCNightlyNews 
<https://twitter.com/NBCNightlyNews> pic.twitter.com/XZfx1B4U9S 
<https://t.co/XZfx1B4U9S>
 <https://twitter.com/freddoso/status/757674721022468096> July 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/freddoso/status/757674721022468096>  