
The computers of the House Democratic campaign committee have been hacked, an 
intrusion investigators say resembles therecent hacking of the Democratic 
National Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/russia-hackers-democratic-national-committee-email-leak>
 (DNC) for which the Russian government is the leading suspect.

Cozy Bear and Fancy Bear: did Russians hack Democratic party and if so, why?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/29/cozy-bear-fancy-bear-russia-hack-dnc>
The digital break-in at the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee 
(DCCC), which the organization acknowledged on Friday, added another layer of 
mystery to the hacking of Democratic party information that has been revealed 
in the heat of this year’s presidential and congressional elections.

Details were initially unclear about who hacked the computers and which 
information was accessed at the DCCC, which raises money and provides other 
assistance for Democratic House candidates. Spokeswoman Meredith Kelly said the 
committee was “the target of a cybersecurity incident” and had been informed by 
investigators “that this is similar to other recent incidents, including the 
DNC breach”.

Barack Obama has said Russia was almost certainly responsible for the hack of 
the DNC, an assertion with whichcybersecurity experts have agreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/russia-hackers-democratic-national-committee-email-leak>
. That breach led to the release by WikiLeaks on 22 July, days before the 
Democratic national convention began, of 19,000 emails showing that supposedly 
neutral party officials were favoring Hillary Clinton over Senator Bernie 
Sanders during their primary contest for the presidential nomination.

As a result of that disclosure, the party chairwoman, Debbie Wasserman Schultz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/24/debbie-wasserman-schultz-resigns-dnc-chair-emails-sanders>
, announced her resignation this week.

Kelly said the DCCC was using CrowdStrike, a computer security firm based in 
Irvine, California, and was “cooperating with the federal law enforcement with 
respect to their ongoing investigation”. She said her organization was 
“continuing to take steps to enhance the security of our network in the face of 
these recent events”.

A House Democratic aide said late on Thursday that the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> was investigating the hack. The aide 
was not authorized to discuss an ongoing investigation and spoke on condition 
of anonymity.

The White House deputy press secretary, Eric Schultz, said he was aware of the 
reports about hacking but referred questions to the FBI. The FBI did not 
immediately respond to a request for comment.

CrowdStrike issued a statement confirming its work for the congressional 
campaign committee but provided no additional details.

Computer hacking, emails and indications of Russian involvement have evolved 
into a political issue in the presidential campaign between Clinton and the 
Republican candidate, Donald Trump.

Donald Trump to Russia: hack and publish Hillary Clinton's 'missing' emails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hillary-clinton-emails-dnc-hack>
This week, Trump encouraged Russia to seek and release more than 30,000 other 
missing emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hillary-clinton-emails-dnc-hack>
 deleted by Clinton, the former secretary of state. Democrats accused him of 
trying to get a foreign adversary to conduct espionage that could affect this 
November’s elections, but Trump later said he was merely being sarcastic.

Clinton deleted the emails from her private server, saying they were private, 
before handing other messages to the state department. The US justice 
department declined to prosecute Clinton over her email practices, though the 
FBI director, James Comey, called her “extremely careless” in handling 
classified information.

CrowdStrike and another security firm, ThreatConnect of Arlington, Virginia, 
said they found evidence pointing to Russian government involvement in the DNC 
hack when they analyzed the hackers’ methods and efforts to distribute the 
stolen emails and other files. The hacker groups,identified by CrowdStrike as 
Cozy Bear and Fancy Bear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/26/dnc-email-leak-russian-hack-guccifer-2>
, used different but sophisticated techniques to break into the DNC and try to 
avoid detection.

The DCCC hack was first reported by Reuters.
 