
Nearly half of all Senate Democrats on Friday urged Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> to put an end to deportation 
raids on women and children, as advocates expressed fears that immigration 
raids could resume this weekend.

A multi-state round-up of Central American families three weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/04/immigration-activists-condemn-deportations-asylum-central-america>
 caused alarm and anger in Latino communities and a political backlash which 
continues to resonate, with the Obama administration offering no indication 
that it would change course on its policy of prioritising recent border 
crossers even if they pose no apparent security threat.

Homeland security secretary defends deportation of Central Americans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/04/us-authorities-begin-deportations-of-central-american-asylum-seekers>
On Friday, 22 Democratic senators sent a letter to the president in which they 
expressed “serious reservations about these ongoing immigration raids”, adding 
that they were “deeply concerned that in its eagerness to deter additional 
arrivals from this region, the Department [of Homeland Security] is returning 
vulnerable individuals with valid protection claims to life-threatening 
violence.”

The letter continues: “It is important to evaluate this as a humanitarian and 
refugee crisis involving a vulnerable population and not strictly as a border 
security and immigration enforcement matter. Targeting families contradicts the 
administration’s repeated commitment to focus its enforcement resources on 
removing felonsnot families … Given the particular risks faced by these mothers 
and children, the tactic of using widely publicised, aggressive removal 
operations – often in the wee hours of the morning – is shocking and misguided.”

The senators also called for those from El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala to 
be granted the temporary right to remain in the US because of the increased 
rates of violence in the countries from which they fled. John Kerry, the 
secretary of state,announced this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/13/central-america-refugees-united-states-migrants-admission-john-kerry>
 that the US would expand its refugee programme for the three countries.

Also on Friday, advocates warned that Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) officials may seek to detain people now aged over 18 who entered the US 
as unaccompanied minors and have final deportation orders pending.

Several calls and emails to ICE were not returned by Friday night.

The Obama administration appears determined to press ahead with the removal of 
families and young individuals despite fierce criticism from activists, lawyers 
and politicians in the wake of the round-ups at the start of the year.

Those raids saw ICE agents detain 121 people, most of them in Georgia, North 
Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina> and Texas who were 
recent arrivals from Central America. They were taken for final processing to a 
family detention centre in Texas. Within a week, about 77 were deported to 
Honduras, Guatemala and Mexico, immigration officials said. In a statement, Jeh 
Johnson, the homeland security secretary, said the 121 individuals had 
“exhausted appropriate legal remedies”.

But advocates scrambling to connect with them in the Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> detention centre before their 
removal said that they met with 12 families who had credible asylum claims and 
were successful in obtaining emergency stays for all of them.

With numbers of unaccompanied children and families apprehended at the 
south-west border on the rise again, sparking worries of a major influx of the 
kind seen in the summer of 2014 that overwhelmed facilities andthe legal system 
, the government is hoping the raids will act as a deterrent.

However, advocates argue that they foster anxiety and distrust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/06/ice-raids-immigrant-families-deportation-fear>
 in the US but will not discourage Central Americans who fear for their lives 
amid rising violence.

They say that families and children should be low priorities for removal and 
that lawyers’ success in stalling deportations underlines that the orders stem 
from inadequate or non-existent legal representation rather than the intrinsic 
merits of their cases.

“Somebody should not be deported because they missed a court deadline,” said 
Mohammad Abdollahi, a spokesman forRaices, a San Antonio legal advocacy 
organisation <https://www.raicestexas.org/>.

Atkinson said that the early January raids had “caused panic” in migrant 
communities since news of the raids on familiesbroke in the Washington Post 
<http://%20https//www.washingtonpost.com/politics/us-plans-raids-to-deport-families-who-surged-across-border/2015/12/23/034fc954-a9bd-11e5-8058-480b572b4aae_story.html>
 shortly before Christmas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fdemocrats-call-on-obama-to-end-deportation-raids-on-women-and-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267eb80cefd74a8d777b15e21a91c0bcbb3296f2%2F0_39_2300_1381%2F2300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Democrats%20call%20on%20Obama%20to%20end%20deportation%20raids%20on%20women%20and%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fdemocrats-call-on-obama-to-end-deportation-raids-on-women-and-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Democrats%20call%20on%20Obama%20to%20end%20deportation%20raids%20on%20women%20and%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fdemocrats-call-on-obama-to-end-deportation-raids-on-women-and-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267eb80cefd74a8d777b15e21a91c0bcbb3296f2%2F0_39_2300_1381%2F2300.jpg>
 Fourteen people, four mothers and ten children, deported from US to Guatemala 
arrive at the International Airport of La Auroa earlier this month. Photograph: 
Esteban Biba/EPA 
Community leaders have reacted with outrage and groups such as United We Dream 
 <http://unitedwedream.org/>have initiated publicity campaigns urging migrants 
to know their rights and not to open their doors to ICE agents.

“The administration’s message that these raids on women and children and 
deportations are routine and nothing to worry about is offensive and wrong,” 
said Greisa Martinez, advocacy coordinator with United We Dream. “There should 
be no ambiguity on this: the US government is sending children to their deaths 
and the Obama administration must put an end to it immediately.”

Bishop Angel Marcial Estades, president of Fraternity of Evangelical Councils 
of Southeast Florida, said that his coalition had received multiple reports of 
potentially imminent ICE raids in Tampa, Dover, and southeast Orlando, Florida: 
“[Residents] are reporting strange movements from ICE vehicles passing through 
their communities as if they’re looking for something, and it’s frightening 
their families.

The raids have put the Obama administration in an unusual and uncomfortable 
position: Donald Trumpclaimed credit 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/680156538598756352> for it, while 
nearly 150 Democratic politicians signed a letter calling for the policy to 
stop. Hillary Clintonsaid 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/politics/articles/2016-01-12/potential-for-new-border-crisis-prompted-immigrant-raids>
 the raids “are divisive, they are sowing discord and fear.”

More than 56,000 immigration court cases involving juveniles began in fiscal 
year 2014 – twice as many as last year. They resulted in 12,137 removal orders 
with 28,955 cases still pending, according to data from the Transactional 
Records Access Clearinghouse at Syracuse University. Since the surge in the 
summer of 2014, about 18,500 women with children have been ordered removed. 
Statistics show that access to legal representation drastically improves 
migrants’ prospects of avoiding deportation, but undocumented immigrants are 
not entitled to public counsel.
 