
Fighting as a child soldier in Sudan, Deng Adut never dreamed he would have a 
positive future, let alone be named theNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> Australian of the 
year.

The 33-year-old refugee and criminal lawyer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/21/archibalds-nick-stathopoulos-hyper-real-portrait-of-deng-adut-wins-peoples-choice>
shed tears as he received the top honour from the NSW premier, Mike Baird, at a 
ceremony in Sydney on Monday night. He said he was beyond surprised.

“I never dreamed of anything,” he said. “Even [being] a fisherman.”

Adut was forced to fight as a child soldier at the age of six in Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> before he was smuggled out and made 
it to Australia.

Archibalds: Nick Stathopoulos' hyperreal portrait of Deng Adut wins people's 
choice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/21/archibalds-nick-stathopoulos-hyper-real-portrait-of-deng-adut-wins-peoples-choice>
From illiterate refugee to criminal lawyer, Adut is studying for a second 
master’s degree while running AC Law Group, which he set up to fight for 
members of the Sudanese community from his home in Blacktown in Sydney’s west.

His story is well known, largely thanks to a TV advertising campaign for 
WesternSydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> University, 
which depicts his remarkable story. Adut said Australia was not his adopted 
country but his home.

“You are not Australian because you are born in Australia. You are Australian 
because Australia is born in you,” he said, rewording an African saying.

There’s a list of issues close to his heart which he hopes to advocate for if 
given the opportunity as Australian of the year – domestic violence prevention, 
juvenile justice, discrimination and inclusiveness.

“Children shouldn’t be going to jail,” he said. “I’d like to be working with 
kids in jail to help them transition into the workforce. I’ll make sure I work 
with schools.

“One day I’ll be able to visit every single school in Australia and be able to 
tell my story.”

Adut was joined on Monday night by doctor John Knight, better known as James 
Wright, who was named NSW senior Australian of the year and reconciliation 
champion Arthur Alla, 27, who won NSW young Australian of the year.
 