
Distance 35-38 miles 
Classification Moderate
Start/finish Derry Peace bridge
Duration 3-4 hours 
Route NCN route 92, Faughan Valley Cycleway route 1
Map OSNI Discoverer 7

Route notes


A long loop through the Derry and Donegal countryside, featuring superb views 
ofLough Swilly <http://www.geographyinaction.co.uk/Issues/Lough%20Swilly.html> ,
Inch Island <http://www.welovedonegal.com/islands-inch-island.html>, the Inis 
Eoghain (pronounced Inishowen) peninsula and the Sperrin mountains 
(sperrinstourism.com). From the banks of the river Foyle, a new traffic-free 
riverside path leads out of Derry through Ballyarnett country park before 
winding back towards the city. Quiet country lanes then carry you to County 
Donegal over the border. Sweeping downhill, an optional detour leads to the 
shores of Lough Swilly – or "Lake of Shadows" – before a climb rewards riders 
with spectacular views over the lough, passing within a stone's throw ofGrianán 
of Aileach 
<http://www.discoverireland.com/gb/ireland-things-to-see-and-do/listings/product/?fid=FI_73795>
, an imposing ancient circular hillfort dating back to 1700 BC that still 
dominates the landscape today. Travelling anticlockwise, you'll want to take a 
short detour at Carrigans, to avoid a busy road and take in views over the 
Laggan valley, before picking up the traffic-free Foyle Valley Greenway back to 
Derry.

Terrain and gradients


One third of the route follows traffic-free tarmac paths; the rest travels 
quiet rural roads. The descent to Lough Swilly is steep, as is the ascent to 
Grianán of Aileach.

How to get there/away

Derry is well served by rail and the station is near the start. After 9.30am 
(all day at weekends) trains can carry up to four bicycles. The Lough Swilly 
Bus Company (loughswillybusco.com) operates in County Donegal and allows bikes 
at the driver's discretion.Ulsterbus 
<http://www.translink.co.uk/Services/Ulsterbus-Service-Page/> also goes to 
Derry andBus Eireann <http://www.buseireann.ie/> links the main towns in 
Ireland.

What to see


Amelia Earhart unexpectedly landed in Derry in 1932 when she became the first 
woman to fly solo across the Atlantic, andAmelia Earhart Cottage 
<http://www.culturenorthernireland.org/article/455/the-amelia-earhart-cottage-museum>
 in Ballyarnett country park, where she stayed after her accidental touchdown, 
has an exhibition celebrating the feat. Grianán of Aileach is awe-inspiring, 
its views stunning. A short detour from the circular route takes you to the 
shore of Lough Swilly, with its sandy beaches, impressive cliffs and views, 
where dolphins, porpoises and sea birds can be seen. Treat yourself to a ride 
over the iconicDerry Peace bridge 
<http://www.derryvisitor.com/P23773-Peace-Bridge-Londonderry-Derry.aspx> 
afterwards, built to help relations between the predominately unionist 
"Waterside" and the predominately nationalist "Cityside".

Watering holes


The Old Church restaurant 
<http://www.angriananhotel.com/dining/Old-Church-Restaurant/> at An Grianán 
hotel in Burt serves a bistro and fine dining menu in a deconsecrated church. 
Newtown Cunningham, around the halfway point, hasCoyles bar and restaurant 
<http://www.coylesbar.com/pb/wp_4218869c/wp_4218869c.html> , as well as plenty 
of picnic opportunities. Derry is your best bet for pubs.
 