
The Short Strand housing estate is a fiercely republican enclave in 
predominantly loyalist east Belfast 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/short-strand-an-enclave-stranded-in-a-sea-of-loyalist-hatred-2301360.html>
. In these tightly packed streets, several thousand Catholics hunker down in an 
area of tens of thousands of Protestants. Close by one of the major routes of 
Orange Order marches, the Short Strand has long been a flashpoint. It was here 
thatthe IRA fought one of the first battles of the Troubles 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_St_Matthew's>, resulting in three dead 
and 26 wounded. And there are still problems, with what some rather stupidly 
call “recreational rioting”. Stones and worse are regularly thrown over the 
peace wall separating the communities.

On a good day, the estate seems unremarkable – except for a huge mural that 
runs alongside a strip of wasteland next to the shops. “Short Strand supports 
Gaza,” it reads. Beside it the Israeli prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, sits 
in a Gaza-shaped bath of blood, wielding a meat cleaver at drowning 
Palestinians as Barack Obama tries to avert Ban Ki-moon’s attention away from 
the massacre.

Over on Northumberland Street, a very different mural has been erected by 
Protestant loyalists, celebrating the memory of Lieutenant-colonel John Henry 
Patterson, a Christian Zionist, and sometimes described as the inspiration 
behind the Israeli Defence Forces. A large star of David is underwritten with 
words from Netanyahu: “In all of Jewish history we have never had a Christian 
friend as understanding and devoted.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fbelief%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fdespite-the-murals-belfast-is-not-bethlehem-with-rain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff23df7a25ad30e6145aa3e3ccee633bd5d4c47f%2F66_457_3141_1885%2F3141.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Despite%20the%20murals%2C%20Belfast%20is%20not%20Bethlehem%20with%20rain%20%7C%20Giles%20Fraser%3A%20Loose%20canon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fbelief%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fdespite-the-murals-belfast-is-not-bethlehem-with-rain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Despite%20the%20murals%2C%20Belfast%20is%20not%20Bethlehem%20with%20rain%20%7C%20Giles%20Fraser%3A%20Loose%20canon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fbelief%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fdespite-the-murals-belfast-is-not-bethlehem-with-rain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff23df7a25ad30e6145aa3e3ccee633bd5d4c47f%2F66_457_3141_1885%2F3141.jpg>
 Mural in Northumberland Street, Belfast. ‘A large star of David is 
underwritten with words from Netanyahu: “In all of Jewish history we have never 
had a Christian friend as understanding and devoted.”’ Photograph: Giles Fraser 
Of course, Belfast is a city that knows its Bible. Presiding over the skyline 
are Samson and Goliath, two massive cranes from the Harland and Wolff shipyard, 
still the largest in the world, and named after two biblical giants. But this 
appropriation of the Israel-Palestine conflict by different sides of the 
sectarian divide has little to do with religious belief. Like many places in 
the UK, the God business is in decline. And for sale signs are going up outside 
many a former chapel. Yet all overBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast>, Palestinian and Israeli flags still 
mark out the boundaries of sectarian geography.

According to the 2011 census, there were only 274 people who self-described as 
Arabs inNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and 
only 335 who self described as Jews – out of a population of 1.8 million. I 
know this is not the same as Palestinian and Israeli, but it’s still some 
indication that interest in the Israeli-Arab conflict is not coming from those 
who have family links with that region. Despite this, and since the second 
intifada in particular, Catholics have tended to imagine themselves as the 
downtrodden Palestinians, still suffering under partition and foreign 
occupation. And Protestants, in response, have aligned with Israel, imagining 
themselves as having an ancient claim to the land that is being denied by the 
activity of murderous terrorists.

Thus the Gaza mural speaks of British colonialism and the Patterson one of 
state security. So Belfast becomes Bethlehem with rain.

Yes, it’s all pretty bizarre. Why further complicate one of the world’s most 
complicated places by seeing it through the perspective of another place of 
equal complexity? Nothing by way of clarity can be gained from this elision. 
But, of course, clarity isn’t the purpose of these murals. They are propaganda. 
And, first of all, an attempt to claim some legitimacy from a faraway conflict 
– borrowing its particular rhetoric and sense of injustice. Which is why these 
murals say more about the domestic rather than international political scene. 
And are intended to.

Not that this sort of dodgy appropriation is restricted to Belfast. For the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict continually suffers from the way many countries 
play out their own domestic agendas through their chosen narratives ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and Palestine. Take the US election 
or a UK student demo. It’s almost as if we have come to see the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict as some sort of universal archetype to which all 
other conflicts are related. This is rubbish. By seeing one set of troubles 
though the lens of another, we create an intractable confusion that does 
nothing to further the cause of peace.

@giles_fraser <https://twitter.com/giles_fraser>
 