
It’s always possible to pick holes, of course, to find fault and point the 
finger.John Keats <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnkeats> described it as 
a “splashy, rainy, misty ... floody, muddy slipshod County”.Robert Southey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/sep/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>
 thought it entirely overrated and “by no means deserving of the encomiums 
which are passed upon it”. And in his poem “Discontents in Devon”,Robert Herrick
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/may/25/poem-of-the-week-robert-herrick>
 opined that “More discontents I never had / Since I was born, then here; / 
Where I have been, and still am sad, / In this dull Devon-shire.” But nothing 
can deter the rest of us, it seems, from falling in love, again and again, with 
dear oldDevon <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/devon>.

According to a recent survey by Country Life magazine, Devon is the best 
county to live in the UK. According to the Sunday Times, in its recent Best 
Places to Live in the Countryside piece, the former tin-mining town ofChagford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/jul/27/top-10-places-to-retire>, in the 
Teign Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/may/12/teign-valley-devon-walk>, is 
the best town to live in the UK. If there were a poll to find the best place 
for polling about the UK in the UK, there’s no doubt that Devon would win that, 
too.

Ian&nbsp;Sansom: the secrets of literary Norfolk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/26/ian-sansom-literary-norfolk> 
Devon is irresistible, the sort of place you imagine retiring to, in good 
health, with a little capital, and the prospect of writing that book you always 
meant to write, and perhaps establishing an English country garden. (The great 
Irish novelistWilliam Trevor <https://www.theguardian.com/books/william-trevor> 
has done exactly that: wisely moving to Devon in the 1950s, he has since 
produced works of genius and an English country garden.) Having won the Booker 
prize forWolf Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wolf-hall> in 2009, 
Hilary Mantel <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> was finally 
able to fulfil a lifetime’s ambition: to live inBudleigh Salterton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/sep/25/budleigh-salterton-devon-property>
. “There are beautiful places all over England,” writesMatthew Engel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/matthewengel> in Engel’s England, his 
survey of the English counties, “but Devon doesn’t do anything else.”

What it does do is provide endless varieties of beauty, and thus endless 
inspiration to novelists and poets. At around about 2,600 square miles, Devon 
is large: among English counties onlyYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/yorkshire> and Lincolnshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/lincolnshire> are bigger. It boasts – 
uniquely – two handsome and separate coastlines, between which it manages to 
contain pretty much everything: barren moors, seaside towns and villages, 
ports, combes and a cathedral city. Take your literary pick.

The wild, unstable undercliff on the Dorset-Devon border provided John Fowles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnfowles> with the perfect landscape to 
contrast with the genteel world ofLyme Regis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2011/aug/11/lyme-regis-jurassic-fossil-coast>
 inThe French Lieutenant’s Woman (“In summer it is the nearest this country can 
offer to a tropical jungle”). The river Dart finds its many voices inAlice 
Oswald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald>’s book of poems, Dart. 
Arthur Conan Doyle <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle> made 
the moors forever melancholy inThe Hound of the Baskervilles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/18/hound-baskervilles-arthur-conan-doyle>
, and the lush, remote villages that became home for Cecil Day-Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/30/cecil-day-lewis-letters-oxford> 
when he took off for the country in the 1930s and reinvented himself as 
Nicholas Blake, novelist, became home also to his great amateur detective Nigel 
Strangeways, who lived in a thatched, whitewashed cottage not dissimilar to 
Day-Lewis’s own cottage overlooking the Axe valley.

Agatha Christie's surfing secret revealed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/29/agatha-christie-hercule-poirot-surfing-secret>
But above all, in literary terms, Devon is Agatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie> country. Born in Torquay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/torquay> in 1890, Christie eventually 
bought a magnificent Georgian house – Greenway, in Churston Ferrers – as a 
summer home with her second husband in 1938. Her work repeatedly returns to 
Devon – to Burgh Island inEvil under the Sun, to the Majestic Hotel (the 
Imperial in Torquay) inThe Body in the Library and in Peril at End House, to 
Churston Station.

For my own purposes, writing about Devon, I was interested in the emergence of 
English surf culture in the 1930s, and was astonished to discover thatChristie 
was, in fact, a pioneering surfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/29/agatha-christie-hercule-poirot-surfing-secret>
, having visited Hawaii with her first husband Archie in the 1920s. In her 
autobiography she writes, “Oh, the moment of complete triumph on the day that I 
kept my balance and came right into shore standing upright on my board!” Just 
as Fowles claimed to have found his inspiration for Sarah Woodruff in a dream 
of a strange, sallow-faced woman staring out to sea, so, too, I imagined a 
woman riding proudly on to Devon’s shores, standing upright on a board.

• Ian Sansom’s novel Death in Devon, the second in his County Guides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/26/ian-sansom-literary-norfolk> 
series, is published by 4th Estate.

• The picture on this article was replaced on 17 March. The original picture 
was of Lyme Regis, which is in Dorset.
 