
Information is the lifeblood of public health. Data about populations, health 
and wellbeing is critical to improving and protecting health. We live in an age 
of information overload, where making sense and good use of big data is 
increasingly important.

This is why Public Health England 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/public-health-england> (PHE) 
publishes local authorityhealth profiles 
<http://www.apho.org.uk/default.aspx?QN=P_HEALTH_PROFILES> every year. These 
are simplified and summarised graphical depictions of key health measures for 
every local authority district, borough and county in England. They draw 
together data from a range of sources in an at-a-glance format, making it easy 
to see where local health issues deviate from the national average.

What does this year's data show?

Many health issues still vary widely across the country, and inequalities 
persist within local authorities. There can be as much as 15 years' difference 
in the life expectancy for men living in different neighbourhoods within the 
same local authority.

Some problems are important for one type of area but less so for another; for 
example, the highest levels of TB are seen in urban areas such as London, 
Leicester and Slough, and the lower levels in more rural areas.

In general, though, we are getting healthier – life expectancy continues to 
increase, and death rates are falling. Broader health issues and social 
determinants of health, such as GCSE success rates, have improved, with the 
national average going up from 48.3% in 2007-08 to 60.8% in 2012-13 (for 5 A*-C 
including English and maths). Teenage pregnancy is down, dropping by almost 
half since 1998.

Liver disease is an exception: early death rates from this are increasing, up 
from 15.8 per 100,000 in 2001-03 to 18 in 2010-12. Liver disease is influenced 
by alcohol consumption, obesity and hepatitis, and PHE is working on a tool to 
show more detailed data to support local action. Similarly, diabetes has 
increased in line with obesity, along with its complications, such as sight 
loss from diabetic eye disease.

Why is the data useful?

These health profiles help to shape and influence local prioritisation and 
decision-making. In the most recent evaluation of the profiles, users told us 
their main reasons to use the profiles were to find out more about public 
health in the area, to scrutinise or challenge health plans, to prepare a 
briefing, and to develop a needs assessment or strategy.

Users can see immediately which health issues in their area are worse than the 
national average, or whether a problem they have identified locally seems to be 
reflected in the data. This can feed into decisions around what to prioritise, 
how to address a problem and how a service should be managed.

Local knowledge is vital in finding the right solutions for an area. For 
example, places with a large population of elderly people, such as Devon, will 
have worse than average rates of diabetes in the population. This is not 
unexpected – people are more likely to develop diabetes as they age – and it 
does not necessarily mean that diabetic residents are receiving poor treatment. 
But it does highlight a topic more relevant for health services in these areas.

Health profiles include information about inequality within a local authority: 
maps of the neighbourhoods within an area are shaded by levels of deprivation 
and a chart shows the differences in life expectancy between most and least 
deprived neighbourhoods. This can help local councillors or service providers 
to demonstrate problems that are less visible when reviewing data for the whole 
local authority where good and bad average out. Some local authority areas with 
less deprivation overall may contain towns or neighbourhoods that are much less 
well off (for example, Northumberland and Harrow).

The profiles also give local areas the opportunity to identify and broadcast 
key priorities for themselves. The Local Government Associationmapped the local 
priorities 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/web/guest/health-and-wellbeing-boards/-/journal_content/56/10180/6111055/ARTICLE>
 in health and wellbeing alongside other issues identified by health and 
wellbeing boards across the country.

The health profiles are a snapshot and people may wish to delve further. The 
public health outcomes framework <http://www.phoutcomes.info/> tool allows you 
to look at how broader public health data impacts on local authorities. You can 
also drill down geographically to smaller areas usinglocal health 
<http://www.localhealth.org.uk/>, which shows health data mapped to super 
output areas and electoral wards. You can even explore specific topics such as 
mental health, sexual health, alcohol or premature mortality.

Dr Julian Flowers is director of the eastern knowledge and intelligence team 
at Public Health England and Helen Shaw is health profiles programme manager at 
Public Health England.

• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com

Join the Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>, 
direct to your inbox. Follow us on twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 