
I was right there in 1966. Was it bliss, very heaven to be young? To be 
honest, I’m not sure. Yes and no. The young are too full of self-conscious 
anxiety to be good at bliss. (You get better at it later).

The Victoria and Albert Museum’s exhibition You Say You Want a Revolution? 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-records-and-rebels-1966-70>
, celebrating 1966-1970, opens on Saturday, a glorious spectacular of gigantic 
themes and minute detail from an extraordinary time. Or was it? Is this just 
cultural imperialism by us baby boomers imposing our “best ever” youth by sheer 
weight of numbers and purchasing power? My generation has earwormed our music 
into the heads of our children and grandchildren, and wedidn’t die before we 
got old <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qN5zw04WxCc>.

You Say You Want a Revolution review: a dizzying trip to the heart of the 1960s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/07/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-review-v-and-a-dizzying-trip>
I came away overwhelmed, lump in the throat, with a flashback and memory 
shock, and the soundtrack of John Peel’s record collection doing my head in (as 
I might or might not have said, I can’t remember). But also a kind of horror, 
maybe just at the passing of so many years, at the fossilising of ephemera, 
things once quick, bright and throwaway now dog-eared and motheaten in glass 
cases. Yes, I had a paper dress just like that! Oh andBiba 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biba> and Granny Takes a Trip 
<https://agnautacouture.com/2012/12/16/granny-takes-a-trip-a-boutique-everybody-wanted-to-be-seen-in/>
 dresses too.

That’s the trouble with history. Those of us who were there are unreliable 
witnesses, let alone the younger curators who sweep up history’s remains to 
shape them into sense. But by the time you exit through the gift shop, you will 
be beaten into submission: no, there is no doubt these few years 1966-70, were 
mindblowingly extraordinary, bookended by the Beatles. You know the images 
(like the music) too well – the 400,000 withJimi Hendrix at Woodstock 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4TgbWOy6Buk>, John and Yoko giving peace a 
chance <http://content.time.com/time/photogallery/0,29307,1887244,00.html> in 
bed,Oz and the schoolkids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/aug/02/pressandpublishing.g2> issue.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Frevolution-victoria-albert-museum-sixties-usher-neoliberalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2eb0eada051766507a49c8b47bdb21c623ca3c45%2F0_112_3862_2317%2F3862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Did%20we%20baby%20boomers%20bring%20about%20a%20revolution%20in%20the%2060s%20or%20just%20usher%20in%20neoliberalism%3F%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Frevolution-victoria-albert-museum-sixties-usher-neoliberalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Did%20we%20baby%20boomers%20bring%20about%20a%20revolution%20in%20the%2060s%20or%20just%20usher%20in%20neoliberalism%3F%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Frevolution-victoria-albert-museum-sixties-usher-neoliberalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2eb0eada051766507a49c8b47bdb21c623ca3c45%2F0_112_3862_2317%2F3862.jpg>
 ‘There is no doubt these few years 66-70 were mind-blowingly extraordinary.’ 
Photograph: Eamonn M. McCormack/Getty Images 
Yes, I wrote a bit for Oz, and sadly Richard Neville died this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/04/richard-neville-obituary>. 
Sixty-six was an electric year for me, working for Amnesty in Rhodesia until I 
was deported, arriving at Oxford, and publishing a novel that certainly would 
never have been printed had publishers been less anxious to grab on to anything 
– anyone – young, regardless.

I dropped out of Oxford the next year and lived in a filthy one-room, 
no-bathroom bedsit above the Spaghetti House in Greek Street. Later I worked in 
Tate & Lyle’s sugar-packing factory in Wandsworth, believing in the honesty of 
manual work. But by 1968 I had landed a temporary job at the Observer and 
covered theGrosvenor Square Vietnam demo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/may/21/1968theyearofrevolt.antiwar>: 
one foot reporter, one foot demonstrator. Fleet Street and central London were 
boarded up as the establishment panicked about a reprise of the Paris riots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Frevolution-victoria-albert-museum-sixties-usher-neoliberalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0900d105c5d49335e70eb587afe0d4f6b8b3567%2F0_367_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Did%20we%20baby%20boomers%20bring%20about%20a%20revolution%20in%20the%2060s%20or%20just%20usher%20in%20neoliberalism%3F%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Frevolution-victoria-albert-museum-sixties-usher-neoliberalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Did%20we%20baby%20boomers%20bring%20about%20a%20revolution%20in%20the%2060s%20or%20just%20usher%20in%20neoliberalism%3F%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Frevolution-victoria-albert-museum-sixties-usher-neoliberalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0900d105c5d49335e70eb587afe0d4f6b8b3567%2F0_367_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 ‘This brilliantly curated exhibition pulls together inter-related themes, 
making sense of psychedelia, politics, protest and pot-heads.’ Photograph: 
Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
Drugs? A bit, not much. I had a junior doctor friend in Poplar hospital who 
brought green medicine bottles of tincture of cannabis, still legal in the 
pharmacopoeia at the time. I went to interview the now ultra-respectable 
Release, campaigning against long prison terms for drug possession, where 
someone insisted I puffed their hookah, and I reeled back to the Observer 
office with nothing but tiny squiggles in my notebook.

I was at the 1969 Dylan Isle of Wight festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/05/bob-dylan-isle-of-wight-festival-1969-photography>
, where the press tent had one enormous bed where everyone slept: I was 
squashed up againstChristopher Logue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/03/christopher-logue>.
 ‘It’s a clever exhibition about ideas as much as style.’ Polly Toynbee in the 
1960s. 
None of that makes me a useful witness; it’s just anecdotes. This brilliantly 
curated exhibition pulls together inter-related themes, making sense of 
psychedelia, politics, protest and potheads. The soft-headed hippy daftness of 
the summer of love always grated with those of us who were more political, and 
yet it infused the air, bringing wit to protest. Though goodness knows, the 
myriad warring splinter groupuscules of Marxists and Trots assembled for the 68 
demo were oblivious of any hippy stuff.

Serious things were happening: those Woodstock kids with daisy-painted faces 
had the Vietnam draft hanging over them. Women’s lib, gay lib and black power 
movements burst out, with a new environmentalism ofBuckminster Fuller’s 
geodesic dome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/jul/04/buckminster-fuller-architecture-design>
 and theWhole Earth Catalog 
<http://www.wholeearth.com/history-whole-earth-catalog.php>. It’s all there in 
glass cases, videos and music.

Step back at the end of this epic show and ask what lasting effect it had? 
Auras of the moment grip the imagination and get set in the aspic of history – 
but what changed?

The co-curator Geoffrey Marsh, taking me round, points out how most protest 
failed. In 1970 Richard Nixon was elected in the US, and Edward Heath in 
Britain. Too many rock greats of the Janis Jopling-Jimi Hendrix stamp died 
young, while others went into tax exile (the Rolling Stones and David Bowie). 
Theyippies <http://countercultureinthe1960s.weebly.com/yippies.html> became 
Wall Street bankers. And yet nothing was ever the same again.

The revolutionary artists of the 60s’ colourful counterculture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/04/revolutionary-artists-60s-counterculture-v-and-a-you-say-you-want-a-revolution>
Unglamorous, unhip Harold Wilson with pipe, Gannex 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gannex> and compromises, emerges as the unlikely 
60s hero. Under his aegis, thanks to Roy Jenkins, came abolition of capital 
punishment, divorce reform, abortion reform, an end to theatre censorship, the 
Race Relations Act, the gay rightsSexual Offences Act 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sexual_Offences_Act_1967> and the Equal Pay Act.

The Open University was a pure 60s inspiration, education for all springing 
from the comprehensive ideal. I would add the extraordinary flourishing of 
high-minded collective endeavour resulting in the founding of Shelter, Crisis, 
Centrepoint, the Child Poverty Action Group, the Joint Council for the Welfare 
of Immigrants, Brook Advisory, the British Pregnancy Advisory Service, the 
Playgroups Association, toy libraries and much more.

But the curators end with a reminder of another child of the flower children: 
out of all this revolution against “the system” came a “me” individualism that 
grew into neoliberalism. Early hippy ideals of silicon valley soon morphed into 
each-for-yourself, pay no taxes, screw all governments. Anti-establishment 
“freedom” has many dark sides and theBeatles had it right 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGLGzRXY5Bw>: “We all want to change the world 
/ But when you talk about destruction / Don’t you know that you can count me 
out”.

It’s a clever exhibition about ideas as much as style, style as reflection of 
thought – but walking through this history of an explosive era is an unsettling 
time warp for those of us who were there.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBGLGzRXY5Bw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBGLGzRXY5Bw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBGLGzRXY5Bw&media=>
The Beatles sing their distaste for destruction in Revolution - video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGLGzRXY5Bw>  