
They call it the greatest free show on Earth, a battle of Britain’s best brass 
bands, fought across the villages of Saddleworth on the old 
Lancashire-Yorkshire border.

It’s a chaotic contest that is part Wacky Races, part Brassed Off, as bandsmen 
and women of all ages frantically race up and down dale to compete in as many 
villages as possible while not getting so drunk they forget their fingering.

Fuelled by real ale and vinegar-laced black peas 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_peas>, tuba players and corneters 
high-tail it between hamlets with names so quintessentially northern I 
initially thought they must be made up: Diggle to Dobcross, Denshaw to Delph.

It is no exaggeration to say I had been waiting 366 days to make my Whit 
Friday brass band festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/commentisfree/2015/jun/02/real-northern-powerhouses-brass-bands-moved-me-to-tears-whit-friday>
debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/commentisfree/2015/jun/02/real-northern-powerhouses-brass-bands-moved-me-to-tears-whit-friday>
. Having stumbled across it in Delph with a friend from Rochdale last year, I 
vowed to return as a contestant.

Never mind that I couldn’t actually play a brass instrument and that 20 years 
had passed since I had scraped a pass in grade six oboe. Grand plans to learn 
the trombone were quietly abandoned when a “scratch” band from Bristol offered 
me a guest spot on bass drum.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fdifferent-drum-novice-snares-gig-in-the-greatest-free-show-on-earth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85b57bfa3b7240f213a8f5c40ae88256b1200e98%2F0_124_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Different%20drum%3A%20novice%20snares%20gig%20in%20the%20greatest%20free%20show%20on%20Earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fdifferent-drum-novice-snares-gig-in-the-greatest-free-show-on-earth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Different%20drum%3A%20novice%20snares%20gig%20in%20the%20greatest%20free%20show%20on%20Earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fdifferent-drum-novice-snares-gig-in-the-greatest-free-show-on-earth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85b57bfa3b7240f213a8f5c40ae88256b1200e98%2F0_124_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Trombonists of Mystic Brass blow away the cobwebs. Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond for the Guardian 
Every year Simon Jones, a tenor horn specialist, gathers together a 
raggle-taggle band of players to contest Whit Friday alongside some of the 
world’s most accomplished and distinguished brass bands, such as the Fairey 
Band from Stockport and the Brighouse and Rastrick Band from Calderdale in West
Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire>, as well as class 
acts from overseas.


For amateur players, or total chancers like me, it’s like being allowed to 
compete in the Tour de France against Bradley Wiggins, or play on a court at 
Wimbledon with Andy Murray.

The “real” bands wear their uniforms: blazers in Dairy Milk purple for the 
Brighouse lot <http://www.brighouseandrastrick.com/?gallery=whit-friday-2015>, 
while the Fairey people play in Manchester City blue, collars lined with golden 
trim.


Why brass bands are back in vogue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/06/riot-jazz-brass-band> 
Simon decided we should dress up as wizards, and named our motley crew Mystic 
Brass. If I’d not been before, I’d worry the “real” bands would think we were 
taking the mick, but in 2015 we’d enjoyed a Bryan Adams cover fromthe Chav 
Band, who were all in Kappa tracksuits and baseball caps 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nf-x3okG2O0> (scroll to one minute in).


I opted for an indigo silken gown embellished with Bowie-esque thunderbolts 
and matching cape, teamed with an enormous grey beard and dreadlocked wig, my 
usual spectacles swapped for a pair of John Lennon-inspired round sunnies with 
skull holograms in the lenses.

 On the tram to Oldham on Friday morning, I suddenly got nervous. My friend 
Oaksey, an Oldham native and a bandsman in his youth, scared me by casually 
noting that the bass drum was “the most important of all the instruments. One 
wrong double hit and you’ll have the whole band finishing too early.”


On arrival, it turned out I had indeed been entrusted with quite an important 
job. It was up to me to not only set the tempo on the “deportment” march 
through each village (we were playing theHogwarts March from Harry Potter 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rP4V6ZoNK7E>), but to count the band in with 
two double boshes and two big trebles, and then signal them to end with another 
double tap.


“You do realise I have never played drums before, right?” I asked Simon, who 
batted away my fears by reminding me that there was no percussion in the actual 
contest. I’d sit out that bit, or more realistically, lug my drum back to the 
coach so as not to hold everyone up.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fdifferent-drum-novice-snares-gig-in-the-greatest-free-show-on-earth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c3beedadbca5df3c473d288552eba0c99418a96%2F0_275_3717_5485%2F3717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Different%20drum%3A%20novice%20snares%20gig%20in%20the%20greatest%20free%20show%20on%20Earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fdifferent-drum-novice-snares-gig-in-the-greatest-free-show-on-earth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Different%20drum%3A%20novice%20snares%20gig%20in%20the%20greatest%20free%20show%20on%20Earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fdifferent-drum-novice-snares-gig-in-the-greatest-free-show-on-earth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c3beedadbca5df3c473d288552eba0c99418a96%2F0_275_3717_5485%2F3717.jpg>
 Helen Pidd: ‘I opted for an indigo silken gown embellished with Bowie-esque 
thunderbolts and matching cape, teamed with an enormous grey beard.’ 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The actual contests are very serious affairs. The adjudicators, usually local 
luminaries, judge each band blind, sitting in darkened rooms with their backs 
to an open window, or in a caravan with blacked out windows.

Before each band begins, a solemn steward silently walks through the crowd 
carrying a blackboard showing the audience the name of the band and the march 
they are to play (Mystic Brass – The Wizard, in our case).

With results from various villages coming in during the evening, it’s often 
not until Saturday that it all becomes clear.


We decided to start our Whit Friday assault in Diggle, where the competition 
takes place on the former tip. It’s significantly more pleasant than it sounds, 
playing brass on a former landfill site, the Saddleworth hills rising in the 
background as the smell of corned beef hash perfumed the air. I was nervous to 
the point of shaking, not that you’d have known it behind my Hagrid-meets-Ozzy 
Osborne disguise.


We got through it without completely embarrassing ourselves, though we were 
hamstrung by following the Diggle band – who not only had the home crowd 
advantage, but also played The Wizard, stealing our thunder somewhat.


Listening from the sidelines, I suspected they may have had more than one 
practice in the hotel car park.

Then it was on to Dobcross for another pint and another performance. It turned 
out the Faireys were a few goes before us and were, by all accounts, as 
spectacular as ever.

But I bet I had a better beard than any of them.
 