
A length of fluffy plumage discovered within a piece of amber has been 
identified as part of a dinosaur tail, offering new insights into the evolution 
of feathers.

Why palaeontologists are aflutter over new fossil feather finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/14/why-palaeontologists-are-aflutter-over-new-fossil-feather-finds>
Around 3.7cm long, with chestnut-coloured feathers on the top and pale 
feathers underneath, the tail was found complete with fossilised bones as well 
as traces of muscles, ligaments and mummified-looking skin.


While researchers say it is not possible to determine the species to which the 
tail belonged, they say the dinosaur lived around 99 million years ago and was 
most likely a juvenile, non-avian theropod – a group of dinosaurs that includes 
velociraptors and tyrannosaurs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60423d85c96156efb9c4d05c40e86a0f7af37efc%2F0_135_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60423d85c96156efb9c4d05c40e86a0f7af37efc%2F0_135_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 This photograph shows the tip of a preserved dinosaur tail section. 
Photograph: RSM/ R.C. McKellar 
“If you were to hold [an adult] in your hand it would have been about the size 
of a sparrow,” said Ryan McKellar, co-author of the research from the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum, Canada.

Bought in a Chinese market, the fragment is not the first piece of amber found 
to contain prehistoric feathers. Indeed McKellar and his colleagues have 
previously discovered wing tips with skeletal remains from a group of extinct 
primitive birds called Enantiornithes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/15/why-two-tiny-wings-preserved-in-amber-have-palaeontologists-in-a-flap-dinosaurs>
, as well as a wide array of amber-bound feathers which could not be linked to 
particular animals.

But none, says McKellar, have been clearly linked to a non-avian dinosaur 
before.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F648ffa3e3f03a1a63f95c13e1dd0aa8eb781f9cf%2F319_0_4681_2810%2F4681.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F648ffa3e3f03a1a63f95c13e1dd0aa8eb781f9cf%2F319_0_4681_2810%2F4681.jpg>
 A reconstruction of a small coelurosaur approaching a resin-coated branch on 
the forest floor. Photograph: Chung-tat Cheung 
“It is the first time we are seeing skeletal material with feathers coming off 
of the sides of it and we know for sure that we are dealing with something that 
is not a bird, it is more dinosaur-like,” he said.


The all-important clues, he adds, lie in the length of the tail, the shape of 
the vertebrae, and the fact that the vertebrae are not fused into a rod-like 
structure as they are in birds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc29b9396b579f98bd01e1f61571d1b247b5037a8%2F0_0_2048_906%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc29b9396b579f98bd01e1f61571d1b247b5037a8%2F0_0_2048_906%2F2048.jpg>
 Reconstruction of soft tissue and feather bases in amber (synchrotron x-ray 
micro-CT data). Photograph: Lida Xing 
Short, fuzzy, and lacking the stiff central shaft ubiquitous among modern 
birds, the feathers also suggest the dinosaur was unlikely to have taken to the 
skies, said McKellar. “The colouration might have played some sort of role in 
camouflage or visual signalling, but the feathers themselves, because they lack 
the central shaft or the rigidity, they are not particularly useful for things 
like flight,” he said.

But the discovery does more than shed light on the creature’s appearance. 
Published in the journalCurrent Biology 
<http://www.cell.com/current-biology/fulltext/S0960-9822(16)31193-9> by 
researchers from Canada, China and Bristol, it offers fresh insights to the 
mystery of how feathers evolved.

“Modern birds have three tiers of branching to their feathers, they have the 
rachis – or central shaft – and there are barbs that come off of those and then 
there are barbules, or these little fine branches, that come off of the barbs,” 
said McKellar. “One of the big long-standing debates is how we developed those 
three tiers of branching in modern bird feathers.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5b71adc93d31a6304412edc31dae0b7fa1c8bd%2F0_34_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5b71adc93d31a6304412edc31dae0b7fa1c8bd%2F0_34_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Tail feathers examined with dark field lighting, to highlight translucent 
structures of the barbs and barbules, as well as lack of rachis. Photograph: 
RSM/ R.C. McKellar 
Fossilised dinosaur feathers in the form of carbon films have previously been 
discovered in rocks, but they offer only limited clues as to the fine details 
of feather structure. Feathers trapped in amber, on the other hand, are rich in 
information.


With the newly discovered amber bearing feathers with a very short rachis but 
boasting both barbs and barbules, the team say the discovery backs up previous 
evidence suggesting the central shaft evolved after the finer tiers of 
branching.


Roy Wogelius from the University of Manchester, who has also studied dinosaur 
feathers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/03/most-dinosaurs-had-scales-not-feathers-fossil-analysis-concludes>
 but was not involved in the new study, said that the research made a 
fundamental contribution to our understanding of how feathers evolved.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f8628ac8cf057c2bb395056e1dab4b30eb36971%2F0_0_2048_814%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dinosaur%20tail%20trapped%20in%20amber%20offers%20insights%20into%20feather%20evolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f8628ac8cf057c2bb395056e1dab4b30eb36971%2F0_0_2048_814%2F2048.jpg>
 Mapping flow lines within the amber using UV light, to examine preservational 
history. Photograph: RSM/ R.C. McKellar 
 “One of the big questions in palaeontology is the evolution of flight, and 
part of that is the evolution of that very, very very special soft tissue that 
we call feathers,” he said. “Part of the reason why it is under debate is 
because this kind of soft tissue preservation is so rare.”

McKellar agrees that amber offers unique opportunities to capture a glimpse of 
the past. “I think the most exciting aspect is how much amber can add to 
vertebrate palaeontology,” he said. “Even a few small scraps like this, they 
give you a quality of view where the preservation is so good that you can start 
to answer bigger questions even though you are not getting the whole animal, 
necessarily.”
 