
If architecture is frozen music, as Goethe said, then Peter Adjaye 
<https://soundcloud.com/musicforarchitecture> has been busy taking a blowtorch 
to his brother’s buildings. The result, released this week in the form of a 
limited-edition vinyl album, sees 10 of David Adjaye’s projects melted down 
into a liquid cocktail of electronic sounds, plucked strings and deep 
percussive beats, in a series of experimental soundscapes composed by his 
musician brother over the last 15 years. Ranging from ambient scores to more 
jazzy tracks, the results form an intriguing album, as meditative, brooding and 
spine-tingling as some of David’s most evocative spaces.

“I see rhythms and melodies in everything that surrounds us,” says Peter. 
“Music is how we navigate the city. Every space has its own soundtrack.” He is 
sitting in the top-floor cafe of his brother’sIdea Store 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2004/jul/11/art2> library in 
Whitechapel, where, looked at through a musician’s lens, the double-height 
timber columns form something of a syncopated beat against the green-tinted 
windows, themselves echoing the tarpaulin canopies of the market stalls 
outside. A grid of exposed concrete beams runs across the ceiling, forming a 
robust rhythm of its own, punctuated by a big open skylight.
 Peter Adjaye’s Music for Architecture on Soundcloud 
The score Peter composed in response to this beacon of public life is as much 
of a fusion of cultures as the streets outside, where Bangladeshi clothes 
stalls jostle with Pakistani fruit sellers, and kameez-clad worshippers spill 
out of the East London Mosque. Woody eastern flutes meld with the tablas and 
sitars in atrack 
<https://soundcloud.com/musicforarchitecture/patterns-for-dialogues-a-vinylfactory-musicforarchitecture-project-by-peter-adjaye>
 that feels as bright and optimistic as the lime-striped building itself. (And 
could that glitchy electronic sound be a reference to the defunct escalator, 
intended to sweep people up from the street, but closed off since the 
building’s opening?)

Peter, AKA AJ Kwame (“because you can’t call yourself DJ Peter, can you?”), 
began his musical career in the early 90s as part of the breakthroughtrip-hop 
group RPM <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6LjV_pyrfkI&list=RD6LjV_pyrfkI#t=3>, 
fresh from a degree in engineering and a PhD in mathematics – in which he 
investigated that most architectural of subjects, the golden ratio. Signed to 
Mo’ Wax records, the same label that produced DJ Shadow and DJ Krush, RPM were 
pioneers of sampling and turntablism, layering live strings and vocals with 
otherworldly sounds to form a bold new style,described by Mixmag 
<http://www.red-lines.co.uk/reading/triphop.htm> as “hip-hop in a flotation 
tank” and “Dr Dre on magic mushrooms”.

David Adjaye's buildings - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/aug/02/david-adjaye-buildings-in-pictures>
“My career took off before David had even begun,” says Peter, at 46 the 
younger brother by three years. “I was DJing in clubs while he was still 
qualifying as an architect. But now he’s rocketed away, while the music 
industry has collapsed thanks to online streaming. He’s even been asked to 
appear on Desert Island Discs – though, as his musicologist, I’m helping him 
with the selection.”

Speaking on the phone from Rome, where he currently has a residency at the 
American Academy, between time spent in his New York and London offices, David 
recalls their globe-trotting childhood, growing up in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, 
Lebanon and London, the sons of a Ghanaian diplomat. “We were all immersed in 
music from an early age,” he says, describing how their older brother James, 
now a genetic scientist, listened to a lot of jazz fusion, while David liked 
everything from the Police to dubstep. “We were all into maths and sciences, 
and very competitive,” he adds, “but I realised I couldn’t compete with the two 
of them, so I chose architecture as the way out.”

Shooting to prominence in the late 90s with a series of private houses for the 
likes ofChris Ofili 
<http://www.adjaye.com/projects/residential/ofili-house-studio/> and Ewan 
McGregor <http://www.adjaye.com/projects/residential/mcgregor-house/>, David 
has since made a name for himself in the US, adding Kofi Annan and the Obamas 
to his address book. He has built a house for the former in Ghana, and was 
hotly tipped to design Barack Obama’s presidential library – until he was 
pipped to the post last week by New York firmTod Williams Billie Tsien 
<http://www.barackobamafoundation.org/meet-the-architects>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fdirty-house-music-how-david-adjayes-dj-brother-turns-his-buildings-into-beats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F101127a0fc6b447e7429ced6dfcdf10f4971464e%2F0_0_2736_2151%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dirty%20house%20music%3A%20how%20David%20Adjaye's%20DJ%20brother%20turns%20his%20buildings%20into%20beats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fdirty-house-music-how-david-adjayes-dj-brother-turns-his-buildings-into-beats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dirty%20house%20music%3A%20how%20David%20Adjaye%27s%20DJ%20brother%20turns%20his%20buildings%20into%20beats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fdirty-house-music-how-david-adjayes-dj-brother-turns-his-buildings-into-beats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F101127a0fc6b447e7429ced6dfcdf10f4971464e%2F0_0_2736_2151%2F2736.jpg>
 ‘It was an epiphany, hearing someone interpret my work through music’ … 
David’s Asymmetric Chamber pavilion, for which Peter wrote a soundscape 
His first collaboration with his younger brother came before global fame, in 
the early 2000s, when Peter created a soundscape for David’s woodenAsymmetric 
Chamber <http://www.adjaye.com/projects/special-projects/asymmetric-chamber/> 
pavilion at Manchester’s Cube gallery. The score follows the three-part journey 
through the space, which visitors entered up a ramp into a meditative central 
chamber. Rising strings represent the inclined entrance, over a pulsating 
heartbeat of a harp and koto, a Japanese stringed instrument with a woody 
sound, used to evoke the texture of the pavilion’s recycled timber. After being 
immersed in a central zone, to an abstract melody of an African kalimba, 
visitors came back to earth with a cascade of pizzicato violin, piano, synth 
pads and kettle drums.

David's Horizon pavilion was given a soundscape based on silence

“It was a real shock to hear it,” says David. “It wasn’t at all what I was 
expecting, but there was something very compelling about it. The structure of 
the music really heightened the experience of the space. It was a bit of an 
epiphany for me, hearing someone interpret my work not through words, but 
music.” Further commissions followed, including a score to help mask the 
background hum of electronics in his interactive exhibition for Oslo’sNobel 
Peace Centre 
<http://www.adjaye.com/projects/civic-buildings/nobel-peace-centre-exhibition-and-archival-institute/>
 in 2005, and a soundscape for his Horizon pavilion in 2007, for which he asked 
for a track “based on silence”.

Things get a bit more spicy in the music inspired by some of his early private 
houses, which remain his most radical work. For theDirty House 
<http://www.adjaye.com/projects/residential/dirty-house/>, designed for 
provocative artists Tim Noble and Sue Webster in 2002, the score begins with an 
unnerving cello line straight out of a horror film, reflecting the building’s 
rough exterior walls, which are smothered with black anti-graffiti paint, 
before breaking into a more lively, uptempo beat to reflect the bright, airy 
world within. “It’s basically dirty house music,” Peter jokes.

Inside the new Smithsonian: a vivid exploration of African American history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/13/new-smithsonian-museum-african-american-history-tour>
Peter is also helping David design a house for himself, complete with an 
infinity pool, set on a hillside in Ghana overlooking the coast. It will take 
the form of a pyramid, he says, “because pyramids have incredible acoustics, 
focusing sound and channelling energy from the earth”.

In the meantime, looming on the horizon is the imminent opening of the most 
important project of David’s career: theSmithsonian National Museum of African 
American History and Culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/13/new-smithsonian-museum-african-american-history-tour>
 in Washington DC, due to open in September, two days after his 50th birthday. 
“I’ve already started working on a score for it,” says Peter. “It’s a dream 
project. The story contains the entire history of black music, from blues to 
jazz to hip-hop and beyond. In fact, I’m a bit frightened of it.”

His dream would be to perform live in the building, although there is already 
an all-star lineup competing to play at the opening. “The stakes are high – and 
I’m not sure I’m ready to take on the likes of Stevie Wonder and Quincy Jones.”

• Dialogues <http://www.vfeditions.com>, produced by the Vinyl Factory, is 
released on 15 July. The album will also be streamed for a limited time at
musicforarchitecture.com <http://www.musicforarchitecture.com/>
 