
Back in the 1970s, national perception of Tyneside owed much to the TV sitcom 
Whatever Happened to the Likely Lads? Those with a sharp memory – or access to 
YouTube – might recognise the huge arched bridges, redbrick mills and stubby 
distillery chimney of the Ouseburn area from the title sequence.

The industrial buildings remain, as do the fishing boats bobbing in the 
Ouseburn, a tributary of the Tyne that was once tidal, but other things have – 
as James Bolam's Likely Lad, Terry Collier, was constantly remarking – changed 
a lot since then. An area that four decades ago appeared to be suffering the 
symptoms of irreversible post-industrial decay has been reborn. Derelict 
factories and warehouses have been converted into workshops, galleries, bars 
and museums. Yet, despite the landscaping and the cobbled paths, the area 
retains some of the atmosphere of its gritty past, with little of the twee 
blandness that often accompanies heritage projects here.

Just a short distance away from the stag/hen weekend mayhem of the Bigg 
Market, it stands as a reminder that you can have a good time in Newcastle 
without having to wear a pink cowboy hat or a T-shirt with your nickname 
printed on the back.

A centrepiece of the area is the Cluny on Lime Street (0191-230 4474, 
thecluny.com <http://www.thecluny.com/>), an arts complex containing two 
theatres (used mainly for live music, from regular blues nights tothe Chapman 
Family <http://thechapmanfamilyisnotacult.com/> and Ghostpoet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ghostpoet>) and an L-shaped bar that serves 
a good selection of cask-conditioned ales from Tyneside's burgeoning 
microbrewery scene. It's open seven days a week and also serves simple, 
high-quality food; try the merguez hot dogs, the spicy Mexican bean burger with 
lime salsa or one of its popular Sunday roasts. There's a good pub, theShip Inn 
(pubsnewcastle.co.uk <http://www.pubsnewcastle.co.uk/ShipInn.html>), just 
across the way, too.

Next door to the Cluny is 36 Lime Street, aka Ouseburn Warehouse Workshops, a 
cluster of artists' studios with a gallery (36limestreet.co.uk 
<http://36limestreet.co.uk/>).

Along the road is the magnificent Seven Stories (0845 271 0777, 
sevenstories.org.uk <http://www.sevenstories.org.uk/>, open Mon-Sat 10am-5pm, 
Sun and Bank Holidays 10am-4pm, admission £6.50 adult, £5.50 child), the 
national centre for children's books. This enterprise sprawls over seven floors 
of a Victorian mill and is filled with 30,000 books, artworks (including 
original illustrations from Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and The Gruffalo, 
and unique works by Edward Ardizzone) and manuscripts by the likes of Michael 
Rosen, Nina Bawden, Philip Pullman andDavid Almond <http://www.davidalmond.com/>
, who grew up on the other side of the Tyne in Felling. It offers film 
screenings, digital games, author events and a huge array of interactive stuff 
for toddlers, kids and younger teenagers to get involved with.

Also popular with younger children is Ouseburn Farm, just off Lime Street in 
Ouseburn Road (0191-232 3698,bykerbridge.org.uk/farm 
<http://www.bykerbridge.org.uk/farm/>). One of the UK's first city farms, it 
opened in 1976 only to be shut down in 2002 when the soil was found to be 
contaminated with lead from the paint factory that had once stood on the site. 
Cleaned up and refurbished, it opened again in 2009. Nearby isStepney Bank 
Stables (0191-261 5544, stepneybank.co.uk <http://stepneybank.co.uk/>, open 
seven days a week and evenings until 9pm after school), the inner-city 
equestrian centre featured in the popular BBC children's documentary series The 
Stables.

Ouseburn Farm is also the starting point for a visit to the Victoria Tunnel 
(Arch 6, Stepney Bank, 0191-261 6596,ouseburntrust.org.uk 
<http://ouseburntrust.org.uk/index.php?page=victoria-tunnel>). This 
19th-century underground waggonway was used to transport coal the 4km from 
Leazes colliery to the Tyne, taking it 27m beneath the city; it briefly served 
as a mushroom farm and subsequently found use as a vast air raid shelter. It's 
about two metres wide and three high, giving visitors a claustrophobic feel of 
what life was like for earlier, less fortunate, generations.
 