
The exposure of a security flaw in WhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/whatsapp-backdoor-allows-snooping-on-encrypted-messages>
 has disappointed activists, diplomats and others who use it regularly for 
their work, but in a world of increasing surveillance and ever more aggressive 
hacking, many say they were already wary of trusting its promise of total 
privacy.

Keeping plans and communications hidden from hostile authorities or rivals can 
be a constantly shifting game of digital cat and mouse. “[I believe] nothing is 
particularly safe in these messenger systems,” said a western diplomat who 
regularly usesWhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> but 
not for sensitive information, “just for keeping in touch and logistics”.

Facebook, which owns WhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp>
, claims no one can intercept messages on the system, not even the company and 
its staff, ensuring privacy for its billion-plus users. But new research shows 
that in fact the company could read messages, owing to the way WhatsApp has 
implemented its end-to-end encryption protocol.

 “It’s just another threat to the security of activists,” said Zaina Erhaim, a 
Syrian journalist and campaigner, who said she did not herself use the app much 
but knew of other Syrians who did.

Many of Syria’s boldest activists have learned to be wary of any 
communications system promising digital protections, because of the widespread 
use of torture by both the government of Bashar al-Assad and opponents 
including Isis. That can make it impossible for any activist who is seized to 
keep their secrets. “When captured, they are forced to decrypt their files,” 
Erhaim said.

The flaw could be most dangerous to people sharing sensitive information who 
are not particularly tech savvy or had been lulled into a false sense of 
security by WhatsApp’s reputation for secure encryption.

“There could be some fears,” said a medical aid worker, who said the app was 
popular with his colleagues although they did not use it for the most sensitive 
conversations. “I think people use it for privacy and convenience.”

If news of the security flaw pushes dissidents and others away from WhatsApp, 
it will not be the first time that a once-trusted programme has been sidelined. 
A decade ago Skype was the communication method of choice, but confidence in 
its systems was already failing badly before leaks by Edward Snowden revealed 
that the US government was regularlylistening in on calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/11/microsoft-nsa-collaboration-user-data>
.

Other systems that have maintained a reputation for security have become 
victims of their own encryption success, banned by the authorities they were 
being used against. At the end of last year Egyptblocked access to Open Whisper 
Systems’ Signal app 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/read/signal-claims-egypt-is-blocking-access-to-encrypted-messaging-app>
, a rival to WhatsApp that was recommended by Snowden.

It uses the same protocol as WhatsApp but does not suffer from the same 
vulnerability. It was favoured by some dissidents because its settings allow 
for the automatic deletion of new messages.

WhatsApp, by contrast, stores messages by default, making a user potentially 
more vulnerable if they are detained.
 