
Power and money are the two great aphrodisiacs, and few people or institutions 
are immune to their attractions. Not even theEconomist, a posh magazine which 
resolutely sees itself as floating above the vulgar ruckus of journalistic 
hackery. Last week, like an elderly dowager seduced by Justin Bieber, the 
venerable publication checked its collective brains at the door and swooned over
Mark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, the 
infant prodigy who now presides over Facebook, and so possessesboth power and 
money.

For the cover illustration, the magazine photoshopped a picture of a 
celebrated statue 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eboracum#/media/File:Constantine_York_Minster.jpg>
 of Emperor Constantine the Great (272-337). Young Zuckerberg’s head, adorned 
with a wreath of gold laurel leaves,replaced Constantine’s 
<http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21696521-mark-zuckerberg-prepares-fight-dominance-next-era-computing-imperial-ambitions?cid1=cust/ednew/n/bl/n/2016047n/owned/n/n/nwl/n/n/UK/n>
. The sword in his left hand was replaced by a Facebook logo, and the emperor’s 
languidly drooping right hand was rotated 180 degrees so that it now gave the 
thumbs-up that is Facebook’s “like” symbol. (The gesture had a rather different 
interpretation in Roman times.) On the plinth of the statue were the words: 
“MARCVS ZVCKERBERGVS” and CONIVNGE ET IMPERA”, which is the nearest the 
photoshopper could get to “connect and rule”.

On inside pages one finds an editorial and a long article explaining why 
Marcvs Z is the greatest thing since Constantine. He rules over “a great empire 
with a vast population, immense wealth, a charismatic leader, and mind-boggling 
reach and influence”. In the western world, the magazine burbles, “Facebook 
accounts for the largest share of the most popular activity (social networking) 
on the most widely used computing devices (smartphones); its various apps 
account for 30% of mobile internet use by Americans. And it is the sixth most 
valuable public company on Earth, worth some $325bn.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmark-zuckerberg-emperors-new-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a0cdf496a93857acc9217183c327374a9cd4f6a%2F73_136_2148_2683%2F2148.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20you%20see%20Emperor%20Zuckerberg%E2%80%99s%20new%20clothes%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmark-zuckerberg-emperors-new-clothes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20you%20see%20Emperor%20Zuckerberg%E2%80%99s%20new%20clothes%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmark-zuckerberg-emperors-new-clothes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a0cdf496a93857acc9217183c327374a9cd4f6a%2F73_136_2148_2683%2F2148.jpg>
 The Economist’s flattering Zuckerberg cover. 
There’s lots more in the same vein. For a reality check, one heads over to a 
video recording 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/04/12/mark-zuckerberg-at-facebook-f8-latest-news.html>
 of last week’s Facebook conference for programmers who develop stuff for its 
platform. The emperor appears, live on stage but minus robes, to explain the 
new wonders he has in store for his subjects. One of these is a conversational 
machine called a “chatbot”. “We think you should be able just to message a 
business, in the same way you’d message a friend,” he declares. “You’d get a 
quick response, and it shouldn’t take your full attention like a phone call 
would, and you shouldn’t have to install a new app. So today we’re launching 
messenger platform, so you can build bots for messenger. It’s a simple 
platform, powered by artificial intelligence, so you can build natural language 
services to communicate directly with people.” This revolutionary achievement 
was then illustrated by purchasing flowers for one of his satraps. One small 
leap for man; one giant leap for florists.

Other wonders unveiled by Marcvs Imperator included a facility for posting 
live video to one’s timeline. Coincidentally,this is exactly what Periscope does
 <https://www.periscope.tv/>. The new facility was immediately used by BuzzFeed 
to broadcast to 2m Facebook users a video ofhow they blew up a watermelon 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/tasneemnashrulla/we-blew-up-a-watermelon-and-everyone-lost-their-freaking-min#.kyrMlGL4Y>
 using just rubber bands. (I am not making this up.) Then there are scannable 
codes and user names “so people can easily connect and share”. (Just like they 
have on Snapchat, a service not yet currently owned by Facebook.) And so on.

There is, you will have already deduced, a common thread here: what the 
Economist calls “imperial ambitions” – to create an environment that Marcvs’s 
subjects will never have to leave. In that sense, the idea is to eliminate the 
distinction between Facebook and the internet so that people think they are 
synonymous; or – in terms that his predecessor Constantine would have 
understood – to make the empire coterminous with the planet. In venture capital 
speak, it’s building the ultimate “walled garden 
<https://medium.com/@washingtonpost/how-facebook-is-slowly-eating-the-rest-of-the-internet-a545870cf414#.hkcpo6cl3>
”.

Will it work? The Economist seems to think that it will. There are other 
digital imperialists around, though. Amazon, for example, aspires to sell 
everything to everyone. And Google, which has about 95% of the market in search 
and gets 35% of mobile advertising revenue (compared with Facebook’s 19%), also 
aspires to keep users within its orbit. But, unlike Marcvs’s empire, Google 
makes money from users who use the wider web and so has less of an incentive to 
build a walled garden.

The Economist’s imperial metaphor is useful in one respect, though: it reminds 
us that no empire lasts for ever. Even the mighty Roman one disintegrated in 
the end. Constantine ruled as emperor for 31 years. On that timescale, young 
Marcvs has 19 more to go.
 