
“Ignorance is Strength” is the third and most powerful slogan chiseled into 
George Orwell’s Ministry of Truth in 1984. And with good reason. By confusing 
truth and lies, Big Brother controls an entire population.

For so long we thought Big Brother was an all-seeing totalitarian dictator. 
Now we know that Big Brother has evolved into a powerful network of far-right 
digital scammers who manipulate public opinion by faking news and slurring the 
news media.

This is a network that can destabilize Germany’s government and its refugee 
policy by triggering protests after the purported rape of a 13-year-old. It can 
send a gunman into a Washington DC pizzeria hunting for a fictitious child 
pornography ring.

And the far-right opportunists who peddle in fear, and seize power in chaos, 
are only too happy to join in the fun and games. Last week, in a speech 
delightfully called “The Principles of Trumpism,” Newt Gingrich proclaimed that 
news organizations are lying propagandists – and said that Trump supporters are 
entering “a world in which we get to tell the truth”.

It’s a world where the peddlers of lies at Breitbart pretend to fact-check the 
Guardian’s reporting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/breitbart-fake-news-right-trump>
 on the US border.

This so-called fact-checking is the same kind of sliming that works so well 
for Trump himself, who recentlytweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/807588632877998081> that CNN was 
reporting “FAKE NEWS!” about his continued role on The Apprentice.

Trump can use as many capital letters as he likes, but CNN was only reporting 
the facts from his own campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway. If she represents 
fake news, what does that say about the Trump campaign and presidency? All this 
from a man who built his political career by denying the facts about Barack 
Obama’s citizenship.


Some respectable figures on the right seem to think the left has lost its mind 
with all this talk about Russian hacking and fake news. I don’t know. You have 
to wonder who is losing their minds when Sean Spicer, formerly of the 
Republican National Committee and now at the Trump transition,dismisses 
<https://twitter.com/seanspicer/status/807442009778688000> the New York Times’ 
reporting on Russian hacking as “exhibit #1 in the fake news”.

This is sadly no joke. Fake news is a lie designed to control public opinion. 
It’s time for people who care about the truth – who can distinguish the truth 
from lies – to stand up and be counted.


This is the time when democracies desperately need a free and independent news 
media. Yet it’s also a time when digital platforms – the ones that choose not 
to separate real news from its fake opposition – are undermining the economics 
of that free news media.

So join us, and the truth, at the Guardian. Become a member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/us/supporter?INTCMP=DOTCOM_HEADER_BECOMEMEMBER_US>
 ormake a contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/us?INTCMP=co_global_epic_us_eoy_control_control>
 today and support our journalism at a time when the facts are under fire.
 