
A Tunisian military doctor seeking to retrieve his son who had joined Islamic 
State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in Syria was among those killed 
in Tuesday’s suicide attack at Istanbul airport, according to security sources.

 Three suspected Isis suicide bombers opened fire and blew themselves up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/turkey-airport-explosions-ataturak-istanbul>
 in Istanbul’s main airport on Tuesday evening, killing 41 people and wounding 
239, in what is the deadliest of a series of suicide bombings this year in 
Turkey.

The Tunisian defence ministry confirmed that Brigadier General Fathi Bayoudh, 
a military hospital doctor, was among those killed. A senior security source 
and local media said he had been inTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> to try to convince his son to leave 
Isis.

“Bayoudh travelled to Turkey in an effort to meet his son, who joined the 
Islamic State in Syria a few months ago with his girlfriend,” the Tunisian 
security source said.

 The source said the son had now been detained by Turkish troops on the border 
with Syria.

 “Bayoudh’s son travelled with his girlfriend, who studied with him at the 
faculty of medicine, a few months ago, which prompted several attempts by his 
father to persuade him to return,” the source said.

Tunisia ill-prepared to tackle homegrown threat as jihadi tide turns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/03/tunisia-homegrown-jihadi-threat> 
Several local Tunisian newspapers, websites and radio stations also cited 
other security sources saying Bayoudh was in Turkey to meet his son to try to 
persuade him to come home.

 Tunisia has become a model of democratic reform in the Arab world since its 
2011 uprising against autocrat Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. But it is alsoone of 
the largest sources of foreign fighters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/03/tunisia-homegrown-jihadi-threat> 
for Islamist groups in Iraq and Syria.

 Government officials estimate more than 3,500 Tunisians have left to fight 
for Isis and other groups in Syria, Iraq and Libya, some in command positions. 
Many are recruited from impoverished areas in the north African nation, but 
others are professionals and graduates recruited online by jihadists.

 