
Christmas often comes with an increase in domestic violence: whether it is the 
free-flowing alcohol, the financial pressure of buying gifts, the extra time 
off work spent in the company of violent partners, or just the stress of the 
festive season, it can all contribute towards the seasonal rise.

One in four women in the UK experience domestic abuse at some point in their 
lives and every week two women arekilled by partners or former partners 
<http://www.womensaid.org.uk/domestic_violence_topic.asp?section=0001000100220036>
. There are an estimated 15.4m incidents of domestic abuse every year in 
England and Wales (12.9m of which are committed against women).

Domestic abuse can have a devastating impact on sufferers and their children, 
and is an expensive and under-reported problem for society. Spotting the signs 
is extremely difficult and the responsibility for this hidden problem is 
scattered over various services. However, those who are best-placed to 
safeguard those at risk include the frontline staff of social landlords and 
council housing departments who work closely with communities, have access to 
people’s homes – and the trust of residents.

“Housing associations have a vital role in trying to save lives and safeguard 
children,” says Gudrun Burnet, Peabody housing association’s domestic violence 
expert. “When you’re working with people experiencing domestic abuse, the first 
thing [to do] is about finding a safe roof over their head.”

 Gudren Burnet has seen reports of domestic abuse increase 825% in six years 
since her employer, Peabody, created a team to tackle the problem. 
Burnet spent three years working at domestic abuse charity Refuge before 
moving to Peabody, a large provider of social housing in London. The housing 
sector, she notes, has no standard method for dealing with domestic abuse yet 
as community organisations with strong links to residents, it has the potential 
to play a much bigger role in helping to identify abuse.

“Housing is in an ideal place because people are quite intimidated of going to 
the police,” Burnet says. “In some cases, our staff can be more approachable.”

The focus on domestic abuse started six years ago at Peabody, when Burnet was 
hired, and in that time the number of new cases reported has increased by 825%. 
This isn’t a sign of increasing domestic abuse, says Burnet, but reveals the 
increased confidence to report it, and offers a scary reminder of how 
unreported the crime had been previously. Her team have a new case every five 
days among Peabody’s more than 80,000 residents.


Domestic abuse is the most under-reported violent crime, with the average 
victimexperiencing 35 assaults before calling the police 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/get-help-now/what-is-domestic-violence/domestic-violence-the-facts/>
. Many dismiss the first few incidents as one-offs and when the abuse becomes 
consistent, victims might feel too ashamed to tell anyone, or see it as a 
private matter. Many are trapped in abusive relationships out of the fear of 
the consequences of leaving. “You’re most at risk of being killed when you 
leave,” Burnet says.


Earlier this month, police in London carried out dawn raids 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/crime/mass-arrests-by-police-tackling-shocking-level-of-domestic-violence-in-london-8364242.html>
 on people suspected of domestic abuse, making more than 260 arrests. But for 
some sufferers calling the police is the nuclear option and a softer approach 
can be helpful. Many reports come from neighbours, who are wary of telling the 
police their suspicions, but may be more willing to alert housing officers and 
other community groups.


Burnet says spotting signs of domestic violence is a lot more than just 
noticing bruises, which can be difficult. “A lot of it is hidden because 
perpetrators are very smart,” she says. Burnet trains frontline staff such as 
housing officers, lettings staff and surveyors to look out for the other signs: 
broken bathroom door locks, fist-sized holes in the wall, smashed windows.

“What seemingly could be seen as antisocial behaviour, actually when you 
uncover it the root cause can be domestic abuse. You need to think about the 
fact it could be masked as something else.”


If an employee spots the signs of domestic abuse, they report their concerns 
to the organisation’s specialist team, led by Burnet. If the team is contacted 
directly by the sufferer, they would agree a safe way to contact them within 24 
hours, but at other times , when concerns are reported by an employee or a 
neighbour, more creative subterfuge is needed.


A team member could visit homes under the guise of a tenancy audit, an 
administrative task to update records of who lives in a property. Once 
satisfied the suspected perpetrator is not home, they can ask their questions 
and offer help. “Perpetrators are very smart. They could be upstairs or even 
behind the door,” says Burnet. “You’ve really got to think where’s the 
perpetrator?” At other times innocuous-sounding appointments are made at the 
housing office for people they suspect of suffering from domestic abuse. “You 
have to be creative,” she adds.

Burnet is adamant that involving the police is an important part of tackling 
domestic violence, but sympathetic that it is not always the preferred option 
for sufferers, particularly for those who may fear the reprisals.


“Domestic abuse is a criminal offence and it’s important to hold people 
accountable because it sends a message that this isn’t acceptable and we will 
speak up about it, but you can’t force people,” she says. “We can do 
third-party reporting for them if they want us to. It depends on the individual 
and what’s happening. They will often say the reason I didn’t go to the police 
is because they said ‘if you go to the police I’ll kill you’ – and that’s a 
real threat. You’ve got to be sensitive around that.”

In September 2014, Peabody co-founded the Domestic Abuse Housing Alliance 
<http://www.peabody.org.uk/resident-services/safer-communities/domestic-abuse/daha>
 (Daha) to improve the housing sector’s response to domestic violence. With no 
national method for how housing providers handle domestic abuse techniques can 
vary significantly, but Daha’s accreditation process aims to standardise how 
they approach it to ensure each housing association or local authority is well 
trained. So far, 40 other organisations have shown interest in the scheme.


“We have had a lot of interest already which is really humbling and great,” 
Burnet says, “but we’d like for every housing provider to be accredited.”

What could be a sign of domestic abuse?

 * Broken bathroom locks

 * Punch marks in walls

 * Shattered windows

 * Smashed objects

 * Repeated requests for lock changes 
 * Complaints of raised voices and shouting

 * Controlling behaviour

 * Inappropriate clothing (eg long-sleeved clothing in summer)

Read more from our domestic abuse series:

 * Abusive student relationships: ‘he raped me, then broke up with me’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/29/abusive-student-young-people-relationships-raped>

 * Olivia Colman: Tyrannosaur made me face true brutality of domestic abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2014/dec/01/-sp-olivia-colman-tyrannosaur-domestic-violence>

 * Domestic abuse: a timeline of UK legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/ng-interactive/2014/nov/28/domestic-violence-legislation-timeline>
 * Services for victims of domestic violence are for the few 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/dec/05/domestic-violence-abuse-services-austerity> 