
When WhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp>, the messaging 
app, launched in 2009, it struck me as one of the most interesting innovations 
I’d seen in ages – for two reasons. The first was that it seemed beautifully 
designed from the outset: it was clean, minimalist and efficient; and, 
secondly, it had a business model that did not depend on advertising. Instead, 
users got a year free, after which they paid a modest annual subscription.

WhatsApp to give users' phone numbers to Facebook for targeted ads
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/whatsapp-to-give-users-phone-number-facebook-for-targeted-ads>
Better still, the co-founder Jan Koum 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/parmyolson/2014/02/19/exclusive-inside-story-how-jan-koum-built-whatsapp-into-facebooks-new-19-billion-baby/#313ef7864ffb>
, seemed to have a very healthy aversion to the surveillance capitalism 
<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2594754> that underpins the 
vast revenues of Google, Facebook and co, in which they extract users’ personal 
data without paying for it, and then refine and sell it to advertisers. In a
blog post <https://blog.whatsapp.com/245/Why-we-dont-sell-ads?> headed “Why We 
Don’t Sell Ads” written in June 2012, for example, Koum quoted approvingly a 
memorable line uttered by Tyler Durden (played by Brad Pitt) in the movieFight 
Club: “Advertising has us chasing cars and clothes, working jobs we hate so we 
can buy shit we don’t need.”

“When we sat down to start our own thing together three years ago,” Koum 
wrote, “we wanted to make something that wasn’t just another ad clearing house. 
We wanted to spend our time building a service people wanted to use because it 
worked and saved them money and made their lives better in a small way. We knew 
that we could charge people directly if we could do all those things. We knew 
we could do what most people aim to do every day: avoid ads.”

From political coups to family feuds: how WhatsApp became our favourite way to 
chat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/03/from-political-coups-to-family-feuds-how-whatsapp-became-our-favourite-way-to-chat>
And Koum was as good as his word. WhatsApp grew and grew, because it did what 
it said on the tin. Its growth was funded by $58m from Sequoia Capital, the 
only venture capital firm to invest in it. By February 2013, WhatsApp claimed 
200m active users worldwide, and had a valuation of $1.5bn – not huge by 
Silicon Valley standards but pretty good for an outfit that had an honest 
business model.

And then, in February 2014, something strange happened. Facebook offered to 
buy the company <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-26266689> – for $19bn – and 
Koum and co took the bait. Given that Facebook’s business depends on selling 
ads, most of us wondered what had happened to Koum’s admirable principles and 
concluded, gloomily, that everyone has a price.

But for a while WhatsApp continued as before within the Facebook stockade. Not 
only did it not sell ads, but in November 2014 it announced that it was 
introducing end-to-end encryption for all WhatsApp communications – which meant 
that nobody, not evenFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>
, could read (and thereby monetise) its users’ messages. So the puzzle 
continued: why on earth had Mark Zuckerberg paid such a whopping price for a 
service that he couldn’t exploit?

Wondering why that millennial won't take your phone call? Here's why | Daisy 
Buchanan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/26/whatsapp-phone-calls-smartphone-messaging-millennials>
Now we know. On 25 August WhatsApp announced that it was changing its terms 
and conditions and its privacy policy. In ablog post  
<https://blog.whatsapp.com/10000627/Looking-ahead-for-WhatsApp>which is a 
masterpiece of lawyerly euphemism, it tells us that it is going to “share” with 
Facebook its users’ phone numbers and details of the last time they signed on 
to WhatsApp. Every user is asked to click “Agree” to this proposition – 
although, of course, they can always reverse this agreement if they can find 
the relevant section of their settings.

Needless to say, this radical change has nothing to do with the needs of 
WhatsApp’s corporate owners. Perish the thought: it’s to improve things for 
you, the user. It’s all aboutusing “your WhatsApp account information to 
improve your Facebook ads and products experience” 
<https://www.cnet.com/how-to/how-to-stop-whatsapp-from-sharing-your-information-with-facebook/>
. And, just to make sure you understand the magnitude of the decision you are 
about to make, “If you tap ‘Don’t Share’, you won’t be able change this in the 
future”.

Seasoned observers of the computer industry will recognise this for what it 
is: just another illustration of the power of the default setting. In 
marketing-speak, it’s how to “Nudge Your Customers Toward Better Choices 
<https://hbr.org/2008/12/nudge-your-customers-toward-better-choices>” – an 
implementation of the philosophy set out by Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler in 
their bookNudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth and Happiness 
<http://amzn.to/2cpYHe9>.

Of course, it’s true – as Sunstein and Thaler argue – that defaults can 
sometimes be used to ensure that people do things that are good forthem, like 
ensuring that they enrol in a pension scheme. But in the computer industry, 
defaults are often deployed purely in the interests of corporations.

So if you’re a WhatsApp user, don’t fall for this particular wheeze: go to 
“Settings”, select “Account”, “Share my account info” and tap on “Don’t Share”. 
And do it now, because time’s running out.
 