
I could probably find a few political parallels between recent events and the 
themes of White Fang and The Call of the Wild.Jack London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jack-london> goes big on the cruel violence 
of nature. But, if you’re like me, you’ll have heard enough about that kind of 
thing recently, and need a rest.

Reading group: let's tackle three Jack London stories this November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/nov/08/reading-group-jack-london-call-of-the-wild-white-fang-the-iron-heel>
More than that, I don’t want to sully an enjoyable reading experience. Reading 
these Jack London books have helped me escape for a while – and I hope they did 
you too. They provided strong stories, well told, in a distant setting where 
the distractions aren’t political.Dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/dogs> in the Yukon in the 19th 
century had their own challenges to face, andWeltschmerz was probably not among 
them.

Yet I can’t deny that some of the sorrows of the world intruded on my reading. 
I was hit hardest by nostalgia for my own childhood. It was sad to think of how 
many things have changed since, and that I’ve changed with them. Even at the 
best of times, as several commenters on the Reading Group observed, it’s risky 
to pick up books that were once childhood favourites.

Fortunately, my memories weren’t trampled. Far from it. I was able to suspend 
disbelief and get swept up all over again. More than that, I felt again the 
strong emotional pull as London’s dogs overcame hardship, stood up for 
themselves, and found a kind of happiness. I didn’t even mind White Fang’s daft 
ending. I was so invested in the wolf dog by the time he was heroically 
thwarting house invaders that my main thought was: “Good boy!” It was only 
afterwards that I reflected that this finale might have been over-the-top.

The 100 best novels: No 35 – The Call of the Wild by Jack London (1903)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/19/100-best-novels-call-of-the-wild-jack-london>
I also found it harder to accept the stories on their own terms. As a child, I 
was more than happy to accept Jack London as an authority on dogs and wolves 
and their behaviour. Now, I couldn’t help thinking that most of the dogs I’ve 
met aren’t quite like the dignified, serious animals I was reading about. My 
own puppy appears to be far more interested in eating underpants than he is in 
maintaining his canine “pride”. I’m not convinced he spends as much time 
thinking his place in the social and evolutionary order as London’s animals do, 
either.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjack-london-white-fang-the-call-of-the-wild-reading-group%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0658b269620e47393ca7ca4b91e69e05b3cc179%2F0_370_4180_2508%2F4180.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don't%20obsess%20over%20the%20science%20of%20Jack%20London's%20dogs%20%E2%80%93%20enjoy%20them%20as%20characters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjack-london-white-fang-the-call-of-the-wild-reading-group%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%27t%20obsess%20over%20the%20science%20of%20Jack%20London%27s%20dogs%20%E2%80%93%20enjoy%20them%20as%20characters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjack-london-white-fang-the-call-of-the-wild-reading-group%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0658b269620e47393ca7ca4b91e69e05b3cc179%2F0_370_4180_2508%2F4180.jpg>
 Author Jack London. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
Like many dog lovers, I do think my canine friend has some emotional life, an 
ability to figure things out, and a capacity to enjoy himself. I understand why 
London writes about Buck feeling the “ecstasy comes when one is most alive, and 
it comes as a complete forgetfulness that one is alive”. After all, there are 
few things more joyful than a dog leaping into water.

But I found it harder to accept that London’s dogs are philosophical 
creatures, as well as expert sled-pullers and mean fighters. In The Call of the 
Wild we get passages where Buck is deeply reflective:

Best of all, perhaps, he loved to lie near the fire, hind legs crouched under 
him, fore legs stretched out in front, head raised, and eyes blinking dreamily 
at the flames. Sometimes he thought of Judge Miller’s big house in the 
sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley, and of the cement swimming-tank, and Ysabel, the 
Mexican hairless, and Toots, the Japanese pug; but oftener he remembered the 
man in the red sweater, the death of Curly, the great fight with Spitz, and the 
good things he had eaten or would like to eat. He was not homesick.

In White Fang, written three years later, London revisits the idea of doggy 
reminiscences – this time with White Fang remembering the north he has left 
behind from his new home in the warm south. This time the thought processes 
have taken on an interesting nuance:

He missed the snow without being aware of it. ‘An unduly long summer,’ would 
have been his thought had he thought about it; as it was, he merely missed the 
snow in a vague, subconscious way. In the same fashion, especially in the heat 
of summer when he suffered from the sun, he experienced faint longings for the 
Northland. Their only effect upon him, however, was to make him uneasy and 
restless without his knowing what was the matter.

In White Fang, London works hard to show how different his dog is to man (“But 
the cub did not think in man-fashion. He did not look at things with wide 
vision. He was single-purposed, and entertained but one thought or desire at a 
time”). But even so, we are also told that White Fang has “thoughts of his 
own”. He can even plan: “He became cunning; he had idle time in which to devote 
himself to thoughts of trickery.”

While these concerns may only have occurred to me now, they’ve also been 
worrying readers ever since the book first came out. Most famously,London was 
accused of being a “nature-faker” 
<http://www.the-tls.co.uk/articles/public/outdoor-pursuits/> by no less than 
President Roosevelt, who had not only read the novel, but had considerable 
knowledge about contemporary scientific opinion (I know,what a contrast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/12/climate-change-marrakech-no-plan-b--trump-victory>
). Roosevelt’s complaints were summarised by London in a typically entertaining 
essay,The Other Animals 
<http://london.sonoma.edu/Writings/Revolution/animals.html>:

Time and again, and many times, in my narratives, I wrote, speaking of my 
dog-heroes: ‘He did not think these things; he merely did them,’ etc. And I did 
this repeatedly, to the clogging of my narrative and in violation of my 
artistic canons; and I did it in order to hammer into the average human 
understanding that these dog-heroes of mine were not directed by abstract 
reasoning, but by instinct, sensation, and emotion, and by simple reasoning.

There’s plenty in London’s novels that zoologists would now think unlikely. 
James Dickey, who introduces my Penguin edition, takes great delight in 
pointing out how much more cooperative and how much less combative real wolves 
are than London’s. But plenty of London’s ideas about dogs having their own 
emotional systemaren’t so far away from modern science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/16/dog-scientists-guilty-look-canine-psychology>
, and his ideas certainly seem more contemporary than the ones that convinced 
Roosevelt that dogs can’t think at all.

But even if London were completely wrong about dogs and wolves, I’d still want 
to argue on his behalf. The scientific accuracy of the books doesn’t matter, in 
the end. He may not have brought an actual dog to life in the form of Buck, and 
White Fang may not be like any wolves you may find in the wild, but I do 
believe in them as artistic creations. I enjoyed following them around and I 
felt their sorrows and triumphs and zest for life. This week, that was good 
enough for me.
 