
How much more suffering will brave whistleblower Chelsea Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning> have to endure in prison 
at the hands of her tormentors and jailors? Since leaking State and Defense 
Department documents to Wikileaks in 2010, the amount of injustice Chelsea has 
had to suffer is almost incalculable.

The Guardian columnist <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chelsea-e-manning> 
isentering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/09/chelsea-manning-hunger-strike-bullying-wikileaks>
 her fifth day of a hunger strike, in protest for not receiving proper medical 
treatment and over the fact that - almost inconceivably - the Army may punish 
her with “indefinite solitary confinement” for hersuicide attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/11/chelsea-manning-confirms-suicide-attempt-hospitalized>
 last month.

Solitary confinement is 'no touch' torture, and it must be abolished | Chelsea 
E Manning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/may/02/solitary-confinement-is-solitary-confinement-is-torture-6x9-cells-chelsea-manningno-touch-torture-and-it-must-be-abolished>
Tragically, this is just one item in a long list of deplorable treatment. 
Before she was even convicted of leaking to WikiLeaks she was subjected to 
brutal and disgusting treatment by the Army, which the UNsaid amounted to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/12/bradley-manning-cruel-inhuman-treatment-un>
 “cruel and unusual” punishment, and what over 250 law professorssaid amounted 
to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/10/bradley-manning-legal-scholars-letter>
 torture. Of course no one was punished for any of it, besides the State 
Departmentspokesman at the time, who had to resign 
<http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2011/03/13/state-departments-p-j-crowley-stepping-down/>
 after calling the treatment “ridiculous and counterproductive and stupid.”

She was then given a grossly out of proportion 35-year sentence - many times 
larger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/bradley-manning-35-years-prison-wikileaks-sentence>
 than any other leaker in history. She and her legal team are thankfully in the 
middle of appealing the conviction in the military court of appeals, where she 
is challenging the constitutionality of the Espionage Act, the outdated and 
draconian law that was meant for spies working for foreign governments, not 
conscientious Americans looking to inform the public.

On top of all this, Manning has been denied proper medical care for gender 
dysphoria and has to fight in court every step of the way to get the government 
to recognize her rights as a transgender prisoner. In 2015, shewas punished by 
the Army 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/08/19/politics/chelsea-manning-new-convictions/> and 
was restricted in her recreation activities for having non-approved magazines 
and “expired toothpaste”.

She attempted suicide last month due to her deteriorating situation, saying 
<http://tumblr.fightforthefuture.org/post/150179552133/chelsea-manning-begins-hunger-strike-to-protest>
 afterwards, “I need help. I needed help earlier this year. I was driven to 
suicide by the lack of care for my gender dysphoria that I have been desperate 
for. I didn’t get any. I still haven’t gotten any.” Fight for the Futurehas set 
up a petition 
<https://actionnetwork.org/petitions/stand-with-chelsea-manning-on-hunger-strike>
 in which supporters can protest her potential punishment.

The Obama administration just released a report urging US prisons to curb the 
use solitary confinement, and Obama himselfsaid that its use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/28/obama-administration-urges-states-to-curb-use-of-solitary-confinement>
 was an “affront to humanity”. Yet apparently his comments don’t apply to the 
military. (Manning herself has written about why solitary confinementamounts to 
torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/may/02/solitary-confinement-is-solitary-confinement-is-torture-6x9-cells-chelsea-manningno-touch-torture-and-it-must-be-abolished>
.)

Facing my fear: being in public as a woman for the very first time | Chelsea E 
Manning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/chelsea-manning-dont-ask-dont-tell-facing-my-fear-column>
Since being incarcerated she has been barred from speaking on the record to 
members of the media. We wouldn’t even know what her voice sounded like if it
wasn’t for a leaked recording of one of her court statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/12/bradley-manning-tapes-own-words>
. Yet through all this adversity, she has been able to get her message out to 
the public and has created a remarkable side career as an incisive commentator 
and writer on current events.

Manning, it should be noted, has already spent more time 
<https://www.propublica.org/special/sealing-loose-lips-charting-obamas-crackdown-on-national-security-leaks>
 in prison that any other whistleblower or leaker in history. Far from 
deserving punishment for her cry for help, she deserves to be released. She has 
suffered enough.

 * In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255 <>; 
Trans Lifeline runs a phone hotline staffed by trans people for trans people on 
1 877 565 8860. In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email
jo@samaritans.org <mailto:jo@samaritans.org>. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.  