
Trump’s first press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
 since July made plenty of news. Heacknowledged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/donald-trump-not-denying-russia-hacking-report-reince-priebus>
 Russia’s role in the Democratic National Committee hack for the first time, 
elaborately sidestepped traditional conflict-of-interest rules and announced a 
new cabinet nomination. Yet the most shocking moments came not with policy 
pronouncements, but in his handling of the assembled media itself.


His pointed, public attacks on journalists during the press conference were a 
tactic ripped from the playbook of authoritarian regimes around the world. 
Their goal is to discredit the media and undermine journalists’ ability to play 
their crucial role in holding government accountable.

The conference began with Trump press secretary-designate Sean Spicer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/22/sean-spicer-white-house-press-secretary>
deriding as “outrageous and highly irresponsible” Buzzfeed’sdecision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/buzzfeed-was-wrong-to-publish-the-trump-rumours-heres-why>
 to publish an uncorroborateddossier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
 alleging, among other things, Russian interference involving the 
president-elect and top campaign aides.


Spicer also impugned as “pathetic” and “sad” CNN, which declined to publish 
the dossier but ran a more general story indicating that US intelligence 
agencies had conveyed to Trump and to President Barack Obama reports of the 
Russian government holding compromising information about Trump.


Trump's trainwreck press conference ushers in a shambolic presidency | Richard 
Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/trumps-trainwreck-press-conference-ushers-in-a-clueless-presidency>
Trump and his team were well within their rights to vociferously and even 
angrily rebut unverified reports that were highly damaging to the 
president-elect. But they didn’t stop there. Once Trump took the podium, CNN 
reporter Jim Acosta made persistent attempts to ask a question, calling out 
that having been attacked by name, the network ought to have the right to pose 
a query.


Trump spurned Acosta menacingly, saying “not you,” “your organization is 
terrible,” and “you are fake news.” He referred to Buzzfeed as a “failing pile 
of garbage.” Acosta reports that he was then told by Spicer that if he tried 
again to ask a question he would be thrown out of the press conference.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftrump-press-conference-buzzfeed-cnn-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BuzzFeed%20branded%20'garbage'%20by%20Trump%2C%20who%20then%20attacks%20CNN%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftrump-press-conference-buzzfeed-cnn-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BuzzFeed%20branded%20%27garbage%27%20by%20Trump%2C%20who%20then%20attacks%20CNN%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftrump-press-conference-buzzfeed-cnn-video&media=>
BuzzFeed branded ‘garbage’ by Trump, who then attacks CNN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/trump-press-conference-buzzfeed-cnn-video>
This was hardly Trump’s first offensive against a journalist. On the campaign 
trail, Univision anchor Jorge Ramos wasejected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/26/donald-trump-in-iowa-obama-esque-campaign-but-the-same-mouthy-mogul>
 from a Trump news conference. And the candidate’s well-publicized feud with 
then-Fox anchorMegyn Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/03/megyn-kelly-leaving-fox-news-to-join-nbc-news>
 helped launch her into superstardom.


But as Trump morphs from candidate to commander-in-chief, his attacks on the 
press take on a far more dangerous and far-reaching power. The specter of a 
president attacking journalists who ask nettlesome questions or expose 
corruption is nothing new. It happens all over the world in authoritarian 
countries where leaders brook no dissent. Journalists who don’t toe the line 
are derided as incompetent, politically-motivated or seditious.


Rather than conclusively rebutting unwelcome reporting, these leaders 
undermine the source. Aimed to intimidate and silence, these tactics can be 
highly effective, training the press to comply with a set of implicit rules 
that, after a while, no longer need active enforcement.


In the most tyrannical countries, including Iran, Cuba and Russia, only a 
handful of journalists are in jail because most others have simply stopped 
writing stories that could risk their lives and freedom. Turkey’s Tayyip Recep 
Erdoğan is currently the world’s biggest jailer of journalists, whom he has 
branded “agents of subversion,” “foreign spies,” and terrorists.


Trump conflicts of interest 'fix' is no such thing | Joshua Matz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/trump-conflict-of-interest-emoluments-clause>
Vietnam’s prime minister has dismissed revelations of party corruption as 
“despicable stratagems by hostile forces” and pursued a policy of aggressive 
prosecutions of journalists and bloggers. Iranian supreme leader Ali Khamenei 
has described the country’s reform-oriented press as “a base of operations by 
foreign enemies inside our country.”

While American presidents going back to Theodore Roosevelt have mostly made a 
point of wooing the media, the one exception is, unsurprisingly, Richard Nixon. 
When LA Times reporter Stuart Loory wrote about how much the president’s 
vacation home had cost taxpayers, Nixon had his staff bar him from the White 
House. In 1969, Vice President Agnew derided the media writ large as “impudent 
snobs.”


Trump’s return to Nixonian tactics of media send an alarming signal as we 
prepare to inaugurate an administration that has already signalled its contempt 
for ethics scrutiny and conflict of interest norms and disregard for the work 
of our intelligence agencies.


There’s no law that says the president must take questions from the press. 
It’s just a long-held practice. If Trump opts to draw the curtains, offering 
selective peeks only to designated sycophants, he could well establish a new 
normal that might govern for years to come, not just in the White House, but 
also the Congress, the State Houses and the corporate boardrooms.


Thomas Jefferson who once remarked “Were it left to me to decide whether we 
should have a government without newspapers or newspapers without a government, 
I should not hesitate for a moment to prefer the latter.”


Trump might well answer that question differently. It is up to the press and 
to the American public to ensure that this is a choice he never gets to make.
 