
The Apprentice <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/apprentice>, that 
long, free commercial for a president-elect, hinges on one moment of drama.

Amid all the meaningless tasks and even less meaningful job offers, there is 
one key scene: whenDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> himself enters the fake 
boardroom to fake fire some hapless contestant. Or possibly their friend. It 
doesn’t much matter.

A more moderate Donald Trump? His taste in men shows otherwise | Angelina 
Chapin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/donald-trump-moderate-extreme-cabinet-picks>
All that matters is that Trump is a god among men: an all-powerful and 
fearsome boss with the capacity to humiliate the weak and needy.

Never mind that his businesses have failed repeatedly and that his campaign 
was so poorly managed that he worked through multiple campaign managers on his 
way to losing the popular vote.

Never mind that Trump University was such a fraudulent enterprise that he paid 
$25m <http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/us/politics/trump-university.html?_r=0> 
to settle the lawsuits between election day and his inauguration.

What matters most is the character Trump has played, first through the tabloid 
gossip pages and then The Apprentice, all the way through his reality show of a 
presidential campaign: the character of the alpha boss. Because that’s the role 
he continues to play during his so-called presidential transition. He’s the 
all-powerful boss who can humiliate the hapless job hunters.


Other presidents-elect prefer confidentiality and class when it comes to 
high-profile nominations.

There are good reasons for this. First, they have no need to preen themselves 
before the cameras since they are already, you know, the next president of the 
United States. Second, any experienced executive knows that you can’t predict 
how job interviews or job offers will play out. Your first choice for a job 
might want another, and nobody wants to be second choice for a job, even a 
powerful cabinet position inside the executive branch.

With Trump, of course, neither reason applies. Come to think of it, neither 
does the power of reason. He constantly seeks proof of his awesome powers as 
president, even if it means standing next to Kanye West.

Which brings us to the parade of contestants for The Cabinet Apprentice, 
recently starring a series of famous or plain desperate applicants.


Unlike real episodes of the reality show, Cabinet Apprentices did not have to 
prove their acumen byhawking T-shirts 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tVVcC3p4IYQ>. They just had to sell the main 
product – Trump himself – in front of the cameras in the lobby of Trump Tower.

Mitt Romney auditioned for secretary of state by eating his reputation over a 
demonic dinner with Trump and Reince Priebus, before heaping praise on the real 
star of the show. “What I’ve seen through these discussions I’ve had with 
President-elect Trump, as well as what we’ve seen in his speech the night of 
his victory, as well as the people he’s selected as part of his transition, all 
of those things combined give me increasing hope that President-elect Trump is 
the very man who can lead us to that better future,” Romneytold the media 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/30/mitt-romneys-stunning-180-on-donald-trump/?utm_term=.46c9cd175798>
.

But as Trump’s Rasputin – Roger Stone – put it so nicely, the president-elect 
only interviewed Romney 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/12/12/donald-trump-interviewed-mitt-romney-to-torture-him-roger-stone-says.html>
 to “torture him” and “toy with him”.

Instead he picked a nominee who somehow manages to give Donald Trump a run for 
his money when it comes to possible conflicts of interest.

Rex Tillerson owns $218m in Exxon stock and another $70m in his corporate 
pension plan. He is also a fierce opponent of US sanctions against Russia, 
which have blocked Exxon business in places like Siberia. As secretary of 
state, Tillerson has a personal stake – and avery large one 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/world/europe/rex-tillersons-company-exxon-has-billions-at-stake-over-russia-sanctions.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
 at that – in seeing those sanctions lifted.

What better payback for Putin’s successful hacking of the US election than a 
little sanctions lifting?

Perhaps that explains why there was no payback for Trump’s most loyal campaign 
lieutenants. Romney was always an unlikely man to get locked inside the Trump 
cabinet. Rudy Giuliani, on the other hand, performed sterling work defending 
Trump on TV against every last embarrassing stumble, including what Romney 
accurately called the president-elect’s “vile degradations” of women.

And yet Giuliani didn’t make it into the fake boardroom with Tillerson and 
Romney. Much like Chris Christie, his only role was to elevate Trump by 
humiliating himself.

This is the game Trump has been playing for a long time. As he told 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-says-his-past-politics-were-transactional-1438213199>
 the Wall Street Journal, the powerful take their orders from him because they 
are desperate. “As a businessman and a very substantial donor to very important 
people, when you give, they do whatever the hell you want them to do,” Trump 
said.

Trump just bought and sold a bag full of career politicians in this 
president-elect episode of The Apprentice. Then he bought a bigger CEO who 
could make him look like the tycoon he never was.

Ronald Reagan once said 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/11/05/AR2005110501651_pf.html>
 that he didn’t know how anyone could serve as a public official without being 
an actor. In an era of fake news and Russian hacking, we may well wonder how 
anyone could get elected without being a reality TV actor.
 