
President-elect Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
railed against China on Sunday, only hours after his transition team denied 
that his call with Taiwan’s president signaled a new US policy toward Pacific 
power.

“Did China ask us if it was OK to devalue their currency (making it hard for 
our companies to compete), heavily tax our products going into their country 
(the US doesn’t tax them) or to build a massive military complex in the middle 
of the South China Sea?” hetweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/805538149157969924>. “I don’t think 
so!”

'Putting lipstick on a pig': experts on why Obama is lending Donald Trump a 
hand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/barack-obama-donald-trump-phonecalls-transition>
Earlier on Sunday the vice-president-elect, Mike Pence, had tried to downplay 
the possibility that Trump could threaten a diplomatic rift with Beijing 
through his actions last week. Trump’s10-minute phone conversation on Friday 
with Tsai Ing-wen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-taiwan-tsai-ing-wen-phone-call-foreign-policy>
 – thought to be the first time a US president or president-elect has spoken to 
a Taiwanese leader since 1979 – and subsequent reference to Tsai as “president”
threatened such a breach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-taiwan-tsai-ing-wen-phone-call-foreign-policy>
, and implied he might be making up policy on the hoof.

In damage control mode, Pence sought to dismiss the row as “a tempest in a 
teapot”, contrasting it with Barack Obama’s rapprochement with communist Cuba.

“He received a courtesy call from the democratically elected president of 
Taiwan,” Pence toldABC’s This Week. 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/week-transcript-vice-president-elect-mike-pence-gen/story?id=43952176>
 “They reached out to offer congratulations as leaders around the world have 
and he took the call, accepted her congratulations and good wishes and it was 
precisely that.”

Later, in an interview on NBC’s Meet the Press, 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/meet-the-press/meet-press-12-04-16-n691726> Pence again 
used the term “the president of Taiwan”, suggesting it was no slip of the 
tongue.

China views self-ruling Taiwan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> as 
part of its own territory awaiting reunification, and any US move implying 
support for independence – including use of the word “president” – is likely to 
offend Beijing.

Chinese state media said Trump’s “inexperience” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/donald-trump-taiwan-call-exposes-inexperience-china-state-media-say>
 led him to accept the phone call but warned that any breach of the “one China” 
stance would “destroy” relations with America.

Asked by ABC host George Stephanopoulos if he understood China’s objections, 
Pence replied: “Yes, of course.” But he quickly shifted gear to claim that the 
American people find Trump’s “energy” refreshing.

The Indiana governor was asked directly if there were implications for the 
“one China” policy. “We’ll deal with policy after 20 January,” he said, 
referring to the day of Trump’s inauguration.

On NBC, Pence suggested the controversy had been overplayed. “The waters here 
seem like a little bit of a tempest in a teapot,” he said.

“I mean, it’s striking to me that President Obama would reach out to a 
murdering dictator in Cuba and be hailed as a hero. And President-elect Donald 
Trump takes a courtesy call from the democratically elected president of Taiwan 
and it becomes something of a thing in the media.”

Other Trump surrogates sought to neutralise the issue. Speaking on Fox News 
Sunday, senior aide Kellyanne Conway said her boss was “well aware” of 
Washington’s “one China” policy.

“I know China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has a perspective on 
it,” she said. “The White House and state department probably have a 
perspective on it. Certainly Taiwan has a perspective on it.

“The president-elect’s perspective is he accepted a congratulatory call. When 
he’s sworn in as commander-in-chief, he’ll make clear the fullness of his 
plans. But people shouldn’t read too much into it.”

Since his stunning victory over Hillary Clinton on 8 November, Trump has 
accepted congratulatory calls from dozens of world leaders including the prime 
ministers or presidents of Israel, Singapore, Japan and China, Conway said.

Speaking at the Brookings Institution in Washington on Sunday afternoon, 
Secretary of State John Kerry said it would be “valuable” to Trump if he took 
advice from state officials before such calls. Speaking to reporters at Trump 
Tower, however, Conway said the president-elect was “not really a talking 
points kind of guy”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20dismisses%20Trump%20call%20with%20Taiwan%20as%20%E2%80%98small%20trick%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20dismisses%20Trump%20call%20with%20Taiwan%20as%20%E2%80%98small%20trick%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video&media=>
China dismisses Trump call with Taiwan as ‘small trick’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/03/china-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video>
There were also signs of uncertainty over Trump’s choice of secretary of 
state. The transition team has previously said the short listwas down to four 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/04/politics/trump-secretary-of-state-candidates/> – 
understood to be Tennessee senator Bob Corker, former New York mayorRudy 
Giuliani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/rudy-giuliani-new-york-mayor-trump-cabinet>
, former CIA director Gen David Petraeus andMitt Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/mitt-romney-praises-donald-trump-dinner-twitter>
, the former Massachusetts governor who was the 2012 Republican nominee for 
president.

Pence and Priebus defend Trump's claim that millions voted illegally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/pence-and-priebus-defend-trumps-claim-that-millions-voted-illegally>
On Sunday, Conway told reporters “he’s broadened the search” and the “list is 
expanding”, and added: “More than four but who knows how many finalists there 
will be. It’s a big decision and nobody should rush through it.”

Petraeus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-vacant-secretary-state-position-david-petraeus-mitt-romney-senator-bob-corke>
 appeared on ABC in what some observers billed as an audition for the 
cross-examination he could expect from Congress over his conviction for 
mishandling classified material.

Petraeus pleaded guilty last year to a misdemeanour charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/23/david-petraeus-sentenced-sharing-classified-information>
 after sharing intelligence with his biographer, Paula Broadwell, a former army 
officer with whom he had an extramarital affair.

“What I would say to them is what I’ve acknowledged for a number of years,” he 
said. “Five years ago, I made a serious mistake. I acknowledged it. I 
apologised for it. I paid a very heavy price for it and I’ve learned from it.”

Petraeus added that he has given more than 38 years of “in some cases unique 
service to our country in uniform and then at the CIA”.

Reflecting on his hour-long meeting with Trump last week, Petraeus, speaking 
from Germany, said he found the president-elect to be “quite pragmatic” and 
added: “What I enjoyed most, frankly, was the discussion of issues, if you 
will, or campaign rhetoric, and placing that in a strategic context.”

Petraeus’s viability for the job was put to Pence, who insisted that despite 
Trump’s attacks on Hillary Clinton over her own carelessness with classified 
emails while secretary of state, the former military leader was an “American 
hero” and still in contention.

“He paid a price for mishandling classified information,” he said on NBC. “I 
think the president-elect will weigh that against the background of an 
extraordinary career of military service.

“It will be the president-elect’s decision about the totality of Gen 
Petraeus’s experience and background.”

Stephanopoulos also grilled Pence over Trump’s evidence-free claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-scam-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton>
 that “millions of people voted illegally”, denying him victory in the popular 
vote in the presidential election, in which Clinton leads by more than 2.5m 
ballots.

The host made 10 different attempts, through questions or interventions, to 
make Pence admit the claim was groundless.

Stephanopoulos asked: “It’s his right to make false statements?” 

Republican defense community fills Reagan shrine with prayers over Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/reagan-republicans-defense-foreign-policy-trump>
Pence replied: “Well, it’s his right to express his opinion as president-elect 
of the United States. I think one of the things that’s refreshing about our 
president-elect and one of the reasons why I think he made such an incredible 
connection with people all across this country is because he tells you what’s 
on his mind.”

Stephanopoulos shot back: “But why is it refreshing to make false statements?”

Maintaining his cool, Pence said: “Look, I don’t know that that is a false 
statement, George, and neither do you. The simple fact is that ...”

Stephanopoulos interrupted: “I know there’s no evidence for it.”

At the end of the exchange, Pence insisted: “He’s going to say what he 
believes to be true and I know that he’s always going to speak in that way as 
president.”

In another series of tweets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/donald-trump-tax-threat-company-jobs-factories>
 early on Sunday, Trump threatened heavy taxes as retribution for US companies 
that move their business operations overseas and still try to sell their 
product to Americans.

He promised a 35% tax on products sold inside the US by any business that 
fired American workers and built a new factory or plant in another country.
 