
There is no journalism course that prepares students for the advent of a bigot 
in high office. How does one address the president-elect of the United States 
and his associates when they have clearly maderacist, sexist or antisemitic 
statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
? It is a protocol of tact and diplomacy that has not recently been tested in 
the western world. But some in the media have not risen to the challenge, 
choosing instead to treat the office and status with a respect that has been 
voided by its occupants.

Ivanka Trump is a shoo-in for the Iron Throne | Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/ivanka-trump-iron-throne-america-politics>
Ivanka Trump is already the subject of the softest of “first daughter” 
profiles. And, days after the election,Jared Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/17/the-son-in-law-behind-trump-throne-jared-kushners-rise-and-rise>
 – Ivanka’s husband – smiled at us while fixing his tie onthe cover of Forbes 
<http://jewishbusinessnews.com/2016/11/28/jared-kushner-is-the-forbes-cover-man-for-december/>
,with the toast 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/stevenbertoni/2016/11/22/exclusive-interview-how-jared-kushner-won-trump-the-white-house/#28a6dac72f50>
: “This guy got Trump elected – America’s new power broker is now poised to 
scale.” The Daily Telegraph, doing its bit to instil calm and serenity at a 
turbulent time, urged us not to panic about Melania’s style credentials – “so 
far she hasn’t put a foot wrong 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/people/melania-buttons-up-for-the-white-house/>
”.

High-office bigotry also necessitates a jarring cultural adjustment. This sort 
of thing happens to other people, in “undeveloped” nations, where infant 
mortality is high and women can’t wear what they want. Their leaders (though 
often elected) are womanising, nepotistic, corrupt despots living ingauchely 
decorated palaces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/sep/11/assad-presidential-palace-syria-kenzo-tange>
. But is this so different?

Beyond diplomacy and cultural disorientation, though, there are more sinister 
reasons for some of the normalising: a deference to a winning class, an almost 
primal subordination to the victors as dominating facts of nature. Immediately 
a narrative of hagiography arises, framing the rise to power as the journey of 
a committed, principled zealot.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-son-in-law-behind-trump-throne-jared-kushners-rise-and-rise&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20son-in-law%20behind%20the%20throne%3A%20Jared%20Kushner's%20rise%20and%20rise%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-son-in-law-behind-trump-throne-jared-kushners-rise-and-rise>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20son-in-law%20behind%20the%20throne%3A%20Jared%20Kushner%27s%20rise%20and%20rise%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-son-in-law-behind-trump-throne-jared-kushners-rise-and-rise&media=>
The son-in-law behind the throne: Jared Kushner’s rise and rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/17/the-son-in-law-behind-trump-throne-jared-kushners-rise-and-rise>
Trump’s pick for attorney general, Jeff Sessions – a man accused of using the 
N-word 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/jeff-sessions-racism-retaliation-donald-trump-douglas-wicks-thomas-figures>
 and demanding that black people be careful how they address white people – was 
described as being“dogged” by his racist past by the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-38030602>, the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/new-law-chief-dogged-by-racist-past-nfg5lmhw2>
 andCNN 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/11/17/politics/jeff-sessions-racism-allegations/>. 
The feat of contortion required to render Sessions passive in such headlines is 
beyond politeness or fear of litigation.

After some initial horror, Stephen Bannon, the executive chairman of the news 
website Breitbart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/steve-bannon-profile-breitbart-trump-campaign-manager>
 andTrump’s chief strategist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
, is now increasingly being profiled in the mainstream media in almost 
flattering terms. A “maverick”, a “firebrand”, a “colourful” character, an “
establishment-hating Leninist genius behind the throne 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/establishment-hating-leninist-is-genius-behind-throne-t3d8qxnl2>
”: this is beyond normalising – this is fawning.

The term “alt-right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/white-nationalists-alt-right-nazi-language-trump>
” is proving to be a helpfully sanitising nomenclature that has saved many from 
calling things as they are. It is an innocuous, perhaps cool name for a 
movement that is defined by an ideology of ethnic purity, and encompassing 
neo-Nazis, white supremacists and even the Ku Klux Klan. Thankfully the 
Associated Press, for one, is nowreviewing its use 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/use-alt-right-or-white-nationalism-associated-press-231889>
.

There are also other elements embedded in modern media DNA: the celebrity 
profile and a fixation on the new. White nationalists are not an existential 
threat to America: they are a “hot” trend, and you will not believe what they 
have to say! They are dapper and glamorously edgy, presented as if anti-heroes 
treading the corridors inHouse of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/16/donald-trump-house-of-cards-frank-underwood-election-2016>
, flawed but somehow lovable.Alex Jones 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/how-alex-jones-conspiracy-theorist-extraordinaire-got-donald-trumps-ear/2016/11/17/583dc190-ab3e-11e6-8b45-f8e493f06fcd_story.html>
, a conspiracy theorist who called Hillary Clinton “a whore of Babylon drunk on 
the blood of the saints”, and who thinks theSandy Hook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/sandy-hook-victims-families-gun-manufacturer-records>
 massacre was staged, wasprofiled in the style section of the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/how-alex-jones-conspiracy-theorist-extraordinaire-got-donald-trumps-ear/2016/11/17/583dc190-ab3e-11e6-8b45-f8e493f06fcd_story.html>
.

Steve Bannon: the Machiavellian 'bully' who made Breitbart into 'Trump Pravda'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/steve-bannon-profile-breitbart-trump-campaign-manager>
The rapidly unfolding normalisation, nay glamorisation, of white nationalism 
is also, depressingly, a function of the media’s profound establishment bias 
towards and solidarity with an elite that looks like them. It is why, in the 
UK, the News International chief Rebekah Brooks was ontexting terms with the 
then prime minister David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/nov/04/david-cameron-texts-rebekah-brooks>
; and it is why politicians movefrom government to penning highly paid 
newspaper columns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jul/14/will-boris-johnson-go-on-writing-his-daily-telegraph-column>
, and vice versa.

The lack of abhorrence is not professional restraint: it is genuine. Whether 
it is awkwardness, laziness or morbid fascination, these are the privileges of 
the fundamentally unaffected. If there were more women, people of colour and 
gay journalists in senior positions, there would be far less preciousness over 
whether to call someone a racist, sexist or homophobe.

But there would still be some. The pull of money in a struggling industry is 
too strong. CNN’s coverage of the“Trump transition” 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/11/09/politics/donald-trump-transition/index.html> 
is a modern version of a medieval freak show. Step right up and gawk atRichard 
Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/alt-right-supporters-donald-trump-backlash-disavow-reddit-4chan>
, the Trump supporter and head of far-right thinktank the National Policy 
Institute, as he questions whether Jews“are people at all, or instead soulless 
golem 
<http://www.esquire.com/news-politics/news/a50906/are-jews-people-was-a-real/>
”. Marvel at the black Trump surrogate who thinks Hillary Clinton started the 
war in Syria.

In pursuit of ratings – from behind a “freedom of speech” fig leaf – many 
media platforms have detoxified radical and untruthful behaviour that was until 
recently confined to the darker corners of Reddit and Breitbart. Outlets such 
as CNN treated the Trump nomination like a fun slasher flick. At some point one 
has to ask: is this still journalism?

Few are in doubt that swaths of the British and US media are no longer a 
fourth estate, speaking truth to power. But it is at moments like this – and 
there have been many since Trump’s victory – that history reveals itself to us. 
If it were ever a mystery as to how the media come to be co-opted in 
dictatorships and are appointed handmaidens to demagogues, this is how it 
happens. It rarely stars with brute oppression: it starts with hesitation, then 
deference – and culminates in collusion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-stephen-bannon-bigotry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F747ea21f96e5b3c95bd5bab01248222324a21814%2F0_3_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%2C%20Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20how%20bigotry%20became%20a%20cool%20new%20trend%20%7C%20Nesrine%20Malik&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-stephen-bannon-bigotry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%2C%20Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20how%20bigotry%20became%20a%20cool%20new%20trend%20%7C%20Nesrine%20Malik&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdonald-trump-stephen-bannon-bigotry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F747ea21f96e5b3c95bd5bab01248222324a21814%2F0_3_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Richard Spencer, head of the far-right thinktank the National Policy 
Institute, who asked if Jews “are people at all, or instead soulless golem”. 
Photograph: Linda Davidson/AP  