
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has named as 
his ambassador to Israel a pro-settler lawyer who has described some US Jews as 
worse than concentration camp prisoner-guards.

David Friedman, a bankruptcy lawyer who represented the president-elect over 
his failing hotels 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/nyregion/donald-trump-atlantic-city.html> in 
Atlantic City, served Trump’s advisory team on the Middle East. He has set out 
a number of hardline positions on Israeli-Palestinian relations, including 
fervent opposition to the two-state solution and strong support for an 
undivided Jerusalem as Israel’s capital.

He has called President Barack Obama an antisemite 
<http://www.israelnationalnews.com/Articles/Article.aspx/18828> and suggested 
that US Jews who oppose the Israeli occupation of the West Bank are worse than
kapos, Nazi-era prisoners who served as concentration camp guards.

Donald Trump still set on relocating US embassy in Israel, adviser says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/us-embassy-israel-jersusalem-trump>
Liberal Jewish groups in the US denounced the appointment as “reckless” and 
described Friedman – a man with no experience of foreign service – as the 
“least experienced pick” ever for a US ambassador toIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.

Yossi Dagan, a prominent Israeli settler leader and friend of Friedman, 
welcomed the news 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/settler-leader-trumps-ambassador-pick-significant-and-encouraging/>
, describing him as “a true friend and partner of the state of Israel and the 
settlements”. Morton Klein, the president of the Zionist Organization of 
America, said Friedman had “the potential to be the greatest US ambassador to 
Israel ever”.

An indication of how Friedman views Israel came in a 16-point action plan 
<https://medium.com/@jgreenblatt/joint-statement-from-jason-dov-greenblatt-and-david-friedman-co-chairmen-of-the-israel-advisory-edc1ec50b7a8#.r5mgpyi3d>
 he issued with another Trump adviser in November. It included “ensur[ing] that 
Israel receives maximum military, strategic and tactical cooperation from the 
United States” and a declaration of war on the Boycott, Divestment and 
Sanctions (BDS) movement and pro-Palestinian campus activism.


Friedman, 57, has worked with Trump for more than 15 years and advised the 
president-elect on the Middle East during his election campaign. He represented 
Trump after the umbrella company for his three Atlantic City casinos, Trump 
Entertainment Resorts, went into bankruptcy in 2009.

He said he was looking forward to taking up his post in “the US embassy in 
Israel’s eternal capital, Jerusalem”, indicating Trump’s determination to 
overturn years of US policy and move the embassy from Tel Aviv. The change 
would be a potentially explosive gesture in the Middle East, as the status of 
Jerusalem is one of the issues in the long-stalled Israeli-Palestinian 
negotiations.


Also controversial is Friedman’s presidency of the American Friends of Bet El 
Institutions, an organisation that supports a large illegal West Bank 
settlement just outside Ramallah.

His links with Bet El, along with recent revelations that the family charity 
of Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law, gave money to one of the West Bank’s most 
hard-line ideological settlements, suggests the settler movement will have an 
unprecedented number of advocates in the heart of Washington.

Announcing the appointment in a statement, Trump said: “[Friedman] has been a 
long-time friend and trusted adviser to me. His strong relationships in Israel 
will form the foundation of his diplomatic mission and be a tremendous asset to 
our country as we strengthen the ties with our allies and strive for peace in 
the Middle East.”



The announcement appears to have caught Israeli analysts by surprise. The 
Haaretz columnist Chemi Shalev said Friedman made Israel’s rightwing prime 
minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, “seem like a leftwing defeatist”.

“From where Friedman stands,” he said, “most Israelis, never mind most 
American Jews, are more or less traitors.”

Friedman disagrees with the general international consensus that the 
settlements are illegal and he opposes a ban on settlement construction on the 
West Bank and in East Jerusalem.

He wrote in the Jerusalem Post during the US election campaign that Israel 
would feel “no pressure” under aTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>. “America and Israel 
will enjoy unprecedented military and strategic cooperation, and there will be 
no daylight between the two countries,” he said.

In a column for the Israel National News website, he compared the liberal 
Jewish US lobby group J Street to concentration camp prisoner-guards and 
described its supporters as “smug advocates of Israel’s destruction delivered 
from the comfort of their secure American sofas – it’s hard to imagine anyone 
worse”.


He went further at the Saban forum earlier this month, saying J Street’s 
supporters were “not Jewish, and they’re not pro-Israel”.

'Call me': Donald Trump woos tech leaders at New York meeting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/14/donald-trump-google-facebook-amazon-microsoft>
The J Street president, Jeremy Ben Ami, said in a statement on Thursday: “J 
Street is vehemently opposed to the nomination of David Friedman. This 
nomination is reckless, putting America’s reputation in the region and 
credibility around the world at risk.”

The National Jewish Democratic Council tweeted: “Trump must stand for a strong 
US-Israel relationship and take it seriously. [There] hasn’t ever been a less 
experienced pick for US ambassador to Israel.”

Lara Friedman, of Americans for Peace Now, tweeted: “I don’t know about the 
Palestinians, but I know Jews who truly care about Israel’s security, democracy 
& place in the world are outraged.”

Like Trump, Friedman is an admirer of Vladimir Putin, and has portrayed the 
Russian president as fighting Islamic State in Syria despite little of the 
Russian war effort being focused on Isis.

“Vladimir Putin gets it,” Friedman wrote in November last year. “He may be a 
‘thug,’ as he was recently described by Senator [Marco] Rubio, but he knows how 
to identify a national objective, execute a military plan, and ultimately 
prevail.”
 