
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> attacked the 
Arizona senator John McCain on Saturday, for being shot down while a navy pilot 
during the Vietnam war.

Trump, who has been in a war of words with the 2008 Republican nominee, jibed 
of McCain: “He’s not a war hero. He’s a war hero because he was captured? I 
like people who weren’t captured.”

Is Donald Trump the greatest meme generator that God has ever created?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/17/donald-trump-greatest-meme-generator-internet>
His words prompted a strong response from Republican candidates for president 
in 2016 – more immediate and forceful, indeed, than such reactions to Trump’s 
recent comments on Mexico and immigration.


The former Texas governor Rick Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry> said the remarks represented 
“a new low in American politics” and demanded that Trump “immediately withdraw 
from the race for president”.

McCain was held prisoner by North Vietnam for five and a half years, and 
repeatedly tortured. Trump received severalstudent deferments from Vietnam 
while in college 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/donald-trumps-vietnam-draft-records-secret-documents-deferments/story?id=13492639>
. After graduating, he received a medical deferment.

Trump’s remarks came in a question-and-answer session at the Family Leadership 
Summit, a gathering of social conservatives in Ames,Iowa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/iowa>, at which a number of Republican 
presidential candidates were scheduled to appear. Amid continuing controversy 
over his remarks about Mexico and immigration, Trump is running at the top of 
most polls of the 15-strong field.

His jibe at McCain came in the midst of back-and-forth remarks between the 
two, in which McCain claimed the attendees at a recent Trump event in Arizona 
were “crazies”.

Trump responded by calling the Arizona senator “a dummy” because McCain 
graduated last in his class from the Naval Academy.

In a press conference on Saturday, Trump refused to apologize and said he had 
nothing to apologize for. Instead, he insisted that he was criticizing McCain 
for “not doing enough for our veterans”.

He went on to refer to a recent high-profile prisoner of enemy forces, from 
the Afghanistan war, when he insisted: “If a person is captured, they are a 
hero as far I’m concerned. Unless they are [Bowe] Bergdahl.”

Trump defended his words on stage by saying: “I am not supposed to respect the 
people who didn’t get captured?”

A number of Trump’s Republican opponents were quick to criticize his comments. 
Former Texas governor Rick Perry released a statement, which said: “Donald 
Trump should apologize immediately for attacking Senator McCain and all 
veterans who have protected and served our country.

“As a veteran and an American, I respect Senator McCain because he volunteered 
to serve his country. I cannot say the same of Mr Trump. His comments have 
reached a new low in American politics. His attack on veterans makes him unfit 
to be commander-in-chief of the US armed forces, and he should immediately 
withdraw from the race for president.”

Former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-santorum> tweeted that McCain “is an 
American hero, period”; at an event on Saturday, Wisconsin governor Scott 
Walker said McCain was “an American hero” as well. Former Florida governor Jeb 
Bush condemned “slanderous attacks” against McCain, in a tweet.

South Carolina senator Lindsey Graham, a friend of McCain, has been a 
vociferous critic of Trump. OnTwitter, 
<https://twitter.com/LindseyGrahamSC/status/622455743917215744> he said: “If 
there was ever any doubt that Donald Trump should not be our commander in 
chief, this stupid statement should end all doubt.”


The most pointed response came from the Louisiana governor, Bobby Jindal, who 
tweeted <https://twitter.com/BobbyJindal/status/622452707392155648>: “After 
Donald Trump spends six years in a POW camp, he can weigh in on John McCain’s 
service.”


Even the Republican National Committee, which has been noticeably reticent to 
criticize Trump, went after the billionaire. Sean Spicer, the RNC’s top 
strategist, tweeted: “There is no place in our party or our country for 
comments that disparage those who have served honorably.”


Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican candidate, tweeted: “The difference between @
SenJohnMcCain <https://twitter.com/SenJohnMcCain> and @realDonaldTrump 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump>: Trump shot himself down. McCain and 
American veterans are true heroes.”

One Republican presidential candidate, though, went out of his way not to 
condemn Trump’s remarks. Speaking to reporters in Ames, Texas senator Ted Cruz 
said “John McCain is a friend of mine” and praised the Arizona Republican as a 
war hero.

However, Cruz said he refused to engage in “Republican on Republican violence” 
and “the bloodsport of politics”.

A McCain spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for comment. 

Reaction from audience members at the Family Leadership Summit was mixed. One 
attendee, Jim Welscher of Des Moines, had no problems with Trump’s comments. 
“The truth needs to be spoken,” he said.

In contrast, Dave Koenigsberg of Hampton, Iowa said: “It’s troubling that he 
would be derogatory to a United States senator, particularly about being a 
veteran.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-iowa-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b16c3f1802e0dbec796224f12dff5a19fac76f1%2F0_134_3499_2101%2F3499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20attack%20on%20John%20McCain%20war%20record%20is%20'new%20low%20in%20US%20politics'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-iowa-republicans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20attack%20on%20John%20McCain%20war%20record%20is%20%27new%20low%20in%20US%20politics%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-iowa-republicans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b16c3f1802e0dbec796224f12dff5a19fac76f1%2F0_134_3499_2101%2F3499.jpg>
 Donald Trump speaks at a news conference after his appearance on stage. 
Photograph: Jim Young/Reuters 
Donald Trump may have overstated his appeal among Hispanic voters, poll finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/16/univision-poll-donald-trump-hispanic-voters>
Trump did not just attack McCain. The former host of Celebrity Apprentice also 
took a populist note in going after the current system of campaign finance. The 
real-estate mogul defended his long history of political contributions to both 
parties as influence-buying: “I give to everybody and they do whatever I say,” 
he said.

He used this to note his independence from special interests and attacked the 
massive fundraising tallies achieved by Jeb Bush and Hillary Clinton.

“Those people are controlled by whoever gave them their money, and I will tell 
you they are totally controlled,” he said.

The socially conservative gathering also meant Trump was pressed on his 
personal faith. While he talked at length about attending church and his love 
of family, he did say to a somewhat surprised crowd that he had never asked God 
for forgiveness.

It doesn’t seem likely he’ll ask John McCain for forgiveness either.
 