
President-elect Donald Trump scheduled a series of meetings with close allies 
and Washington veterans this week, stoking speculation about his possible 
cabinet picks – just as he did this summer, when he polled crowds  
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/06/11/politics/donald-trump-running-mate/>about his 
running mate and floated improbable names to the press.

Who are Trump's attorney general, national security adviser and CIA chief?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/sessions-flynn-and-pompeo-who-are-the-potential-trump-cabinet-picks->
Trump has weeks to decide nominations to head the US’s powerful federal 
agencies, though presidents-elect have historically made most of their 
nominations in December. So far he has made three nominations, and his aides 
have leaked out a dozen possible names for other cabinet positions.

Attorney general

Senator Jeff Sessions, 69, was named by Trump as nominee to lead the justice 
department, provoking immediate outrage from Democrats and civil rights groups. 
Sessions was rejected for confirmation as a federal judge in 1986, after 
testimony that he said the Ku Klux Klan was “OK until I found out they smoked 
pot 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/17/us/politics/specter-of-race-shadows-jeff-sessions-potential-trump-nominee-for-cabinet.html>
” and called a black attorney “boy” (he denied the latter). A decade later he 
won election to a Senate seat in Alabama, and in the 2016 campaign he became 
one of Trump’s most ardent supporters, especially on immigration.

“If you have nostalgia for the days when blacks kept quiet, gays were in the 
closet, immigrants were invisible and women stayed in the kitchen, Senator 
Jefferson Beauregard Sessions is your man,” Democratic representative Luis 
Gutiérrez said in a statement.

If confirmed, Sessions would succeed Loretta Lynch, the first African American 
woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/23/loretta-lynch-attorney-general-confirmation-equality>
 to serve as attorney general.

CIA director

On Friday, Trump named representative Mike Pompeo, 52, as his choice for 
director of the CIA. Like Sessions, Pompeo was an early supporter of Trump, and 
shares hawkish views with the candidate on surveillance and espionage. An army 
veteran and graduate of Harvard Law and West Point, Pompeo won a seat 
representing Kansas in 2011, and took on a leading role in the investigation 
into Hillary Clinton’s response to the 2012 attack on a US compound in 
Benghazi, Libya. The investigation found no wrongdoing by Clinton, butfaulted 
the Pentagon’s procedures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/house-benghazi-report-clinton-attack-military>
.

Before he joined Congress, Pompeo worked at Sentry International, a vendor of 
oil field equipment, and in 2012 published a Politico op-ed 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2012/02/stop-harassing-the-koch-brothers-072379> 
pleading: “Stop harassing the Koch brothers”, the oil billionaires whose 
company is based in Kansas, and whose employees havegiven $75,000 to Pompeo 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/politicians/summary.php?cid=N00030744>, according 
to the Center for Responsive Politics.

National security adviser

Trump has named retired general Michael Flynn, 57, a confidant who supports 
closer ties with Russia 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/michael-flynn-key-trump-aide-sat-in-on-intel-briefings-while-advising-foreign-clients-004512931.html?soc_src=social-sh&soc_trk=tw>
, a role as one of his top advisers on foreign policy. Flynn had a decorated, 
three-decade career that culminated in a job as head of the Defense 
Intelligence Agency. But in 2014 he wasforced out of that position 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/trump-national-security-adviser-pick-has-medals-baggage-n685681>
, reportedly because of his extremely hawkish views and chaotic management 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/trump-national-security-adviser-pick-has-medals-baggage-n685681>
.

In retirement, Flynn headed a consulting firm with wealthy international 
clients 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-adviser-michael-flynn-plans-to-sever-consulting-firm-ties-if-tapped-for-administration-1479417634>
, met with Vladimir Putin 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/04/donald-trump-2016-russia-today-rt-kremlin-media-vladimir-putin-213833>
 and Kremlin-owned news organization RT,claimed 
<https://twitter.com/GenFlynn/status/703387702998278144?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
that “fear of Muslims is rational” andpropagated fake news 
<https://t.co/ZokxzpR770>. As national security adviser, he would help Trump 
determine the direction of foreign policy and shape of the military.

Rumored nominees: secretary of state

At least seven names have been raised for secretary of state, the United 
States’ chief diplomat and head of the state department.

On Saturday in Bedminster, New Jersey, Trump is due to meet Mitt Romney, the 
Republican nominee in 2012. Romneyaccused Trump of fomenting racism and misogyny
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/11/mitt-romney-donald-trump-trickle-down-racism>
 throughout the 2016 campaign, and repeatedly warned about the dangers of 
Putin’s Russia. A friend of Romney’s told CNN he would probably not join 
Trump’s cabinet.

Sources with diplomatic posts said that disgraced general David Petraeus, the 
former director of the CIA, isbeing considered  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/david-petraeus-secretary-of-state-donald-trump>
for the position of secretary of state. Petraeus’s nomination would prove 
ironic, however, in light of Trump’s repeated accusation that Clinton 
endangered national security with her use of a private email server while 
secretary of state. Petraeuspleaded guilty 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/04/us/petraeus-plea-deal-over-giving-classified-data-to-lover.html>
 in 2015 to giving secrets to his autobiographer, with whom he was having an 
affair. He wassentenced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/23/david-petraeus-sentenced-sharing-classified-information>
 to two years’ probation and a fine of $100,000.

Henry Kissinger, the secretary of state to Richard Nixon, visited Trump Tower 
on Thursday, though the 93-year-olddeclined to endorse  
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/09/02/politics/henry-kissinger-george-shultz-donald-trump-hillary-clinton/>
Trump during the campaign. Trump also met South Carolina governorNikki Haley, 
who in December called his proposed ban on Muslims entering the US “absolutely 
un-American” 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/12/09/politics/nikki-haley-donald-trump-south-carolina/>
, but ultimatelyvoted 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc-news/watch/gov-haley-of-course-i-will-vote-for-trump-729045059917>
 for him 11 months later.

Former UN ambassador John Bolton and former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani, two 
more reported candidates, have already been opposed 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-11-16/trump-s-cabinet-picks-may-not-get-rubber-stamped-in-gop-senate>
 by one Republican senator, Rand Paul. Bolton and Giuliani rank among the most 
hawkish members of the party, and in September the latter said“anything is 
legal” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/rudy-giuliani-donald-trump-anything-legal-war>
 in war. Bolton’s support for the invasion of Iraq, however, and Giuliani’s
history with foreign wealth 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/john-cassidy/has-rudy-giuliani-been-done-in-by-his-own-buck-raking>
 could prove a problem in confirmation hearings.

One member of Congress has been mooted for the position. Senator Bob Corker, 
chairman of the committee on foreign relations and a self-described “realist” – 
less hawkish 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-opinions/why-the-trump-corker-partnership-could-never-work/2016/07/06/1f476dd2-43ba-11e6-bc99-7d269f8719b1_story.html?utm_term=.9baf442e5b71>
 than Giuliani – has said he is “in the mix” for the position. Headded that he 
considered himself unlikely 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-opinions/why-the-trump-corker-partnership-could-never-work/2016/07/06/1f476dd2-43ba-11e6-bc99-7d269f8719b1_story.html?utm_term=.9baf442e5b71>
 to be chosen.

Treasury secretary

Steve Mnuchin, a 17-year veteran of Goldman Sachs and Trump’s campaign adviser 
for finance, visited Trump Tower on Thursday and Friday, as on Thursday did 
Texas congressmanJeb Hensarling, the chairman of the House financial services 
committee. Politico reported earlier this month that Mnuchin isa favorite 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/steven-mnuchin-treasury-donald-trump-230716>
 for secretary of the treasury, despite Trump’s pledge to “drain the swamp” of 
consultants and lobbyists.

Homeland security secretary

Texas congressman Mike McCaul, the chairman of the House homeland security 
committee, toldPolitico 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/donald-trump-administration/2016/11/mccaul-on-dhs-chief-ive-expressed-my-interest-231407>
 that he was interested in taking over the sprawling agency responsible for 
immigration, the border and disaster management. CongressmanJohn Katko, who 
oversees transportation for that committee, is another reported possibility.

More unlikely are Arizona sheriff Joe Arpaio, who lost re-election this month 
andfaces contempt charges in a racial discrimination suit 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/18/us/sheriff-joe-arpaio-arizona.html>, and 
Milwaukee sheriffDavid Clarke, who has repeatedly suggested crackdowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/milwaukee-sheriff-david-clarke-pitchforks-torches-time-twitter>
 on protests.

Environmental Protection Agency

Trump has named Myron Ebell, a lobbyist who leads a group claiming to dispel 
“myths of global warming” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/science/myron-ebell-trump-epa.html>, as head 
of his EPA transition team. He is also reportedly considering venture capitalist
Robert Grady 
<https://www.politicopro.com/energy/story/2016/11/trump-transition-team-eyes-christie-ally-136168>
; lobbyistMike Catanzaro 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/trumps-energy-and-environment-team-leans-heavily-on-industry-lobbyists/2016/09/29/6eb7a2a6-84ec-11e6-ac72-a29979381495_story.html>
, whose company’s clients include oil and natural gas companies; and lobbyist 
Jeffrey Holmstead 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/11/16/lobbyists-in-the-running-for-trump-cabinet-jobs-despite-drain-the-swamp-pledge/>
, who was a deputy EPA administrator for George W Bush.

Defense secretary

Two names raised to lead the Pentagon are Stephen Hadley, a former national 
security adviser to George W Bush, andTom Cotton, a hawkish Arkansas senator 
and veteran who earnednotoriety and derision 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2015/03/13/tom-cotton-picked-apart-by-army-general-over-mutinous-iran-letter/?utm_term=.8dbe1fe9ec87>
 for athreatening letter 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/12/us/politics/senator-behind-iran-letter-is-latest-freshman-republican-to-stir-things-up.html>
 to the leaders of Iran.Jim Talent, a former Missouri lawmaker, has also been 
named by ananonymous source to Defense News 
<http://www.defensenews.com/articles/source-jim-talent-a-front-runner-for-defense-secretary>
 as a possible nominee.

Ruled out

New Jersey governor Chris Christie, a former prosecutor and early Trump 
supporter, is probably out of the running for the attorney general post. He was 
removed from Trump’s transition team,reportedly by Trump’s son-in-law 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/16/us/politics/trump-transition.html> Jared 
Kushner, whose father was prosecuted by Christie 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/03/05/nyregion/democratic-donor-receives-twoyear-prison-sentence.html>
 for tax evasion and witness tampering.

Former House speaker Newt Gingrich, a prominent supporter throughout the 
campaign, hasruled himself out 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/11/17/gingrich-says-he-wont-hold-cabinet-post-under-trump/?postshare=6911479418716230&tid=ss_tw>
 for a cabinet position. Retired neurosurgeonBen Carson has also said he would 
not serve in Trump’s cabinet,citing his lack of government experience 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/politics/trailguide/la-na-trailguide-updates-ben-carson-won-t-be-joining-donald-1479231990-htmlstory.html>
. Carson endorsed Trump after dropping his own bid for president.
 