
Tony Schwartz’s former editor has a nickname for him. “He’s Dr Frankenstein,” 
was how Edward Kosner put it in the New Yorker.

FBI director Comey faces fury for cryptic letter about Clinton email inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/29/fury-fbi-director-cryptic-letter-clinton-emails-response>
In fairness, there have been many Dr Frankensteins behind the rise and rampage 
ofDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. They’ve 
included the Republican party, with its years of divisiveness and racially 
charged rhetoric; the media, with its collective chase of the next shiny 
object; and the baby boomers feeling the cultural and economic ground give way.

But it was Schwartz who sparked this strange political creature into life. As 
theghostwriter of Trump’s bestselling 1987 book The Art of the Deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/19/trump-co-writer-says-candidate-could-end-civilisation-the-art-of-the-deal-tony-schwartz>
, he did more than anyone to create the businessman’s public persona. In it he 
translated Trump’s coarse ramblings into charming straight talk and came up 
with the phrase “truthful hyperbole”, which captures brilliantly an approach to 
business and politics in which everything is the greatest, the most beautiful. 
Schwartz helped give Trump the sweet smell of success – now seemingly 
irresistible to millions of people clinging to the American dream.

“It’s been horrifying,” he says. “In the nearly 30 years after the book was 
published, the main thing I felt was, I want to be as far away from this man as 
I can, but I didn’t feel I created Frankenstein, because he was a real estate 
developer and reality television star. Who cared? It wasn’t that consequential 
to the world.”

But building on the foundation of The Art of the Deal, Trump spent a decade 
hosting the reality TV showThe Apprentice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/mark-burnett-donald-trump-apprentice-tapes>
, reinforcing his image as a preternatural businessman with the power to say 
“You’re fired!” (and blurring the boundaries between reality and reality 
television, just as he would throughout the presidential campaign). Many 
supporters say they trust him to run America like a company; the business of 
America is business. It was no coincidence that helaunched his presidential 
campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-announces-run-president>
 at Trump Tower, a marbled cathedral of capitalism in Manhattan.

He is a man who is a chameleon and doesn’t have any core beliefs beyond his 
own aggrandisement and power

Schwartz, 64, continues: “I simply didn’t think that much about it until he 
decided to run for president and it became clear that this wasn’t going to just 
fade away, that he was actually in a position to win the nomination. That’s 
when I thought, ‘Oh my God, I’ve contributed to creating the public image of 
the man who is sociopathic and people don’t realise it.’”

If he were writing The Art of the Deal today, he’d call it “The Sociopath” 
instead, Schwartztold the New Yorker in July 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/07/25/donald-trumps-ghostwriter-tells-all>
, an interview that broke decades of silence on the matter. “I certainly felt a 
kind of moral imperative to step in and say what I knew about a man I 
considered to be so dangerous, and I am very relieved that I did.”

The Trump he observed was vulgar and vainglorious, a narcissistic liar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/16/donald-trump-narcissist-profile>
 with a short attention span, no appetite for reading books and an “extremely 
mixed” business record. A Trump presidency could, he warns, lead to martial 
law, the end of press freedom and the risk of nuclear war: “Staggeringly 
dangerous. Worse than I imagined when he began to run. Unthinkable. Horrifying. 
He’s way more out of control in the last couple of months than I’ve ever seen 
him. He doesn’t have any core beliefs beyond his own aggrandisement and power.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-tony-schwartz-art-of-the-deal-out-of-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0946058be14987797a4cc0e7f47e40f9bd7ff7e7%2F310_213_2423_1454%2F2423.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump's%20ghostwriter%20on%20being%20the%20'Dr%20Frankenstein'%20who%20made%20a%20monster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-tony-schwartz-art-of-the-deal-out-of-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%27s%20ghostwriter%20on%20being%20the%20%27Dr%20Frankenstein%27%20who%20made%20a%20monster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-tony-schwartz-art-of-the-deal-out-of-control%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0946058be14987797a4cc0e7f47e40f9bd7ff7e7%2F310_213_2423_1454%2F2423.jpg>
 Tony Schwartz, left, with Ivana Trump, photographer Francesco Scavullo, and 
Donald Trump at the book party for The Art of the Deal at Trump Tower, in 
December 1987. Photograph: Sonia Moskowitz/Getty Images 
Schwartz fell into writing the book almost by accident. A liberal journalist 
in Ronald Reagan’s America, he wrote a scathing magazine article on Trump, only 
to receive a note from the entrepreneur, ever greedy for attention, saying he 
liked it. When Schwartz went to interview him for Playboy, Trump said he wanted 
to write an autobiography, even though he was only 38. Schwartz suggested 
instead a book called The Art of the Deal. Trump agreed – and said he should 
write it.

World Series trumps presidential election in two title-starved midwest cities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/29/world-series-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians>
With a high mortgage and a second child on the way, Schwartz needed the money. 
He struck his own deal: a joint byline, half of the $500,000 advance and half 
the royalties. It paid off in financial if not spiritual terms: The Art of the 
Deal sold more than a million copies and spent 13 weeks atop the New York Times 
bestseller list.

Even at the time, Schwartz felt he was selling out, but to say he feels regret 
alone would be too simple. “I’ve spent a long, long time thinking about why I 
did it,” he muses. “It wasn’t the only choice I made that I’m not proud of in 
my life. It’s a complicated question to say whether I would do it differently 
today and here’s why: if I knew everything I know about what would happen to 
Trump, of course I wouldn’t do it.

“But the complexity is that the experience of writing that book was so 
powerful, in a negative way, that it led me to change my life dramatically and 
move from a focus on being successful and earning more money to really 
exploring what a meaningful life looks like.”

Schwartz quit journalism and set up a consulting firm, The Energy Project, 
<https://theenergyproject.com/> which aims to boost employees’ productivity 
with happier, healthier workplaces. “I’ve spent 30 years doing stuff I’m proud 
of, that I’m not sure I would have gotten to if I hadn’t written that book. It 
gave me such a profound experience of the wrongness the direction of my life 
was taking. So it’s complicated, right?

“One does good things and bad things over the course of a life and, if you get 
to the age I am and feel good about the life you’ve lived, it’s hard to say, 
‘Gee, I wish I’d done this differently or that differently.’ Maybe I wouldn’t 
have landed where I did.”

Schwartz delivered an address to the Oxford Union 
<https://www.oxford-union.org/term_events/27> in the UK last Friday with the 
title “Into the belly of the beast: how Donald Trump led me on the path to 
dharma [enlightenment]”. He says: “What are the consequences of the choices you 
make that you rationalise to yourself, but can little imagine potentially huge 
consequences?”

It remains to be seen who else will find a moment of zen after election day on 
8 November. Probably not the Republicans, facing bitter infighting after 
Trump’s hostile takeover. It will also be a time for the media to look at 
itself closely. Last December, the Republican candidate Jeb Bushtold press 
reporters: 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/261438-jeb-trump-playing-the-media-like-a-fiddle>
 “He’s playing you guys like a fiddle … by saying outrageous things and 
garnering attention.”

In February, Les Moonves, chairman of TV network CBS, declared: “It may not be 
good for America, but it’s damn good for CBS.” By March Trump was already 
estimated to have earned$2bn of media attention. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/16/upshot/measuring-donald-trumps-mammoth-advantage-in-free-media.html?_r=0>
 There will be hard questions over the thousands of hours of airtime he has 
been given – and whether his bigotry should have been called out sooner, rather 
than normalised and mainstreamed.

I was a reporter for many years. You’re driven by the story … To write about 
Hillary’s policies just isn’t as sexy

While TV has often been in thrall to Trump, newspapers have shown their mettle 
with a series of investigations and exposures. The New York Times obtained 
records showing the billionaire may not have paid tax for 18 years. Then the 
Washington Postrevealed a 2005 video 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html>
 in which Trump bragged about groping women (something Schwartz says he did not 
witness in 18 months shadowing him). This opened the floodgates for a dozen 
women to come forward with allegations of sexual assault or unwanted advances.

Schwartz reflects: “I think my journey has a parallel in the journey of the 
media over the past six to 12 months. Along comes something that seems pretty 
damn seductive, a guy who attracts huge ratings and you know that people are 
going to read your story if you write about him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ftrump-responds-fbi-investigation-clinton-emails-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20gleefully%20responds%20to%20new%20FBI%20investigation%20into%20Clinton%20emails%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ftrump-responds-fbi-investigation-clinton-emails-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20gleefully%20responds%20to%20new%20FBI%20investigation%20into%20Clinton%20emails%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ftrump-responds-fbi-investigation-clinton-emails-video&media=>
Trump gleefully responds to new FBI probe into Clinton emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/28/trump-responds-fbi-investigation-clinton-emails-video>
“I think the best people in the media have come to see that rationalising hate 
without considering the consequences of giving him that much attention turns 
out to have potentially really damaging, long-term consequences.”

Anthony Weiner takes center stage in presidential race about men's sex lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/29/anthony-weiner-hillary-clinton-fbi-emails>
After this most astounding of all elections, nothing will be quite the same 
again, he believes. “It’s going to change the media because there’s no way not 
to go through a period of self-examination. It’s true for the media, for 
politics, for the culture of this country and for the whole issue of 
polarisation. Assuming it ends without Trump being elected, we have to use this 
as an opportunity to question a lot of assumptions that vast numbers of people 
had accepted and he has proved are not true.”

If Trump does lose the election, as opinion polls strongly suggest, there will 
tremendous relief for Schwartz. “This is an inflection point and if he’s as 
soundly rejected as it looks like he will be, it’ll be quite a contrast, for 
example,to Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/trump-clinton-polls-brexit>. 
It will suggest the forces of progress and evolution hurled away the forces of 
hatred and fear.”

But how would Trump, whose entire personal mythology is based on winning with 
swagger, react to the devastating loss? Schwartz knows it won’t be pretty. “You 
can tell he’s terrified and angry about it and bewildered by it. It’s hard to 
predict exactly how he’s going to respond. It won’t be in a healthy way.

“There’s a chance he’s going to do everything he can to blame this on someone 
other than himself. To insist it’s a rigged election and to try to mobilise the 
angry people who are his base to do something violent and crazy, which he can 
then blame on the next administration. I’m very concerned.”
 