
Donald Trump’s public disparagement of US intelligence agencies would have a 
discouraging effort on the country’s spies and undermine the moral authority of 
their leaders to send them “into harm’s way”, a formerCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> director said on Wednesday

Michael Hayden, who served as director of the NSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa> and then the CIA during the George W 
Bush administration, entered the growing controversy over the president-elect’s 
attitude towards the US intelligence community. Trump has questioned its 
conclusion that Russia had hacked the Democratic National Committee and the 
CIA’s reported finding that Moscow had meddled in the presidential election in 
Trump’s favour.

It also emerged that Trump had only met intelligence officials to receive what 
is normally a daily briefing, four times since the election. “I get it when I 
need it,” he said. An aide said on Wednesday that he would from now on 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/13/politics/donald-trump-presidential-daily-briefings/>
 receive apresidential daily brief 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-38297532> three times a week instead 
of just once.

Intelligence figures fear Trump reprisals over assessment of Russia election 
role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/intelligence-agencies-cia-donald-trump-russia>
Hayden said that missing the daily briefing would be discouraging “but may not 
be catastrophic” if he was well briefed by top aides. However the public 
denigration of the work of the intelligence agencies would be more damaging, 
Hayden said.

“That would be very discouraging, if the information is rejected, if the 
information is never used,” Hayden told the Guardian in an interview. “That 
information is sometimes bought at great price. A director of the CIA sends 
people into harm’s way to get information otherwise unavailable. If it’s not 
used, if it’s rejected or it’s contradicted, under what moral authority then 
would I as a director send these men and women out to do it?”

Hayden, who served as NSA director from 1999 to 2005 and CIA director from 
2006 to 2009, said: “I have been fairly concerned about what the 
president-elect has said. It’s not just the question of Russian hacking and his 
reluctance to accept what appears to be good evidence that the Russians did 
this.

“There is the broader question I’m concerned about,” he added. “Will the 
president accept the intelligence guys to come in and give him points of view 
that are different from his a priori assumptions or beliefs? That’s really 
important, so I’m looking for clues about that.”

He noted that Jimmy Carter had preferred to be briefed by his national 
security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and suggested that once in office, Trump 
might prefer to get his briefings from his vice president, Mike Pence. Asked 
about the potential role of the man Trump has picked to be his national 
security adviser, retired lieutenant general Michael Flynn, Hayden expressed 
reservations.

Michael Flynn will be a disaster as national security adviser | Richard Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/michael-flynn-will-be-a-disaster-as-national-security-adviser>
“Mike is going to have to act a bit differently from how he has during the 
campaign. Mike is tactically brilliant. He has been a very successful general 
officer at the tactical level. This is a strategic job, so it’s going to extend 
him,” Hayden said. “And especially for this president who has said some 
intemperate things on the campaign, I would like the national security adviser 
to be a calming influence and Mike in the campaign was at least as intemperate 
as the president.”

The former CIA and NSA director was speaking after giving an address at a 
conference on terrorism organised by theJamestown Foundation 
<https://jamestown.org/event/tenth-annual-terrorism-conference/> thinktank, at 
which he was also critical Trump’s proposed counter-terrorist strategy, in 
particular the suggestion that the US might find common cause with Russia in 
Syria to fight the Islamic State.

“Im personally very sceptical of any convergence between Russian and US 
interests in this part of the world,” he said, pointing to Russian support for 
the Assad regime, which he argued was generating terrorism by its repression.


“[Trump] literally said: if you fight Isis you’re our friend,” he said. “Well, 
the world is a complicated place. There are other issues out there.”

 