
Donald Trump’s unorthodox US presidential transition continued on Monday when 
he held talks with one of the most prominent supporters of leftwing Democrat
Bernie Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders>.

The president-elect’s first meeting of the day at Trump Tower in New York was 
with Tulsi Gabbard, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/21/why-one-of-the-hills-top-bernie-sanders-democrats-is-meeting-with-donald-trump/?postshare=5781479747560397&tid=ss_tw>
 a Democratic maverick who endorsed the socialist Sanders during his 
unsuccessful primary battle with Hillary Clinton.

Trump cabinet appointments will 'undo decades of progress', rights activists 
say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/trump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn>
Over the past few days Trump has also held talks with Mitt Romney, who once 
branded him a “phony” but is now under consideration for possible secretary of 
state, Ted Cruz, whom he labelled “Lyin’ Ted” during the Republican primary 
campaign, andDemocrat Michelle Rhee, the former schools chief of Washington 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/trumps-team-makes-overtures-to-democrats-as-transition-push-ramps-up-1479343438>
, who is mooted as a possible education secretary.

The celebrity businessman’s aides have characterised him as a deal maker who 
intends to cast the net wide for diverse talents. Barack Obama has called Trump 
“pragmatic”, not an “ideologue”, while former secretary of state Henry 
Kissinger said he would be a unique president because he “has no obligation to 
any particular group”. He is entertaining both loyalists and rivals, although
his three appointments so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/trump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn>
 – Jeff Sessions for attorney general, Mike Pompeo for CIA chief and Michael 
Flynn for national security adviser – have been in the former category.

At first glance Gabbard, who is from Hawaii and is the first Hindu member of 
the US Congress, seems an unlikely counsellor. She resigned from the Democratic 
National Committee to back Vermont senator Sanders andformally nominated 
<https://www.votetulsi.com/node/26351> him for president at the party 
convention in July, crediting him with starting a “movement of love and 
compassion”, although by then Clinton’s victory was certain.

But the Iraq war veteran has also expressed views that might appeal to Trump, 
criticising Obama,condemning interventionist wars in Iraq and Libya 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/02/29/opinions/why-im-endorsing-bernie-sanders-gabbard/>
 and taking a hard line on immigration. In 2014, she called for a rollback of 
the visa waiver programme for Britain and other European countries with what 
she called “Islamic extremist” populations.

In October last year she tweeted: “Al-Qaeda attacked us on 9/11 and must be 
defeated. Obama won’t bomb them in Syria. Putin did.#neverforget911 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/neverforget911?src=hash>.” She was then among 47 
Democrats 
<http://hawaiitribune-herald.com/news/local-news/gabbard-supports-gop-bill-syrian-refugees>
 who joined Republicans to pass a bill mandating a stronger screening process 
for refugees from Iraq and Syria coming to the US.

Media reports have suggested that Trump’s chief strategist Steve Bannon is an 
admirer of Gabbard. Last week, when 169 Democratssigned a letter 
<http://cicilline.house.gov/sites/cicilline.house.gov/files/images/letter.pdf> 
condemning Bannon’s appointment by Trump for encouraging white nationalism, she 
was not among them.

Trump, the former host of The Apprentice, continues to throw out hints and 
teases about his cabinet picks reminiscent of a reality TV show. “We really had 
some great meetings, and you’ll be hearing about them soon,” he said on Sunday.

His other meetings on Monday included talks with Oklahoma governor Mary 
Fallin, former Texas governor and Republican presidential rival Rick Perry, and 
executives and anchors from major TV networks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdonald-trump-transition-meeting-tulsi-gabbard-rick-perry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdc762b3f9174cf7448f7a8cc8325440ff09aff9%2F0_55_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20meets%20with%20prominent%20Sanders%20supporter%20Tulsi%20Gabbard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdonald-trump-transition-meeting-tulsi-gabbard-rick-perry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20meets%20with%20prominent%20Sanders%20supporter%20Tulsi%20Gabbard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdonald-trump-transition-meeting-tulsi-gabbard-rick-perry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdc762b3f9174cf7448f7a8cc8325440ff09aff9%2F0_55_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Former Texas governor Rick Perry exits a meeting with Donald Trump at Trump 
Tower on Monday. Photograph: Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters 
Kellyanne Conway, Trump’s former campaign manager and still a key aide, told 
Fox News that Perry is a possible contender to lead the defense or energy 
departments while Fallin is being considered to head the interior department.

Meanwhile there was no sign of an end to the war of words between Trump and the
hit Broadway show Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-booed-at-hamilton-performance-then-hears-diversity-plea>
. Actor Brandon Victor Dixon, who plays Vice-President Aaron Burr in the 
award-winning musical, directly addressed Vice-President-elect Mike Pence after 
Friday’s performance, expressing fears that his administration would not 
protect America’s diversity.

Trump used Twitter to demand an apology. But Dixon told CBS’s breakfast show 
This Morning <http://cbsn.ws/2fjxY1a> that he was delivering the message on 
behalf of the producers, creators and the cast. “We recognise Hamilton is an 
inherently American story, it’s told by the definition of the American 
community,” he said.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
The Theater must always be a safe and special place.The cast of Hamilton was 
very rude last night to a very good man, Mike Pence. Apologize!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/799974635274194947> November 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/799974635274194947> 
“We are men and women of different colours, creeds and orientations and the 
resonant nature of the show throughout the world demands we make statements 
when there are important issues facing us as a community. We wanted to stand up 
and spread a message of love and unity considering the emotional outpouring 
since the election.

“Conversation is not harassment and I was appreciative that 
Vice-President-elect Pence stood there and listened to what we had to say.”

Dixon said Pence was welcome to come backstage to have conversations with the 
cast about their concerns. He added that the show’s creator Lin-Manuel Miranda, 
who played Hamilton as a member of the original cast, was involved in writing 
the message.

Jeff Sessions: Trump's attorney general pick accused of racial slur in 1981
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-racial-slur>
Asked how he felt about Trump’s demand for an apology, Dixon said: “There is 
nothing to apologise for … We welcomeDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> at Hamilton because I think 
the power of our show and the way we tell it is undeniable.”

Trump tweeted nine times over the weekend. Two tweets were about his 
transition plans; the other messages complained about Hamilton, a skit on 
Saturday Night Live, Democratic senator Harry Reid and his recently settled 
fraud case over Trump University.


The billionaire businessman will spend Thanksgiving at his Mar-a-Lago resort 
in Florida. Jason Miller, a spokesman for the transition team, said Trump would 
get together with family and take a brief break from transition planning, 
“hopefully eating some turkey”.

Vice-President elect Mike Pence is travelling for the holiday to Mississippi, 
where his son, a marine who is training to be a pilot, is stationed.
 