
The Republican nominee, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, has declined to endorse the 
re-election campaign of the House speaker, Paul Ryan, the highest-ranking 
member of his party in Washington, as divisions intensified in the GOP.

“I like Paul, but these are horrible times for our country,” Trump said in an 
interview withthe Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-refuses-to-endorse-paul-ryan-in-gop-primary-im-just-not-quite-there-yet/2016/08/02/1449f028-58e9-11e6-831d-0324760ca856_story.html?platform=hootsuite>
, a publication that is still banned from Trump’s campaign events.

“We need very, very strong leadership. And I’m just not quite there yet. I’m 
not quite there yet.”

His wording was presumably a reference to Ryan’s comments in May, when the 
House speaker was asked if he was backing Trump: “I’m just not ready to do that 
at this point. I’m not there right now.”

Trump also refused to back Senator John McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain>, the party’s 2008 nominee, in 
his bid for re-election in addition to Ryan, the most powerful elected 
Republican in the country.

Both Ryan and McCain are longtime critics of many of Trump’s remarks, but both 
have said they would support the Republican nominee in the general election. 
Ryan, in particular,needed coaxing to eventually support Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/02/paul-ryan-endorses-donald-trump-president>
, citing hisconcerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/26/donald-trump-republican-party-mitch-mcconnell>
 about the candidate’s proposed ban on Muslims entering the US. Eventually Ryan 
not only endorsed Trump butpresided over his nomination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/paul-ryan-republican-convention-mitch-mcconnell>
 at the Republican national convention in Cleveland.

Ryan’s campaign responded through a spokesman, Zack Roday, who said: “Neither 
Speaker Ryan nor anyone on his team has ever asked for Donald Trump’s 
endorsement. And we are confident in a victory next week regardless.”

The pair of senior Republicans have been critical of Trump in recent months 
following a string of increasingly racially and religiously charged statements. 
In June, Ryandescribed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/07/paul-ryan-donald-trump-textbook-racism>
 Trump’s attacks on a federal judge, Gustavo Curiel, as “the textbook 
definition of a racist comment”, and McCainissued a strong rebuke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/01/john-mccain-condemns-trump-khizr-ghazala-khan-comments>
 of Trump’s remarks about the Muslim family of a dead army captain on Monday.

“I cannot emphasize how deeply I disagree with Mr Trump’s statement,” McCain 
said in a statement, referring to Trump’sclaim that the Khans had “no right” to 
criticize him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/30/donald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech>
 and were motivated by opposition to the ban. “I hope Americans understand that 
the remarks do not represent the views of our Republican party, its officers or 
candidates.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fkhizr-humayun-khan-donald-trump-video-democrat-convention&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Father%20of%20Muslim%20American%20soldier%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%2C%20you%20have%20sacrificed%20nothing%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fkhizr-humayun-khan-donald-trump-video-democrat-convention>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Father%20of%20Muslim%20American%20soldier%3A%20%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%2C%20you%20have%20sacrificed%20nothing%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fkhizr-humayun-khan-donald-trump-video-democrat-convention&media=>
Father of Muslim American soldier: ‘Donald Trump, you have sacrificed nothing’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/28/khizr-humayun-khan-donald-trump-video-democrat-convention>
Ryan also criticized Trump for his comments, saying: “Many Muslim Americans 
have served valiantly in our military, and made the ultimate sacrifice.”

“Captain Khan was one such brave example,” he added. “His sacrifice – and that 
of Khizr and Ghazala Khan – should always be honored. Period.”

Even Chris Christie, the New Jersey governor and a Trump ally, broke rank to 
tell reporters that Trump’s remarks on the the Khans were inappropriate, and 
that the family had the right to say “whatever they want” after losing their 
son.

Christie told a press conference: “I didn’t see Mr Khan’s speech at the DNC 
but I’ll just say this: I’m a father and I just cannot imagine the pain of 
losing a child under any circumstances. For Mr and Mrs Khan, the pain of losing 
their son while defending our country is unfathomable, and I think it gives 
them the right to say whatever they want, whether they’re right or wrong.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fchris-christie-donald-trump-khan-family-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Christie%3A%20Trump%20criticism%20of%20Khan%20family%20%E2%80%98inappropriate%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fchris-christie-donald-trump-khan-family-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Christie%3A%20Trump%20criticism%20of%20Khan%20family%20%E2%80%98inappropriate%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fchris-christie-donald-trump-khan-family-video&media=>
Chris Christie: Trump criticism of Khan family ‘inappropriate’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/02/chris-christie-donald-trump-khan-family-video>
Two weeks after a party convention that attempted to focus on party unity, new 
rifts are appearing betweenRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> and their candidate.

On Tuesday, the retiring New York representative Richard Hanna became the 
first Republican member of Congress to say he would vote for Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/02/republican-congressman-richard-hanna-endorses-hillary-clinton>
 in November, saying of Trump: “He is unfit to serve our party and cannot lead 
this country.”

Later the same day, the Hewlett-Packard executive Meg Whitman, a prominent 
Republican fundraiser, also threw her support behind Clinton. “Donald Trump’s 
demagoguery has undermined the fabric of our national character,” she said.

They join dozens of high-profile GOP leaders who have previously said they 
would not vote for Trump, including the party’s 2012 nominee, Mitt Romney, and 
the former Florida governor Jeb Bush. With the Khan row ongoingthe New York 
Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/03/us/politics/donald-trump-gop.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news&_r=1>
 that mass defections by Republican politicians were now a possibility.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fobama-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20unleashes%20blistering%20attack%20on%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fobama-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20unleashes%20blistering%20attack%20on%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fobama-donald-trump-video&media=>
Obama unleashes blistering attack on Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/02/obama-donald-trump-video>
In his harshest comments about Trump yet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/02/barack-obama-donald-trump-president-republican-party>
, Barack Obama on Tuesday described him as “unfit” and “woefully unprepared” to 
be president, urging Republican party leaders to take the unprecedented step of 
denouncing their nominee.

Away from the frontline of politics, veterans and the families of soldiers 
killed in war continue to call on Trump to apologize for his treatment of the 
Khan family.

Dakota Meyer, one of a handful of living Medal of Honor recipients and the 
former Alaska governor Sarah Palin’s son-in-law, wrote Tuesday on Twitter:
Dakota Meyer (@Dakota_Meyer) 
If @realDonaldTrump <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump> wants to be the 
Commander in Chief, he needs to act like one. And that cant start until he 
apologizes to the Khans.
 <https://twitter.com/Dakota_Meyer/status/760592745178083328> August 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Dakota_Meyer/status/760592745178083328> 
Trump’s refusal to support McCain and Ryan comes exactly one week before Ryan 
faces a primary challenge from the businessman Paul Nehlen, a candidate who has 
sought to emulate Trump’s rhetoric and policies. Nehlen has branded Ryan “a 
soulless globalist” and attacked him as the candidate of open borders.

On Tuesday, Trump praised Nehlen for running “a very good campaign”.

McCain is also facing a primary challenge at the end of August from Kelli 
Ward, a former Arizona state senator who has accused the 2008 Republican 
nominee of being “directly responsible for Isis”. If the five-term senator 
manages to fend off the primary challenge, he still faces a competitive general 
election against the Democratic representative Ann Kirkpatrick, in what McCain 
has described as “the race of my life”.

Although Arizona was once solidly Republican, the heavily Latino state is now 
considered an electoral toss-up because of Trump’s unpredictable effect on 
candidates whose names follow his own on the ballot. For over a year, McCain 
has also called on Trump to apologizefor saying he prefers “people who weren’t 
captured” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/19/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-prisoner-of-war>
 to prisoners of war, like the senator was himself in Vietnam. Trump has not 
apologized.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-insists-campaign-united-despite-reports-republican-party-split-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20insists%20campaign%20is%20united%20despite%20reports%20of%20Republican%20party%20split%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-insists-campaign-united-despite-reports-republican-party-split-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20insists%20campaign%20is%20united%20despite%20reports%20of%20Republican%20party%20split%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-insists-campaign-united-despite-reports-republican-party-split-video&media=>
Donald Trump insists campaign is united despite reports of Republican party 
split 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/03/donald-trump-insists-campaign-united-despite-reports-republican-party-split-video> 