
President-elect Donald Trump’s disavowal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-steve-bannon-alt-right-white-nationalist-disavow>
 of Richard Spencer and his far-right thinktank the National Policy Institute, 
a day after video of Spencer’s supporters giving the Nazi saluteat an event in 
Washington DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/alt-right-conference-richard-spencer-white-nationalists>
 surfaced, has dismayed some of his supporters on the “alt-right”.

Trump disavows the white nationalist 'alt-right' but defends Steve Bannon hire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-steve-bannon-alt-right-white-nationalist-disavow>
“This constant virtue signaling needs to finally end, otherwise our 
civilization will simply collapse,” a commenter wrote underneath the article of 
Trump’s disavowal on rightwing news siteBreitbart 
<http://www.breitbart.com/2016-presidential-race/2016/11/22/donald-trump-disavow-alt-right-groups/>
.

People in the myriad “alt-right” communities that have flourished online in 
recent years are also expressing their displeasure that Trump appears to have 
abandoned the most extreme of his policies – at least for now – such as 
building a wall andprosecuting Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-investigation-jail-dropped>
.

They also objected to his visiting of the New York Times for an on-the-record 
meeting on Tuesday, at which Trump described the news organization as a “world 
jewel”.

On /pol/, the political discussion board of the anonymous message-board 4chan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/4chan>, one poster wrote: “Already 
reneging on his word before he even takes office?! People will remember that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&media=>
Stephen Bannon and the alt-right in the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/stephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
A post 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/altright/comments/5ec97l/donald_trump_at_the_nyt_disavows_the_altright/>
 on Reddit’s r/altright board, one of the movement’s home bases, linked to 
Trump’s disavowal at the New York Times meeting and asked: “Anyone here feeling 
bamboozled by the Donald?” Dozens of commenters responded.

“You are fooled if you think Trump was going to give us some sort of 
permission slip to start cleansing America. He isn’t our ‘man on a white 
horse’,” one said.

Another wrote: “Trump can’t be non-negative on the alt-right. We support him 
because he agrees with us on important policy goals, not because he flatters 
us.”

Over on 4chan’s /pol/, fierce discussion was raging on the issue of how to 
deal with Richard Spencer and his neo-Nazi event. Many thought that Trump was 
right to disavow him.

Hitler salutes and white supremacism: a weekend with the 'alt-right'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/alt-right-conference-richard-spencer-white-nationalists>
Another wrote: “The leaders of the Alt-Right no longer look like attractive, 
young, rebellious counter-culture intellectuals, but now they look like fat, 
dumb racists.”

Opinion on the board was split, with many saying that the entire debacle was a 
“false flag” operation cooked up to discredit their movement, and others – a 
small minority – calling for the board to rally in support of Spencer.

On Reddit’s r/The_Donald board, one of the most popular pro-Trump corners of 
the internet, supporters urged patience in the face of signs discouraging to 
the “alt-right”, like the rumors that Mitt Romney was the frontrunner for 
secretary of state.

One post 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/The_Donald/comments/5edx47/remember_romney_is_not_confirmed_dont_listen_to/>
 urged people to “stay fucking calm” until the appointment of Romney – who is a 
reviled figure amongst the “alt-right” – was reported by Breitbart.
 