
Donald Trump appears to have softened his stance on a range of sweeping 
campaign pledges, saying in his first interview since his election as US 
president that he might not repeal Obamacare and that prosecutingHillary Clinton
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> over confidential emails 
was not a priority.

The president-elect, who had said he would “immediately repeal and replace” 
Obamacare after taking office, told the Wall Street Journal he might instead 
seek to reform the policy, keeping the ban on insurers denying coverage for 
pre-existing conditions.


He said he would also look to retain the provision that allowed young adults 
to be insured on their parents’ policies, adding that he had been convinced of 
the virtues of the two points in his meeting with Barack Obama on Thursday.


Trump and his family also filmed an interview with CBS’s 60 Minutes to be 
broadcast on Sunday. The president-elect said he would amend, or repeal and 
replace Obamacare without any gaps in healthcare provision. “It will be just 
fine. It’s what I do. I do a good job and I know how to do this stuff,” he told 
Lesley Stahl.

Having called Clinton a “nasty woman” and “crooked” during the campaign, Trump 
struck a conciliatory tone towards his former opponent in both interviews. The 
Wall Street Journal asked about campaign promises to appoint a special 
prosecutor to pursue criminal charges against his Democratic rival over her use 
of a private email server to conduct official business as secretary of state.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
“It’s not something I’ve given a lot of thought, because I want to solve 
healthcare, jobs, border control, tax reform,” Trump said. The statement may 
anger the president-elect’s core supporters, many of whom chanted “lock her up, 
lock her up,” at campaign rallies.

He told 60 Minutes the call in which Clinton conceded the election was 
“lovely”, adding: “It was a tough call for her, I can imagine ... She couldn’t 
have been nicer. She just said ‘congratulations Donald, well done’.”

“She’s very strong and very smart,” he said, adding that Bill Clinton had also 
called. “He couldn’t have been more gracious. He said it was an amazing run. 
One of the most amazing he had ever seen,” Trump said of the former president.

The Republican party’s shock victory has led to protests in some cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/anti-trump-protests-weekend-new-york-trump-tower>
 and on university campuses, and there have been allegations of racist and 
Islamophobic attacks. Trump told the Wall Street Journal he wanted to soothe 
the febrile public mood. “I want a country that loves each other,” he said . 
The best way to do this was by creating jobs.”

Asked whether the tone of his campaign had gone too far, he said: “No. I won.”

The vice president-elect, Mike Pence, will play a key role in his 
administration, serving as a liaison with Congress, Trump said. On Friday Trump
put Pence in charge of his transition team 
<https://www.greatagain.gov/news/president-elect-donald-j-trump-announces-new-implementation-phase-presidential-transition-team.html>
, while his daughter, Ivanka, her husband, Jared Kushner, and his sons Eric and 
Donald Jr joined the executive committee. ThePayPal co-founder Peter Thiel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/11/peter-thiel-joins-donald-trump-transition-team>
 and Stephen Bannon, the former chairman of Breitbart News who directed Trump’s 
campaign, are also on the committee.

On foreign policy, Trump described resolving the Israel-Palestine conflict as 
“the ultimate deal … As a dealmaker, I’d like to do … the deal that can’t be 
made. And do it for humanity’s sake,” he said.


On Syria, he said his focus would be on fighting Islamic State rather than 
getting rid of the country’s president, Bashar al-Assad. “Russia is now totally 
aligned with Syria, and now you have Iran, which is becoming powerful, because 
of us, is aligned with Syria … Now we’re backing rebels against Syria, and we 
have no idea who these people are,” he said.

He said had received a “beautiful” letter from the Russian president, Vladimir 
Putin, and would speak to him soon.

Protesters across the US have been preparing for a weekend of demonstrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/anti-trump-protests-weekend-new-york-trump-tower>
 in response to Trump’s election, as other activists began work on plans to 
disrupt his inauguration in Washington early next year.


Rowdy protests against Trump and a campaign that was widely criticised as 
divisive have spread to cities all over the country following his victory on 
Tuesday, leading to dozens of arrests and a complaint from Trump on Twitter 
about “professional protesters” in one of his first public remarks as 
president-elect.

Early on Saturday morning a man was shot at a protest in Portland, Oregon 
<https://twitter.com/PortlandPolice/status/797362459321303040>, where police 
also reported that “burning projectiles” had been thrown at officers. Portland 
policeannounced 25 arrests 
<https://twitter.com/PortlandPolice/status/797166934454366209> and described 
the situation as a riot.

More than 10,000 people have signed up to attend a march at midday on Saturday 
from New York’s Union Square to Trump Tower, the future president’s home and 
corporate headquarters. “Join us in the streets! Stop Trump and his bigoted 
agenda,” the organisers of the said in a Facebook post.

The Loyal White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan said on their website they would 
be holding a “victory parade” in North Carolina next month. There have been 
reports of racist and other discriminatory attacks following the election. The 
Southern Poverty Law Center has loggedmore than 200 such incidents 
<https://www.splcenter.org/hatewatch/2016/11/11/over-200-incidents-hateful-harassment-and-intimidation-election-day>
 since Wednesday. Richard Cohen, the organisation’s president,told the New York 
Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/us/reports-of-bias-based-attacks-tick-upward-after-election.html>
: “I don’t think there’s any question that there’s been an increase.”

In Europe, politicians expressed deep misgivings about the Republican’s 
victory andattacked Theresa May’s hopes that the result would lead to a good 
trade deal for Britain as delusional 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/eu-warns-may-over-trump-m29hkqxfr>. 

Axel Schafer, a senior German politician, told the Times: “Even before Tuesday 
the chances were rather low, now the hope for this kind of deal seems 
delusional ... With a more inward-looking Trump administration, it is in United 
Kingdom’s own interest to seek close cooperation with their EU partners in this 
field.”

Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European commission, said Trump 
needed to learn “what Europe is and how it works.”

“I think we will waste two years before Mr Trump tours the world he does not 
know,” he said.


Boris Johnson, the UK foreign secretary, described the EU’s reaction as 
“whinge-o-rama”.

He said on Saturday he would not be attending an emergency European foreign 
ministers’ meeting to discuss the election result.

A Foreign Office spokesman told the Press Association: “There is a regular 
foreign affairs council meeting on Monday where a range of issues can be 
discussed in the normal way.

“We do not see the need for an additional meeting on Sunday because the US 
election timetable is long established. An act of democracy has taken place, 
there is a transition period and we will work with the current and future 
administrations to ensure the best outcomes for Britain.”

The former MI6 chief Sir John Sawers struck a cautionary tone in an interview 
with the BBC’s World At One. “We’re getting back into a world which is quite 
dangerous,” he said, raising the prospect of the US going to war with Russia or 
China.
 