
At the end of a devastating week for Republican election hopes, many Democrats 
felt that all that was left to do was refer toMichelle Obama’s emotional 
evisceration of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/michelle-obama-donald-trump-misconduct-frightening>
 and shrug: “What she said.”


“The speech that she gave, I think put into words what so many people are 
feeling,” Hillary Clinton told Ellen DeGeneres, afterurging a landslide victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/clinton-california-calls-landslide-victory-trump-bigotry-bullying>
 on 8 November as a “rebuke of all the bigotry and bullying”.

“If you want to hear the best case for Hillary Clinton, if you want to hear 
the very real stakes in this election, I would advise you to link up to 
Michelle’s speech from earlier today in New Hampshire,” added her husband 
Barack in Ohio before focusing on the state’s Senate race instead.

Not long ago, it would have looked like complacency. But in the seven days 
since a video emerged of Trump bragging about sexually assaulting women, even 
manyRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> concede the 
US election race has changed out of all recognition.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-sexual-allegations-hillary-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20denies%20'vicious'%20sexual%20misconduct%20allegations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-sexual-allegations-hillary-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20denies%20%27vicious%27%20sexual%20misconduct%20allegations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-sexual-allegations-hillary-clinton-video&media=>
Trump denies ‘vicious’ sexual misconduct allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/13/donald-trump-sexual-allegations-hillary-clinton-video>
The week before that, Trump had been neck-and-neck in national opinion polls. 
On the morning of the first presidential debate in Long Island on 26 September, 
respected statistician Nate Silver put the Republican party’s chances of 
winning the White House at more than 45%.

But two divisive debate performances and a dozen sexual harassment allegations 
later, thisweighted extrapolation 
<http://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016-election-forecast/?ex_cid=rrpromo> of 
polling saw his predicted chances sink as low as 13%.

A lifetime of misogyny catches up with Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/donald-trump-women-misogyny-lifetime>
A popular rolling average 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/general_election_trump_vs_clinton-5491.html>
 of raw survey numbers now shows Clinton with a comfortable seven-point lead, 
while a poll carried out during the weekend of the tape byNBC News and the Wall 
Street Journal 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/327216789/Public-161027-NBCWSJ-October-N900-Poll-10-11-RELEASE>
 had her up by double digits – the highest since springtime.

Trump continues to boast in his speeches of the occasional outlier which shows 
a tighter race 
<http://www.rasmussenreports.com/public_content/politics/elections/election_2016/white_house_watch_oct14>
. The clearest indication of what his campaign thinks in private came this 
week, whenaides confirmed reports 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/washwire/2016/10/13/trump-campaign-withdraws-from-virginia/>
 they were pulling staff and advertising out of Virginia to preserve resources 
for battleground states where the campaign still thinks there is a chance of 
turning things around in the 24 days left.

With diverse swing states like Virginia and Colorado now firmly off any 
realistic target list, Trump’s sole remaining path to victory relies on winning 
Ohio, Florida, Pennsylvania and North Carolina, states where he is currently an
average of two points, three points, eight points and three points behind, 
respectively 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/2016_elections_electoral_college_map.html>
.

Instead, Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> are now 
increasingly focused on attacking Republican strongholds rather than defending 
Rust Belt swing states that once looked vulnerable to Trump’s populist surge.

Clinton’s running mate, Tim Kaine, has spoken of his growing confidence about 
winning Arizona and Georgia. Other “expansion states 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/10/12/clinton-campaign-eyes-expansion-states-of-utah-arizona-and-georgia/>
” that the Democrats have their eyes on in the hope of the landslide include 
Utah, where an unknown independent candidate Evan McMullin is destroying 
Trump’s natural lead among religious conservatives. Even Trump’s lead in Texas 
is now down within the margin of error in some polls.

Republicans still hope there is time to push back. One of Trump’s few 
remaining loyal supporters in the party, running mate Mike Pence, has promised 
his boss will respond swiftly and specifically to the deluge of recent sexual 
abuse allegations. Others, such as a former candidate Ben Carson, say “it 
doesn’t matter” whether Trump accusers are “lying or not” because bigger issues 
are at stake for America. What matters is that “the train is going off the 
cliff”, Trump’s erstwhile opponent told CNN on Friday.

But the reason that many other party leaders, such as the House speaker, Paul 
Ryan, havedeserted their candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/paul-ryan-ends-support-trump-campaign-endorsement-republicans>
 in recent days is that the real battle has now shifted from the White House to 
Congress.

Despite a naturally favourable set of Senate races up for Democrats this 
cycle, Republicans had hoped there was a chance of holding on to control of the 
upper chamber thanks to strong candidates such as Marco Rubio in Florida and 
John McCain in Arizona. But the Trump effect now seems to be hurting them 
whether they distance themselves from the nominee or not. Thelatest Florida poll
 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/polls-clinton-ahead-florida-pennsylvania-n662076>
 shows Rubio clinging to just a two-point lead, while McCain has finally 
unendorsed Trump.

For Democrats, the dithering of uncertain Republicans is irresistible. “I 
understand that Ted [Strickland]’s opponent has finally withdrawn his support 
fromDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, after 
looking at the polling, now that it’s politically expedient,” Obama said of his 
party’s rival in Ohio. “But he supported him up until last week. So I guess it 
was OK when Trump was attacking minorities, and suggesting that Mexicans were 
rapists and Muslims were unpatriotic, and insulting Gold Star moms, and making 
fun of disabled Americans. I guess that didn’t quite tip it over the edge. Why 
was that OK?”
election turnout quiz 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/10/voter-turnout-promo/> 
Even the uphill battle to regain control of the House of Representatives is 
now seen as possibly winnable. Despite gerrymandered boundary maps that 
entrench Republican control, theWashington Post estimates 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/10/12/heres-how-good-a-shot-democrats-have-of-actually-winning-the-house/>
 a dozen once safe seats in places such as Virginia and California could now 
swing it too.

A challenge for both parties is making sure that the electorate does not tune 
out entirely. Apoll by the American Psychological Association 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-13/it-s-official-this-election-is-driving-americans-nuts>
 found more than half of Americans say the 2016 election has become a “major 
source of stress”.

“After watching MSNBC last night, I have decided to unplug … I am so rattled 
and disturbed,” says Mark Herzog, one Washington parent typical of those 
deciding they have heard enough. Many Republican women are particularly 
appalled by Trump’s sexually graphic language and aggressive tone. The GOP 
chairman of Ohio recentlyrevealed his wife will no longer let him put up a 
Trump yard sign in front of their house 
<http://www.cincinnati.com/story/news/politics/blogs/2016/10/05/ohio-gop-chairman-cant-put-trump-sign-in-his-yard/91608442/>
.

Democrats insist this is what Republicans have brought upon themselves. “This 
is in the swamp of crazy that has been fed over and over and over and over 
again,” concluded President Obama in Ohio.
 