
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> touted the 
benefits of waterboarding in a campaign rally on Monday night, telling a crowd 
that “you bet your ass” he would bring it back into use.

Addressing thousands of people in Columbus, Ohio, the Republican frontrunner 
praised waterboarding, an interrogation method that has been called torture. “I 
would approve more than that,” he said.

Trump told supporters: “Would I approve waterboarding? You bet your ass I 
would. In a heartbeat. I would approve more than that. It works.”

The Republican frontrunner then added “… and if it doesn’t work, they deserve 
it anyway for what they do to us”.

Trump is not the first Republican candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/28/carly-fiorina-endorses-waterboarding>
 to endorse the use of waterboarding, which involves simulating drowning, in an 
attempt to elicit information from terror suspects.

Waterboarding was first used by the US in 2002 on an al-Qaida suspect, then on 
at least two other CIA detainees during the Bush administration, including 
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, a top lieutenant of Osama bin Laden and mastermind of 
the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Itwas banned 
<http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2007/09/cia-bans-water-.html> by the Bush 
administration in 2006 as ineffective and potentially illegal.

Trump also doubled down on his unproven claim that Muslims in New Jersey 
celebrated the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States. Trump insisted 
there were “tailgate-style celebrations” on rooftops in Jersey City, New 
Jersey, and said: “I saw it on television and I read about it on the internet.”

The author of the newspaper article that Trump has cited for that claim said 
on Monday 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/cheats/2015/11/23/9-11-reporter-crowds-weren-t-cheering.html>
 that he does not remember any evidence of those celebrations.

The Republican frontrunner further reminisced about the terrorist attacks, 
which killed nearly 3,000 innocent people, saying that he watched them from his 
apartment. “I watched people jumping off the buildings,” Trump said. He also 
told attendees that he watched “the second plane come in [to the World Trade 
Center] and I said ‘Wow, that’s unbelievable’”.

Trump added that in his view 9/11 “was worse than Pearl Harbor because at 
least with Pearl Harbor they were attacking the military”. In addition to the 
two planes that flew into the World Trade Center in New York, a third flew into 
the Pentagon, killing 125 people there, and a fourth targeted at Washington DC 
crashed outside Shanksville, Pennsylvania, after a struggle between the 
terrorists and passengers.
 