
The horrors of a haunted house usually end once you push open the final set of 
black, saloon-hinged doors and step back in the fairground. However, the 
Mexican artistPedro Reyes <http://www.pedroreyes.net/> hopes his nightmares 
remain with visitors long after they have left his immersive 2016 Halloween 
attraction, opening in New York next month.

“Monsters have always been a way to speak about our real fears,” says the 
44-year-old. “Zombies are a fear of poor people; Karl Marxtalked about capital 
being like a vampire that stalks the living 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch10.htm>; and Mary 
Shelley’s Dr Frankenstein is trying to create life, which is exactly what 
genetic engineers are trying to do today.”

All these bogeymen and more will populate Doomocracy 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/2026016011/doomocracy-a-haunted-house-with-pedro-reyes-and-cr>
, “a political haunted house” that Reyes is preparing to stage within the vast 
Brooklyn Army Terminal from 7 October until 6 November in conjunction with the 
New York non-profit arts organisationCreative Time <http://creativetime.org/>.

Doomocracy’s spooky run will coincide with both Halloween and the 2016 
presidential election, and is appropriately pitched somewhere between a 
carnival attraction, an immersive theatre production and any given hour or two 
within today’s news cycle. Creative Time’s artistic director,Nato Thompson 
<http://creativetime.org/about/staff/nato-thompson/>, describes the venture as 
“Hieronymus Bosch meets Fox News. It’s holding up a funhouse mirror to society.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fdoomocracy-art-installation-pedro-reyes-haunted-trump-and-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2c929b766ec60a5169052dd47b7df1ba92d9e29%2F0_0_926_509%2F926.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doomocracy%3A%20the%20funhouse%20haunted%20by%20Trump%20and%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fdoomocracy-art-installation-pedro-reyes-haunted-trump-and-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doomocracy%3A%20the%20funhouse%20haunted%20by%20Trump%20and%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fdoomocracy-art-installation-pedro-reyes-haunted-trump-and-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2c929b766ec60a5169052dd47b7df1ba92d9e29%2F0_0_926_509%2F926.jpg>
 Seven tombs of gloom: a screengrab from Doomocracy’s Kickstarter campaign. 
Photograph: Supplied 
Reyes and Nato hope to offer about 400-500 people a night a ghastly, dramatic 
interactive trip that takes in gun nuts, genetically modified crops, climate 
change, deadly fast-food chains and, looming over Doomocracy’s entrance, a 
chimeric effigy that’s part Statue of Liberty, part Trojan Horse, and, in 
Reyes’ view, entirely the embodiment of American foreign policy. “The USA 
doesn’t have true representation,” he argues, “and yet they say they’re 
exporting democracy around the world.”

That may all sound as satirical as it is scary. Nevertheless the artist – who 
has previously staged a fine-art version ofa psychiatric sanatorium at 
different galleries around the world 
<http://camstl.org/about-pedro-reyes-and-sanatorium/> and overseen a programme 
to repurpose firearms as musical instruments 
<http://www.npr.org/2014/01/25/265794611/artist-transforms-guns-to-make-music-literally>
 – is deeply serious in his examination of fear within today’s political 
landscape.

“These days, politicians are trying to create fear in order to take power,” 
Reyes says, “so it’s quite an experiment to be dealing with the production of 
fear and its political uses.”

He is also highly respectful of the funhouse trope, partly because it is so 
familiar to people who might not necessarily be avid gallery goers.

“Pretty much everyone can picture a horror house,” he says. “It will, if you 
forgive the paradox, deal with political issues in a very democratic way. 
Everyone can engage with the form.”

Reyes and Thompson are keen to ensure Doomocracy keeps pace with events and 
have been writing and rewriting the dramatic scenarios to reflect the changing 
nature of the electoral race.

“We’ve been workshopping the scripts today,” says Thompson. “It’s a fluid 
process. The ground is moving fast this election, it’s hard to keep up.”

Reyes, who visited both commercial haunted houses and guerrilla theatre groups 
in preparation for the show, also says Doomocracy reflects a general 
hopelessness within contemporary politics, both in the US and elsewhere.

“Why do people vote against their own interests?” Reyes says. “Is it that we 
have brainwashed people to make the wrong decisions? There’s a feeling in the 
US that it’s a downer to have to choose between the [presidential] options. But 
it’s elsewhere too; it can be said of Mexico and many other places around the 
world.Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> was almost 
like a democratic, rightwing coup d’état.”

Despite this gloomy view, Doomocracy is still able to engage with some of the 
norms of campaign fundraising. ItsKickstarter page 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/2026016011/doomocracy-a-haunted-house-with-pedro-reyes-and-cr>
 looks set to reach its goal of $80,000 by its deadline of 29 September, 
offering suitably doom-laden swag for its pledgers, including Doomocracy 
pennants and buttons, and “Yes We Can’t” bumper stickers.

With all this left-leaning pessimism, Reyes’ haunted house looks unlikely to 
attract many Trump voters. However, Creative Time’s executive director, Katie 
Hollander, argues that the work doesn’t favour either side. “It’s not a 
commentary on the candidates, more a commentary on the issues,” she says.

Indeed, Reyes hopes to take in wider political issues unlikely to be addressed 
by either party this election year. “It will deal withmental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/27/-sp-americas-mental-health-care-system-crisis>
, theexcessive criminalisation of drug use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/feb/03/us-war-on-drugs-impact-in-latin-american>
, and the increasing role of the medical industry as a kind ofwhite-collar drug 
dealer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/jun/20/healthcare-drugspolicy>
,” the artist says. “There’ll be stuff on the food industry too, and equity or 
the lack of social mobility – those universal issues, that are experienced in 
every part of the world.”

While this all may sound nihilistic, Reyes hopes Doomocracy could be 
liberating too. “Usually my art is more about hope, but on this occasion it is 
a dark project, and offers more of a space for catharsis,” he says. “After all, 
Halloween is a moment to go crazy. That is the role of carnival.”

Yet, does he genuinely expect Doomocracy to actually change any visitors’ 
minds about the issues examined? Won’t most already agree with his position on, 
say, pharmaceuticals and gun crime?

“There will be people who love it, people who hate it, people who feel 
empowered, and people who feel offended,” says Reyes. “Making art is one way to 
elaborate and engage with reality.”

And this autumn, at a time when truth seems if not stranger, then at least as 
spooky as fiction, one route for meaningful political engagement appears to lie 
through Doomocracy’s funhouse doors.
 