
It’s not that mixed-media artist Doug Aitken 
<http://www.dougaitkenworkshop.com> disdains museums, but he often attempts to 
subvert them by transcending their walls. In 2007 his video Sleepwalkers played 
in a loop on the facade of New York’s Museum of Modern Art, while a later piece,
Song 1 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2555192/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>, was projected on 
the sides of Washington DC’s Hirshhorn Museum.

But in his first North American survey, Doug Aitken: Electric Earth 
<http://www.moca.org/exhibition/doug-aitken-electric-earth>, at Moca’s Geffen 
Contemporary in Los Angeles, Song 1 – a loop of various artists singing and 
lip-synching to I Only Have Eyes for You – is projected on a massive circular 
screen inside the cavernous confines of the gallery. The 2012 piece, which 
features Tilda Swinton and ex-punk rockerJohn Doe 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/xs-john-doe-on-early-l-a-punk-why-green-day-deserve-more-respect-20160510>
, anchors what the 48-year-old Aitken calls a “constellation” of his career so 
far.

Meanwhile in a room in the north-east corner of the gallery, a warehouse 
repurposed byFrank Gehry <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/frank-gehry>
, the artist has dug through the cement floor into the soil beneath the 
building, the resulting hole surrounded by dirt and concrete and filled with 
milky water. From above, timed to a rhythm, drops fall, their sound amplified 
by microphones. It’s a new installation, Sonic Fountain II.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdoug-aitken-electric-earth-moca-geffen-contemporary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5437b374141f17942181fa807466268c40c81603%2F141_0_4219_2532%2F4219.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doug%20Aitken%3A%20turning%20perversity%20into%20an%20art%20form&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdoug-aitken-electric-earth-moca-geffen-contemporary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doug%20Aitken%3A%20turning%20perversity%20into%20an%20art%20form&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdoug-aitken-electric-earth-moca-geffen-contemporary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5437b374141f17942181fa807466268c40c81603%2F141_0_4219_2532%2F4219.jpg>
 A still from Black Mirror, which features Chloë Sevigny. Photograph: Doug 
Aitken 
“When you do an exhibition with someone like Doug Aitken and you tell him you 
cannot do this piece …” Moca director and co-curatorPhilippe Vergne 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philippe-Vergne> trails off, shaking his head as 
he stands by the curb outside.

“It’s nonfigurative, but it’s more of an installation that opens up the 
architecture and exposes this kind of rhythm and tempo and language,” explains 
Aitken, adding with a smile: “So, it’s pretty perverse.”

Vergne knew perversity would be instrumental in getting the LA artist to agree 
to the mid-career survey. With co-curator Anna Katz, the two came up with an 
immersive approach rather than a chronological layout. Viewers enter a darkened 
maze of seven of Aitken’s large-scale video installations punctuated by 
text-driven wall sculpture made of materials such as cracked mirrors or neon.

“I think in working with Philippe we were able to make the exhibition become 
an artwork,” says Aitken, notably charged up just days before the opening. “It 
made me become really engaged in thinking about how you see a museum so it’s 
less passive and more empowering and more mysterious.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdoug-aitken-electric-earth-moca-geffen-contemporary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78e602796c9a9f80d4f8d7344a4304509a48d183%2F0_0_4500_3003%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doug%20Aitken%3A%20turning%20perversity%20into%20an%20art%20form&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdoug-aitken-electric-earth-moca-geffen-contemporary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doug%20Aitken%3A%20turning%20perversity%20into%20an%20art%20form&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdoug-aitken-electric-earth-moca-geffen-contemporary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78e602796c9a9f80d4f8d7344a4304509a48d183%2F0_0_4500_3003%2F4500.jpg>
 Labyrinthine: view of Black Mirror’s installation. Photograph: Norbert Miguletz
Appropriately, Black Mirror 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2492564/?ref_=nm_flmg_dr_4> is viewed in a booth 
surrounded by smoky glass reflections, casting the image in a kaleidoscopic 
pattern around the viewer. An earlier piece,Electric Earth 
<https://collection.whitney.org/object/12729>, plays on various screen sizes 
laid out in a series of rooms the viewer walks through, emulating the movie’s 
subject as he strides and shuffles amid deserted nighttime cityscapes.

While images constantly change, new paths propel the viewer forward, 
suggesting a radical departure from the way most of us have been trained to 
consume moving images. “I was always fascinated by cinema but was always 
frustrated by the distance between the viewer and screen, the idea that you go 
to a movie and sit in a thick chair and watch a single image move in front of 
you,” says Aitken. His own non-linear brand of moviemaking often relies on 
poetic voiceover, tends to be evocative rather than expositional and subverts 
the rules of conventional narrative.

“I think the fundamental of you, the viewer, and what you perceive in that 
space is very interesting,” he continues. “I’m trying to look at alternatives 
and other possibilities to bring the viewer into a greater engagement with a 
concept.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdoug-aitken-electric-earth-moca-geffen-contemporary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97f546aa4883ed889b1fe1c792bbc4c46619a03b%2F0_0_4500_3896%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doug%20Aitken%3A%20turning%20perversity%20into%20an%20art%20form&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdoug-aitken-electric-earth-moca-geffen-contemporary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doug%20Aitken%3A%20turning%20perversity%20into%20an%20art%20form&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdoug-aitken-electric-earth-moca-geffen-contemporary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97f546aa4883ed889b1fe1c792bbc4c46619a03b%2F0_0_4500_3896%2F4500.jpg>
 A still from Migration (empire), a 2008 video installation. Photograph: Doug 
Aitken 
That said, most audiences, conditioned from a lifetime of viewing film and TV, 
prefer a linear structure – meaning that the medium stagnates. “For Hollywood, 
a good film is a good story. That’s not enough,” insists Vergne, who lists 
Terrence Malick’sThe Tree of Life 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0478304/?ref_=fn_al_tt_4> as a non-linear film 
that drew the scorn of numerous critics and fared poorly at the box office. 
“You have [abstraction] in art, you have that in music, but with film we live 
with this very rigid structure. You want a beginning and you want an end. It’s 
reassuring.”

In the spirit of Aitken’s Station to Station <https://stationtostation.com>, 
his 2013 cross-country train trip with artists of multiple disciplines 
participating in happenings and pop-up concerts along the way, Moca is lining 
up lectures, performances and events with the exhibit as a backdrop. Visitors 
might catch a glimpse of Chloë Sevigny, star of Black Mirror; or Beck might 
stop in for song, or Iggy Pop, Jorge Seu, Cat Power or some other Aitken 
collaborator.

Some might turn up for a 24-hour happening on 5 November on nearby Catalina 
island <http://www.catalinachamber.com>, in the casino, an art deco landmark 
overlooking Avalon Harbor. A short distance away, three geometric sculptures 
will be submerged five, 10 and 50ft below the surface, constituting Aitken’s 
latest project, the recently announcedUnderwater Pavilions 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/arts/la-et-cm-doug-aitken-underwater-pavilions-20160907-snap-story.html>
. Their mirrored surfaces will create a fractured view of the surrounding 
kelp-rich seabed for divers and snorkelers. Footage collected from cameras 
inside the sculptures will be edited and included in the Moca exhibit later in 
the run.

When Sonic Fountain II smashed through the floor of the gallery, Aitken 
managed to transform but not transcend the Geffen. But with Underwater 
Pavilions he puts viewers miles away at the bottom of the ocean. “It’s being 
willing to go beyond structure,” he says. “Whether it’s a self-imposed 
structure or the structure of an institution, look at things in a way that’s 
more fluid.”
 