
I used to be a disciplined morning writer, but in the spring of 2010 I was 
visiting a router-making facility in Shanghai’s Pudong district and witnessed 
thousands of workers in robin’s egg blue jumpsuits building the equipment 
necessary to pole-vault China’s technological connectedness ahead of all other 
countries in our new world order. This tableau prompted in me a gentle 
realisation that the world was changing even more quickly than I’d thought it 
was, and that I’d better shake things up creatively to keep pace with it.

I asked myself a few questions: how can I imbue fiction with that same fractal 
sense of falling down a rabbit hole that we all experience when we’re online? 
How can writing compete with Netflix? How could I compress emotion into as few 
words as possible – not just on a page but something people can read from a car 
at 50 miles per hour?

Novelist Douglas Coupland: the man who sees into the future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/sep/07/decca-aitkenhead-douglas-coupland>
To this end I deliberately upended what had been a 20-year-old writing 
routine. No more AM clock-based passivity, quietly awaiting words that may or 
may not come depending on the fussiness of my muse. No more predictability; 
instead of sitting there feeling nostalgic for my pre-internet brain, I tried 
to figure out what my new brain was becoming and how that affected my writing. 
So if you ask me what is my typical writing day, I have no specific answer, 
just a series of tendencies which together define my new writing normal.

One: I do much of my writing on planes. I’m actually at my happiest when I’m 
writing on a plane, and I’m writing these words on a plane right now, Lufthansa 
flight 1436 from Frankfurt to St Petersburg. There’s no Wi-Fi (sanctuary!) and 
I’m having that not unpleasant sensation of soon-to-end Schengen-era 
statelessness – the kind of transnational fluidity so accurately touted by 
Monocle magazine – a headspace where all the men wear slim-fit clothing and all 
the women in little black dresses go back to the office from the Embassy 
function to do some late night C++ coding.

Q: Would you like a glass of water with your vodka tonic?
A: No. That’s why God invented ice cubes.

Two: I do much of my writing in hotel rooms, especially if there’s a deadline. 
Actually, since I wrote the above paragraph I’ve landed and am now in the St 
Petersburg W hotel which has killer Wi-Fi and interior design choices possibly 
made (in the best possible sense) by an oligarch’s mistress. There’s something 
about being in a hotel room – most writers know this implicitly – that frees up 
one’s thinking. First you place a scorched earth do-not-disturb on your email 
account (autoreply: “I’m dead and hence unable to reply to your email”) and 
second, hide the mobile phone in the desk drawer and … it’s almost as good as 
being on a plane. Nobody can reach you. You’re safe.

Three: I write in places connected in definable ways to the forces of both 
globalisation and deglobalisation: Shanghai router-making facilities; Chilean 
classrooms taken over by protesting students, the rooms now converted into 
artists’ studios; the International House of Pancakes on the north side of 
Interstate 15 in Las Vegas. The more random and unexpected the better.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fmy-writing-day-douglas-coupland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e8d61dd887af63f131a6fd0b8fe7d48a3dd27a1%2F0_209_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Douglas%20Coupland%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20actually%20at%20my%20happiest%20when%20I%E2%80%99m%20writing%20on%20a%20plane%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fmy-writing-day-douglas-coupland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Douglas%20Coupland%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20actually%20at%20my%20happiest%20when%20I%E2%80%99m%20writing%20on%20a%20plane%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fmy-writing-day-douglas-coupland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e8d61dd887af63f131a6fd0b8fe7d48a3dd27a1%2F0_209_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Interstate 15, Las Vegas. Photograph: George Rose/Getty Images 
There’s a kind of existential heebie-jeebies that accompanies the abandonment 
of routine: what if I lose my skills and they never come back? What if I become 
too fragmented? What if the forces of the future I’m trying to depict crush me 
like a bug? But then, nothing ventured, nothing gained. The world has never 
been so interesting as it is now. How sad not to go out and bungee-jump into it 
from a cosmic New Zealand cliff.

A few years back, the New York Times did a series of photos of writers in 
their writing places. All of the other ones I saw were of desks in almost empty 
white rooms with linen sheers blowing in through the windows. The photo of me 
was of a small room painted black with all of the walls covered in shelving 
that was densely filled with hoarder-like amounts of design objects and art. I 
don’t understand why writers would want an empty white room. It’s like a 
metaphor for no life after life after death. My spaces will never be normal; 
normal has never seemed to be my friend. Words always come first.

• Bit Rot, a collection of stories and essays by Douglas Coupland, is 
published by Heinemann on 13 October. To order a copy for £16.40 (RRP £20) go to
 bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bit-rot.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 