
About 100 people are feared missing after a boat sank off the coast of Libya, 
amid mounting evidence that already dangerous conditions are worsening for 
migrants crossing the Mediterranean sea to get toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

General Ayoub Qassem, a spokesman for the Libyan navy, said on Thursday that a 
boat carrying 126 people from the port of Garabulli had sunk after being hit by 
high waves, and that only 20 people had been rescued.

The UN announced this week said that 2016 has become the deadliest year on 
record for migrants crossing the Mediterranean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/rising-death-toll-in-mediterranean-makes-2016-deadliest-year-yet?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, with an estimated 3,800 deaths so far.

The UN refugee agencies and other aid groups have said that the 
already-treacherous sea journey to Italy, which is more dangerous than the 
route to Greece, has deteriorated, in part because people-smugglers are using 
even flimsier inflatable rafts than they were before. The vessels are being 
overloaded with people – sometimes thousands at a time – making rescues riskier 
and more difficult.

The UN’s grim assessment for 2016 came almost exactly three years after the 
death of hundreds of migrants off the coast of Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/03/lampedusa-boat-tragedy-italy-migrants>
 prompted European leaders to promise “decisive measures” to stem the 
humanitarian crisis. At the time, a group of European interior ministers said 
the deaths were a “wake-up call”.

But, far from improving, the situation has got worse for migrants making the 
sea crossing.

In Italy, prime minister Matteo Renzi this week warned that he might veto the 
disbursement of European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/italy-matteo-renzi-migrants-refugees-european-union>
 funds to countries that refused to help Italy and Greece, which have taken in 
hundreds of thousands of refugees this year.

Tough border controls along Italy’s borders with France, Austria and 
Switzerland mean that attempts by migrants to reach northern Europe have become 
more difficult and that more are staying in Italy.

“Italy cannot take another year like the one we’ve just had,” Renzi said.

The sinking off the coast of Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> 
on Thursday came a day after the aid group Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) said 
it had discovered 25 dead men and women in a rescue operation around 26 
nautical miles from the Libyan coastline.


The dead were discovered after rescuers initially saved 139 people from a 
nearby rubber raft. When they returned to the scene, they found the bodies at 
the bottom of another boat. The likely cause of death was asphyxiation by fuel 
fumes.

“Sea rescue operations are becoming a race through a maritime graveyard, and 
our rescue teams are overwhelmed by a policy-made crisis where we feel 
powerless to stop the loss of life,” said Stefano Argenziano, the manager of 
migration operations for MSF. “How many tragedies like this do we need before 
EU leaders change their misplaced priority on deterrence and provide safe 
alternatives to the sea?”


MSF estimates that it has saved about 17,000 people since April. About 327,800 
people have arrived in Europe by boat so far this year, and around 3,740 have 
died on the journey.

Separately, Save the Children announced that it had rescued more than 290 
refugees and migrants off the coast of NorthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> on Wednesday in two operations.

The aid group also recovered the bodies of 20 men and women who died before 
rescuers could reach them.

The group said several unaccompanied children were among the survivors, as 
well as pregnant women and families with small children.
 