
If you stand on the pavement outside the Royal Hotel on Whitby’s West Cliff 
and look out across the harbour town as the sun goes down, you can pretty much 
see, in their entirety, the early chapters ofBram Stoker’s Dracula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/21/100-best-novels-dracula-bram-stoker>
. Across the bay, in the shadow of the half-ruined abbey, sits St Mary’s 
Churchyard, where Lucy Westenra was attacked by the vampiric count. Below is 
Tate Hill Sands, where the ship carrying Dracula ran aground, its crew missing, 
its dead skipper lashed to the wheel. The 199 steps, known locally as the 
Church Stairs, rise to the East Cliff, up which Dracula, in the guise of a 
black hound, ran after arriving in Whitby.

It is the same view that Stoker himself would have seen, aside from one or two 
modern flourishes, exactly 125 years ago – a view that would become synonymous 
with his novel Dracula. It was at the end of July 1890 that the flame of 
Stoker’s classic was kindled. Stoker, then the business manager of the actor 
Sir Henry Irving, had just endured, with his theatrical company, a somewhat 
disastrous tour of Scotland. Irving decided they should all take a month’s 
holiday and then regroup; he suggested Stoker try Whitby on the north Yorkshire 
coast, where Irving had once run a circus.

Dracula imagery adds to myths about bats | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/aug/02/dracula-imagery-adds-to-myths-about-bats>
Stoker took rooms at 6 Royal Crescent; his wife Florence and son Noel would 
join him in August, but it was in that week and a half alone, roaming the 
fishing port and talking to the locals, that the ideas that would become 
Dracula took hold. Little has changed in the streets around Royal Crescent 
since; a whalebone arch still stands, framing the cold grey North Sea (though 
the current one is the third to have been erected since the original in 1853). 
You could almost believe, on nights when sea frets dog the craggy coast, that a 
black-clad figure haunts the narrow alleys. In fact, here’s one now ...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fdraculas-birthplace-how-whitby-is-celebrating-the-counts-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438098337331%2Fc8f77fe2-2b83-4252-b2d6-9f204c8a6771-2060x1557.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dracula's%20birthplace%3A%20how%20Whitby%20is%20celebrating%20the%20count's%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fdraculas-birthplace-how-whitby-is-celebrating-the-counts-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dracula%27s%20birthplace%3A%20how%20Whitby%20is%20celebrating%20the%20count%27s%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fdraculas-birthplace-how-whitby-is-celebrating-the-counts-anniversary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438098337331%2Fc8f77fe2-2b83-4252-b2d6-9f204c8a6771-2060x1557.jpeg>
 Whitby as Stoker saw it … the town pictured between 1890 and 1900. Photograph: 
Alamy 
It’s Harry Collett <http://www.whitbywalks.com/HarryCollett.html>, who dons 
Victorian dress and top hat to conduct Dracula-themed night-time walks around 
Whitby. He is a natural storyteller, fond of melodrama. “I’ve been doing the 
walks since about 92,” he announces. “... 1892!” He goes on: “Whitby was 
undoubtedly instrumental to Stoker when he wrote Dracula. When he took up 
residency in Royal Crescent, his landlady would turf him out in the morning so 
she could clean the room. Stoker would go to the reading room of the Royal 
Hotel and look out at the scene you can see now. That first week when he was 
alone in Whitby, he would go around, soaking up the ambience.”

Talking to the old salts on the harbour and mooching around the churchyard up 
on the East Cliff, Stoker assembled a catalogue of local myths and stories that 
are recognisable to anyone familiar with the Dracula story. In the novel, the 
count comes ashore when a Russian schooner, the Demeter, runs aground, all 
hands lost. This was based on a real event in 1885: a ship – the Dmitry – was 
beached on Tate Hill Sands.

“In the book,” says Collett, “Dracula runs ashore as a black dog. This is 
based on another legend Stoker would have heard about a dark hound – a story 
brought over by the vikings. And the black coach that later takes Jonathan 
Harker to Castle Dracula was taken from a local story about the lord of 
Mulgrave Castle, who used to take to a black coach that rattled down the road 
when he was on his way to court Elizabeth Cholmeley.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fdraculas-birthplace-how-whitby-is-celebrating-the-counts-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438098805243%2Fc0b12619-6eda-4fe6-aae6-66c639fedc72-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dracula's%20birthplace%3A%20how%20Whitby%20is%20celebrating%20the%20count's%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fdraculas-birthplace-how-whitby-is-celebrating-the-counts-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dracula%27s%20birthplace%3A%20how%20Whitby%20is%20celebrating%20the%20count%27s%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fdraculas-birthplace-how-whitby-is-celebrating-the-counts-anniversary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438098805243%2Fc0b12619-6eda-4fe6-aae6-66c639fedc72-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A catalogue of local myths and stories … Harry Collett, Whitby tour guide 
It was 1897 when history was made with the publication of Dracula as a novel, 
though the story hatched in Whitby first came to life as a play, entitled The 
Undead. After the first test performance, his friend Irving reportedly told 
Stoker that he never wanted to see the play again, prompting its re-imagining 
as the epistolary novel. While working on the manuscript, Stoker researched the 
folklore of the Carpathian mountains and added to the experiences of Whitby by 
visiting St Michan’s Church and its eerie crypts in his native Dublin, which 
hold a number of mummified corpses dating back centuries.

Even as undeath preoccupied Stoker, life continued, and he began to work on a 
freelance basis for the Daily Telegraph in London, which would lead to a 
permanent position from 1905. He had cut his journalistic teeth on his hometown 
paper, the Dublin Evening Mail, which was co-owned by the writer Joseph 
Sheridan Le Fanu, a gothic writer whose novel Carmilla was one of the earliest 
vampire novels and almost certainly provided some inspiration for Dracula.

Stoker entered the literary and arty hub of fin de siècle London, counting as 
his friends not only a host of theatrical names, thanks to moving in Irving’s 
circles, but also the artist Whistler, fellow novelist Arthur Conan Doyle, and 
even Oscar Wilde, who was something of a love rival to the Dracula writer. 
Stoker’s wife Florence was not only a society beauty, but she had apparently 
thrown over Wilde to accept a proposal from Stoker. The two men had known each 
other at Dublin’s Trinity College and the love spat prompted a celebrated 
fallout between Wilde and Stoker, though they resumed their friendship after 
Wilde’s trials and exile to Paris.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fdraculas-birthplace-how-whitby-is-celebrating-the-counts-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438099047505%2Fa9ec3b86-94d5-4490-beb6-050fa6474b03-2060x1893.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dracula's%20birthplace%3A%20how%20Whitby%20is%20celebrating%20the%20count's%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fdraculas-birthplace-how-whitby-is-celebrating-the-counts-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dracula%27s%20birthplace%3A%20how%20Whitby%20is%20celebrating%20the%20count%27s%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fdraculas-birthplace-how-whitby-is-celebrating-the-counts-anniversary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438099047505%2Fa9ec3b86-94d5-4490-beb6-050fa6474b03-2060x1893.jpeg>
 Bram Stoker, photographed between 1880-1900. Photograph: Hulton-Deutsch 
Collection/Corbis 
Stoker died in April 1912, possibly from syphilis. Before his death, the 
writer suffered a series of strokes and, according to his nephew Daniel Farson, 
the death certificate gave as one cause “Locomotor Ataxy 6 Months” – apparently 
a euphemism for the sexually transmitted disease. But the mark Stoker left on 
the town is as indelible as a pair of pinprick bites on a snow-white neck. In 
the fudge shop on the front, you can buy chocolate coffins, and there is of 
course theDracula Experience <http://www.draculaexperience.co.uk/>, where for a 
few pounds you can creep through labyrinthine pitch-black passages and be 
scared out of your skin by students earning holiday cash dressed up as ghouls 
and revenants.

Meanwhile, there’s the Bram Stoker international film festival 
<http://www.bramstokerfilmfestival.com/>, and the Whitby Goth weekend 
<http://www.whitbygothweekend.co.uk/news.php>, a twice-yearly fixture in spring 
and around Halloween. And, to coincide with the 125th anniversary of Stoker’s 
creation,family-friendly promenade stagings 
<http://www.discoveryorkshirecoast.com/whitby/event/plays-films-shows/dracula> 
of Dracula are being held throughout August in the environs ofWhitby Abbey 
<http://www.hauntedisland.co.uk/haunted-churches/whitby-abbey-north-yorkshire>.

Of course, some who visit Whitby on the Dracula trail have trouble accepting 
that Stoker’s novel is actually a work of fiction. A former rector of St Mary’s 
Church used to mischievously direct tourists asking for the location of Count 
Dracula’s grave to a cracked tomb in the churchyard, its inscription long-since 
weathered away by the unforgiving salt-laden winds. Harry Collett got so tired 
of being asked the same question that he had a stonemason make up a false 
headstone – and had it placed at a suitable location on his walk.
 