
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)’s governing coalition and other smaller 
parties have agreed to delay next month’s elections to April 2018 – a move that 
will anger opposition groups, which have accused the president of trying to 
cling on to power.


DRC <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo>’s main opposition bloc was not 
immediately available for comment but has already called a general strike for 
Wednesday to press President Joseph Kabila to leave at the end of his mandate 
in December.

Last month dozens died in two days of protests in the capital, Kinshasa, 
against planned delays to the vote due to what authorities said were logistical 
problems registering millions of voters in the massive and impoverished country.

US pushes for sanctions against Congolese president's inner circle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/06/congo-sanctions-president-joseph-kabila>
Parties had agreed in talks on Saturday to give more time for voter 
registration and to keep Kabila in office until the delayed vote, said one 
organisation in the discussions, the opposition party the Union for the 
Congolese Nation. Delegates at the talks would be likely to ratify the decision 
on Monday, the statement said.

The president of the Union for the Congolese Nation, Vital Kamerhe, is widely 
expected to become prime minister as part of the power-sharing government 
ushered in under the talks.

Kabila, who came to power in 2001 when his father was assassinated, says he 
will respect the constitution but has yet to rule out attempting to change the 
country’s laws to enable him to run for a fresh term.

The presidents of neighbouring Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> and Congo Republic changed their 
constitutions last year to allow themselves to stand for a third term, and 
Kabila’s opponents say they fear he will do the same.

Hundreds of people have died since last year in neighbouring Burundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi> after its president, Pierre 
Nkurunziza, pursued and won a third term in office that his opponents say is 
unconstitutional.

The head of the UN mission in Congo warned last week that the political 
impasse poses an “extreme risk” to stability.
 