
I was just “a wee scrap”, as my father would say, when we left the north east 
coast of Scotland for the south coast of England. Dad is from London, but after 
six years living in Dundee he was pretty much bilingual.

Then he joined the army and for the next decade my brother and I were shunted 
around various military bases, clocking up schools and fighting over bedrooms, 
but the one thing that grounded us was the fact that we came from Dundee.

I learned how to be Dundonian by listening to my mother (Dundee born and 
bred), and from highly anticipated trips back. And I pored overThe Broons 
<https://www.dcthomson.co.uk/brands/the-broons/> and Oor Wullie 
<https://www.dcthomson.co.uk/brands/oor-wullie/>: iconic cartoon strips written 
in broad Scots that first appeared inThe Sunday Post in 1936 and still come out 
as annuals every Christmas. My language is, I’m told, peppered with words and 
phrases from mid-century Dundee. “It’s like talking to my granny,” said a 
friend when I was last up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fdundee-travel-art-little-pot-of-gold-at-the-end-of-a92%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89f4d49187044cd9c10ae4de36aa78daed783b97%2F395_73_2380_3437%2F2380.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dundee%3A%20'A%20little%20pot%20of%20gold%20at%20the%20end%20of%20the%20A92'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fdundee-travel-art-little-pot-of-gold-at-the-end-of-a92%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dundee%3A%20%27A%20little%20pot%20of%20gold%20at%20the%20end%20of%20the%20A92%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fdundee-travel-art-little-pot-of-gold-at-the-end-of-a92%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89f4d49187044cd9c10ae4de36aa78daed783b97%2F395_73_2380_3437%2F2380.jpg>
 Public art: the author’s Oor Wullie sculpture, which ‘snows’ when someone 
approaches. 
So whenever I get the chance to go back, I do so in a spirit of great 
excitement. To my mind, Scotland’s fourth largest city has always been a little 
pot of gold at the end of the A92: the place where I first tastedtablet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/jan/22/how-to-make-perfect-tablet-recipe>
, a proper fish supper, and Scotch pies – from Doig’s, naturally. It was where 
my older cousin bought me my first record (“Jan-u-arry” by Pilot, second-hand 
fromGroucho’s <http://www.grouchos.co.uk/>), where I spotted my first red 
squirrel but never quite caught sight of the haggis that roamed the hills.

I realise now that this impression of Dundee is not everyone’s. Often the 
disclosure of my birthplace is met with snorts of derision. The worst critics 
seem to be Dundonians themselves. Poet and musicianDon Paterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/don-paterson> describes the recent 
regeneration efforts as “post-apocalyptic”. ChefJeremy Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jeremy-lee>, who admits to having a soft 
spot for the city, talks about “a black cloud of negativity hovering above and 
in many cases in it”.

But on a sunny day, with the wind behind it (so often the case), Dundee does a 
great long weekend – and its position just below the Cairngorms makes it a good 
stop-off for Highland trips. I was commissioned to make a public artwork there 
this summer, as part of the popularOor Wullie Bucket Trail 
<http://www.oorwulliebuckettrail.com/>, and was glad of the chance to 
reacquaint myself with this handsome, misunderstood city.

How things have changed. Arriving by train means walking past the magnificent 
RRS Discovery, the tall ship in which Captain Scott travelled to the Antarctic, 
currently dwarfed by the adjacent building site that will, in two years’ time, 
become theV&A Museum of Design <http://www.vandadundee.org/whatson>.

Last time I was here I built a replica of The Broons’ but ’n’ ben 
<https://www.thecourier.co.uk/news/local/dundee/104014/but-n-ben-injects-some-broons-charm-at-mcmanus-galleries/>
 (their highland cottage) at theMcManus <http://www.themcmanus-dundee.gov.uk/>, 
the fantastically gothic museum and art gallery. This time, continuing what has 
become something of a theme, I made an interactive sculpture,Oor Wullie in a 
7ft snowglobe 
<https://www.eveningtelegraph.co.uk/fp/giant-snowglobe-oor-wullie-set-arrive-dundee/>
, which was duly wheeled into its temporary home at Ninewells Hospital on a 
surgical trolley by a consultant anaesthetist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fdundee-travel-art-little-pot-of-gold-at-the-end-of-a92%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F462aa8c76f20c5800b0b7ebcf807b6d3b7b648ab%2F0_171_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dundee%3A%20'A%20little%20pot%20of%20gold%20at%20the%20end%20of%20the%20A92'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fdundee-travel-art-little-pot-of-gold-at-the-end-of-a92%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dundee%3A%20%27A%20little%20pot%20of%20gold%20at%20the%20end%20of%20the%20A92%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fdundee-travel-art-little-pot-of-gold-at-the-end-of-a92%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F462aa8c76f20c5800b0b7ebcf807b6d3b7b648ab%2F0_171_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 ‘Fantastically gothic’: the McManus museum and art gallery, in the middle of 
Dundee. Photograph: Alamy 
Ninewells arrived after I first left, and the hospital I was born in, the 
historic Dundee Royal Infirmary, has since become “yuppie flats”, a taxi driver 
told me. Doig’s, our family pie purveyor of choice, is gone. If you want a 
decent hit of grey meat in water-crust pastry you must go to Goodfellow & 
Steven on the Perth Road.

The Oor Wullie Bucket Trail <http://www.oorwulliebuckettrail.com/> has been 
very popular among Dundonians and tourists, with more than 50 painted 
sculptures of the comic-strip laddie installed all over the city, from the top 
of the Law to the banks of the Tay. Among them are Oor Bowie, a homage to the 
Starman himself, and Woodland Wullie, by the first female cartoonist at DC 
Thomson, who worked onThe Dandy. All will be auctioned on 13 September.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fdundee-travel-art-little-pot-of-gold-at-the-end-of-a92%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03081f8ea816f05ab093d905579d24c7732b216c%2F632_527_2307_4550%2F2307.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dundee%3A%20'A%20little%20pot%20of%20gold%20at%20the%20end%20of%20the%20A92'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fdundee-travel-art-little-pot-of-gold-at-the-end-of-a92%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dundee%3A%20%27A%20little%20pot%20of%20gold%20at%20the%20end%20of%20the%20A92%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fdundee-travel-art-little-pot-of-gold-at-the-end-of-a92%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03081f8ea816f05ab093d905579d24c7732b216c%2F632_527_2307_4550%2F2307.jpg>
 Wild at heart: the famous statue of Desperate Dan. Photograph: Alamy 
I often wonder if my decision to study art was somehow mixed up with Dundee. 
The city has long been a hub of creativity – albeit a quietly seething one. 
Some of the derelict jute mills are now occupied by artists and designers. It’s 
a little-known fact that the computer game Grand Theft Auto was created here. 
There’s Dundee Contemporary Arts, renowned for its exhibitions (and 
restaurant). And you can’t miss the statue of Desperate Dan near the Caird 
Hall, testament to the enduring legacy of DC Thomson’s comic heroes.


Down at the Overgate, I nipped out to the shops, dodging the giant seagulls 
that divebomb passers-by for their sandwiches. Inside is the biggest branch of 
Greggs I’ve ever seen. Maybe that explains the size of the birds. Weirdly, 
right next door to the shopping centre is the Howff, an atmospheric and ancient 
cemetery, which makes for a slightly jarring transition when stepping from one 
to the other: like a very dark episode ofMr Benn.

My uncle Jim once told me that a one-eyed gangster named “Och Aye’’ stalked 
Dundee’s badlands, but I’ve yet to spot him. He’d make a great comic strip 
character though.

Essentials

The Apex Hotel has double rooms from £80 per night (apexhotels.co.uk 
<https://www.apexhotels.co.uk/>). 
All the Oor Wullies will be displayed at the Farewell Gathering in Slessor 
Gardens from 9­-11 September, and will be auctioned on 13 September 
(ticket/auction information fromoorwulliebucket trail.com 
<http://www.oorwulliebuckettrail.com/>) in aid of The Archie Foundation’s 
Appeal for Tayside Children’s Hospital. To see more of Debbie Lawson’s work, 
visitdebbielawson.com <http://debbielawson.com/>
 