
A sniper has fatally shot a Dutch journalist in the Libyan city of Sirte, 
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>’s last bastion in the 
chaos-wracked north African country.

Jeroen Oerlemans was killed on Sunday while he was out with a team that clears 
mines in the part of the city that has been freed from Isis control, according 
to Dutch national broadcaster Nos and Belgian publication Knack. Both cited 
fellow journalist Joanie de Rijke of Knack, who was reporting with Oerlemans in
Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>.

The Dutch ambassador to Libya, Eric Strating, tweeted: “Rest in Peace. Your 
photographs of #Sirte #Libya and other places will live on forever.”

Foreign minister Bert Koenders said in a statement that “Oerlemans is a 
journalist who kept going where others stopped. Driven to put the news into 
pictures in the world’s hotspots. It is profoundly sad that he has now paid the 
ultimate price for this.”
 Dutch journalist Jeroen Oerlemans was described as ‘prudent, and very smart’ 
by a friend and colleague. Photograph: Twitter 
Oerlemans, 45, is survived by a wife and three small children, according to 
Eike den Hertog of the Beeldunie photo agency, who had worked with Oerlemans 
for much of the past two decades. Oerlemans had been scheduled to return home 
Monday.

He mourned the loss of a friend and a powerful photographer who “managed to 
capture what he wanted to say in pictures”.

“He wasn’t a cowboy. He was prudent, and very smart,” den Hertog said. He was 
surprised that Oerlemans wanted to return to Libya so soon after a previous 
assignment, also inSirte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/sirte-libya-forces-capture-university-isis-islamic-state>
, two months ago.

Oerlemans was abducted and wounded in Syria in 2012 with British photographer 
John Cantlie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/13/british-hostage-john-cantlie-appears-in-new-isis-propaganda-video>
, and freed a week later. Cantlie was later abducted again, and is believed to 
still be in captivity.

Oerlemans had covered wars in Afghanistan, Syria and Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> and the journey of migrants to 
Europe. Oerlemans studied photojournalism at the London College of 
Communication, according to his Facebook account.

It is especially difficult and dangerous for journalists to work in Libya, in 
chaos since the 2011 uprising that toppled and killed Libyan leader Muammar 
Gaddafi. Much of the country is ruled by a patchwork of local and tribal 
militias, and Islamic militants have also gained a foothold.

Militias from Misrata have recently driven Isis militants out of most of 
Sirte, their last urban stronghold, with the help of US airstrikes.
 