
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is 
trailing Barack Obama’s performance in the 2012 election, according to early 
voting data that underlines fears of an “enthusiasm gap” for the Democratic 
candidate.

Nearly a quarter of all expected ballots have already been cast after a surge 
in people wanting to express their preference before election day. Early voting 
by mail and at polling stations is under way in 37 states, with at least 33 
million votes now in.


There are indications that Clinton is not doing as well as Obama four years 
ago, according to the Associated Press. Ballot requests from likely supporters 
have been weak in parts of the midwest, while African American turnout is down.

The heavily Democratic counties of Cuyahoga and Franklin in Ohio are posting 
declines in ballot requests compared to 2012, AP reported, while 
Republican-leaning counties such as Warren have seen an increase. No candidate 
of either party has won the White Housewithout carrying Ohio 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/30/us/politics/ohio-campaign-trump-clinton.html>
 since John F Kennedy in 1960.

Journalist John Judis, author of The Populist Explosion, predicted: “Trump is 
probably going to win Ohio.”

How women could vote Hillary Clinton into the White House
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/hillary-clinton-how-women-voters-could-win-election>
Clinton and her allies are spending additional money in Michigan and Colorado, 
states long considered Democratic strongholds. Michigan has not voted for a 
Republican for president since 1968 but the former secretary of state fared 
poorly there in the Democratic primary.

Former president Bill Clinton made an unannounced appearance in Detroit on 
Wednesday night to meet privately with black ministers, the city’s mayor and 
other local leaders. Hillary Clinton planned to travel to the Detroit area on 
Friday.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nevada's%20women%20stand%20divided%20over%20Trump%20and%20Clinton%20on%20eve%20of%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nevada%27s%20women%20stand%20divided%20over%20Trump%20and%20Clinton%20on%20eve%20of%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women&media=>
Nevada’s women stand divided over Trump and Clinton on eve of election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/03/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women>
However, the dip in African American voters is to some extent offset by a 
dramatic rise in Democratic-leaning Latino voters, potentially giving Clinton a 
significant edge in Nevada and Colorado. With more than half the votes already 
cast in those states,Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> 
are matching if not surpassing their successful 2012 pace, the AP said.

Opinion polls show Trump narrowing the gap in other all-important battleground 
states, including some where Clinton has led for weeks, but she remains the 
clear favourite. With five days until one of the most consequential elections 
in living memory, the candidates took the battle to Florida and North Carolina, 
where Obama told voters on Wednesday: “The fate of the republic rests on your 
shoulders.”

America's undecided voters: could they swing the whole 2016 election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/datablog/2016/nov/03/undecided-voters-election-2016-hillary-clinton-donald-trump>
In Florida, where more than half of voters have already cast ballots – the 
black share of ballots is down but the Latino share is up – Trump traded blows 
not with Clinton but with Obama. The president let rip at a boisterous rally in 
Miami, pointing out that Trump let actor Alec Baldwin’s portrayal of him on the 
TV comedy show Saturday Night Live get under his skin.

 “Anybody who is upset about a Saturday Night Live skit, you don’t want in 
charge of nuclear weapons,” the president told supporters in Miami. “No, I’m 
serious. This is a guy who, like, tweets they should cancel Saturday Night Live 
– ‘I don’t like how Alec Baldwin is imitating me.’ Really? I mean, that’s the 
thing that bothers you, and you want to be president of the United States? Come 
on, man. Come on. Can’t do it.”

Obama continued: “The most frustrating thing is, some of his support is coming 
from working folks. People say, well, you know, he’s going to be our voice. Are 
you serious? This is the guy who spent 70 years – his whole life – born with a 
silver spoon, showing no respect for working people.

“He’s spent a lot of time with celebrities. Spends a lot of time hanging out 
with the really wealthy folk. But you don’t see him hanging out with working 
people unless they’re cleaning his room or mowing the fairways on his golf 
club. You’re going to make this guy your champion if you’re a working person? 
Come on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fearly-voting-results-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f9d6f6681ac2f2f592ce7545376fd48398e3077%2F0_208_4862_2916%2F4862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Early%20voter%20turnout%20worries%20Democrats%20who%20fear%20'enthusiasm%20gap'%20for%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fearly-voting-results-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Early%20voter%20turnout%20worries%20Democrats%20who%20fear%20%27enthusiasm%20gap%27%20for%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fearly-voting-results-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f9d6f6681ac2f2f592ce7545376fd48398e3077%2F0_208_4862_2916%2F4862.jpg>
 Barack Obama speaks at a rally for Hillary Clinton at Florida International 
University arena on Thursday. Photograph: Al Diaz/AP 
Trump has shown disrespect to women and accepted the support of the racist Ku 
Klux Klan, the president argued. “You can’t make excuses for this stuff,” Obama 
said angrily. “This isn’t a joke. This isn’t Survivor. This isn’t The 
Bachelorette. This counts. This has to do with what’s going to happen in your 
family, in your community, to soldiers and veterans, the safety of our kids.”

Trump has become increasingly riled by Obama’s interventions in recent days, 
claiming that he should be working from the White House and fixing the 
healthcare system instead. He tweeted on Thursday: “Looking at Air Force One @ 
MIA. Why is he campaigning instead of creating jobs & fixing Obamacare? Get 
back to work for the American people!”

Then, at a rally in Jacksonville, he said: “I just left by the way Miami. And 
in leaving I saw Air Force One. And I said to myself, I wonder who that could 
be. And it’s our president, and he’s down here campaigning for Crooked Hillary.

'The FBI is Trumpland': anti-Clinton atmosphere spurred leaks, sources say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/fbi-leaks-hillary-clinton-james-comey-donald-trump>
“Why isn’t he back in the office, sometimes referred to as the Oval Office ... 
He’s campaigning every day, and I actually think, considering that she’s under 
criminal investigation, I think he’s got a conflict.” Clinton is not known to 
be under a criminal investigation, although the FBI is examining emails that 
may be related to the investigation into her private email server.

Trump has to hope that reluctant Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> will return to the fold. Ted 
Cruz, his bitter foe during the party primary campaign, appeared alongside his 
running mate Mike Pence at a rally in Prole, Iowa, which is leaning towards 
Trump.


Cruz tweeted: “RT if you agree there needs to be a special prosecutor to 
investigate and prosecute the corruption of Hillary Clinton!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fearly-voting-results-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9056546247946f243360b368ccd6a1387ae1f469%2F0_223_3905_2343%2F3905.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Early%20voter%20turnout%20worries%20Democrats%20who%20fear%20'enthusiasm%20gap'%20for%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fearly-voting-results-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Early%20voter%20turnout%20worries%20Democrats%20who%20fear%20%27enthusiasm%20gap%27%20for%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fearly-voting-results-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9056546247946f243360b368ccd6a1387ae1f469%2F0_223_3905_2343%2F3905.jpg>
 Donald Trump continued to get riled by Barack Obama’s campaign appearances 
during a stop in Jacksonville, Florida, on Thursday. Photograph: Matt Rourke/AP 
The Clinton campaign announced the grand finale to its campaigning on Monday 
night with a rally in Philadelphia featuring Clinton herself,Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, Michelle Obama, Bill 
Clinton and Chelsea Clinton. Philadelphia was the birthplace of the US 
constitution and hosted this year’s Democratic national convention, where 
Clinton became the first female nominee of a major party.

Trump meanwhile is striving to remain on message and avoid more of the 
missteps that have plagued his campaign each time he seems to be building 
momentum. “Stay on point, Donald, stay on point,” he teasingly quoted his staff 
as saying in Florida on Wednesday night. “No sidetracks, Donald. Nice and easy. 
Nice and easy.’”

Clinton made a late stop on Wednesday in Arizona, where Trump’s unpopularity 
among Hispanic votershas given Democrats hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/hillary-visits-arizona-in-unprecedented-show-of-bravado-for-democratic-nominee>
 of turning a traditionally Republican state. “This state is in play for the 
first time in years,” she said to a crowd of 15,000, one of the biggest of her 
campaign.

Clinton took her critical message to a huge TV audience on Wednesday night 
during the final game of baseball’s World Series. The Democrats broadcast a 
series of ads that highlighted Trump’s lewd comments about women. Trump’s 
commercials were a mix of positive and negative, including one promising “a 
future brighter than our past”.

Republicans are fighting hard to protect their 54-46 majority in the Senate 
ahead of Tuesday’s election. They are on defence around the country, but a 
number of close races are essentially toss-ups in states such as Pennsylvania 
and New Hampshire.


Trump adviser reveals how Assange ally warned him about leaked Clinton emails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/trump-adviser-clinton-emails-wikileaks-roger-stone>
The FBI has opened a civil rights investigation into the arson and vandalism 
of an African American church in Mississippi, where someone spray-painted “Vote 
Trump” in what Greenville mayor called a “heinous, hateful, cowardly act”. The 
pulpit and pews were burned, and soot stained the brick around some windows.

Meanwhile Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, has said the whistleblower 
website did not get emails related to Hillary Clinton’s campaign from a state 
actor. US intelligence has blamed Russia for the hacked emails from campaign 
chairman John Podesta.

But in a statement on Thursday, Assange said WikiLeaks’ sources of the emails 
“are not state parties”. It does not say how it obtained the documents, noting 
only that the original sources are Podesta “and his correspondents”.
 