
From the top of the nine-storey building in Avdiyivka, Sergei Veremeyenko and 
his men can see the separatist capital of Donetsk just a few miles away. 
Avdiyivka has been on the frontline between Russian-backed separatists and 
Ukrainian forces for the past two years and fighting has intensified recently 
in the “industrial zone” on the outskirts of town.

The war in east Ukraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> rarely 
makes the headlines two years on, but every day brings new casualties. The 
situation is at its most tense since the end of large-scale fighting in 
February 2015. Russian claims to have foiled a “terror plot” in Crimea earlier 
this month, followed by strong rhetoric from the president, Vladimir Putin, led 
many in Kiev and the west to worry that a major new Russian-backed offensive 
could be imminent.

The revolution-inspired graffiti changing the face of Kiev – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/aug/26/the-revolution-inspired-graffiti-changing-the-face-of-kiev-in-pictures>
Avdiyivka is one of the first places where such a move would be visible. 
Clambering up a ladder to the roof, Veremeyenko pointed out what he said was 
the closest separatist position, just over a kilometre away. A few kilometres 
in the opposite direction are thetwin towers of Donetsk airport, seized by 
separatist forces last January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/15/russian-backed-separatists-seize-donetsk-airport-ukraine>
 after an epic, bloody battle lasting several months.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e76583d9f1598fc24e785b4c2d523285563cc87%2F0_605_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20Ukraine%3A%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20Europe's%20forgotten%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20Ukraine%3A%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20Europe%27s%20forgotten%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e76583d9f1598fc24e785b4c2d523285563cc87%2F0_605_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Sergei Veremeyenko, left, looks out over separatist positions from the top of 
an apartment block in Avdiyivka. Photograph: Shaun Walker for the Guardian 
Shortly the airport and other territory was seized by the separatists, backed 
by a contingent of regular Russian troops who the Kremlin denies were there, a
peace deal was signed in Minsk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/13/ukraine-service-personnel-killed-minsk-ceasefire>
. Full-scale fighting has stopped since then, but skirmishes continue on almost 
a daily basis. August has been the worst month for a long time.

The unarmed monitoring mission from the Organisation for Security and 
Cooperation inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> (OSCE) 
logs hundreds of explosions a day. It is not full-blown war, but it is not much 
of a ceasefire, either.
Ukraine map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/ukraine-zip/giv-31075fI0THQxPi3mk/>
Every day, one or two people are killed or injured on the Ukrainian side 
around Avdiyivka, according to Veremeyenko. The separatist side also reports 
frequent losses. On Thursday, when the Guardian visited the apartment block 
where Veremeyenko’s group are based, it was shaken by what the men believed to 
be mortar fire from separatist positions. They claim they have strict orders 
not to fire and only respond to attacks. The separatist side says the same.

“We noticed an intensification of activity in the last few days; they even 
drove up tanks to their forward positions, just so we could see them,” said 
Viktor Shotropa, who leads Veremeyenko’s group, which is part of the Kiev 
Regiment, initially a volunteer battalion that was later given official status 
as part of the Ukrainian interior ministry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c90c6b4cad47dd8d7e238cc743f5a4668efe4e6%2F0_347_5640_3385%2F5640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20Ukraine%3A%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20Europe's%20forgotten%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20Ukraine%3A%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20Europe%27s%20forgotten%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c90c6b4cad47dd8d7e238cc743f5a4668efe4e6%2F0_347_5640_3385%2F5640.jpg>
 Separatists at the destroyed Donetsk international airport in October last 
year. Photograph: Aleksey Filippov/AFP/Getty Images 
“But mainly I think they are just firing out of boredom. In order to actually 
seize more territory, they would need a full-blown invasion, with the full 
support of the Russian army,” he said.

Events over the past fortnight have put everyone on edge, however. Earlier 
this month, Russia said a soldier and a security services officer had died 
while detaining a Ukrainian terror cell that had planned attacks in Crimea, the 
peninsula annexed byRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> in 
February 2014.

Later, Russian television showed footage of a bruised Ukrainian and claimed he 
was working for Ukrainian military intelligence. “We obviously will not let 
such things slide by,” Putinsaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/11/russia-and-ukraine-step-up-security-amid-tension-over-crimea>
.

The Russian president accused Kiev of embracing “tactics of terror” and said 
there was little point in four-way negotiations between Russia, Ukraine, 
Germany and France, planned for the sidelines of the upcoming G20 summit in 
China. This led many to suspect that a new Russian offensive could be on the 
way, possibly with the aim of opening up a land bridge between Russia and 
Crimea.

Ukraine marks 25 years of independence a riven nation despite the flags
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/ukraine-marks-25-years-independence-riven-nation-east-war>
Ukraine insisted the entire plot was fabricated by the Russians and the 
Russian reaction caused the president, Petro Poroshenko, to put his forces on 
high alert. Ukraine has not been immune to militaristic rhetoric: last week, 
the countrycelebrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/ukraine-marks-25-years-independence-riven-nation-east-war>
 25 years of independence with a huge military parade in central Kiev that 
critics said differed little from the Soviet-style shows of force Kiev is 
trying to distance itself from.

After the initial panic over the Crimea incident, things have calmed down. 
“People were worried for a day or two but then they realised it didn’t seem to 
be the start of something major,” said one Ukrainian official.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bed84759bc6a1c51b6862d252aed4e724a8372c%2F0_140_4958_2975%2F4958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20Ukraine%3A%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20Europe's%20forgotten%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20Ukraine%3A%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20Europe%27s%20forgotten%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bed84759bc6a1c51b6862d252aed4e724a8372c%2F0_140_4958_2975%2F4958.jpg>
 An elderly woman approaches a destroyed bridge near Donetsk airport in March 
2015. Photograph: Vadim Ghirda/AP 
The timing for a major Russian escalation seems wrong: with European unity on 
sanctions against Russia wavering, a Russian-backed offensive now would 
reignite anger in western capitals over Moscow’s behaviour.

Up to now, Russia has used a mixture of loosely directed volunteers, military 
advisers and occasional injections of regular troops at key moments, while 
denying it has ever had a major military presence in east Ukraine. But with 
Ukraine’s army improving over the past two years, a push for further territory 
would probably require a full-scale, overt Russian invasion that would 
irrevocably damage relations with the west.


For all the improvements, there is still a certain ad-hoc nature to the 
Ukrainian military effort. Veremeyenko said he was not officially signed up to 
the army and was technically registered as a mechanic, although he fights on 
the frontline.

The group operates from a number of apartments in a block that housed 
civilians until fighting started. Amid the weapons and other accoutrements of 
war, kitchen tiles featuring kiwis and watermelons are a reminder that this was 
once someone’s home. The nine-storey building was only finished in early 2014; 
now the residents from all but one floor have fled as almost every apartment 
has some kind of damage. In the courtyard, an elderly woman pleads with the 
soldiers to bring her some potatoes.

The OSCE has blamed both sides for the repeated ceasefire violations. At a 
briefing earlier this month, Alexander Hug, the deputy chief OSCE monitor, said 
a lack of trust hampered any lasting peace, because “without trust each side 
fears the vacuum will be filled by the other”.

He criticised both sides for barring access to the monitors. “We need access 
and, to be frank, that’s not happening. The sides prevent our monitors from 
accessing certain areas. The sides plant landmines and obstacles. The sides 
threaten and intimidate our unarmed civilian monitors.”

As the potential for renewed full-scale hostilities remains, it is the 
population of east Ukraine who suffer the most. At Mariinka, one of the few 
points where civilians can cross the frontline, snaking queues of people, 
including the elderly and young children, wait for permission to cross the 
makeshift border. On Thursday morning on the Ukrainian side, outgoing rounds of 
light artillery were audible, as well as the crackle of machine-gun fire.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3e5a5852d3af77fdb4d7dd493c867eb8e34e5d5%2F0_265_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20Ukraine%3A%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20Europe's%20forgotten%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20Ukraine%3A%20on%20the%20frontline%20of%20Europe%27s%20forgotten%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Feast-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3e5a5852d3af77fdb4d7dd493c867eb8e34e5d5%2F0_265_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 A woman inspects her damaged house on Thursday after shelling in Gorlovka, 
eastern Ukraine. Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/EPA 
The weary Ukrainian soldiers at the checkpoint and the beleaguered locals 
trying to cross the lines hardly paid attention; the war has become a way of 
life here over the past two years, and they were far more concerned about 
whether or not they would make it across the border. An elderly woman burst 
into tears as her pass to cross the line was not in the system and she was 
forced to turn back after many hours of waiting.

The checkpoint at Mariinka has gradually taken on the trappings of a real 
border, with passport booths and customs check, and is one of many signs that a 
political solution to the conflict seems further away than ever.

Moscow is keen for a settlement that would see much of the separatist 
infrastructure legalised, giving it de facto control over part of Ukraine 
without having to fund it. In Kiev, attitudes have hardened against any 
compromise with the “terrorists” in the east. Amid the deadlock, many in Kiev 
still worry about the possibility of Russia opting for full-scale war. “It 
doesn’t seem logical but then the things they do often don’t,” said the 
Ukrainian official.

 