
Across the African continent second-hand clothes from developed countries are 
a mainstay of many informal traders, dominating local market stalls.East Africa 
alone imported $151m <http://comtrade.un.org/data/> of second-hand clothing 
last year,most of which <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-30227025> was 
collected by charities and recyclers in Europe and North America.

In February, however, the East African Community (EAC), an intergovernmental 
organisation,proposed a ban  
<http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/EAC-heads-of-state-to-ban-used-clothes-and-shoes-imports-/-/2558/3094476/-/6jmhba/-/index.html>
on imported used clothes and shoes. The aim is to encourage local production 
and development within member countries: Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and 
Uganda.


In the 1970s, east Africa’s clothing manufacturing sector employed hundreds of 
thousands of people, but when the debt crisis hit local economies in the 1980s 
and 1990s, local manufacturing struggled to compete with international 
competition and factories were forced to close. Today, the small sector 
remaining is geared towards production for exports.


Many orthodox economists disagree with banning imports because it goes against 
the principles of free trade. Rather than having the freedom to choose imported 
used clothing, east African consumers will have to buy higher priced local 
goods or new clothes imported from Asia.


Increasing the cost of clothing will hit east Africa’s many low-income 
consumers, but the shock effect could be reduced if a ban was imposed 
gradually. If a tax on used clothing imports was introduced before an outright 
ban, this could subsidise local production and increase local manufacturing 
capacity.

A revitalised local market would ultimately boost the EAC’s economy by 
providing more jobs than the second-hand sector while retaining money that 
currently goes to Europe and the US to pay for second-hand imports.


It is important to emphasise, however, that turning off the supply of used 
clothing alone will not enable the growth of local manufacturing. The proposed 
ban on imports doesn’t include new clothing imports from outside the EAC. While 
foreign garments will be more expensive than used clothes, they are likely to 
be cheaper than locally manufactured clothesas has been found in South Africa. 
<https://muse.jhu.edu/article/545095> Efforts to ban used clothing imports are 
therefore unlikely to be beneficial for the local economy unless there are 
similar controls on new clothing imports. This would require the strengthening 
of customs and borders.

Clothing manufacturers in east Africa face other challenges. If countries such 
as Kenya are to revitalise their clothing industry, which once employed an 
estimated 500,000 people and nowonly has around 20,000 workers, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/06/second-hand-clothing-donations-kenya>
 then the EAC needs to promote industrial policies.

These might include improving communication, transport infrastructure and 
power supplies to enhance distribution and avoid delays in production; 
providing tax relief for factories; and offering export incentives. Links could 
also be established with east Africa’s cotton growing sector to improve its 
sustainability and help ensure a reliable local supply of raw materials.

Successful nations such as China and South Korea did not emerge from poverty 
by becoming dependent on exports from the west. Instead they protected domestic 
markets. Second-hand clothes may be more affordable, but trading in them 
reinforces an unequal relationship between haves and have-nots in the global 
economy.

If east African leaders want to do more than maintain the status quo they need 
to take bold decisions, even if this means sometimes taking decisions that 
might be unpopular with international advocates of free trade. The intention of 
the ban and the goal of promoting industrialisation in the east African region 
is commendable, but for it to be successful more needs to be done to support 
industry and to break the cycle of dependency.

Dr Andrew Brooks is the author of Clothing Poverty: The Hidden World of Fast 
Fashion and Second-hand Clothes <http://www.clothingpoverty.com/>
 