
Stephen Tumhaire rakes through the knee-high grass in his field to get rid of 
fallen tree branches that might stop the grass from growing. Sweat shines on 
his face, and he repeatedly mops it with his palm.

In 1972, Tumhaire’s grandfather moved from the west of Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> to the central Nakasongola district, 
a once sparsely populated area now made up of small farms created when farmers 
started dividing land among their children.

With increasing rural-urban migration in the area, demand for charcoal grew in 
nearby towns and villages, and this accelerated a vicious cycle ofdeforestation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2013/nov/15/global-deforestation-10-hot-spots-on-google-earth-in-pictures>
 that began with the clearing of land for cultivation.

“This place was good before charcoal burning took centre stage. There were 
very many trees, there was much grass and cows, hence abundant milk,” he says.


On Ghana's cocoa farms, Fairtrade is not yet working for women | Roy 
Maconachie and Elizabeth Fortin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/11/ghana-cocoa-farms-fairtrade-not-yet-working-for-women>
Tumhaire lives in Chamkama village in Uganda’s cattle corridor, 140km north of 
the capital Kampala. He says that in the mid-90s charcoal burning became so 
lucrative some young men dropped out of school to focus on making the fuel.


Now, efforts are under way to use farmers, like Tumhaire, to help revive the 
trees through a scheme known asfarmer managed natural regeneration (FMNR) 
<http://fmnrhub.com.au/>. Farmers encourage regrowth by pruning and protecting 
existing trees, as well as encouraging new growth from felled tree stumps, 
sprouting root systems or seeds.

The regrown trees and shrubs improve the soil, prevent erosion and water loss, 
and increase biodiversity. This can translate into increased crop yields, more 
timber for firewood and better incomes for farmers.

Tumhaire was trained under the FMNR for east Africa 
<http://fmnrhub.com.au/projects/fmnr-east-africa/> project, funded by World 
Vision Australia <http://fmnrhub.com.au/projects/fmnr-east-africa/#.VuFu62ThBdA>
 and the Australian government. Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda are also taking part 
and theWorld Agroforestry Centre <http://www.worldagroforestry.org/> provides 
research and evaluation.

“After the training, I pruned the trees and cleared shrubs on my land and soon 
grass started growing. Pasture was usually a problem during dry seasons here 
but through FMNR, my cows have enough grass and I have managed to sell a 
surplus of 39 bags of grass worth 331,000 shillings [£70],” Tumhaire says.

“Milk production from my cows increased gradually … I sell seven litres per 
day, which fetches 9,100 shillings per litre, while the rest is consumed by my 
children.”


Tony Rinaudo 
<http://partners.worldvision.com.au/meet-tony-rinaudo-the-tree-whisperer/>, a 
natural resource expert for World Vision Australia and FMNR pioneer in Niger, 
says this land restoration technique is cheap, based on community knowledge, 
and it promotes the regeneration of indigenous vegetation.

Bananas facing a bleak future as staple African crops decline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/07/bananas-bleak-future-staple-african-crops-decline-beans-protein>
“Between 25-30% of the world’s agricultural soil 
<http://www.fewresources.org/soil-science-and-society-were-running-out-of-dirt.html>
 has been degraded. The very natural resource relied on for food supply is 
washing away, hence the need for trees back in the landscape in order to 
maintainsoil fertility and stop it from eroding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/15/land-degradation-costs-word-trillions-dollars-year-report-says>
,” he says.

In east Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, where many farmers 
cannot afford inorganic fertiliser, trees can be an incredible resource in 
restoring soil’s fertility and nutrients.

“Many tree species are nitrogen-fixing species. Any tree species would drop 
leaf litter on to the soil and build up carbon stock and other nutrients,” he 
says.


The Australian government has injected $1.5m (£0.78m) into the project, says 
John Feakes, the Australian high commissioner toKenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>. “The programme has supported 160,000 
farmers, of whom 60,000 are women,” he adds.

For Florence Namembwa, another farmer in Chamkama, FMNR means wood is easier 
to find for cooking and boiling water. And that has given her the gift of time.

 “I now have enough time for other economic activities, such as working in the 
vegetable garden and attending our women’s savings group. My children can now 
concentrate on doing their homework since they don’t have to look for firewood 
any more,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Feast-african-farmers-rewarded-for-letting-grass-grow-under-their-feet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F861f9829a58f828314fa15f3a425eea7b290de83%2F0_0_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=East%20African%20farmers%20rewarded%20for%20letting%20grass%20grow%20under%20their%20feet%20%7C%20Robert%20Kibet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Feast-african-farmers-rewarded-for-letting-grass-grow-under-their-feet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=East%20African%20farmers%20rewarded%20for%20letting%20grass%20grow%20under%20their%20feet%20%7C%20Robert%20Kibet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Feast-african-farmers-rewarded-for-letting-grass-grow-under-their-feet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F861f9829a58f828314fa15f3a425eea7b290de83%2F0_0_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Sayian Leparmai tends an acacia tree in his grazing field in Kenya’s semi-arid 
Baringo county, which borders Nakuru county. Photograph: Robert Kibet 
In Kenya’s Nakuru county, Jackson Mwangi stands between two acacia trees in 
his field of short grass and scattered bushes. The 46-year-old recalls how 
drought ravaged livestock herds in 2000, in this often-arid land 130km north of 
the capital, Nairobi. Today he practises FMNR.

“Human activities led to desertification here,” says the father of four. “I 
can’t believe that the piece of land that used to give me eight bags of maize 
three years ago is now producing up to 25 bags,” he says.

Kenya, like other nations in sub-Saharan Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/feb/25/great-green-wall-sahel-desertification>
, has seen thousands of hectares of farmland becomeso degraded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/feb/17/green-loans-kenya-farmers-environment>
 that they no longer produce adequate or regular crops or pastures for 
livestock.

Government officials have also received training in FMNR in Kenya, and this 
has been useful in helping implement anational policy to increase nationwide 
forest cover from 1% to 10% of land. 
<http://www.worldagroforestry.org/newsroom/media_coverage/agroforestry-key-reaching-10-tree-cover-kenya>


For Rinaudo, the benefits of FMNR go beyond the tangible. “Apart from FMNR’s 
contribution in increasing milk production and doubling crop yields, its 
biggest transformation is restoring hope to vulnerable communities in east 
Africa.”
 