
It’s already Cornwall’s most visited attraction – thanks to its pair of 
striking biomes, housing an indoor rainforest as well as 1,000 varieties of 
Mediterranean plant – but theEden Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/eden-project> has now announced plans to add an 
£8.5m hotel to its site near St Austell.

The idea is for the 109-room hotel to use a two-block design in order to 
reduce its visible impact on the landscape, while a focus on energy efficiency 
and sustainability will involve the use of timber and stone from the local 
area. If new plans are approved, construction will start in late 2017, with an 
opening date in April 2018.

Plans for the accommodation at the Eden Project are not new. It received 
planning permission for a hotel in June 2015, but these plans were revised to 
take in advice from hotel experts and concerns about the impact and scale of 
the property. And according to the Eden Project’s executive director, David 
Harland, a hotel option dates back to the attraction’s early days.
 The biomes at the Eden Project. Photograph: Kevin Britland/Alamy 
“We have always aspired to have a hotel at Eden and this is the culmination of 
years of work towards that aim,” he said.


The hotel is likely to appeal to music fans attending the Eden Sessions 
concerts held every summer, andmay also tempt families and day trippers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/18/the-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip>
 looking to extend their stays. Since it opened in 2001, more than 18 million 
people have visited the site, which also puts on themed shows and activities 
with an educational slant.

Harland added: “We feel that hotel accommodation would increase Eden’s appeal 
as a venue for weddings, conferences and events. This is part of our plan to 
enhance the year-round sustainability of Eden’s business.”
 