
I loved Edith Nesbit's writing as a child, as did most of my contemporaries. 
In the school library, the copy ofThe Phoenix and the Carpet  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141340869>
had been mended several times with aged Sellotape –Five Children and It 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/45181.Five_Children_and_It>, The Story of 
the Treasure Seekers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140367065>
 andThe Wouldbegoods 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/837524.The_Wouldbegoods> were all out on 
rotation. The books were read to us on drowsy Friday afternoons, and we took 
them home and read them again ourselves until they fell to pieces.

She remains a writer of unusually enduring popularity. No shiny box of 
essential children's classics can fail to featureat least one Nesbit title 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Little-Classics-Library-Railway-Children/dp/B00AHYLDPU>
 – Five Children and It has never been out of print since its first 
publication. The secret of her perennial appeal is the fine balance she strikes 
between the exotic and the down-to-earth, the exalted and the humorously 
mundane. Her child protagonists, stolid, bumbling middle-class kids with the 
best of intentions, narrowly avoid the worst of outcomes through their own good 
natures and occasional magical intervention. But whether they're dealing with 
amulets, firebirds, railway porters or incensed uncles, they show a native 
imagination and shrewdness familiar to every child reader. They know how to 
coax favours from authority, how to turn away wrath with a soft answer, and how 
to fall from grace and be redeemed.

Nesbit also retains her popularity because she wears her learning and her 
large intelligence so lightly.The Story of the Amulet 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/763489.The_Story_of_the_Amulet> is rich 
with her deep, careful research into Egyptology, but she never overburdens her 
pages or her reader. LikeKipling 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puck_of_Pook%27s_Hill>, she lets her characters 
encounter towering historical and mythological figures – Caesar, Pharaoh, the 
Queen of Babylon – in a straightforward way that lets her young reader, too, 
hold immediate and arresting conversations with the past. Reading her books 
helped confirm me, and many others, in an early love of mythology, fairy tale 
and folklore far and wide. Occasional sour notes, like the large-nosed Jewish 
stockbrokers the children encounter in London, might make the contemporary 
reader wince, but they don't efface Nesbit's evident joy in the stories and 
peoples of the world.

Nesbit's personal life, uniquely turbulent and often contradictory, is 
idealised or reimagined complete in many of her books – most notably in The 
Railway Children, wherein the breadwinning, story-selling Mother remains the 
linchpin of the family after Father is unjustly imprisoned. Mother is funny, 
clever and kind, but she is invariably a respectable lady, even though jam AND 
butter on the same piece of bread now represents "reckless luxury".

Nesbit, a co-founder of the Fabian Society, married when seven months pregnant 
to philandering Hubert Bland, chain smoker and frequently inattentive parent, 
was rather less ladylike, although arguably more interesting. A recurrent trope 
of her books is also the rebuilding of a family's fortunes after mishap or 
bereavement. Nesbit lost her own father shortly before her fourth birthday. No 
real suprise, then, that in many of her books, alongside dreamy, neverland 
English summers and the triumphant finding of uncountable treasures, she 
unforgettably conveys the hot-eyed, resenting silence of the mourning child who 
cannot cry.

Her imagination imparts the dangerous excitement of fabulous beasts to trains 
in tunnels - and makes an everyday occurrence of thick-furred, snail-eyed, 
wish-granting Sand Fairies. Speaking directly to young readers, without 
constraint or moral tight-lacing, she will continue to convey the unkempt 
richness of her unique world to children for many years to come.
 