
Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> has declared three days of 
mourning on Sunday after a bombing at a chapel adjacent to Egypt’s main Coptic 
Christian cathedral killed 25 people and wounded another 49.

Egypt’s state-run news agency Mena reported that 12 kilograms of TNT 
explosives were used in the attack. The majority of those killed were women and 
children.

There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the attack.


In a statement, President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi encouraged Muslims and Coptic 
Christians to band together “to emerge victorious in the war against terrorism, 
which is the battle of all Egyptians”. He stressed that the government would be 
harsh in its response to the attack, one of the deadliest carried out against 
the religious minority in recent years.
map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/cairo_map/giv-3902Uk14tWDxp7hQ/>
Those who pray regularly at St Mark’s Cathedral described a system of security 
within the compound that appeared strong, but could be lax. “People who commit 
such acts do so with impunity,” said one man, declining to be named as he stood 
close to the blast site and held up a small wooden cross. “There are normally 
police on both entrances to the cathedral and to the chapel.” Asked whether 
everyone who entered the cathedral compound was searched, he answered: 
“Sometimes yes, sometimes no”.

As the death toll rose and nearby hospitals called for blood donations, there 
was grief and anger in the streets. Hundreds of people crowded outside the 
cathedral, including a large crowd of young men who made clear their complaints 
against conservative Muslim groups, Egypt’s ministry of the interior and even 
the president. “As long as any Egyptian blood is cheap, down with any 
president,” they chanted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fegypt-bomb-blast-cairo-cathedral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed1280f8f1e3bb6590bc125ea9ef3e4ae3d569a3%2F0_28_1718_1031%2F1718.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt%3A%20three%20days%20of%20mourning%20declared%20after%2025%20people%20killed%20in%20Cairo%20bomb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fegypt-bomb-blast-cairo-cathedral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%3A%20three%20days%20of%20mourning%20declared%20after%2025%20people%20killed%20in%20Cairo%20bomb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fegypt-bomb-blast-cairo-cathedral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed1280f8f1e3bb6590bc125ea9ef3e4ae3d569a3%2F0_28_1718_1031%2F1718.jpg>
 Egyptian security forces examine the scene inside St Mark’s Cathedral 
following Sunday’s bombing. Photograph: Omar El-Hady/AP 
“You ask for our emotions? Look in there,” said one man, pointing at the angry 
crowd. “What do you expect us to feel? People were killed while they were 
praying. They didn’t even die in their homes,” he said.

The Egyptian government has staked its mandate on the fight against Islamist 
groups as well as the Sinai chapter ofIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>. Protecting the minority Christian 
population is the cornerstone of this pledge, but Sunday’s attack caused some 
to question whether the government is living up to its promise to provide 
security to all Egyptians.

“The government doesn’t protect us. They can’t protect us against terrorism in 
general,” said one man, who also wished to remain anonymous.

“Lots of Christians supported the current regime out of fear of being targeted 
by Islamist extremists,” said Mina Thabet, an expert on religious minorities at 
the Cairo-based Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms. “Many Christians 
supported Sisi as he represented himself as a protecter of Christians against 
extreme groups. Today’s event may affect their support.”

Other members of the Coptic community were unshaken in their support for 
Egypt’s government.

“This is an injury to all Egyptians,” said Father Boules Haliem, spokesman for 
the Coptic Church of Egypt. “This is about more than the Coptic community, this 
is an attack on all Egyptians.”

Egypt has witnessed a rise in attacks by Islamist groups including those 
affiliated to Isis since the overthrow of former Islamist president Mohammed 
Morsi in 2013.

An attack close to a mosque in Giza on Friday killed six security officials, 
and was later claimed by a group named “Hasm”, or “Decisiveness.” The group, 
which the Egyptian government believes is a violent offshoot from the deposed 
Muslim Brotherhood group, issued a statement condemning Sunday’s attack via the 
encrypted messenger service Telegram, calling it an example of “dirty hands 
extending to churches to kill women and children”.









 