
Egypt’s government has approved a deal to hand over two Red Sea islands to 
Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> and sent it to 
parliament for ratification, despite a legal dispute over the plan, according 
to state television.

 The deal, announced in April, caused public uproar  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/egypt-saudi-arabia-tiran-sanafir-red-sea-islands-transfer>
andprotests  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/cairo-protests-egypt-red-sea-islands-saudi-arabia>
by Egyptians who said the uninhabited islands of Tiran and Sanafir belonged to 
their country.

The controversy has become a source of tension with Saudi Arabia, which has 
providedEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> with billions of 
dollars of aid but recently halted fuel shipments amid deteriorating relations.

 In June, Egypt’s higher administrative court annulled the agreement, saying 
Egyptian sovereignty over the islands could not be given up. The Egyptian 
government lodged an appeal.

 Earlier this month, an Egyptian state advisory body recommended the court 
uphold its original decision, in a report seen by Reuters. The court is 
scheduled to issue its final verdict on 16 January and is not obliged to follow 
the advisory body’s report.

 The government’s latest move showed “the collapse of the state of law and the 
constitution” in Egypt, said Khaled Ali, a lawyer who filed the lawsuit in June 
to annul the deal.

 “The decision that parliament is going to issue is void and the people should 
defend their land with all legitimate means against this tyrant regime that 
doesn’t respect either law or judiciary.”

 But Nabil al-Gamal, member of the legislative and constitutional committee in 
parliament, said there was “absolutely no conflict” in sending the agreement to 
parliament for ratification before the court’s final ruling.

 “I expect the parliament not to vote ... on the agreement before the 
judiciary rules, so that there won’t be any conflict between them,” he said.

 Tiran and Sanafir are situated in the narrow entrance to the Gulf of Aqaba 
leading to Jordan and Israel.

 Saudi and Egyptian officials say they belong to Saudi Arabia and were only 
under Egyptian control because Riyadh asked Cairo in 1950 to protect them.

 Lawyers who opposed the handover said Egyptian sovereignty over the islands 
dated to a 1906 treaty, which was before Saudi Arabia was founded.
 