
Polls have opened to American voters after a star-studded climax to a campaign 
that could elect either the first female president of the United States or a 
celebrity billionaire who threatens to rewrite the rules of politics forever.


Minutes after midnight the traditional first election day ballot was cast in 
Dixville Notch, New Hampshire, as Lady Gaga in North Carolina and Donald 
Trump’s running mate Mike Pence in Michigan introduced competing last-ditch 
rallies.

With a fumbled start 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BMiWTeOgNBe/?taken-by=danroberts73> that many will 
hope does not herald more serious voting irregularities to come, residents of 
Dixville delivered four votes for Hillary Clinton, two for Trump, one for 
libertarian Gary Johnson and a quirky write-in for the 2012 Republican nominee 
Mitt Romney.

US election 2016: voters head to polls as Trump and Clinton aim to make 
history – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-polls-trump-clinton-results-live>
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> were cautiously 
optimistic of national victory after Trump’s promise to build a wall against 
immigrants appeared instead to be bolstering Clinton’s electoral firewall.

Analysis of early voting behaviour suggested the Republican candidate may have 
stirred a demographic giant by encouraging up to 87% more Hispanic voters than 
usual in states such as Florida.

Democrats began election day with an average lead in national opinion polling 
of around three points, though state-level polling suggested several possible 
paths to victory also remained for Trump among white working-class voters.

Leaving nothing to chance, Clinton and Barack Obama held afternoon rallies in 
Michigan on Monday andappeared on stage together in Philadelphia with Bruce 
Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/hillary-clinton-visits-obamas-springsteen-jon-bon-jovi-america-polls>
, a one-man songbook for America’s blue-collar angst.

Who is leading the polls the day before voting? Not a clear 'Clinton' or 
'Trump'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/polls-us-election-accuracy-margin-error-clinton-trump>
Springsteen played Thunder Road, ending with the lyric “We’re pulling out of 
here to win”, and Long Walk Home, a bleak hymn to a town that has lost its 
businesses but still “wraps its arms around you”.

Before the largest crowd of the Democratic campaign, in front of Independence 
Hall, Obama slapped the lectern as he introduced “this fighter, this 
stateswoman, this mother, this grandmother, this patriot, our next president of 
the United States of America, Hillary Clinton”.

The former secretary of state implored “we have to bridge the divide in our 
country” as she began pivoting to what may be a key challenge if she does win. 
“I regret deeply how angry the tone of the campaign became.”

In New York, Madonna – sporting a stars and stripes bobble hat – covered John 
Lennon’s Imagine in an impromptu acoustic show.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fmadonna-supports-hillary-clinton-with-surprise-new-york-concert-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madonna%20supports%20Hillary%20Clinton%20with%20surprise%20New%20York%20concert%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fmadonna-supports-hillary-clinton-with-surprise-new-york-concert-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madonna%20supports%20Hillary%20Clinton%20with%20surprise%20New%20York%20concert%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fmadonna-supports-hillary-clinton-with-surprise-new-york-concert-video&media=>
Madonna supports Hillary Clinton with surprise New York concert – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/nov/08/madonna-supports-hillary-clinton-with-surprise-new-york-concert-video>
The night’s momentum continued as Clinton boarded her plane, bound for 
Raleigh, North Carolina, where she held the final rally of her campaign just 
after midnight.

 Accompanied by her family, Clinton was in visibly good spirits while chatting 
jovially with aides towards the front cabin. The singer Jon Bon Jovi, who also 
performed in Philadelphia, joined the flight. Even Huma Abedin – the longtime 
aide who left the trail amid renewed but ultimately unfounded controversy 
surrounding Clinton’s emails 10 days ago – had returned.

 The revelry resembled a campaign aware it was on the brink of victory, 
savoring every last moment after an exhausting 18 months.

But Trump was voicing equal confidence he could pull off a surprise win that 
would send shockwaves around the world, hoping to channel anger over jobs and 
trade into an election day upset without parallel.

“Today is our independence day,” he told the audience in Grand Rapids. “Today 
the American working class is going to strike back, finally.”

“We have one flawed candidate left to beat,” added Trump, reeling off his list 
of equally unexpected wins in the Republican primary. “It’s going to be the 
beginning of a new adventure.”

The Trump camp went into the final day of the campaign needing an almost clean 
sweep of battleground states such as Florida and North Carolina to win 
outright, plus a series of shock wins in the rust belt that looked less and 
less likely.


But sensing possible danger, the Clinton campaign poured last-minute resources 
into the industrial midwest, a region where she struggled against a similar 
anti-establishment surge for Bernie Sanders during the primary election season.

Clinton told supporters in Michigan the election was a choice “between 
division and unity … between strong and steady leadership and a loose cannon 
who could put everything at risk”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-michigan-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20rallies%20Michigan%20supporters%20in%20final%20speech%20before%20polls%20open%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-michigan-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20rallies%20Michigan%20supporters%20in%20final%20speech%20before%20polls%20open%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-michigan-election-video&media=>
Donald Trump rallies Michigan supporters in final speech before polls open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/08/donald-trump-michigan-election-video>
Speaking to a packed crowd in a community college gymnasium in Scranton, 
Pennsylvania, Trump outlined his closing message that “this election will 
decide whether we are ruled by a corrupt political class or by yourselves, the 
people”.

Both presidential candidates planned to watch Tuesday night’s election returns 
in New York, prompting the city to stage the largest election day police 
deployment in its history, officials said.

The New York police department was poised to station 5,000 uniformed officers, 
including some with automatic weapons and explosives detection equipment, 
across Manhattan and the city’s 1,205 polling stations.

The Department of Justice announced its civil rights division was deploying 
more than 500 voting monitors to 28 states, amid particular concern that 
changes to voting rules in some states such as North Carolina might 
deliberately affected African American turnout.
North Carolina 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=NC> 
At Trump’s rally in Scranton, a blue-collar crowd sitting in steep, narrow 
bleachers looming from the gym floor was deafening at times. In addition to 
familiar chants like “Lock her up” and “Build the wall”, Trump supporters 
shouted “I love you Donnie” about their candidate and “She’s a demon” about his 
opponent.

Trump, who was repeatedly interrupted by raucous chants of “CNN sucks”, called 
Clinton “the face of failure” and “the face of failed foreign policy” as he 
continued his attacks on familiar targets including Jay Z and Beyoncé, as well 
as the media.

The Republican nominee was heartened by the sound of the rowdy cheers in a 
state that was last won by a Republican, George HW Bush, in a presidential 
election in 1988, and where Clinton has long maintained a narrow but consistent 
lead. “This is not the sound of a second-place finisher,” he declared from the 
stage.

Yet by the time he appeared at the final, hastily scheduled rally in Michigan, 
he was an hour and a half late and many started streaming towards the exits as 
the clock approached one in the morning.

But this was not a sign of flagging support. Bruce Dykstra of Grand Rapids 
said that he had seen the nominee the week before and compared him to a rock 
star, while Todd Willman, a local furniture maker, was there despite needing to 
get up a 6am for work. He seemed to typify the devil-may-care ethos of the 
campaign: “If I was his campaign manager I would made his slogan ‘Fuck it’.”

Under the crisp blue skies forecast for much of the country on election day, 
Clinton began her last full day of campaigning with a personal moment: one that 
highlights her historic opportunity to become the first female president in the 
US and a role model for a generation of young women.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Flady-gaga-bon-jovi-hillary-clinton-north-carolina-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lady%20Gaga%20and%20Bon%20Jovi%20back%20Hillary%20Clinton%20at%20final%20campaign%20rally%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Flady-gaga-bon-jovi-hillary-clinton-north-carolina-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lady%20Gaga%20and%20Bon%20Jovi%20back%20Hillary%20Clinton%20at%20final%20campaign%20rally%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Flady-gaga-bon-jovi-hillary-clinton-north-carolina-video&media=>
Lady Gaga and Bon Jovi back Hillary Clinton at final campaign rally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/08/lady-gaga-bon-jovi-hillary-clinton-north-carolina-video>
Pausing beneath the plane that has carried her through the closing months of a 
sometimes interminable-feeling campaign, she stopped to show the scene to her 
two-year-old granddaughter Charlotte via her cellphone.

“I wouldn’t have worked as hard as I have over 18 months … if I did not 
believe in my heart that we can do this,” she later told supporters in 
Pittsburgh. “We don’t have to accept a dark and divisive vision for America. 
Tomorrow you can vote for a big-hearted America.

“There is fear and anger in our country,” Clinton added. “But anger is not a 
plan. We have got to start talking to each other again.”

Amid continued Democratic rancour over the late role of the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/donald-trump-fbi-hillary-clinton-emails-final-day-campaign>
 and Trump’s threat to refuse to recognise an election result he claims may be 
rigged, it will be a tough battle for whoever wins.

Though stock markets rebounded in the wake of better national polls for 
Clinton, Democrats feared the cloud cast by the FBI could cost them control of 
Congress and prolong Washington gridlock even if Clinton wins the White House.
Michigan <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=MI> 
Clinton took her closing argument to four cities across three battleground 
states on Monday, dubbing the choice before voters as among the most 
consequential in modern history.

“Our core values are being tested in this election,” Clinton said at a rally 
in Grand Rapids, Michigan. “But my faith in our future has never been stronger.”

Earlier in the day she implored thousands of mostly young voters, who filled 
an outdoor park at the University of Pittsburgh as hundreds more lined the 
streets, to grasp why this election was different.

“This person is temperamentally unqualified, experientially unqualified to be 
president,” Clinton said.

“We have got to rise above all of this hate-filled rhetoric, all of these 
insults and scapegoating and finger-pointing and insulting.”

Between rallies and flights Clinton took her pitch to the airwaves with a 
series of interviews in pursuit of undecided voters who might still be 
persuaded or those needing motivation to head to the polls. A conversation with 
radio host Ryan Seacrest drew Clinton’s first reaction to the announcement by 
the FBI director, James Comey, a day earlierclearing her once more after 
reviewing a new batch of emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
 that may have been pertinent to her use of a private server.

“I kept saying that I was surprised, I never expected them to do that,” she 
said of Comey’s controversial decision to cast renewed scrutiny over the 
now-closed investigation into her emails less than two weeks before the 
election.

“I was just a little bit befuddled by the whole process, but it’s behind us 
now and I think everybody should focus on what is best for our country and how 
we’re going to meet the challenges we have.”

Barack Obama urged Americans to focus on the big picture as he began his last 
day of campaigning, warning that the election could be close-fought.

“I want you to tune out all the noise and I want you to focus because the 
choice you face when you step into the voting booth could not be clearer:Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is temperamentally 
unfit to be commander-in-chief,” he told a rally in Ann Arbor, Michigan.

“Just think, over the weekend his campaign took away his Twitter account. Now, 
if your closest advisers don’t trust you to tweet, why should we trust you with 
the nuclear codes?”

What’s the mood where you are? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/us-election-voting-polls-mood> 
Share your pictures and views with us
 