
In the middle of a vast salt desert in Bolivia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bolivia>, tour guide Angel Calani crouches 
down and jabs his index finger into the crusted earth. “Litio,” he announces as 
he withdraws his finger, now glistening with brine. “We could mine it for a 
thousand years and not run out.”

The 4,000-square-mile Salar de Uyuni is the world’s largest salt flat and 
unexploited lithium reserve, with the metal sitting just a few centimetres 
below the surface.

Demand for lithium – which is used in pharmaceuticals, fertilisers, and 
smartphone and electric car batteries –has surged 
<http://blogs.ft.com/ftdata/2016/04/14/lithium-price-on-the-rise/#respond> in 
the past year, ahead of an anticipated boom in electric cars, and isprojected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/23/battery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia>
 to outstrip supply by 2023.

The Bolivian government claims that it has 70% of the world’s 
<https://nacla.org/news/bolivia-bets-state-run-lithium-industry> lithium 
reserves, piquing the interest of many international companies.

Supplying a raw material needed to develop the electric car industry will help 
to reduce reliance on fossil fuels, and could provide a much-needed economic 
boon for one of South America’s poorest countries. But there are concerns about 
the impact of the extraction process on the desert’s fragile ecosystem.


Extraction could mean increased traffic and pollution, pressure on water 
supply and damage to the site’s natural beauty, affecting tourism.
 Locals, including tour guide Angel Calani, are concerned about the 
environmental impact of extracting lithium. Photograph: Max Opray 
Luis de la Barra is a tour operator based in Uyuni, a busy tourist hub on the 
edge of the salt flats and the closest town to the 400 sq km portion of the 
Salar designated for lithium development. He says there have been few signs of 
lithium activity in the area so far, but worries about big machines digging up 
the Salar. “I’m concerned they will destroy the area and the environment,” he 
says. “People from Uyuni are not going to be happy with that.”

Back in the desert, the brine dripping off Calani’s finger does not just 
contain lithium, but high levels of magnesium and other elements. This makes it 
more difficult and costly to process than the purer lithium reserves found in 
neighbouring Argentina and Chile.

These countries – which along with Bolivia are described as the lithium 
triangle – have been busily harvesting their salt flats to meet demand. After 
Australia, Chile is the second largest producer in the world andArgentina is 
third 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/23/battery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia>
.

At the moment, Bolivia’s salt plain is a shimmering white elephant, with just 
a few pilot extraction projects under way. These include a lithium carbonate 
project spearheaded by German company K-UTEC Ag Salt Technologies and a battery 
manufacturing plant built by China’s Linyi Dake Trade.

Bolivia’s president, Evo Morales, pledged to develop the country’s lithium 
industry as part of his 2009 re-election campaign. He has since made a series 
of pledges to investa total of $995m 
<http://www.theecologist.org/News/news_analysis/2986741/bolivias_coming_lithium_boom_economic_miracle_or_environmental_nightmare.html>
 by 2019. The government has spent $250m of that sum so far, according to a 
report fromBelmont Resources. 
<http://www.belmontresources.com/LithiumReport.pdf#page=84>

Tesla’s reported interest

Morales has been less keen about involving international companies. At the 
start of his presidency, he declared an end to the “looting” of the country’s 
resources by foreign countries. He has imposedstrict requirements on foreign 
investment 
<http://www.mining.com/bolivia-passes-mining-law-that-bans-partnerships-with-multinationals-39699/>
, demanding that the Bolivian government serve as an equal partner in any 
project processing and manufacturing products made from its lithium.

Related: Unlikely heroes: how lithium mining could change the Pilbara for the 
better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/10/unlikely-heroes-how-lithium-mining-could-change-the-pilbara-for-the-better>

The country seems to be warming to international investment, however. In 
November last year, Luis Alberto Echazu, head of Bolivia’s national lithium 
company Comibol, announced he was in discussions with an unnamed Canadian 
company about setting up a lithium battery plant in the country. In a report on 
its website, Comibol said Tesla expressed an interest in building a plant in 
Bolivia.

Industry observers suspect Pure Energy Minerals, a lithium supplier for Tesla, 
is the Canadian organisation in question. Sources have confirmed to the 
Guardian that Pure Energy Minerals is interested in the Bolivian lithium 
industry. Comibol and Tesla have not responded to requests for comment. 

Patrick Highsmith, chief executive of Pure Energy Minerals, says he cannot 
confirm or deny involvement because of Canadian stock market regulations. But 
in answer to concerns about the extraction processes used, he says his company 
is experimenting with a lithium extraction process developed in Israel and 
particularly suited to the challenges of the Salar de Uyuni.

The process involves passing the brine through nano filters and mixing it with 
a solvent to separate the lithium from the other minerals. Once the lithium is 
extracted, the brine is reinjected back into the ground.

“If we can get in there and tinker with the process a little, the team 
believes it has applicability to the Bolivian salar,” says Highsmith, who adds 
that it is less water-intensive than traditional methods of extracting lithium, 
employed by K-UTEC Ag Salt Technologies, that use the sun to evaporate the 
water from the brine, extracting the lithium from the leftovers.

However, Heiner Marx, director of K-UTEC Ag Salt Technologies, dismisses 
concerns about the water-intensity of the process. “We evaporate only the brine 
from the Salar, not the drinking water from the communities around,” he says.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 