
The fact that Jane Austen, in the course of her short life, published her 
books anonymously made a great impression on me as a girl of 15. It was the 
surly English teacher who told us this, and I was tempted to ask why, but I 
soon abandoned the idea, out of timidity. Meanwhile, I readPride and Prejudice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/26/pride-prejudice-200th-anniversary>
, but it didn’t interest me. At the time, I was enthralled by the great male 
adventure novels, with their stories that ranged all over the world, and I 
wanted to write such books myself: I couldn’t resign myself to the idea that 
women’s novels were domestic tales of love and marriage. I was past 20 when I 
returned to Austen. And from that moment not only did I love everything she had 
written but I was passionate about her anonymity.Sense and Sensibility appeared 
in October of 1811 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/12/saturdayreviewsfeatres.guardianreview2>
, in three volumes, with the sole clue: “By a lady”. The three other books that 
she published in her lifetime –Pride and Prejudice (1813), Mansfield Park 
(1814),Emma (1815) – also came out anonymously. As for the two novels published 
posthumously in a single volume,Persuasion and Northanger Abbey, they, too, 
appeared without the name of the author, but with a note about Austen written 
by her brother Henry: an interesting example of how the living can both respect 
and, at the same time, violate the memory of the dead.

Ten questions on Jane Austen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/18/ten-questions-jane-austen> 
I still like to contemplate the moment when Austen decided to make public one 
of the texts she had been secretly working on for years, to have it printed at 
her own expense, and even to renounce the idea of a pseudonym. Who wroteSense 
and Sensibility? Who invented Marianne and Elinor and their mother and the many 
female characters who appear, disappear, reappear, first in the confined space 
of the country, then in London, and, finally, again in the country? Who devised 
the plot that led both to marriage? Who advanced the story by means of verbal 
exchanges, conversations that in wit, intelligence, and dramatic force rival 
those of Shakespeare? Was itJane Austen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten> or, simply, a lady, no name or 
last name, an extremely cultured, extremely perceptive lady who was well 
acquainted with the ways of the landed gentry, who knew the rituals of the 
London bourgeoisie, who was aware of how unstable the world is – of how 
everything changes in spite of sense and in the tumult of sensibility?

We have to follow Elinor to compose an answer. Marianne, of course, let’s not 
forget, has an important role. She’s a beautiful model of the blossoming young 
girl to whom all conventions seem constricting, and who adheres to a new 
convention: considering her own sensibility as the only possible truth. 
Marianne wants to be Marianne, an extraordinary, unique Marianne, even at the 
risk of her own ruin. She has inherited the giddy, incautious thoughtlessness 
of her mother, but she is also the product of new times and new tastes and new 
requirements of freedom. All things considered, she might be a female version of
Werther 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/01/werther-goethe-david-constantine-review>
, a pastel representation of oppressive revolutionary times. All things 
considered, it’s not impossible thatTolstoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/oct/08/classics.leonikolaevichtolstoy> 
thought of her and girls like her created by women writers when he imagined 
Natasha. All things considered – yes, all things considered – she is not very 
different from the other women, old and young, who appear in the novel, and 
who, although their motivations are less pure, are led by their sensibility.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsense-and-sensibility-jane-austen-elena-ferrante-anonymity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444738056583%2F3ce18df0-95cc-4f01-b2c6-aabaf779dc4f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elena%20Ferrante%20on%20Sense%20and%20Sensibility%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20passionate%20about%20Austen's%20anonymity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsense-and-sensibility-jane-austen-elena-ferrante-anonymity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elena%20Ferrante%20on%20Sense%20and%20Sensibility%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20passionate%20about%20Austen%27s%20anonymity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsense-and-sensibility-jane-austen-elena-ferrante-anonymity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444738056583%2F3ce18df0-95cc-4f01-b2c6-aabaf779dc4f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Elinor (Emma Thompson, left) is ‘a product of the prudent control of 
sensibility’. Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
Elinor  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/mar/12/inpraiseofjane>is 
something else. She has nothing of her mother and nothing of her sister. She 
has nothing of the world of females struggling to escape spinsterhood and 
secure for themselves a solid matrimonial arrangement. She has nothing of the 
women who manipulate men to safeguard their interests and those of their 
children. She has nothing of the women who are in daily conflict with other 
women. She doesn’t have their egoism, their treacherousness, their gossipy 
chattiness, their opacity as fiancées, wives, mothers. And yet she is totally 
absorbed by the hierarchy of values of her sex. Elinor knows that money counts 
and should be counted. Elinor wants love. She seeks a husband. She aspires to 
happiness and happiness is marriage. She has a strong sensibility that makes 
her tremble with desire, with suffering, with indignation. Her originality lies 
in the fact that she is both outside of and within the daily life of her sex. 
But it’s not only that: closeness and distance could have produced a lopsided 
figure, now hypercritical, now hypocritical. Instead, what we get is a person 
who is involved but not audacious, vigilant, armed, and yet understanding. Both 
sisters are educated; they value elegance, refined manners, kindness, 
intelligence and wit in conversation, narrative ability. But while Marianne 
uses those qualities as a means of discriminating – on the one hand, the few 
who possess them, and are worthy of her attention; on the other the majority, 
male and female, who do not have them and scarcely deserve to exist – Elinor 
gradually achieves an ironic acceptance of flaw, an understanding of error, a 
sympathetic closeness that keeps conflict from exploding. She sees the worst of 
her sex, but, unlike Marianne, without tracing a line of demarcation between 
herself and others.

As for her own sex, Elinor perceives the cage in which the male world confines 
it

Her sister at one point accuses her of a lack of sensibility. It’s an 
unfounded charge; Elinor will demonstrate that she is mistaken. What makes her 
different is not coldness but an attention to others that allows her to reduce 
to the minimum her own need to be central. She is fully aware of the 
small-mindedness of her neighbours, but, skilled as she is with words, she can 
confront the world without setting off a recriminatory explosion that will 
destroy it.

Elinor, in short, is a product of the prudent control of sensibility. She 
eliminates from herself what in others generates confrontations, open or hidden 
– that is to say, occasions for turmoil, suffering, unhappiness. To put it 
another way: Elinor hides Elinor in order to become better than Elinor; she 
goes through her world maintaining self-control in the face of those who for 
various reasons can’t control themselves. She does so with far-sightedness. She 
prefers men who are not handsome, not clever in conversation, incapable of 
giving a narrative order to their experience, but serious, reliable. Yet she is 
able to understand the handsome, egocentric and cynical Willoughby, whose 
suffering touches her even though it derives from the most banal of men’s 
torments: that another man possesses the woman they wanted and could have had.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsense-and-sensibility-jane-austen-elena-ferrante-anonymity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444738268670%2Fc18c2100-de82-4db2-8394-48c09427bec0-1652x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elena%20Ferrante%20on%20Sense%20and%20Sensibility%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20passionate%20about%20Austen's%20anonymity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsense-and-sensibility-jane-austen-elena-ferrante-anonymity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elena%20Ferrante%20on%20Sense%20and%20Sensibility%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20passionate%20about%20Austen%27s%20anonymity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsense-and-sensibility-jane-austen-elena-ferrante-anonymity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444738268670%2Fc18c2100-de82-4db2-8394-48c09427bec0-1652x2040.jpeg>
 Jane Austen, after a watercolor by Cassandra Austen Photograph: 
GraphicaArtis#Unified ED/Getty Images 
As for her own sex, Elinor perceives the cage in which the male world confines 
it, and the bad feelings that explode in that cage. But she does her best to 
manage the situation and ably stands up to the sharp-witted egotism of her 
sister-in-law, Fanny, as well as to that of her rival, Lucy, an ambitious woman 
who, like her, practises self-control, if only in order to hone a hypocrisy 
that serves to procure an optimal arrangement for herself. Elinor’s “sense” is, 
in short, the art of living in the world with equilibrium, satisfying her own 
desires without hurting other women but, rather, offering herself as a support 
for their fragility. She behaves like a lady who can confront a storm of 
individual feelings, with their egotistical impulses and ungovernable 
desperation, with an orderliness made up of ironic detachment and a spirit of 
observation. If, at a certain point, she allows room for sensibility and bursts 
into tears, it is only when she is sure that her own most secret anxieties will 
not disturb the life of anyone else.

It seems to me that Austen, by not putting her name on the books she 
published, did the same thing as Elinor, and in an extremely radical way. She 
uses neither her own name nor one that she has chosen. Her stories are not 
reducible to her; rather, they are written from within a tradition that 
encompasses her and at the same time allows her to express herself. In this 
sense they are indeed written by a lady, the lady who does not fully coincide 
with everyday life but peeks out during the often brief time when, in a common 
room, a space not hers, Austen can write without being disturbed: a lady who 
disappears whenever something – the disorderly world of the everyday – 
interrupts her, forcing her to hide the pages. This lady doesn’t have Jane’s 
anxieties or her reserve. The lady-narrator describes the ferocity of the male 
world that clusters around income, is afraid of change, lives idly, contends 
with futility, sees work as degrading. And above all she rests a clear gaze on 
the condition of women, on the battle between women to win men and money. But 
she doesn’t have Jane’s natural resentments toward daily life. The 
lady-who-writes can set aside dissatisfaction and bitterness, spread a light, 
ironic glaze over the old world that, with its wrongs, is collapsing and the 
new world that is emerging, with its abundance of new wrongs. But pay 
attention, for the lightness conceals pitiless depths – it’s a glaze that, 
miraculously, doesn’t sweeten anything. There are a thousand traces of these 
depths, continually opening up in a narrative that proceeds at the easy pace of 
a dance. The last sentence ofSense and Sensibility provides an example:

And among the merits and the happiness of Elinor and Marianne, let it not be 
ranked as the least considerable, that though sisters, and living almost within 
sight of each other, they could live without disagreement between themselves, 
or producing coolness between their husbands.

“Though sisters”: the relationship between the sisters is full of perils, and 
if we read the novel attentively we realise this, thanks to the skilful play 
between what is and isn’t said. But a happy ending is a happy ending, and the 
happy entrance into adulthood of Elinor and Marianne is marked by a change in 
their primary bond. The lady-who-writes, after staging all the conflicts 
between women, also makes plain to the reader, almost as a fact of nature, the 
conflict within the relationship that has been at the centre of her novel, the 
relationship that is the hardest to examine truthfully, the relationship 
between the sisters. But she does it lightly, almost in spite of Jane, and only 
to emphasise the fact that, thanks to the careful management of sense and 
sensibility, Elinor and Marianne, although they will live for the rest of their 
lives within sight of one another, have overcome that dangerous obstacle as 
well.

 * Sense and Sensibility, introduced by Elena Ferrante (translated by Ann 
Goldstein) and illustrated by Philip Bannister, is available fromThe Folio 
Society <http://www.foliosociety.com>.
 