
Despite the late cold spring upsetting the rhythms of growth and renewal, the 
Royal Bath & West Show <http://www.bathandwest.com/royal-bath-west/97/>opened 
punctually and jubilantly to mark its 150th year as "England's largest 
celebration of rural life". And seeing the cheerful families funnelling in from 
the car parks towards the entrance gates, it truly had the sense of a great 
regional carnival â€“ Somerset's own Derby day.

In the building that housed the pigs 
<http://www.britishpigs.org.uk/breedlist.htm>, among the proud champions were 
large whites and British saddlebacks, reclining on beds of straw. Excited 
children on tiptoe were peering into a pen where a great landrace sow was 
sprawling on her side, apparently fast asleep while 10 suckling piglets 
frantically jostled and butted, desperate for her milk.

In the next hall, amid the statuesque, cream-coloured simmental cattle and the 
great white charolais, it was a massive red ruby bull that caught the eye. His 
name was Elgar, and his sire was Nimrod. The literature told of the ruby reds' 
kind temperament and of genetics that produce perfect hybrids, with high 
fertility, easy calving and quick growth.

You could see every kind of cutting-edge agricultural technology, or get 
advice on best business practice and accountancy, but only if you could spare 
time away from the show rings or from spending money on well-cut tweeds or 
enticing "Best of the West" produce.

And then there was the village green. Muscular farriers sweating in singlets 
fetched white-hot strips of metal from the fire with their tongs and hammered 
them into horseshoe shapes on the "beck" or rounded, horn-shaped end of the 
anvil, the techniques, the heat and the ring of the hammer unchanged through 
the ages. Horses stood patiently as their hooves were trimmed. On the grass, 
small children grasped their ribbons anxiously at the maypole, preparing for a 
first try at the dance.
 