
Ellyse Perry describes it as a watershed season for women’s cricket in 
Australia but the superstar hopes there is plenty more growth to come.


The inaugural Women’s Big Bash League is ongoing but already it has been a 
resounding success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/03/womens-big-bash-league-cricket-now-an-australian-television-ratings-hit>
.


Ellyse Perry: 'It's the most exciting time in women's cricket' | Russell 
Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/09/ellyse-perry-its-the-most-exciting-time-in-womens-cricket>
Network Ten has shifted games to its primary channel, while a record crowd of 
12,901 attended Saturday’s WBBL Melbourne derby.


Perry, one of Australia’s most high-profile athletes, is among those hoping 
the WBBL helps fast track a fully-professional era of women’s cricket.


“As elite players in the game you want to be as professional as possible and 
have every opportunity to continue to develop,” Perry said.


“That’s certainly where the women’s game is heading.


“In a lot of aspects it’s already there. There’s a number of players that are 
essentially full-time players now.”


Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia and the players’ 
union will soon start working on a memorandum of understanding.


SCG Trust chairman Tony Shepherd praised CA for growing the women’s game.


“Their rise may indeed be the greatest legacy of Cricket Australia’s current 
administration,” Shepherd said in a function on Sunday.


Women's Big Bash League cricket now an Australian television ratings hit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/03/womens-big-bash-league-cricket-now-an-australian-television-ratings-hit>
CA announced a pay rise for female players last May.


Top domestic players currently earn $17,000 a season, while those contracted 
by CA can earn retainers of $50,000 plus tour payments.


James Sutherland knows those numbers need to improve.


“I don’t think we’ve got anywhere near far enough down the track,” CA boss 
Sutherland said.


“Our ambition is for there to be a much greater number of fully professional 
female cricketers. We’re very focused on that.”

Female participation has been rising steadily in recent years and CA is fully 
aware the bigger the WBBL gets, the more it will fuel that growth.


“It’s about telling the world that cricket is a game for girls,” Sutherland 
said.


It’s been a watershed summer for women’s cricket.
Ellyse Perry 
“We need to back that up as well by saying not only is this a sport for girls 
but it’s a career for girls as well.”


Perry, an integral part of Australia’s Ashes success in 2015 and the Sydney 
Sixers’ first signing, said “anything is possible” when it came to the WBBL.


“There’s scope to continue to grow it,” the 25-year-old said.


“Obviously continue to attract a lot of fantastic international players, which 
we’ve been able to do this season, and really make it the premier competition 
in the world for women. It’s been a watershed summer for women’s cricket ... 
it’s been absolutely incredible.”
 