
A voluptuous portrait of Emma Hamilton, commissioned by her husband and later 
bought by her lover Lord Nelson to save it from the shame of a public sale, is 
to be displayed in a major exhibition on her extraordinary life.

“She was a really remarkable person, who has usually been seen only in the 
shadows of the men in her life. It is time to bring her back into the light,” 
said Quintin Colville, curator of the exhibition that opens at the National 
Maritime Museum in Greenwich, London, next month.

The portrait has been in private collections since it was completed, and has 
not been exhibited in the UK for almost half a century.


Colville, like many men before him, has fallen heavily for Emma, the 
blacksmith’s daughter who became an aristocratic diplomat’s wife and the 
mistress of one of the most famous men of the day. He told the Guardian he 
finds it hard to forgive the artist, Élisabeth LouiseVigée Le Brun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/15/vigee-le-brun-painter-french-royalty>
, for being so rude about Emma, who had been typically kind to her when Vigée 
Le Brun came to the Naples court as a refugee from the French Revolution.

Emma was far more famous in that circle than Vigée Le Brun, and was renowned 
for her “attitudes”, theatrical exhibitions of poses drawn from classical art 
and literature, including her husband’s famous collection of Greek vases. Her 
performances were essential viewing for visitors to Naples, including the 
German writerGoethe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johann-wolfgang-von-goethe>, who described 
her as “exceedingly beautiful”, and said she brought the ancient world to life 
“as if one were in some dream”.

 In 1791, Sir William Hamilton took the then Emma Hart as his mistress from 
his nephew and then married her when he was 61 and she was 26. The blacksmith’s 
daughter became Lady Hamilton, an ambassador’s wife and society hostess. Many 
regarded the match as shocking, but it was nothing to the scandal that 
followed. When a wounded Nelson came to convalesce in Naples, Lady Hamilton 
nursed him back to health and the two fell passionately in love. Instead of 
throwing her out and challenging Nelson to a duel, her husband remained on 
affectionate terms with both of them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fportrait-emma-hamilton-lord-nelson-on-display-national-maritime-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b24c0147c3f998d7f2a5bb748d3260e587ebd3f%2F0_0_6049_4954%2F6049.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emma%20Hamilton%20portrait%20bought%20by%20her%20lover%20Lord%20Nelson%20to%20go%20on%20display&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fportrait-emma-hamilton-lord-nelson-on-display-national-maritime-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emma%20Hamilton%20portrait%20bought%20by%20her%20lover%20Lord%20Nelson%20to%20go%20on%20display&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fportrait-emma-hamilton-lord-nelson-on-display-national-maritime-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b24c0147c3f998d7f2a5bb748d3260e587ebd3f%2F0_0_6049_4954%2F6049.jpg>
 A devotional book Emma Hamilton gave to Horatia, her daughter by Nelson, is 
among the objects on display. Photograph: Jon Stokes/National Maritime Museum 
Vigée Le Brun: artist to the aristocracy who played and changed the game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/12/vigee-le-brun-metropolitan-museum-of-art-woman-artist-revolutionary-france>
“Hamilton greatly admired Nelson, and he was unquestionably extremely fond of 
Emma. He didn’t want to lose her, he was getting old, and I think he wanted a 
comfortable life spending time with his collections and his books, surrounded 
by people he liked,” Colville said.


The portrait shows Lady Hamilton as either a bacchante or Ariadne, daughter of 
King Minos of Crete in Greek mythology. Colville notes her expression of sleepy 
satisfaction, and the little ship sailing away in the background, and wonders 
if there is a sly reference to Nelson.

Vigée Le Brun went on to paint many more highly saleable portraits of Hamilton 
– who was already the muse and favourite model ofthe artist George Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2002/jun/02/1> – and said of her: “I 
could have copied her different poses ... and filled a gallery with paintings.”

However, she also wrote in her diary: “Lady Hamilton was not very intelligent, 
though she was exceedingly mocking and denigrating, to the point that her 
faults were her only means of conversation. But she was cunning, and this 
helped her to snare a husband.”

The exhibition will include many loans from private collections, including 
touchingly modest objects that belonged to Lady Hamilton, which have never been 
displayed before. Almost everything she owned was scattered in sales after 
Nelson died at Trafalgar in 1805, two years after Sir William. She ended up 
poorer than when she was born, having been released from a debtor’s prison to 
die penniless in Calais in 1815.

The objects will include a little needle book with nautical scenes owned by 
Horatia, her daughter by Nelson, and a devotional book she gave her, inscribed 
“a life well spent makes old age pleasant and honourable”, but signed “Emma 
Hamilton” rather than as her mother.

Both Sir William and Nelson loved the Vigée Le Brun portrait. Sir William left 
a miniature version to Nelson in his will, “a very small token of the great 
regard I have for his Lordship, the most virtuous, loyal and truly brave 
character I ever met with”. Nelson, when he learned the original was to be 
sold, wrote to Lady Hamilton: “My dearest friend you are on SALE: I am almost 
mad to think of the iniquity.” He paid £300 for it, and kept it over his bed 
for the rest of his life.

• Emma Hamilton, Seduction and Celebrity 
<http://www.rmg.co.uk/see-do/emma-hamilton-seduction-and-celebrity> runs from 3 
November 2016 to 17 April 2017.

• This article was amended on 24 October 2016. An earlier version incorrectly 
referred to Sir William Hamilton as Lord Hamilton.
 