
One of my favourite childhood books was Professor Branestawm. Its eponymous 
hero is a querulous inventor, with a multitude of spectacles perched on his 
vast forehead, who spends his days creating fantastical machines, most of which 
don't work properly, or catch the user unawares. He's a bit absent-minded, 
adorable and above all, eccentric. Tim Hunkin, the creator of the Under the 
Pier show in Southwold, Suffolk is as close as you'll ever get to a real-life 
Branestawm. He's softly spoken and has a playful air of mischief about him; his 
shoulders are ever so slightly hunched and I suspect he spends much of his time 
giggling. I adore him from the off. Tim's passion is coin-operated machines, 
but coin-operated machines the like of which you have never seen.

Amusement arcades have been a staple of seaside entertainment for more than a 
century. The Victorian Mutoscope and its titillating What the Butler Saw 
flicker book provided many with their first experience of a moving picture, in 
the 1930s pinball machines were a real innovation, and in the 1970s, Space 
Invader games machines were at the cutting edge of the computer revolution.

But arcades became a bit "samey" and so Hunkin, with his boundless imagination 
and a deep hankering to entertain, decided to create some machines of his own. 
Working models – coin-operated automatons that told cautionary tales – used to 
be very popular and Hunkin, as a boy, loved Blackpool Tower's collection of old 
John Dennison machines.

"They're slightly macabre and cautionary, but funny nonetheless. There's a 
machine called Is Marriage a Failure?, in which a man is shown looking after 
babies and sewing while all the time being beaten over the head with a rolling 
pin by his wife. They slipped from fashion and have been replaced with fruit 
machines and crane grab booths."

Tim made his first machine in 1975 – it was called The Birth of Venus and, for 
2p, you could watch as a water-operated Raquel Welch emerged from a bathtub.

"I started off using cardboard and Sellotape," he tells me, as we sit on his 
Quickfitcorrect <http://timhunkin.com/a102_quickfit.htm> creation from 2003 – 
it's a large massage table covered in baby-blue towelling that promises "No 
embarrassing perspiration, no revolting display of sinews and no obnoxious 
panting" – "but the batteries kept dying. So I switched to coin operation. It's 
more reliable."

In the 1980s, he collaborated with the Cabaret Mechanical Theatre 
<http://www.cabaret.co.uk/> in Covent Garden, making machines that stood 
outside the museum to draw people in. But it was hisInstant Eclipse machine 
<http://timhunkin.com/71_instant_eclipse.htm>, an oval cupboard that you shut 
yourself into, that changed things forever.

"I stood it outside my house," he says, ruefully, "but the neighbours 
complained. So I asked Chris Iredale, owner of Southwold Pier, whether I could 
put it outside the pier cafe. He said yes, but the salt air kept breaking it."

Iredale clearly recognised Tim's peculiar genius, and when he rebuilt the pier 
in 2001, he gave up a small space to Tim and his incredible creations.

They are absolutely brilliant. The Microbreak 
<http://timhunkin.com/a100_microbreak.htm> (pictured) is a chintzy armchair set 
in front of a 1950s-style portable TV that sets out to take the "busy 
executive" on a holiday that lasts "no more than 3 minutes". As an added 
incentive, there's "No risk of deep vein thrombosis" which, I must confess, I 
found very enticing. It's built on the chassis of a 1985 Sega Space Harrier 
arcade game, and once you've put your money in the slot, you are whisked away 
as the armchair tips and rocks and an animated film of your holiday appears in 
front of you. It's hilarious.

"I built that because I hate holidays," Tim tells me. "I find them stressful 
and depressing. That's my favourite ride."

In the Mobility Masterclass 
<http://timhunkin.com/a113_Mobility_Masterclass.htm>, you play a pensioner 
(choosing quite how ancient you want to be) and have to control a real Zimmer 
frame as you cross three lanes of a motorway to get to the Rivoli Danceroom.

I think what I found most wonderful about the Under the Pier show is that 
everywhere I looked, adults were grinning, children were wide-eyed and everyone 
was laughing. TheExpressive Photobooth 
<http://timhunkin.com/a104_photobooth.htm> is brilliant, Rent-A Dog 
<http://www.timhunkin.com/a109_rentadog.htm> is joyous, AutoFrisk 
<http://timhunkin.com/47_security_coinops.htm> made me howl and the Bathyscape 
<http://timhunkin.com/a106_bathyscape.htm> made me rethink everything I've ever 
seen in a natural history programme. The Under the Pier show's strength is 
that, despite being very modern, it has a wonderfully nostalgic feel to it. I 
can't recommend it highly enough. Once seen, never forgotten. Go. Go. Go.

• The Under the Pier Show (underthepier.com <http://www.underthepier.com>) is 
on Southwold Pier. Entry is free. The machines cost from 40p to £2 a go
 