
Beaten, drowned, burned alive: how US justice failed Emmett Till and Frank 
Morris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/19/emmett-till-frank-morris-murders-justice-never-served>
The legacy of the lynching of thousands of black people in America was 
recalled when the death 60 years ago inMississippi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi> of just one, Emmett Till, was 
commemorated on Friday at his gravesite in a suburban Chicago cemetery.

Relatives and civil rights activists gathered in Burr Oak Cemetery, south of 
Chicago <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago>, to listen to speeches 
and songs, and comfort one another with hugs. A large wreath of white flowers 
encircled a black and white portrait of Till’s smiling face.

Congressman Bobby Rush recalled his own mother explaining to him as an 
eight-year-old the “horrors” of Till’s death. He said that memory still 
inspires him.


“We stand here and bear witness to the fact that the truths around Emmett 
Till’s murder are still truths that America refuses to recognize,” he said.

The 14-year-old Till was visiting relatives in the cotton country of the 
Mississippi Delta on 24 August 1955 when witnesses said he violated the Jim 
Crow social code by whistling at Carolyn Bryant, a white woman working behind 
the counter of a store in the tiny town of Money.

On 28 August he was kidnapped from his uncle’s home a few miles away. On 31 
August his body was recovered from the Tallahatchie River, with a bullet hole 
in his head and severe cuts on his face. Barbed wire was wrapped around his 
neck and he was weighted down with a cotton gin fan.

Among those attending the ceremony was Till’s cousin, Wheeler Parker, who as a 
16-year-old witnessed three white mendrag Till from the house 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/19/emmett-till-frank-morris-murders-justice-never-served>
.

“I thought we would all die,” he said. “I’ve never been that afraid before in 
my life. And at 16, I was not trying to die … so you relive that and wonder 
what could you have done.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Femmett-till-civil-rights-legacy-commemorated-60-years-after%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fffbe3bb45a8480c01acbffc8027634d1b26e58%2F176_0_2711_1628%2F2711.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emmett%20Till%3A%20civil%20rights%20legacy%20commemorated%2060%20years%20after%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Femmett-till-civil-rights-legacy-commemorated-60-years-after%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emmett%20Till%3A%20civil%20rights%20legacy%20commemorated%2060%20years%20after%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Femmett-till-civil-rights-legacy-commemorated-60-years-after%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fffbe3bb45a8480c01acbffc8027634d1b26e58%2F176_0_2711_1628%2F2711.jpg>
 The grave marker of Emmett Till at the Burr Oak Cemetery where the 60th 
anniversary of his murder has been commemorated. Photograph: Charles Rex 
Arbogast/AP 
The wreath-laying ceremony followed a procession from Robert Temple Church of 
God in Christ, where Till’s funeral took place.

Till’s mother insisted on an open-casket funeral in Chicago, and Jet magazine 
published photos of his corpse. The brutality sparked outrage that gave urgency 
to the civil rights movement.

“The casket was right there,” Parker recalled. “All I can remember is being 
numb, saying this is not Emmett.”

Friday’s observance marked the start of a weekend of events aimed at 
remembering Till’s death and what it means today.

Among those scheduled to participate in a Till memorial dinner are Sybrina 
Fulton, the mother of Trayvon Martin; and Michael Brown Sr, the father of 
Michael Brown, whose shooting in 2014 led to protests over police action in 
Ferguson, Missouri.

“Black lives matter,” Rush said. “Black lives mattered when Emmett was killed. 
Black lives mattered when [Chicago Black Panther leaders] Fred Hampton and Mark 
Clark were killed. Black lives matter even today.”

Movie screenings and other memorial events will be held on Thursday through 
Sunday in Mississippi.
 