
Its legacy winds back through centuries and across continents, past the birth 
of America to the waning days of the Enlightenment. It is a record of 
humanity's achievements in war and peace, art and science, exploration and 
discovery. It has been taken to represent the sum of all human knowledge.

And now it's going out of print.

The Encyclopedia Britannica has announced that after 244 years, dozens of 
editions and more than 7m sets sold, no new editions will be put to paper. The 
32 volumes of the 2010 installment, it turns out, were the last. Future 
editions will live exclusively online.

For some readers the news will provoke malaise at the wayward course of this 
misguided age. Others will wonder, in the era of Wikipedia, what took the 
dinosaur so long to die. Neither view quite captures the company or the 
crossroads.

Jorge Cauz, president of Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc, suggested that the 
encyclopedia was already something of a relic within the company itself, which 
has long since moved its main business away from its trademark publication and 
into online educational tools.

"The company has changed from a reference provider to an instructional 
solutions provider," Cauz said. He projects that only 15% of the company's 
revenue this year will come from its namesake publication, mostly through 
subscriptions and app purchases. "The vast majority" of the remaining 85% of 
revenue is expected to come from educational products and services, said Cauz, 
who declined to provide dollar amounts but said the company was profitable.

Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc, is owned by the Swiss banking magnate Jacqui 
Safra. The company's websites, which include Merriam-Webster dictionaries, 
attracted more than 450 million users over the course of 2011, according to 
internal numbers.

If the company's move over the last decade into the education market is an 
impressive example of corporate versatility, the competitive difficulties the 
encyclopedia faces are easy to grasp.

Wikipedia English has 3.9m articles. The comprehensive Britannica has about 
120,000. Wikipedia is free. The DVD Britannica, which includes two dictionaries 
and a thesaurus, costs $30 on Amazon. Individuals will also be able to sign up 
for an annual $70 subscription (universities will be charged about $1 per 
student).

Cauz said the product was worth the price.

"We may not be as big as Wikipedia. but we have a scholarly voice, an 
editorial process, and fact-based, well-written articles," Cauz said. "All of 
these things we believe are very, very important, and provide an alternative 
that we want to offer to as many people as possible. We believe that there are 
1.2 to 1.5bn inquiries for which we have the best answer."

Asked whether the decision to end the publication's monumental run had not 
caused a backlash inside the company, Cauz said the opposite was true.

"The transition has not been that difficult," he said. "Everyone understands 
we needed to change. As opposed to newspapers, we felt the impact of digital 
many years ago â€“ we had a lot of time for reflection. Everyone is very 
invigorated.

"We are the only company that I know of, so far, that made the transition from 
traditional media to the digital sphere, and managed to be profitable and to 
grow."

But what of the kids who will no longer grow up in the beneficent shadow of 
the physical volumes, or be guided in their learning by happy chance, as when 
they go looking for "kookaburra" and accidentally encounter "komodo dragon" on 
an adjacent page?

"I understand that for some the end of the Britannica print set may be 
perceived as an unwelcome goodbye to a dear, reliable and trustworthy friend 
that brought them the joy of discovery in the quest for knowledge," Cauz wrote 
in a company announcement. The product will improve, however, when it finally 
leaves the space constraints and black-and-white finality of print behind, he 
said.

"Today our digital database is much larger than what we can fit in the print 
set. And it is up to date because we can revise it within minutes anytime we 
need to, and we do it many times each day."
 