
Enda Kenny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> has been re-elected 
as prime minister of Ireland after 10 weeks of deadlock that followed an 
inconclusive general election in February.

Kenny is the first Fine Gael PM to win re-election in Irish history, though 
his triumph is marred by a minority administration that is propped up by 
independent MPs and, more crucially, by Fianna Fáil.

The party, which will remain on the opposition benches, has agreed to support 
the Fine Gael government for a period of two years in an unprecedented 
political ceasefire between the rivals.

Micheal Martin, the Fianna Fáil leader, said his party reserved the right to 
criticise the government despite the “confidence and supply” agreement he 
secured with Kenny. “This potentially represents a new beginning,” Martin added.

Ireland to have minority Fine Gael government after deal agreed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/ireland-to-have-minority-fine-gael-government-after-deal-agreed>
Earlier this week, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael hammered out a deal that includes 
the suspension of controversial water charges, a 15% rise in rent allowances to 
alleviate the housing crisis and a 15,000 increase in police numbers to fight 
rising crime, such as a resurgence ofgangland warfare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/01/dissident-republican-dies-apparent-escalation-dublin-gang-war>
 in Dublin.

Kenny’s centre-right party lost 26 seats in February’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/irish-election-enda-kenny-plans-to-form-government-despite-losing-voters>
, but remained the largest party in parliament with 50 seats. Fianna Fáil made 
a stunning recovery from a historical low of 21 seats in the 2011 general 
election to win 44 seats. Sinn Féin remained the third-biggest party with 23 
seats.

On Friday Kenny received 59 votes, with 49 against, in the 158-member 
parliament – by far the fewest votes ever received for a winning premier in
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

In a subdued victory speech, he appealed to opposition politicians to “work in 
partnership together to build a better Ireland. It will be a real test of our 
democracy, of our character and indeed of this house a test I am convinced we 
will pass.”

Parliament has now adjourned to allow Kenny to travel to see the Irish 
president, Michael D Higgins, at his residence in Dublin’s Phoenix Park, where 
Fine Gael leader will officially become PM.


Sinn Féin and other leftwing groups in parliament have criticised the Fianna 
Fail-backed deal.
 