
The end is nigh unless miracles happen on Mondays in Mumbai. England still 
trail India by 49 runs and they have just four wickets remaining. A vibrant 
Test match, providing rich entertainment, has brought beaming smiles to the 
locals, who have filled the stands of the Wankhede Stadium over the weekend.

India v England, fourth Test: day four – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/11/india-v-england-fourth-test-day-four-live>
For the tourists there is now the grim realisation that they have been 
outplayed once again and that there is no way back in the series, a dreadful 
feeling yet no disgrace. On a brilliant surface for cricket, though you might 
struggle to find many pace bowlers adhering to this view, the best batsmen 
scored runs and skilful spin bowlers took wickets. From England’s perspective 
the sadness was that most of the batsmen were Indian, so too the bowlers.

From 307 for six on Saturday afternoon, India romped to 631 all out with Virat 
Kohli’s hand forever on the tiller and Jayant Yadav a willing and able first 
mate. Hence England started batting with a massive deficit of 231, which was 
bound to dictate the outcome of the match. Their response was a mesmerising, 
technicolour affair, almost certainly futile, but which made for another 
wonderful spectacle.

On what was presumed to be a deteriorating fourth day surface 362 runs were 
scored for the loss of nine wickets, most of the latter English. The ball is 
bouncing for the spinners and turning but any good batsman who lasts for 20 
minutes can still prevail. England’s response verged between the calamitous and 
the cavalier.

Poor Keaton Jennings followed his century on debut with a golden duck – the 
first batsman in Test history to do so. He was lbw to Bhuvneshwar Kumar and it 
transpired that his partner, Alastair Cook, was correct not to advise a review. 
Moeen Ali, having repelled 53 overs in the Indian innings, dutifully appeared 
at No4 and was also dismissed without scoring to a fast-turning delivery from 
Ravindra Jadeja. In between Cook fell to Jadeja, yet again lbw seeking runs on 
the leg side.

The cavalier element came from the Yorkshiremen. Joe Root, determined to 
counterattack and enjoying the challenge, hit 77 from 112 balls, an innings 
brimful of improvised sweeps, which often seemed less hazardous than a forward 
defensive.

Joe Root admits England got selection wrong again for fourth India Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/joe-root-england-selection-wrong-fourth-india-test-cricket>
In the end he was lbw to the new poster boy of Indian cricket, Jayant Yadav. 
Jonny Bairstow survived a few scares but was still there at the close on 50. 
Initially those heart-in-the-mouth moments came from inside edges; then he kept 
being given out by umpire Bruce Oxenford only for the review system to come to 
everyone’s rescue. On the second occasion Oxenford was clearly aghast a 
millisecond after he had raised his finger, in recognition of his error; he 
made one pine for Kumar Dharmasena.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Findia-england-fourth-test-day-four-report-cricket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b7a01cb5464a933323f260b219dcd45c3e265c4%2F0_155_4145_2488%2F4145.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%20heading%20towards%20defeat%20after%20Virat%20Kohli%E2%80%99s%20double%20century%20for%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Findia-england-fourth-test-day-four-report-cricket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%20heading%20towards%20defeat%20after%20Virat%20Kohli%E2%80%99s%20double%20century%20for%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Findia-england-fourth-test-day-four-report-cricket%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b7a01cb5464a933323f260b219dcd45c3e265c4%2F0_155_4145_2488%2F4145.jpg>
 India celebrate dismissing Keaton Jennings for a golden duck. Photograph: 
Rafiq Maqbool/AP 
However, Bairstow is running out of partners. Ben Stokes, reverse sweeping, 
unluckily gave a catch off his boot and the nightwatchman, Jake Ball, departed 
to the final delivery of the day, a second victim for Ravichandran Ashwin. Thus 
England face the prospect of a dismal dead rubber in Chennai where the fifth 
Test starts on Friday.

Their humiliation commenced promptly in the morning session. Adil Rashid’s 
first two overs yielded 16 runs and thereafter Cook shuffled his bowlers like a 
card sharp with superglue on his fingers. It did not make much difference who 
was bowling, though there would be the odd reminder that the pitch was allowing 
the ball to grip more readily for the spinners.

But England’s spinners were already a spent force; they had been emasculated 
on Saturday.Virat Kohli <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli> was his 
irrepressible self, super fit and super driven to ram home India’s advantage. 
Jayant Yadav, meanwhile, batted in the manner of Ashwin, which is now high 
praise. England think they bat deep but their lower order cannot compare with 
India’s in this series.

Yadav, happily cruising along in Kohli’s wake, barely played a false shot. If 
Cook kept the field up for the spinners he popped the ball over their heads, if 
not he milked them as if they were as unthreatening as cuddly old Jerseys who 
doubled as house pets. Landmarks came and went: Kohli’s double century, which 
would advance to being the highest score by an Indian captain; Yadav’s maiden 
century, the first by an Indian No9. Some were not so palatable as the runs 
conceded by England’s spinners kept mounting. In the end Rashid finished with 
four wickets when Yadav was stumped on 104 and Kumar was caught on the deep 
mid-wicket boundary by Chris Woakes, who had just dismissed Kohli for 235, 
snaffled on the boundary at deep-extra cover.

Fumbles, fallouts and faulty planes: England’s nightmarish 1993 tour of India 
| Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/08/fumbles-fallouts-and-faulty-planes-englands-nightmarish-1993-tour-of-india>
But four wickets for Rashid came at a cost, 192 runs to be precise, which puts 
him third on the list of runs conceded by Englishmen in an innings. Sir Ian 
Botham, top with 217 (against Pakistan at the Oval in 1987) was around to shake 
his hand if necessary. Ian Peebles, a leg-spinner – and scribe – of another 
era, remains in second place (on 204) and would surely have written about 
Rashid’s lot with great sympathy.

Not that the experience of Rashid or Moeen, who conceded 174 runs, was 
unprecedented for English spinners in India. Thosewho witnessed England’s tour 
of 1992-93 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/08/fumbles-fallouts-and-faulty-planes-englands-nightmarish-1993-tour-of-india>
 can recall John Emburey, Phil Tufnell and Ian Salisbury being ruthlessly 
shredded on surfaces that only seemed to turn when England were batting – and 
two of those were renowned for their parsimony when bowling outside India. Just 
to cheer up Rashid let him contemplate a quirky stat, which should not be 
over-interpreted: his 22 wickets in four Tests here at an average of 32 may not 
have led to any victories but this is way beyond anything achieved by Shane 
Warne, who took his wickets at 47 apiece in India. That aside, there was not 
much for Englishmen abroad to be cheerful about.

The Indian board of control also confirmed on Sunday that the fast bowler 
Mohammed Shami and the wicketkeeper Wriddhiman Saha will miss the final Test 
through injury.
 