
Virat Kohli has dominated England’s bowlers to the tune of 640 runs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/india-england-fourth-test-day-four-report-cricket>
 this series but Jimmy Anderson, who has gone wicketless in his last three 
innings, believes the right-hander’s technical flaws are merely being masked by 
home conditions.

England heading towards defeat after Virat Kohli’s double century for India
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/india-england-fourth-test-day-four-report-cricket>
Kohli’s 235 on day four in Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/india-england-fourth-test-day-four-report-cricket>
 took him to 1,200 Test runs in 2016, as he surpassed Rahul Dravid’s Indian 
record of 602 runs in a series between the two sides, and he could now replace 
Australia’s Steve Smith at the top of the world batting rankings when they are 
published on Tuesday morning.

Nevertheless, England’s record Test wicket-taker appears to see little 
difference in the right-hander’s game from their nine encounters prior to the 
current series, during which time he averaged 20.12. “I’m not sure he’s 
changed,” said Anderson, who has claimed four wickets at 53 in this series.

“I just think any technical deficiencies he’s got aren’t in play out here. We 
had success against him in England but the pace of the pitches over here just 
take any flaws he has out of the equation. There’s not that pace in the wicket 
to get the nicks, like we did against him in England with a bit more movement. 
Pitches like this suit him down to the ground. He’s a very good player of spin 
and if you’re not bang on the money and don’t take your chances, he’ll punish 
you.”

Anderson also offered words of support for his captain, Alastair Cook, after 
another chastening day in the field for England when India’s last three wickets 
cost 267 runs, which appeared to snuff out any hope of a drawn series and 
prompted more questions about the long-term leadership of the side.

Anderson said: “[Cook] is obviously frustrated with the last couple of games 
and the way this game’s gone so far. But we knew it was going to be very tough 
when we came here. We have got an inexperienced team, especially in these 
conditions.

“We’ve shown glimpses of some exciting cricket, but it’s those fine margins. 
You get stuck and in a rut and it’s difficult to get out. He’s still very keen 
to be England captain, as far as I’m aware. I know I’m biased because I’m his 
friend, but I think he’s a very good captain.

“It is immensely frustrating. Coming to the ground this morning, we needed to 
get three wickets. If we could get them we were still well in the game. 
Unfortunately we didn’t bowl as well as we could have first thing. The ball 
started flying around and then they got settled and managed to put on a big 
partnership.”
 