
Chris Woakes is a happy Brummie at present. The all-rounder is not only 
glowing with form but riding the wave into his first Test match on his home 
ground of Edgbaston on Wednesday.

It is the venue where, 10 years ago this week, Woakes made his first-class 
debut for Warwickshire against West Indies A, having by that stage already 
tasted the Test match experience when, the previous summer, he and his fellow 
academy players were roped into helping the groundstaff duringthe epic 2005 
Ashes Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jul/28/edgbaston-ashes-test-simon-jones>
.

Now, with the current series against Pakistan locked at 1-1 after England’s 
330-run win at Old Trafford last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/25/england-pakistan-second-test-day-four-match-report>
, Woakes will step out on to this most familiar of turf and look to continue a 
personal golden run that has returned 26 wickets in four Tests, including 18 at 
11 runs apiece in his past two.

At the minute, I'm just trying to bottle up whatever it is that is happening 
and keep it going

“At the minute I’m just trying to bottle up whatever it is that is happening 
and keep it going,” Woakes says over coffee in Birmingham city centre. “There 
is a long way to go. I want this to be the start of a long and full career, not 
simply one summer.”

But what a summer it has been. If Joe Root has been dominating the headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/joe-root-england-pakistan-old-trafford>
 since his epic double-hundred in Manchester last week, then England’s man of 
the season to date is Woakes, not simply for the performances, such as his 
unbeaten 95 in thetied one-dayer against Sri Lanka at Trent Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/21/liam-plunkett-england-sri-lanka-tie-first-odi>
 or hismatch figures of 11 for 102 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/chris-woakes-england-pakistan-yasir-shah>
 in the first Test against Pakistan at Lord’s, but the manner in which he 
confounded so many along the way.

Rewind to the start of the year and the outlook was rather grim. While England 
were jubilant aftera famous Test series win in South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/stuart-broad-six-wickets-england-south-africa-series-win>
, Woakes was reflecting on a rusty one-wicket performance inthe dead-rubber 
defeat at Centurion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/26/england-south-africa-fourth-test-day-five-kagiso-rabada>
, one that followed four weeks on tour without match practice and left him, and 
many others, wondering whether his chance had simply been and gone.

Eight wickets from six Tests at 63 runs apiece since his debut at the end of 
the 2013 Ashes, albeit in stop-start fashion, did not point to further 
opportunities. Butwhen Ben Stokes’s knee locked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/22/england-ben-stokes-second-test-chris-woakes-sri-lanka-squad-chris-woakes-cricket>
 duringthe first Test with Sri Lanka at Headingley in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/21/england-sri-lanka-first-test> – 
an injury that required surgery – the selectors held their nerve and returned 
to a player in whom they had invested plenty over the years.

“It was last chance saloon for me, that’s how I saw it,” says the 27-year-old. 
“I would have been devastated if Centurion had been it. They say timing is 
everything and, when Ben got injured, I was probably the only all-rounder in 
county cricket they were willing to take a risk on. Had it been an out-and-out 
seamer injured, they would probably have looked elsewhere.”

Despite being a popular competitor on the county circuit – and one with 
statistics that command little but respect – Woakes has needed to develop a 
thick skin over the course of his career, with those curious souls who use 
social media as a direct tool for criticism having taken a shine to him in the 
past; unsurprisingly, the noise seems to have died down of late.

“I have had one or two messages saying they got it wrong but most of them seem 
to be hiding,” he says with a smile. “But that’s part and parcel of being a 
professional sportsman. And I don’t check Twitter that much. I did after the 
Lord’s Test, though. If you’re not going to look then, when are you?”

Chris Woakes handed golden chance to prove he really is England class
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/27/chris-woakes-england-sri-lanka> 
Where better to continue the resurrection than his home town and at the ground 
where, during his last championship appearance and on the day of his call-up, 
he claimeda career‑best nine for 36 against Durham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/chris-woakes-england-nine-durham-wickets-warwickshire>
 this summer? Woakes, along with Moeen Ali, is one of two sons of Birmingham in 
the England team, having been born in Sandwell and raised in Great Barr in the 
city’s north-west.

The Brummie accent, he claims, has mellowed over the years and only returns 
when in the company of old school friends; not that his England team-mates, who 
have called him “Wizard” since a darts competition during the 2008 Under-19s 
World Cup, have noticed. “The lads still give me so much stick for it,” he 
says, smiling. “Not a day goes past without an ‘owroight Wiz’. But I quite 
enjoy it.”

Woakes began his club cricket for Aston Manor, following in the footsteps of 
his two older half-brothers, and despite a preference for football – he was 
once on the books of Walsall, with a dream of one day playing for his beloved 
Aston Villa – his talent quickly shone through and, having been accepted into 
theWarwickshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warwickshireccc> academy at 
the second attempt aged 12 , he began following the first team as a supporter.

“My era was Ashley Giles, Dougie Brown [now director of cricket], Jim 
Troughton – and Ian Bell [now captain] was just coming through, too. I didn’t 
know them personally but I used to check their scores on Ceefax. Me and a few 
mates would buy tickets and watch them from time to time, too.”

Making his first-class debut in 2006 aged 16 – “I remember Tino Best was 
bowling rockets for West Indies A and thinking I would die if I faced him” – a 
County Championship debut came the following year against Surrey, with Mark 
Ramprakash, now the England batting coach, chalking up century No95 of his 
glittering domestic career.

After this tough baptism, the numbers quickly started to stack up for Woakes 
in championship cricket and, having passed 45 wickets in three successive 
seasons, he made his England debut during the limited overs leg of their 
2010-11 Ashes tour. Though hehit the winning runs in the first Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/12/paul-collingwood-chris-woakes-england>
 in Adelaide and claimed six for 45 inhis second one-day international in 
Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/30/australia-england-fifth-odi>, 
the call-up said more about England’s approach to one-day cricket.

“At the time I didn’t feel I warranted selection,” he says. “I’d done well in 
red-ball cricket but I thought I could get found out very quickly in one-day 
cricket. I just tried to enjoy it. But you wouldn’t get that now, a player 
being selected to see if they could perform at international level in another 
format.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fchris-woakes-england-pakistan-edgbaston-third-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F782af4182c8c51835fe2023bb3344e8168317fdf%2F0_280_2385_1431%2F2385.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%E2%80%99s%20Chris%20Woakes%20hopes%20to%20bring%20fine%20form%20home%20to%20Edgbaston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fchris-woakes-england-pakistan-edgbaston-third-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%E2%80%99s%20Chris%20Woakes%20hopes%20to%20bring%20fine%20form%20home%20to%20Edgbaston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fchris-woakes-england-pakistan-edgbaston-third-test%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F782af4182c8c51835fe2023bb3344e8168317fdf%2F0_280_2385_1431%2F2385.jpg>
 Chris Woakes during a difficult Test debut, against Australia at the Oval in 
2013: ‘I didn’t have an amazing game but I didn’t have a train smash either.’ 
Photograph: Philip Brown/Reuters 
If his international bow showed promise, despite white-ball cricket not being 
his strongest suit at the time, hisTest debut at the end of the home Ashes 
series in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/21/australia-shane-watson-england-woakes-kerrigan>
 was chastening, with Woakes batting at No6 to accommodate two spinners in the 
side, one of whom was Lancashire’s Simon Kerrigan.

“I felt like it went pretty well and, had it not been for bad light, I could 
have hit the winning runs,” he says. “But Kegs didn’t have the greatest game 
and I felt I was put into the same bracket – Kerrigan/Woakes – afterwards. I 
didn’t have an amazing game but I didn’t have a train smash either.”

From there Woakes missed out on selection for the winter Ashes tour with 
Stokes preferred, and, though there was an encouraging, if unrewarded, Test 
return during the win over India in 2014, it is only now, having turned himself 
into a genuine fast bowler and a highly dependable bat with nine first‑class 
hundreds, that he truly feels part of the set-up.

With Stokes missing once again for this week’s third Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/ben-stokes-expected-to-miss-rest-of-international-summer-with-calf-injury>
 following the calf injury sustained in the last Test, the presence of Woakes 
and the form he is exhibiting provide comfort for home supporters. Edgbaston 
now awaits, with the all-rounder understandably buzzing. “I have played two 
one-dayers and a Twenty20 at Edgbaston but Test cricket has always been the 
pinnacle for me,” he says. “Pakistan will have a lot of support here too but it 
will still feel like a home game. And when it’s full, it’s rocking. It’s the 
best atmosphere in the country.”
 