
For the management at least, the rest between Tests has been interrupted. A 
one-day squad for the three ODIs and three T20s against India in January will 
be announced on Monday. So there have been some conference calls in between the 
R&R.

As ever, there are a jumble of priorities; the importance of white-ball 
cricket has been properly emphasised by this regime, yet there remains the 
issue of when to rest England’s key, three-format players. So selection remains 
a precarious balancing act. In the new year there is a bit of respite from 
international cricket after the return to India, with just a brief trip to the 
Caribbean for three ODIs in early March, which might be quite an attractive 
proposition for the players. Next summer there is the Champions Trophy in 
England, a trophy that has been targeted by everyone from Andrew Strauss 
downwards.

Liam Dawson surprised by England call but Keaton Jennings can stake claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/england-cricket-india-tour-2016-mumbai>
For the games in India there will be a return to the squad for the captain 
Eoin Morgan and Alex Hales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/eoin-morgan-return-england-one-day-captain-india>
, both of whom opted out of the ODIs in Bangladesh. If Morgan were an old-style 
journalist he would operate for a Sunday paper, so neatly has his workload as 
an international cricketer evolved. He seems to play so infrequently that there 
is an additional pressure on him to succeed when he does. However he has 
overseen a major improvement in England’s ODI cricket. So he remains in credit 
and like Hales, he should at least be fresh.

Therefore a minimum of two players from the ODI squad will have to give way. 
One to miss out is James Vince, who throughout his brief England career has 
flickered but never caught fire. Another to stay at home might beMoeen Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/moeen-ali> for different reasons.

Moeen, like Ben Stokes, Joe Root and, increasingly, Chris Woakes, generally 
plays in the best side whatever the format. Unlike Root, Moeen played in the 
ODIs in Bangladesh; in the past few weeks in India there have been signs that 
the spark has diminished. The most amenable of cricketers – he must always be 
asking “what number would you like me to bat today, skip?” – Moeen might 
benefit from a break. Since Root was absent at the start of this expedition he 
should come back to India in the new year, though he will become a father for 
the first time in or around the first week of January.

So a bit more juggling is required. Root’s return means the selectors would 
have to choose two from Sam Billings, Ben Duckett and Jonny Bairstow (all of 
whom could provide cover for Jos Buttler behind the stumps). This is a tricky 
choice, especially since there is an eagerness to begin Duckett’s 
rehabilitation process as soon as possible after historment in the Tests 
against the off-spinners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/18/ben-duckett-haseed-hameed-lesson-test-cricket-england-india>
. It may be that they decide Bairstow, not necessarily an ODI regular in recent 
times, might usefully recharge after his record-breaking year in Test cricket 
with the bat and the gloves. If not, Duckett misses out.

There is inevitably concern about Stokes’ workload – even though he always 
gives the impression that he wants to play.

And, of course, England want to win, which is more likely when their 
charismatic all-rounder is in the side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/ben-stokes-england-icc-trevor-bayliss-india-test-mohali>
. So Stokes – and perhaps Woakes – might be required for the 50-over games only 
but then given a break for the ensuing T20 matches. Moreover, it is highly 
likely that England will want to continue the experiment of having Tymal Mills, 
who bowls fast, as a T20 specialist. Expect a list of names that contains a few 
asterisks.

Possible squad Morgan, Hales, Roy, Duckett, Root, Buttler, Billings, Stokes 
(50-over matches only), Dawson, Woakes (50-over matches only), Willey, Rashid, 
Plunkett, Finn, Ball, Mills (T20s only)
 