
Eoin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan> has become the 
first England captain to pull out of a series for security reasons after it was 
confirmed he and Alex Hales have declared themselves unavailable for selection 
for the winter tour to Bangladesh.

The England and Wales Cricket Board’s <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> 
head of security, Reg Dickason, had cleared the month-long Test and one-day 
trip a fortnight ago but, despite those assurances – and two days of talks with 
Andrew Strauss, the director of cricket, in which the remainder of the England 
squad committed – Morgan and Hales will be the glaring omissions when the 
squads are named on Friday.

Morgan had last week spoken of an increased sensitivity to safety owing to 
incidents on the subcontinent, something that, given he has played in the 
Indian Premier League and aWorld Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/world-twenty20-2014> in Bangladesh since, 
appears to have been triggered by the Julyterrorist attack in Dhaka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/england-tour-bangladesh-doubt-dhaka-terrorist-attack>
 and a report, which Cricket Australia has tried to play down, that Australia
postponed their tour to the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/cricket-australia-poised-to-call-off-bangladesh-tour-amid-security-fears>
 last year owing to the team being directly targeted.

Eoin Morgan: I will not advise England team-mates on tour of Bangladesh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/eoin-morgan-england-tour-bangladesh-safety>
England’s one-day side will be led by the vice-captain, Jos Buttler, for the 
three-match series that begins on 7 October before the Test captain, Alastair 
Cook, takes over for the remainder of the tour that leads to two months in 
India before Christmas. Morgan will then, in theory, return to lead the 
limited-overs sides against India in January.

Strauss, in an ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> statement, said: 
“Whilst we understand and respect Eoin’s and Alex’s decision, we are 
disappointed they have made themselves unavailable for selection for the 
Bangladesh tour. We have had open and honest conversations with all the players 
about the security arrangements and we are not expecting any other individuals 
to withdraw. Final selection for the Bangladesh tour will take place on Friday.

“As with all England tours, the safety and security of players and staff is of 
the utmost importance. We will continue to monitor the situation in Bangladesh, 
take advice and consider the appropriate steps up to and throughout the five 
weeks we are on tour.”

Morgan, who first voiced concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/04/england-eoin-morgan-security-concern-tour-bangladesh-ecb>
 four days after the 1 July attack, has received greater attention than Hales 
owing to his status as captain. It remains to be seen whether his authority 
will be affected long term.

England have made significant strides in limited-overs cricket over the past 
18 months under him, reaching thefinal of the World Twenty20 in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/03/west-indies-win-world-t20-final-carlos-brathwaite-sinks-england>
, and there has been no indication of an issue among the team over the past two 
weeks despite his deliberation on the subject. Writing in his Mail on Sunday 
column about how team-mates would likely react, the Test seamer Stuart Broad 
said: “I know there won’t be any questions. It’s not a one-in, all-in. You have 
to make up your own mind. It’s entirely up to the individual and the ECB has 
said that all along. No one should be making throwaway comments about it being 
ridiculous if people don’t tour.”

Barmy Army founder issues Bangladesh tour warning to England supporters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/barmy-army-bangladesh-tour-warning-england-supporters>
For Hales the call halts a Test career that began in South Africa last December
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/england-alex-hales-jonny-bairstow-south-africa-first-test-cricket>
 but, bar a strong showing in the early summer series with Sri Lanka where he 
scored three half-centuries, has disappointed with an average of 27.28 from his 
11 caps.

While his place as Cook’s opening partner in Test cricket is expected to go to 
Lancashire’s 19-year-old opener Haseeb Hameed for both Bangladesh and India, 
Hales can have no such fears over his one-day berth; only Joe Root has scored 
more than his 1,132 runs since the 2015 World Cup, while he broke the 
23-year-old England record ODI score when scoring171 against Pakistan at Trent 
Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/30/england-pakistan-odi-world-record-match-report>
 last month.

Buttler, before his thoughts turn to the one-day captaincy, will on Monday 
play his first red-ball match since October last year when Lancashire host the 
Division One leaders, Middlesex, at Old Trafford, with England considering him 
for their winter Test party as the back-up to incumbent wicketkeeper, Jonny 
Bairstow, and the middler-order batsmen.

Eoin Morgan given deadline to change his mind on England’s Bangladesh tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/09/eoin-morgan-deadline-england-bangladesh-tour-andrew-strauss>
The all-rounder Ben Stokes posted a statement on Twitter in which he said he 
respected the decisions of his team-mates.

“I will always back, not just my captain but also any fellow team-mate’s 
decision on matters like this,” Stokes wrote.

“They have both obviously thought long and hard about this important decision 
and have both made the call that is right for them as individuals. Please try 
and respect their choice, I do, as a colleague and as friend to them both.”
 