
It has been a magnificent contest fluctuating deliciously for four days and as 
the players departed from the field on Sunday evening in front of the largest 
crowd yet witnessed in the match no one knew which team was going to win it.

The floodlights beamed down and the temperature dipped below 30C when Sabbir 
Rahman and Taijul Islam headed for their dressing room in the knowledge that 
they could be national heroes within 24 hours. Bangladesh, with two wickets 
remaining, need 33 more runs to achieve their first win against England in Test 
cricket and their first against a team other than Zimbabwe and West Indies.

Bangladesh v England: first Test, day four – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/23/bangladesh-v-england-first-test-day-four-live>
England were grateful for the chance to regroup in the hope that the scale of 
the opportunity to make history would weigh heavily on the shoulders of the 
three Bangladesh batsmen still able to influence events on Monday morning. So 
far this burden has not seemed to bother Sabbir a great deal. On his Test debut 
he was 59 not out overnight and his uncompromising treatment of England’s 
spinners has caused Alastair Cook a nasty headache.

The tension has mounted over four thrilling days of cricket. The pitch, which 
allowed the ball to turn from the start, has contributed to the entertainment. 
In county cricket the prospect of a surface so spin-friendly would have senior 
figures jumping up and down in protest and, perhaps, advocating penalty points. 
But this arid 22-yard strip has added to the entertainment. We know there will 
be a winner and the match has reached the fifth day. Brilliant.

It all makes for a compelling spectacle, but not necessarily one of sustained 
quality. Both sides have competed ferociously, but England, who have beaten 
Bangladesh in their eight previous meetings, must already recognise some of the 
frailties that could make it an arduous expedition to Bangladesh and India over 
the next two months ever more taxing.

For all the endeavour, there were numerous shortcomings on show on Sunday. The 
art of batting includes expertise in running between the wickets and in the 
morning Stuart Broad, in his 99th Test, called for a run that he would have 
struggled to complete in his first Test nine years ago. When Gareth Batty 
succumbed meekly, lbw to Islam, England had added only 12 runs to their 
overnight score. With a tail of this calibre it was reasonable to expect more.

Thereafter the apprehensions grew. In this topsy-turvy game where the new ball 
seems to favour the spinners and the pacemen try to keep it tight with an old 
one, Cook followed Bangladesh’s lead by opening the bowling with two spinners, 
Batty and Moeen Ali. Sometimes they found swift and prodigious turn. Yet the 
runs flowed. In part this was due to the bravado of Imrul Kayes but the 
inaccuracy of the off-spinners, unaccustomed to bowling with a shiny new ball, 
was another factor. As the day wore on it would become clear from the fields 
Cook set and his bowling changes that he has limited faith in his spinners. Nor 
does that faith appear to be on the rise. It is easy to understand why.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fengland-tense-finale-bangladesh-near-first-test-victory-chittagong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc52208f9d52266cc116e91b7647871e8904efcc1%2F0_75_4300_2580%2F4300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%20braced%20for%20dramatic%20finale%20as%20Bangladesh%20near%20historic%20Test%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fengland-tense-finale-bangladesh-near-first-test-victory-chittagong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%20braced%20for%20dramatic%20finale%20as%20Bangladesh%20near%20historic%20Test%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fengland-tense-finale-bangladesh-near-first-test-victory-chittagong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc52208f9d52266cc116e91b7647871e8904efcc1%2F0_75_4300_2580%2F4300.jpg>
 Bangladesh captain Mushfiqur Rahim, right, and Sabbir Rahman mounted an 87-run 
stand on day four of the first Test in Chittagong. Photograph: Dibyangshu 
Sarkar/AFP/Getty Images 
Bangladesh raced along at four runs per over so there was great relief just 
before lunch when Kayes was dismissed. A wonderfully entertaining “catch” by 
Joe Root at slip, which involved the ball being transported from his hands to 
his ankles and back to his hands, was in vain when it was discovered there had 
been no contact with the batsman’s bat or gloves. No matter, Kayes was caught 
more prosaically next ball at short-leg.

After the interval Batty was under the microscope. He had bowled two ropey 
overs before his reddening face could break into a smile. First Mominul Haque 
attempted to sweep a ball that was too full for that purpose and was given out 
lbw on review. In the next over when Batty had the good sense to go around the 
wicket to the right-handed Mahmudullah, another full delivery beat the bat. 
Another lbw was granted this time after a batsman’s review (by the close the 
number of reviews in this match had sailed past the previous record of 19 to 
24). From there it was odd that Batty should bowl only two more overs in this 
spell.

Ten overs later Moeen delivered a spitting cobra of a delivery to find the 
edge of Shakib al Hasan’s bat. At last there was some breathing space but 
Mushfiqur Rahim and Sabbir added 39 runs up to the tea interval with such ease 
that the England thinktank had a rethink. Sabbir had hit Moeen for a mighty six 
over long-on, which may be regarded as an occupational hazard. But Moeen’s 
response was poor. The next ball, a long hop, was easily swatted fine for four.

The plan adopted after tea was almost surreal yet it was just about 
understandable. The ball was, as they say, turning square yet England resumed 
with two pacemen, Chris Woakes and Ben Stokes. Cook’s lack of faith in the 
spinners was laid bare. The spinners offered unplayable deliveries and runs, 
the pacemen control. For 35 minutes the England captain preferred control.

When he finally returned to Batty there was an off-break that leapt devilishly 
and the defiant Mushfiqur was the victim. Broad, who would bowl nine 
consecutive overs in that final session, intervened twice. Mehedi Hasan was lbw 
and soon after Kamral Islam Rabbi gave a sharp catch to Ballance at short-leg. 
As dusk descended rapidly the impressively calm Sabbir, who had survived one 
chance to Bairstow down the leg side off Broad on 34, looked on as Taijul 
conjured 11 of the 15 runs of their unbeaten partnership from various parts of 
his bat. In this match, 15 runs swings the pendulum a long way.

The consequence of all that was that the players of both sides set off for 
their hotel – it is the same one – condemned to a sleepless night.
 