
Ben Stokes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ben-stokes> had a great 
all-round game against Sri Lanka. No one can argue with that. Yet his 
contribution illustrated how Twenty20 cricket demands a new set of significant 
numbers.

England’s Charlotte Edwards sets up semi-final with Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/england-women-pakistan-world-twenty20-match-report>
In the past very important people such as captains, selectors, committee men 
and cricket correspondents would demand a few statistics to aid and inform 
their decision-making processes. Very often the answers to “So what is he 
averaging with the bat and with the ball?” might be all they need to know. It 
seldom works like that now. TakeStokes against Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/england-world-twenty20-jos-buttler-sri-lanka-england-women-cricket>
.

He faced one delivery, which he hit for six; he did not take a wicket in his 
four overs; he took one catch and his direct hit from short-extra cover ran out 
one batsman. And by common consent he had a great game.

Stokes is a key man in England’s lineup. Now look at his figures for the 
tournament so far: 43 runs in four innings, 1-112 with the ball at an economy 
rate beyond nine per over, and two catches. These numbers are hardly 
Bothamesque – except that Ian Botham, like Stokes up until now, was both 
statistically and actually a much more devastating force in Test cricket than 
in the one-day format.

Stokes, given his prodigious talent, has a modest record in white-ball 
cricket. InTwenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> for England in 
15 matches his top score is 31 and he has taken five expensive wickets.

However, shed those numbers now; they may be a tad economical with the truth. 
Stokes remains a danger man against New Zealand in Wednesday’s semi-final 
against England. He is starting to enjoy this tournament and he has a 
Bothamesque disdain for dry, mendacious statistics as well as an eagerness to 
be at the heart of the action as frequently as possible.

Looking back at the victory over Sri Lanka, he says: “I was pleased with my 
overall game. I’d much rather be doing that last-over thing [Stokes was 
entrusted by Eoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/england-world-twenty20-jos-buttler-sri-lanka-england-women-cricket>
 with the final over with Sri Lanka needing 15 to win] than sitting there 
watching and hoping whoever bowls it gets us through. I’d rather be the man 
doing it. It’s a lot easier on the nerves. I just love being involved in the 
game and the high-pressure situations and it probably brings the best out of 
me.”

Captains crave such men in their team, the sort who don’t avert their eyes 
when the flak is flying in the field, who want to bowl, bat or catch, however 
dire the situation. He is not into self-preservation and he has learned that 
failure is part of the deal when opting for a career as a professional 
cricketer.

“T20 is generally the fun side of cricket. You’ve got to have a sense of 
humour. Some days you can turn up and get whacked. Next game turn up, bowl the 
same and you don’t go for many. You have to take it as it comes,” he says.

This is his first ICC tournament – somehow he managed to make himself almost 
unselectable for theWorld Cup in Australasia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/england-world-twenty20-jos-buttler-sri-lanka-england-women-cricket>
 last year, given that England were not minded to gamble – and he is learning 
fast and having fun. “It’s been enjoyable and, obviously, it’s a massive help 
when you’re winning and through to the semis. We’re not going to change 
anything just because we’re there”.

It is rumoured that Stokes is not a great advocate of long, anguished team 
meetings. His mood is more important than a detailed analysis of techniques but 
he obviously listens some of the time, notably to Paul Collingwood, his Durham 
club captain, who has been assisting England’s head coach, Trevor Bayliss. 
“Colly did say at the start of the tournament when we were beaten by West 
Indies that this was a good omen because it happened to him [in 2010 when
England won the trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/may/16/england-australia-world-twenty20-final>
]”.

No doubt Stokes would like to bowl more and bat higher but winning is more 
important than that. “It doesn’t bother me,” he says before outlining the 
obstacles to going up the order. “Rooty’s a world-class player; even though 
Morgy’s struggled a bit, he’s one of the guys other teams will look at 
carefully, knowing he’s a very dangerous player. The other night Jos [Buttler] 
showed how good he is. So it’s quite hard to get in ahead of him”.

Nonetheless Stokes is now very much part of England’s furniture whatever the 
format – and despite the figures. He swishes away the inevitable query of what 
might have been if he and his parents had stayed in New Zealand, where he was 
born. “I’d probably have a different accent”, he says with a smile and a 
Geordie twang.
 