
The England one-day captain, Eoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan>, has outlined the reasons why 
he is close to pulling out of the tour to Bangladesh, with two past instances 
of security problems on the subcontinent having left him increasingly sensitive 
when it comes to overseas safety.

Andrew Strauss: England players who miss Bangladesh tour risk place in team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/andrew-strauss-england-players-miss-bangladesh-tour-risk-place-team>
Morgan and his team-mates will meet Andrew Strauss, the director of England 
cricket, over the next 48 hoursat the national academy in Loughborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/andrew-strauss-england-players-miss-bangladesh-tour-risk-place-team>
, where they will be expected to state their availability or otherwise for the 
month-long tour that begins on 29 September, when the one-day squad flies out.

Strauss has said the detailed security plan in place for the tour, which was 
previously placed in doubt by the 1 July terrorist attack in Dhakain which 20 
hostages were killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
, “mitigates the risk to an acceptable level”. However, Morgan and the opener 
Alex Hales are believed to be still wavering over whether to take their places.

“As an individual you need to be comfortable within yourself to be able to 
focus on cricket,” Morgan said. “I have been to places before when things have 
become a distraction and once or twice when that has been security. I told 
myself I would not put myself in that situation again.”

As well as the assurances given by England’s security director, Reg Dickason, 
Strauss will draw on his experience as part of the team that returned to India
in 2008 after the Mumbai terror attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/30/mumbai-terrorism-attacks> when 
talking things through with Morgan, a player with a heightened awareness of 
security matters.

The first incident that informed his views came in 2010 when, during Morgan’s 
first season playing in the Indian Premier League for Royal Challengers 
Bangalore alongside a former England team-mate Kevin Pietersen, two bombs 
exploded outside their home ground, the M Chinnaswamy Stadium, before a game 
against Mumbai Indians, leaving 15 injured.

Recalling the blast later, Pietersen said: “I was in the nets having a few 
throwdowns and the bomb went off literally 50 yards away. It was behind a stand 
just next to me. What a noise. We were told it was a transformer but then they 
cleared us all off the field and into the dressing rooms and we thought: ‘They 
wouldn’t be doing this for a transformer.’”

The match still went ahead after a 45-minute delay and a controversial 
players’ vote. However, an already worrying situation intensified when, 
contrary to security advice telling them to remain in the team hotel, the 
franchise decided to move the squad to the airport – only for the bus to become 
stuck in gridlocked traffic for more than an hour, with a minimal police escort 
and in full view of one of the bomb sites.

Morgan’s second such episode relates to a 10-day spell in November 2013 when 
he played for Gazi Tank in the Dhaka Premier League – one of the main domestic 
tournaments in Bangladesh – during political unrest in the country leading up 
to a general election. “Things were incredibly violent,” he said.

The 29-year-old has returned to play in the IPL and Bangladesh since, however, 
and will know that the levels of security afforded to the players for the 
upcoming tour of Bangladesh will be significantly greater than during those two 
previous occasions.

While other players have already committed to the tour, Morgan has found 
deliberating difficult in the past fortnight while leading the side during the 
now concluded limited-overs series against Pakistan.

Speaking after Wednesday’s Twenty20 defeat at Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/england-pakistan-t20-international-match-report>
, he said: “Playing international cricket – or any cricket – is not about 
worrying about different things, it should be the best time of your life. It 
should be something you are looking forward to, wanting to do well in and are 
able to focus on.

“You have guys who haven’t toured under circumstances like this before and I 
think given that nobody has toured Bangladesh since the [1 July] terrorist 
attack adds more to the decision.”
 