
It was as if the scriptwriters of The Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> had taken a sabbatical 
in India to oversee the World Twenty20. Melodrama became the norm in this 
tournament, with a succession of last-over finishes that left onlookers gasping 
for breath, and players either with shellshocked heads in sweat-drenched hands 
or dancing ecstatically around outfields glistening with dew.

World Twenty20 2016: tournament awards | Dan Lucas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/04/world-twenty20-2016-awards> 
It was not a perfect tournament but it was mesmerising and no game was more 
gobsmacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/04/world-twenty20-2016-awards> 
thanthe final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/apr/03/england-v-west-indies-world-twenty20-final-live>
. The notion T20 is too short a format to encompass a bit of ebb and flow has 
been banished; so, too, has the old idea it is just “a bit of hit and giggle”. 
The intensity, the gamut of emotions engendered within the space of three hours 
– which is, after all, longer than it (usually) takes to perform Hamlet, not to 
mention a dozen episodes of The Archers – has made for spell-binding sporting 
theatre, in whichEngland played a starring role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/03/west-indies-win-world-t20-final-carlos-brathwaite-sinks-england>
.

With the exception of the semi-final against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/30/england-new-zealand-world-t20-match-report>
, when Eoin Morgan and his men almost achieved the perfect game, every England 
match has been a rollercoaster experience. They clambered out of a variety of 
holes with great tenacity, skill and spirit and after 39 overs against West 
Indies at Eden Gardens it looked as if they would extricate themselves once 
more. Then came the Ben Stokes over, which would never be completed.

Stokes will never be the man to take on the role of the second gravedigger. He 
demands attention; he wants to be in the thick of it. Without the benefit of 
hindsight, everyone, including Morgan, was tossing him the ball for that final 
over in Kolkata. He was the man for the job. We all know what happened next and 
now we wonderhow long the scars will remain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/03/ben-stokes-carlos-brathwaite-england>
. In the space of three balls he was transformed from the ruthless 
international sportsman, poised to produce the coup de grâce, to a gauche young 
boy lost in the floodlights in front of 50,000 spectators and millions glued to 
their TV sets.

The team have rallied around him. “We share the pain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/03/england-eoin-morgan-cruel-final-world-twenty20-west-indies-ben-stokes>
,” said Morgan, who was quick to point out how his batsmen had dug the hole in 
the first place. There was sympathy from just about everyoneexcept Marlon 
Samuels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/03/marlon-samuels-ben-stokes-shane-warne>
. Bowlers especially understand “there but for the grace of God go I” feeling.

The scars will be around for a while. It may well be Stokes in the future will 
spend more time contemplating his own game rather than engaging in too many 
conversations with provocative opponents. He will surely overcome his agony, 
though. A chat with Stuart Broad may help; he was carted forsix sixes in an 
over by Yuvraj Singh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/sep/20/cricket.worldtwenty2020075> in 
the World T20 of 2007 in Durban;in 2015 he took eight for 15 against Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/06/england-australia-stuart-broad-joe-root>
 atTrent Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/06/england-stuart-broad-zone-australia-ashes>
, and there have been many highlights in between. A chat with Geoff Miller or 
Chris Cowdrey and down the line Stokes has a great after-dinner speech. 
However, it was probably not a great time for speeches in the England camp on 
Sunday night. After the game the coach, Trevor Bayliss, said: “Whatever words I 
come up with in the dressing room won’t be enough. They’re hurting but this 
will steel them for the future.”

We are likely to see much more of these England players than the victorious 
West Indies in years to come. Bayliss – and Morgan – sense this could be the 
start of something special, while even the eternal optimist,Darren Sammy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/03/west-indies-win-world-t20-five-talking-points>
, accepts his team are too old to stay together for much longer.

West Indies win World T20 final as Carlos Brathwaite sinks England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/03/west-indies-win-world-t20-final-carlos-brathwaite-sinks-england>
“If you add up the white-ball games these guys have played, it’s a long way 
behind other teams,” Bayliss said. “It’s a promising side and the signs are 
good. We have still got work to do but we have a lot of good players to work 
with. English cricket is in good hands. We may not have any pretty bowlers but 
we have guys who give 100%. On Sunday we gave ourselves a chance to win and 
that’s a great sign moving forward.”

Bayliss shuns hyperbole – he will never get a job on TV here or back home on 
Channel Nine – but he is surely right. It was agony on Sunday for his players 
but in this tournament England demonstrated they have the talent and the 
character to challenge the best in the world. And they would do well to 
remember the pain, just to remind themselves that they never want to experience 
it again when the next opportunity to win a trophy comes around.
 