
Alan Knott, one of the greatest wicketkeepers, once concluded his best session 
behind the stumps for England took place against Pakistan in the searing heat 
of the subcontinent. His Kent colleague, Derek Underwood, bowled from one end 
throughout and Knott recalled how on a very flat track he never took a single 
ball from him. “But I expected to take everyone,” he said.

Wicketkeepers have to concentrate for every minute of the day in the field and 
that is howJonny Bairstow <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-bairstow> 
likes it. He could walk into this England side as a specialist batsman – 
already he has scored more runs in a calendar year than any keeper in history 
and there are still six Tests to go but he wants to keep those gloves.

Ben Stokes could become one of the best all-rounders, says England’s Bayliss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/25/ben-stokes-england-bangladesh-trevor-bayliss>
Keeping here in Dhaka, where the second Test starts on Friday, is so much more 
difficult than in Perth for example, where the bounce is generous and true and 
where the wicketkeeper spends most of the day 25 metres from the stumps. 
Bairstow reckons theChittagong Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/bangladesh-fall-short-as-england-secure-victory-on-final-day-of-first-test>
 was probably his best as a keeper. And it was very tough there thanks to 
extreme heat and unpredictable bounce. “Standing up to the stumps from the 
start you did not know which way the ball would go,”he said. “Some would turn a 
lot; some would skid on. And you can’t anticipate that; you just have to watch 
the ball off the pitch.”

Moreover it is incredibly uncomfortable when weighed down by extraneous pieces 
of equipment. Bairstow’s own temperature is bound to be raised by the fact he 
has to wear a helmet at all times when keeping up to the stumps. This is nowa 
decree from the ECB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/27/helmets-professional-cricketers-england-wales>
. “In the UAE last winter I often wore a cap, sunglasses and a gumshield but 
that is not an option any more. With a helmet on you have to get in a slightly 
different position behind the stumps”.

You would think he may like to relinquish the gloves occasionally and chill 
out (metaphorically) down at third man, like a Tendulkar or a Boycott used to 
do, but he said: “I really enjoy being in the game for every single ball.”

Being the wicketkeeper adds a bit of additional insurance to his Test place, 
not that he needs it. His determination to keep going may be increased by the 
pain of being dropped.

“I missed out for 18 months after the Ashes and I had to earn my place back 
and now I just want to play as many matches as I can,” he said. He is unlikely 
to have any enthusiasm for the notion of being rotated, either.

Now the Test matches are coming thick and fast and they will not be played on 
surfaces, like the one mentioned by Knott, where the ball seldom reaches the 
keeper. This winter will be the sternest test of Bairstow’s stamina as well as 
his burgeoning keeping skills.
 