
“This is a very tough tour whether you’re playing or on the bench,” said Jonny 
Bairstow on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/england-jonny-bairstow-every-ball-bangladesh>
. Seven Tests in 62 days is an unprecedented schedule and will test the stamina 
of those selected for every game. But England’s Test wicketkeeper was also 
right to highlight the demands upon those constantly not in the team. For them 
it is a case of retaining sanity rather than stamina.

In the modern era those on the bench troop off every day with the rest – they 
play their football, they hit some catches and throw some balls to those 
engaged in the Test match, they rush on to the field with drinks at every 
opportunity, they traipse off to the nets for one more lonely knock in the 
knowledge that there is no obvious chance of an innings in the middle on the 
horizon. They are obliged to stay cheerful, constantly encouraging and 
pandering to the lucky boys out in the middle.

I know from personal experience that this can be a mind-numbing experience. In 
India, 32 years ago, I was a spectator/gopher/cheerleader for all five Tests. 
Maybe I was lucky to have the distraction of writing a tour book (Marks Out of 
XIis still available for 1p 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Marks-Out-XI-England-Australia/dp/0047961082>, I see, 
but watch out for the delivery charge).

England’s Jonny Bairstow keen to keep his eye on every ball in Bangladesh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/england-jonny-bairstow-every-ball-bangladesh>
Most often the bystander role has been the lot of the second wicketkeeper. For 
years Bob Taylor of Derbyshire, the most silky keeper imaginable, toured as 
Alan Knott’s understudy and he was nicknamed “Chat” for a reason. Visits to 
high commissions and local dignitaries were once commonplace on tour and Taylor 
was an invaluable asset. He had the capacity to chat to anyone, anywhere about 
anything in the most engaging manner. In fact the recent visit of the England 
team to the high commission in Dhaka was a fine throwback, an evening enjoyed 
by all and enhanced by the moving witness of victims of acid attacks in this 
country.

On the tour of 1984-85 Bruce French, a mentor for England’s current keepers – 
and Jake Ball’s uncle – was the second keeper, who played one international 
match in three and a half months, a rain-restricted 15-over match in 
Chandigarh. That contest aside French soon recognised that he would only gain a 
place if the incumbent, Paul Downton, was injured and he remained remarkably 
cheerful throughout – in part because of the enlightenment of the management. 
French loves mountains – he still likes to climb them – and on that tour he was 
allowed to leave the party for a few days to explore the foothills of the 
Himalayas.

Back in 1977, Roger Tolchard of Leicestershire was England’s second 
wicketkeeper in India, a selection that appalled the purists and prompted one 
of the selectors, John Murray, a keeper himself, to resign. No one pretended 
that Tolchard was anywhere near the second best wicketkeeper in England but 
Tony Greig wanted him in his squad because this arch-competitor was an 
unorthodox yet effective player of spin bowling. Tolchard was soon selected 
alongside Knott, scoring 67 in his first Test match in Kolkata and he would end 
up playing all his four Tests on that tour – as a batsman.

Which brings us to Jos Buttler <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jos-buttler> 
on this tour. Since the ODIs he has had to revert to a subsidiary role, batting 
late in the nets, helping out wherever possible while dutifully trying to 
conjure a spring in his step. His current lowly position in the pecking order 
must be especially hard to take. A fortnight ago during the ODIs he was running 
the show as the stand-in captain for Eoin Morgan, the focus of everyone’s 
attention and reacting to his additional responsibilities most impressively. 
Now he is in his bib carrying water bottles.

Zafar Ansari to make England debut in second Test against Bangladesh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/zafar-ansari-england-debut-second-test-cricket>
It is still possible that Buttler, like Tolchard all those years ago, will be 
drafted into the Test team as a batsman, though the longer that he – and Haseeb 
Hameed – are denied any batting in the middle, the harder it will be for them 
to have an impact if suddenly catapulted into a Test match in India.

Moreover there is another issue regarding Buttler. His precocious talent makes 
him a candidate for Test cricket despite a relatively modest first-class 
record, which cannot easily be enhanced because he seldom encounters a red ball 
nowadays. By the same token in recent times we have seen the virtues of so many 
“specialists” bringing such zest and freedom to the one-day side. Among these 
Buttler has obviously been a linchpin.

However spending months plodding around the periphery of the Test squad on 
tour is an enervating experience. If Buttler is a constant spectator throughout 
the Test series against India it is hard to imagine him being properly 
refreshed when the one-day matches take place in January.

For future tours a tricky decision will have to be reached about how to make 
the most of him. Unless Buttler has a very good chance of making the Test team 
it might be better to keep him fresh and to have another keeper on hand to 
deputise if there is an injury, to carry the drinks and, perhaps, to chat away 
to all and sundry at those rare official functions.
 