
Jos Buttler’s remarkable form in limited-overs internationals has prompted 
Mumbai Indians to lavish £385,000 on his services in the Indian Premier League 
auction.

The deal was struck just hours before Buttler led England to victory in the 
second ODI with South Africa in Port Elizabeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/jos-buttler-england-south-africa-alex-hales>
, scoring a rapid, unbeaten 48 to follow on from amatch-winning 105 three days 
earlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/03/south-africa-england-first-odi-match-report>
 and arecord-thrashing unbeaten 116 from 52 balls in the final 50-over match of 
England’s series with Pakistan in the United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/20/jos-buttler-england-pakistan-odi-match-report>
.

The Lancashire wicketkeeper-batsman, who decided to play in the tournament 
after losing his Test place to Jonny Bairstow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/10/jos-buttler-ipl-auction-england-trevor-bayliss>
, was the subject of a bidding war between Mumbai and the Kolkata Knight Riders 
during the auction in Bengaluru. But it was the reigning champions that stumped 
up the cash, meaning Buttler will be based at the Wankhede Stadium for his 
first foray into the IPL, which runs from 9 April until 31 May.

The Mumbai Indians said on their Twitter feed <https://twitter.com/mipaltan>: 
“Jos Buttler is under the hammer and we are in it. Welcome to our fortress 
Wankhede Stadium @josbuttler.”

Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> was the 
first player sold in the auction as Rising Pune Supergiants paid £350,000 for 
his services. The Twenty20 specialist joins the newly formed side, returning 
for his fifth IPL campaign.

Kent’s wicketkeeper Sam Billings is heading for the Delhi Daredevils but Ravi 
Bopara was not bought. The England captain, Eoin Morgan, is under contract at 
Sunrisers.

Australia’s Shane Watson attracted the highest bid as Royal Challengers 
Bangalore paid more than £950,000 for him. He will join a franchise boasting 
power-hitters Chris Gayle, AB de Villiers and Virat Kohli as well as the 
Australia pace bowler Mitchell Starc.

Shane Watson sold for $1.98m in Indian Premier League auction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/shane-watson-sold-for-198m-in-ipl-auction> 