



England still know how to collapse

To lose a couple of quick wickets on a turner in Asia may be regarded as 
perfectly normal. To lose 10 in a session looks like fecklessness. This England 
team are good at digging themselves out of a hole and Chris Woakes, at No8, is 
regularly making more runs, with more style, than Gary Ballance at four. But 
this was a slide they couldn’t stop and it soon turned into a collapse to rival 
any of the great vintages of the Eighties. England were an omnishambles in the 
morning, a model of attacking cricket for most of the afternoon, and an 
omnishambles again after tea. Poor old Ballance has to go and they have to 
bring in a right-hander to replace him – either Haseeb Hameed to add solidity 
at the top, with Cook, perhaps, taking the tougher job in the middle order, or
Jos Buttler to add attacking flair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/jos-buttler-england-cricket-reserve-wicketkeeper>
 and share the gloves, so Jonny Bairstow doesn’t wilt in the heat. Both options 
require a bit of lateral thinking, which is more to Trevor Bayliss’s taste than 
Cook’s.TdL

Bangladesh claim historic Test win over England as collapse ensures tied series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/bangladesh-beat-england-draw-test-series>
Cook and his spinners ... again

In a way you have to feel sorry for Cook. He was criticised (rightly) for 
underusing his spinners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/england-zafar-ansari-debut-bangladesh-second-test>
 in the final session of the first Test’s third day. So here he changed tack; 
he bowled Zafar Ansari from the start ... and kept him on until well after the 
first drinks break. The Surrey all-rounder bowled 10 overs on the spin and went 
wicketless – admittedly England’s four dropped catches hardly helped him in 
this regard – for 41 runs. He created chances, especially early on his spell, 
but his length looked increasingly ragged and Shakib Al Hasan dispatched him to 
extra-cover with increasing regularity as he tired. Cook also bowled Moeen Ali 
through that first hour and it was astonishing that, when the captain finally 
did make a bowling change, it was the senior spinner who was first out of the 
attack. It’s a tired line but a valid one:Cook’s use of the spinners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/28/tamim-iqbal-england-spinners-bangladesh>
 makes their prospects in India look bleak.DL

Tamim Iqbal tucks in and gives spinners and Alastair Cook food for thought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/28/tamim-iqbal-england-spinners-bangladesh>
Stokes is making a fool of himself

The all-rounder’s contribution with bat and ball in this series cannot be 
faulted – his 128 runs in the series were the most by any England player in the 
two-Test series and his 11 wickets at 10.09 were a brilliant return, albeit one 
overshadowed by Mehedi Hasan. However, his verbal sparring with Sabbir Rahman 
in the morning session tipped over from feisty to slightly unpleasant and the 
umpires were forced to intervene. Stokes was hit for two fours in his final 
over before lunch, then turned with his arms raised in celebration when he 
thought Sabbir had nicked one – confident that Alastair Cook’s review would see 
the not-out decision overturned. It wasn’t and his unearned chutzpah, along 
with the increasingly aggressive chuntering, made Stokes look more than a bit 
pathetic.DL

Shakib’s shot selection is bizarre

As a senior player in the Bangladesh side and batting with his side uncertain 
as to what kind of lead they would need Shakib might be expected to play with a 
modicum of responsibility. He had seen the night before what irresponsible shot 
selection could do when Mahmudullah was bowled swiping wildly across the line; 
indeed that was the very reason Shakib was at the crease first thing this 
morning. The all-rounder was stumped having a brainless charge in the first 
inningsof the first Test  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/24/bangladesh-england-first-test-day-five-live-cricket>
as his side conceded an eventually crucial first-innings lead. Today he played 
an identical shot just after the fall of a wicket – with long-on back to boot – 
and was fortunate the ball evaded Bairstow and went for byes. He had already 
swung and missed, or got a top edge, with a number of slog-sweeps and the 
manner of his wicket, looking to cut against the spin to a massive leg-break 
turning out of the rough, came as no surprise.DL

Duckett shows no fear in breaking the mould

The traditional England opener is sober, solemn, a little dull. He comes from 
either the home counties or the Yorkshire or Lancashire league, and he likes to 
let the ball go outside his off stump. Two Tests in, Ben Duckett is not so much 
breaking the mould as smashing it to smithereens. After being found guilty of 
the most glaring of England’s dropped catches, Duckett put that behind him and 
batted as if chasing a Twenty20 target, which was exactly the right strategy. 
He swept, he reverse-swept, he switch-hit, he lofted over the infield, he raced 
to a fearless first Test fifty. It was the biggest moment for Northants youth 
since Matt Smith took over as Doctor Who. Then, first ball after tea, Duckett 
got a grubber. He was gone for 56 and, although England tried to stay 
purposeful, onlyBen Stokes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ben-stokes>, 
briefly, threatened to show the same chutzpah.TdL



 