
After the captivating drawn Test series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/england-pakistan-10-wicket-defeat-fourth-test-series-drawn>
 that left Pakistan, not England, basking in anewly acquired status as the 
world’s No1 team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/pakistan-no1-test-side-in-world>
, attention now switches to the 50-over format over five matches starting in 
sunny Southampton on Wednesday afternoon with, on paper at least, Eoin Morgan’s 
home side as the favourites.

England players set to learn the fate of their winter tour of Bangladesh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/england-players-winter-tour-bangladesh>
Misbah-ul-Haq, who hauled Pakistan from the low of the 2010 spot-fixing 
scandal to the top of the Test pile, retired from limited-overs cricket last 
year and his replacement, Azhar Ali, has overseen something of a tricky spell 
for the team in green since; they are currently ninth in the one-day rankings 
to England’s fifth.

With Morgan’s squad theoretically only Steven Finn short of being at full 
strength – two global tournaments on English soil in the next three years mean 
the white‑ball stuff is no longer a time to rest players at home – and, having 
won the previous meeting between the two sides in the United Arab Emirateslast 
November 3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/20/jos-buttler-england-pakistan-odi-match-report>
, they appear the value bet.

On the other hand, while England’s curve has been refreshingly upwards since 
theshambles of the 2015 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/09/england-crash-out-cricket-world-cup-bangladesh>
 their run-up into this latest one-day series has not been entirely plain 
sailing and they will field two men, in Morgan and Jos Buttler, who are playing 
their first cricket for some weeks because of broken digits.

Ben Stokes is also on the comeback trail following a calf tear and, given the 
all-rounder cannot bowl for the first two matches, may miss out to Jonny 
Bairstow while David Willey, whose left-arm angle and ability to swing the new 
ball has become a vital part of the attack, also sits out the opener with a 
hand knock.

Southampton has not been England’s favourite home venue for one-day cricket of 
late either, with a record of five defeats in their past five matches only 
mildly tempered by theTwenty20 victory against Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/05/england-sri-lanka-t20-international-match-report>
 this summer. Morgan is also wary of a Pakistan side that will be feeling the 
glow from their Test counterparts and are now well acclimatised to the 
conditions.

“I think it’s hugely important [we picked a first-choice side] playing against 
Pakistan, who are flying high at the minute in Test cricket,” the 29-year-old 
said. “That rubs off on any side doing well. Also when teams tour places they 
don’t come to that often they get better as they go along, so that’s another 
challenge for us.”

Morgan, who chipped a bone in a finger playing for Middlesex at the end of 
July, is slightly short on international runs himself, having gone 23 innings 
in 50-over and Twenty20 cricket without a half-century. With burgeoning batsmen 
such as Ben Duckett and Sam Billings missing out, despite pressing hard for 
selection from the Lions set-up beneath, the captain could do with a score soon.

England’s bowling, which could in theory feature three spinners if the 
Hampshire all-rounder Liam Dawson makes a one-day debut on his home ground, 
looks significantly bolstered by the return of Mark Wood – the Durham fast 
bowlerwho lit up T20 finals day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/mark-wood-england-lads-like-not-been-away-odi-squad-pakistan>
 on Saturday with speeds in excess of 90mph and five wickets.

Pakistan, for all their lowly ranking, come into the fixture on the back of a 
record 252‑run win against a callow Ireland side in Dublin last week, with 
their main plus being the bristling form of the opener Sharjeel Khan, who 
struck 152 from 86 balls. With the second fixture rained off, the electric Test 
pairing of the left-armer Wahab Riaz and the leg-spinner Yasir Shah did not 
have a run-out but are expected to feature on the south coast.

Azhar, a captain wrestling to produce some Misbah magic, views the England 
tour as vital preparation for the 2017 Champions Trophy and the World Cup that 
follows two years later – automatic qualification for the latter is not 
guaranteed as it stands – and hopes that some of the magic from the Test side 
will rub off.

“We are all very confident, no one rated us very highly and there were doubts 
if we could win the Test matches here,” he said. “The boys really believed in 
the Test series, so here also we believe we can do it. If we bring our A-game 
we definitely will compete and, inshallah, beat England.”

Along with being a solid workout for both teams as they plot a path to future 
global silverware – not to mention a chance to earn more points in the 
overarching, albeit scarcely mentioned, Super Series – the five-match encounter 
will also be a proving ground for a new way of adjudicating front-foot no-balls 
via the third umpire.

Marais Erasmus, who will sit in the TV booth for the first match, will be 
furnished with a split-screen feed of the two batting creases and have the 
ability, via a vibrating “pager” watch, to inform his on-field colleagues when 
a bowler has overstepped, thus alleviating them of one of their many 
split-second decisions.

The trial has been introduced by the International Cricket Council in response 
to recent instances of players being reprieved when dismissed off legitimate 
deliveries that were wrongly called no-balls; Alex Hales, whose Test-best score 
of 94 in Mayshould have ended on 58 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/sri-lanka-complain-icc-no-ball-mistake-alex-hales-england-third-test-lords>
 for this reason, will be grateful it did not come sooner.

England possible team

Alex Hales, Jason Roy, Joe Root, Eoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan> (capt), Jonny Bairstow, Jos 
Buttler (wk), Moeen Ali, Chris Woakes, Adil Rashid, Liam Plunkett, Mark Wood

Pakistan possible team

Azhar Ali (capt), Sharjeel Khan, Mohammad Hafeez, Babar Azam, Safraz Ahmed 
(wk), Shoaib Malik, Imad Wasim, Umar Gul, Yasir Shah, Wahab Riaz, Mohammad Amir.
 