
There are a surprising number of reasons why England might reach the World 
Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> final, even though, 
as Eoin Morgan acknowledges, New Zealand “have played the best cricket of the 
tournament so far”. Among the men the Kiwis are the only unbeaten side.

These reasons range from the scheduling of the tournament and recent history, 
to sod’s law and superstition. England have been in Delhi for the past nine 
days, having undertaken only one internal flight from Mumbai since the 
tournament began. “We are settled here,” Morgan said, “and we are used to the 
pitch. That will help us.”

New Zealand have played – extremely well – at four venues on surfaces that 
bear little resemblance to the one at the Feroz Shah Kotla ground. Adapting 
with characteristic shrewdness, the Black Caps have prospered on bare tracks 
that have encouraged the ball to spin. They have become low-score specialists; 
in Nagpur they defended 126 against India; in Dharamsala 142against Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/new-zealand-australia-world-twenty20>
; in Mohali, the one pitch encountered with a bit of green grass visible, they 
had the luxury of 180 on the board against Pakistan; in Kolkata against 
Bangladesh 145 was more than enough.

How underachieving, behind-the-times England won the 2010 World Twenty20
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/09/england-won-2010-world-twenty20-cricket>
Kane Williamson has won every toss, chosen to bat and then his spinners, who 
were barely household names in New Zealand a month ago, have set to work. It is 
still hard to believe Mitchell Santner and Ish Sodhi are theBedi 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bishan_Singh_Bedi> and Chandrasekhar 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B._S._Chandrasekhar> of the 21st century but, 
intuitively employed by Williamson, they have had great tournaments. Santner, 
swift through the air, has seen his left-armers turn sharply; Sodhi’s wrist 
spinners, delivered from a great height, can go either way. They have yet to be 
collared.

England know in Delhi there will be minimal turn. On a fresh pitch there 
remains live grass, a welcome decision taken by the groundsman, who was still 
watering the surface on Tuesday morning. That grass does not usually offer 
great deviation for the pacemen but it does generate a little more bounce, 
which can be attractive to the quick bowlers – and to the batsmen. There is no 
guarantee the spinners will prevail.

Anticipate that Morgan will bowl first if he wins the toss; so, for a change, 
might Williamson. Thus New Zealand may have to do some more adapting. They may 
even consider wheeling out one of their Test supermen, Tim Southee or Trent 
Boult, who have been hidden under the substitutes’ yellow bibs throughout the 
tournament. More likely Nathan McCullum, despite being the most economical 
bowler in the competition, albeit after two games, will give way to Adam Milne. 
But this is not certain; New Zealand like to surprise.

Then there is the “it’s too damn quiet out there” factor. New Zealand analyse 
just as voraciously as every other team, if not more so, but one statistic that 
will not be stressed in their camp is the quirk that after five World T20 
tournaments no team have won the cup without losing a game along the way.

There is an echo here of 12 months ago when New Zealand played brilliantly all 
through the 50-over World Cup before beingthumped by Australia in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/29/australia-new-zealand-world-cup-final>
 in the mildly unfamiliar conditions of Melbourne.

Morgan is the sole playing survivor here of England’s surprisingly successful 
campaign in the Caribbean in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/09/england-won-2010-world-twenty20-cricket>
 and he is happy to draw parallels with that triumph. “The main one would be 
how relaxed everybody is around the group; how much they are enjoying the 
challenge of playing international cricket. But it is all right having fun and 
enjoying what you are doing, but if you don’t have that inner drive to improve 
and win games you are going to stand still. This side has shown strengths, 
which are similar to 2010.”

While extolling the virtues of his team Morgan expresses mild astonishment 
that he finds himself in this position. “I can’t quite believe how far we’ve 
come in our white-ball cricket,” he said. “The guys we’ve selected have done 
outstandingly well and shown a great attitude to learning. It is not always 
easy to come up against very strong sides, who knock you back, but every 
question has been asked of us and we’ve come back with either a counter‑answer 
or a more aggressive option.”

It is unlikely that too many options have been mulled over by the England 
management about the make-up of their team for this match. The message will 
surely be “same team, even better performance, please”. Liam Plunkett’s 
inclusion at the expense of Reece Topley in the past two matches has sharpened 
up the pace attack.

It would help matters greatly if they could dispense with Martin Guptill 
swiftly. He is New Zealand’s leading runscorer in the tournament and over the 
years he has had a particular affinity for England bowlers clutching a white 
ball. “It is going to be a tough game of cricket,” Morgan said. “I hope the 
wicket is as good as it looks and, yeah, may the best team win.”
 