
Alastair Cook: 89 runs at 22

With his record on the subcontinent, not many would have predicted that 
England’s captain would be dismissed three times by a teenager, but Mehedi 
Hasan’s impeccable line and length on “spin or skid” pitches proved too much, 
even for Cook. There were signs that he was finding his celebrated batting 
rhythm in the second innings at Dhaka, when the four balls went to the boundary 
and his strike rotating pushes and prods kept the scoreboard moving. As 
captain, he never seemed to know quite what to do with his bowlers, for whom he 
needed a couple more fielders due to their inability to bowl one side of the 
wicket. He was clearly dissatisfied with his spinners but was curiously 
reluctant to go to Chris Woakes, who bowled just 25 overs in the series at an 
economy rate well under three.

Ben Duckett: 92 runs at 23

Alastair Cook: Defeat by Bangladesh is not the toughest I’ve had to bear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/defeat-by-bangladesh-not-toughest-had-to-bear-england-alastair-cook>
The David Warner of English cricket? Not yet, for sure – but his chutzpah, his 
fearless deployment of white ball shots in tough red ball conditions and the 
marmite reaction he provokes in pundits and fans recall the Australian biffer 
when he broke into the Test side in 2011. In his fifth Test, Warner made an 
astonishing 180 off 159 balls at Perth against India to silence the doubters, 
and, before tea on the tumultuous third day at Dhaka, Duckett looked like he 
might do something similar. But how long can you last in Test cricket 
premeditating so many shots (even, it seems, the leave)? How long can you last 
in Test cricket with a front leg that appears to “clear” towards midwicket even 
defending balls outside off-stump? How long can head, hands and feet get into 
such extraordinary non-alignment and bat hit ball? If you were to ask me, I’d 
say that he will make one glorious century in India and nine scores of fewer 
than 30 – time will tell.

Joe Root: 98 runs at 25; 2-0-5-0

Busy as usual at the crease, but LBW three times out of four as the bat missed 
the ball – was he watching it closely enough? Lasted just six balls in 
England’s two second innings, a trend that he will have to rectify in India as 
the impact of his dismissal seems to have the effect of two wickets going down.

Gary Ballance: 24 runs at 6

That impact is, of course, largely the result of the wretched form of Gary 
Ballance, who looks wracked with anxiety at the crease and has neither of the 
two options batsmen often turn to in such circumstances: he can neither hit his 
way back into form nor rely on a solid defensive technique to work his way into 
a bit of nick. Good balls are getting him out, but bad balls will do too, as 
his dismal cross-batted shovel that could only edge a skier to Tamim in the 
Dhaka disaster showed.

Moeen Ali: 92 runs at 23; 74.5-13-252-11; average 23, economy 3.4

Perhaps Garry Sobers might have found it a stiff ask to bowl the most overs in 
the series for his team and bat at No5 – and Moeen, though sharing some of the 
great Bajan’s aesthetic qualities with the bat, is no Sobers. In the first 
innings of the series, he spent over three hours guiding England from 21-3 to 
194-6 to keep his side in the game, so he is certainly not the most culpable of 
England’s batsmen, who collectively failed in unfamiliar conditions (ie against 
spinners who could rip it and land it). With the ball, he bagged a fivefer and 
took wickets in all four innings, but, despite an impressive average of 23, he 
was milked for crucial strike rotating singles and smacked to the fence when 
fractionally off line or length. An impressively phlegmatic character on and 
off the pitch, who stepped in to calm down Ben Stokes at the right moment (the 
short-fused all-rounder might owe him a bit of the 85% of his match fee he 
retained in Dhaka). India will be a definitive examination of his credentials 
to be in the side as the long term first choice spinner in helpful conditions.

Celebrating Garry Sobers' 26th and final Test century, a thing of unalloyed 
beauty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-nightwatchman/2016/aug/11/garry-sobers-80-century-west-indies-england-lords>
Ben Stokes: 128 runs at 32; 48.3-14-111-11; average 10, economy 2.3

Played the best innings of his career at Chittagong reining in his natural 
game (because, no matter how often the pundits tell us that the “natural game” 
is the only way to go, sometimes batsmen and bowlers need to play the match 
situation and conditions). His three-hour 85 took England from 46-4 (and we now 
know from Dhaka how perilous a position that is) to 197-7 and what everyone 
believed to be a comfortable winning lead. It’s worth noting that before he hit 
his first six in that match-turning innings, he had faced 47 balls for his 17 
runs. With the ball, he sought (and sometimes found) reverse swing, but even 
when it wasn’t going, the snap of his wrist and an upright seam produced a 
smidgeon of movement in air and off the seam and his bouncer and variations 
kept the batsmen honest. Cook, mindful of November, underbowled him in October 
– lay that at the door of the ICC. For all his later, good-natured banter on 
Twitter with Shakib Al Hasan, his verbals on the field at Chittagong (and, 
especially, his disdain for both the umpires’ and his captain’s advice to calm 
down) were unedifying and wasteful of energy.

Jonny Bairstow: 126 runs at 32, 7 catches, 1 stumping

Batted (as we have come to expect) like a No5 at No7 in Chittagong, but 
couldn’t repeat the trick at Dhaka where there were signs that the old failing 
of an overly strong bottom hand pulling the bat across the line, was creeping 
back into his game (though he was not alone in his desire to play horizontal 
bat shots on pitches that demanded the straightest of vertical bats for 11 
balls out of 12). Difficult conditions in which to keep, but too often the 
gloves moved late to the ball when it lifted off the surface, though much of 
his work down the legside to the spinners was effective. That England’s 
fielding was below par must surely be (psychologically at least) down to so 
many untidy gathers of returns from the outfield – they don’t produce 
overthrows, but the ball continually squirting out of the gloves looks terrible 
and does not set an example to follow.

Chris Woakes: 110 runs at 55; 25-8-68-3; average 23, economy 2.8

I have argued before that Chris Woakes’ batting record for Warwickshire in 
recent years made him a fringe candidate for England even if he did not bowl, 
and that was borne out in his relative comfort in dealing with the spinning 
ball, playing straight, watching the ball from hand to bat and waiting 
patiently for the long hop or half volley to put away. Amid all the talk of how 
England can shuffle the batting order to deal with Ballance’s inevitable 
dropping, nobody has mentioned Woakes at No6, but he now averages nearly 35 in 
Tests, which is more than Ben Stokes or Andrew Flintoff. Quite why Cook was so 
reluctant to turn to his bowling, which offered him control and a wicket-taking 
threat, asking him to deliver just 11 overs in the second Test, remains a 
mystery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fengland-bangladesh-test-player-ratings-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff4cc9e59ffea1632da81d03a2290802e711b620%2F201_207_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%20in%20Bangladesh%3A%20report%20cards%20for%20the%20players%20who%20drew%20the%20Test%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fengland-bangladesh-test-player-ratings-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%20in%20Bangladesh%3A%20report%20cards%20for%20the%20players%20who%20drew%20the%20Test%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fengland-bangladesh-test-player-ratings-draw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff4cc9e59ffea1632da81d03a2290802e711b620%2F201_207_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
 Chris Woakes and Adil Rashid. Photograph: Gareth Copley/Getty Images 
Adil Rashid: 79 runs at 26; 54.5-4-209-7; average 30, economy 3.8

In the side to whip out the tail and score a few runs down the order and did 
so often enough, but outside that narrow remit, the long hops and full tosses 
were just too frequent between the jaffas and the occasional “stock” delivery. 
With India likely to bat Ravindra Jadeja at No9, there isn’t much of a tail for 
Rashid to bowl at on the forthcoming tour and little to suggest, ten years into 
his career and after nearly 4,500 first class overs, that the four balls can be 
eliminated. Perhaps if England go two down with three to play, he could come 
into a must-in match, but he looks too much of a risk to me, even turning the 
ball away from India’s phalanx of right-handers.

Stuart Broad: 23 runs at 12; 23-6-43-2; average 22, economy 1.9

Appeared almost surplus to requirements before his marathon nine-overs spell 
at the end of day four in Chittagong applied pressure through dot balls and 
wickets to drag England back into a game they were losing. Was actually surplus 
to requirements in Dhaka when rested, a poor and disrespectful decision to the 
hosts – will he really be less knackered by the fifth Test in India, if he has 
played the other four?

Gareth Batty: 4 runs at 4; 34-4-116-4; average 29, economy 3.4

A few years ago, you would have got Leicester-to-win-the-Premier-League odds 
on the ruddy-faced Surrey captain opening the bowling for England, but that’s 
what happened in the first Test but he was more Leicester 2016-17 than 
Leicester 2015-16 in his first spell. He settled after that and picked up four 
quality wickets without ever suggesting he is more than the good county pro 
that has been on the circuit for years. Unlucky to miss out in Dhaka on the 
dubious pretext that England needed a look at county colleague Zafar Ansari – 
but blame the schedule as much as the selectors for that one.

Bangladesh claim historic Test win over England as collapse ensures tied series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/bangladesh-beat-england-draw-test-series>
Zafar Ansari: 13 runs at 7; 25-0-112-2; average 56, economy 4.5

His figures do not do him justice, as he created plenty of chances in a long 
spell on the third morning at Chittagong, risking being clipped to leg by 
attacking the stumps. But that just showed up his dilemma – is he an attacking 
wicket-taker or a man to tie down one end? If England think such a spinner 
exists in the domestic game, they may spend a long time searching for the next 
Graeme Swann.

Steven Finn: 0 runs at 0; 11-1-48-0

In contrast to Ansari, Finn’s figures do reflect his performance.

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>
• This article first appeared on The 99.4 Cricket Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> on Twitter
 