
Eoin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan> said England 
players are worried about the security situation in Bangladesh and suggested 
matches may be played on neutral soil.

England are scheduled to play in Bangladesh between late September and early 
November, and Morgan, England’s one-day captain, said: “It is quite a big 
concern. We’ve always left the big decisions to theECB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb>. They write reports and send guys out 
to see if it is safe and then come back to the players to see how happy or 
unhappy they are. Certainly it is a concern at the moment.”

Pakistan’s Mohammad Amir roars back to post early warning to England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/04/somerset-pakistan-tour-match-report>
The England and Wales Cricket Board responded to the terrorist attack in Dhaka 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
on Friday by releasing a statement promising to take “appropriate steps” should 
it be advised Bangladesh is not “acceptably safe”. Bangladesh cricket officials 
have conceded they cannot, in the circumstances, reasonably object if England 
decide to stay away.

Sheikh Sohail, the Bangladesh Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board director, said: “I agree the 
situation of our country is now more critical than before. If England opt not 
to come, we won’t have anything to say. I hope England won’t take any such 
decision. We have to wait and see what they have to say. We still have plenty 
of time on our hands, so let’s hope for the best.”

Bangladesh have already had Australia pull out of a bilateral tour of the 
country for security reasons, as well as withdraw their team from the Under-19 
World Cup.

Morgan was speaking before Tuesday’s one-off T20 match with Sri Lanka at the 
Ageas Bowl where he is looking forward to unleashing one of England’s fastest 
bowlers, Tymal Mills.

The 23-year-old Mills surprised the West Indies opener Chris Gayle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/14/chris-gayle-mel-mclaughlin-sexism-row-west-indies-cricket>
 with a 93.3mph yorker in a domestic Twenty20 game for Sussex last month and 
Morgan said: “I’ve only seen it once, on a vine on Twitter, and it looked 
pretty quick. I’d love it if he could bowl like that all the time but the 
ability to bowl 90 miles an hour doesn’t come easy.

“I’ve always spoken about how, if we could have more than one guy who can do 
that, it would be great, but he seems to be a lot quicker than our next 
quickest at the moment. I saw him at Chelmsford playing a couple of games 
against Essex and before Sussex played England in an Ashes warm-up game and he 
bowled quick then.”

There are fitness concerns about the left-armer’s ability to bowl long spells, 
but that is hardly a concern in T20 cricket, and the bowler is thought to have 
made progress since his switch from Essex to Sussex last year.

England’s tour of Bangladesh in doubt after Dhaka terrorist attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/england-tour-bangladesh-doubt-dhaka-terrorist-attack>
Morgan said: “His challenge will always be managing his workload and fitness 
and being able to peak at the right time, but certainly he bowled as well then 
as he has done recently.”

Morgan said the quickest bowler he had faced was Australia’s Shaun Tait. 
“Steve Finn had one year where he bowled 95 and when you talk about 95 it is 
absolutely ridiculous, like bowling off 15 yards. To have someone in your team 
you can throw the ball to who is that quick causes problems and I think Tymal 
is in that category.”

Morgan’s Middlesex team-mate Dawid Malan is also poised for a call-up while 
England rest Joe Root and Moeen Ali, who play in all three formats of the game.

Morgan said: “Dawid is a top order, left-handed batsman who has scored heavily 
in all three forms of the game. He’s adapted his game, which is hard to do. A 
lot of guys, including myself, have changed methods across formats but over the 
last few years he has been very classy.”
 