
Eoin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan>, England’s 
limited-overs captain, was in an upbeat mood before Wednesday’s fourth one-day 
international with Sri Lanka, happily fielding questions about the inglorious 
demise of the nation’s footballers the night before despite his own team 
sitting one win away from a series win.

Test cricket's two-tier proposal is an imperfect but necessary step forward | 
The Spin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/28/test-cricket-two-tier-proposal-is-an-imperfect-but-necessary-step-forward>
Morgan, given both his Irish background and a personal preference for watching 
rugby, did not take in the match himself but does at least have some experience 
in rebuilding a team from the ruins of an abject tournament failure, with 
England’s current 50-over side scarcely recognisable from the onethat stank out 
the 2015 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/09/england-crash-out-cricket-world-cup-bangladesh>
.

Since then Morgan’s side, under the head coach, Trevor Bayliss, have 
impressed, combining some enterprising cricket with an upturn in results, as 
well a sense that the players themselves are enjoying the ride; the early 
signs, dare one say it, are encouraging for theChampions Trophy on home soil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/01/england-drawn-against-australia-new-zealand-india-pakistan-champions-trophy-cricket>
 next summer.

“I suppose for us it was going with a new method and a new group of players,” 
replied the 29-year-old, politely, when asked how his national team recovered 
from its Iceland moment. “The learning experience we’ve had over the last 12 
months has been so significant that it is almost a completely different team.”

Wednesday’s sold-out floodlit encounter in south London represents a chance 
for this rebooted group to claim a second home series victory in eight – a 
statistic that owes much to the dithering of the previous regime – sitting 1-0 
up with two to play afterSunday’s washout in Bristol  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/26/england-sri-lanka-one-day-international-match-report>
prevented a chase of 249 after a third impressive performance on the bounce 
from the bowlers.

With grass on The Oval pitch and damp conditions tipped by the forecasters 
Morgan was leaning towards an unchanged team and the retention of the seamer 
Chris Jordan in the XI ahead of the off-spinner, Moeen Ali, while admitting 
that the five-man attack he has been forced to juggle with this series, a 
result ofinjury to the all-rounder Ben Stokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/21/ben-stokes-england-test-sri-lanka>
, has sharpened the mind in the field.

The batsmen, on the other hand, have been largely frustrated thus far, with 
Sunday’s rain anda 10-wicket victory at Edgbaston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/england-sri-lanka-jason-roy-alex-hales>
 the Friday before it denying the middle order of Joe Root, Morgan and Jonny 
Bairstow any time at the crease since their collective struggle during the tied 
opening fixture at Trent Bridge.

Bairstow is playing as a specialist batsman, of course, with the captain 
treading carefully when explaining that, in one-day cricket at least, Jos 
Buttler is considered the better behind the stumps. “Jos has played a lot more 
one-day cricket than Jonny. He was picked ahead of him initially, has kept his 
place in the side and he is world-class at it,” said Morgan.

If England are now at a tweaking stage, Sri Lanka are trying to remain in 
positive spirits towards the end of a tour that has so far, on English soil at 
least, gone winless. Havinglost the Test series 2-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/13/england-sri-lanka-third-test-match-report>
, after drawing both warm-up matches, the match in Nottingham last week, when 
Liam Plunkett’s dramatic straight last-ball six meant the spoils were shared, 
is as close as the tourists have come to adding to the two victories secured 
during a brief visit to Ireland.

In these circumstances the sight of an experienced player such as Upul 
Tharanga coming out to bat at No7 has been a curious one, not least because 161 
of the right-hander’s 185 caps have come as an opener, where he has scored 13 
one-day hundreds during an 11-year international career, one more than Marcus 
Trescothick’s record number by an Englishman.

Women’s ODI: Tammy Beaumont blasts England beyond Pakistan’s reach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/27/england-pakistan-womens-one-day-international-match-report>
Despite averaging 56 against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>, his highest against any nation, 
Tharanga says he is happy to perform this largely unfamiliar role, with scores 
of 53 not out and 40 in his last two innings showing good adaptability at the 
age of 31. The reason, he claims, is that the management wants to give vital 
experience to the more youthful opening pair of Kusal Perera and Danushka 
Gunathilaka, as well as Kusal Mendis at No3. The trio have failed to fire to 
date, however, with England’s bowlers consistently picking them up cheaply to 
leave the captain, Angelo Mathews, and his deputy, Dinesh Chandimal, with a 
rebuilding job. While the pair have combined for three of their side’s four 
highest partnerships, neither is yet to kick on for a big score himself and lay 
a genuine platform for a late-innings assault by such as their converted opener.

“I came for the one-day part of the series and I think the team is in a really 
good shape,” said Tharanga. “But players are getting 40 or 50 and we are 
getting 240-250-260, so some of the top five need to get a big score. These 
pitches have been good for batting. There are still two ODIs left and we are 
looking forward to winning those games and winning the series. Everyone is 
looking forward and trying 200%.”England (possible): Alex Hales, Jason Roy, Joe 
Root, Eoin Morgan (c), Jonny Bairstow, Jos Buttler (wk), Chris Woakes, David 
Willey, Chris Jordan, Liam Plunkett, Adil Rashid

Sri Lanka (possible): Kusal Perera, Danushka Gunathilaka, Kusal Mendis, Upul 
Tharanga, Dinesh Chandimal (wk), Angelo Mathews (capt), Dasun Shanaka, Farveez 
Maharoof, Seekkuge Prasanna, Nuwan Pradeep, Suranga Lakmal
 