
Eoin Morgan cannot believe how far England’s limited-overs team have come 
since the World Cup as they prepare to faceNew Zealand in the semi-finals of 
the World Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/28/ben-stokes-england-new-zealand-world-twenty20>
 on Wednesday in Delhi.

England were humiliated in Australia and New Zealand last year but things look 
much brighter for Morgan’s side. “I’ve been asked the question a couple of 
times after every series we’ve played and I can’t quite believe where we are 
overall with one-day cricket and T20 cricket,” Morgan said.

“I think the guys that we’ve selected have done outstandingly well, they’ve 
shown a great amount of attitude in learning, because it’s not always easy. You 
come up against very strong sides who knock you back on a day-to-day basis but 
every question that’s been asked of us we’ve come back with either a 
counter-answer or a more aggressive option.”

If it is possible to find a turning point in England’s limited-overs fortunes, 
it was likely last summer’s series against New Zealand when England were able 
to match their aggressive style and make it pay.

“I think that series was very important,” the England captain said. “Coming 
into the series we talked about emulating what Australia and New Zealand did at 
the World Cup. Where we were and where they were, we were miles away so to 
bridge the gap we had to emulate the fashion in which they played and the 
aggressive nature in which they went about their game, particularly with the 
ball.

“Throughout the World Cup their swing bowlers were outstanding and that 
encourages a positive mindset in everything you do. The batting can come more 
naturally.”

England’s progress to the semi-finals has hardly been smooth but they have 
pulled out victories from awkward positions against South Africa,Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/england-afghanistan-world-twenty20-match-report>
 andSri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/england-sri-lanka-world-t20-match-report>
.

“I think it shows the amount of character in the group,” Morgan said. “We 
haven’t had to repeat the same things twice. It shows different sides to every 
person’s personality and what they’ve got as opposed to just what they do on a 
day-to-day basis, and it shows the group as a whole can be very powerful if we 
string a game together.”

England’s Ben Stokes defies the numbers to be a danger man against New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/28/ben-stokes-england-new-zealand-world-twenty20> 