
Eoin Morgan, who along with Alex Hales missed the tour of Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/andrew-strauss-disappointed-eoin-morgan-alex-hales-bangladesh>
 over security concerns, will return to his role as England’s limited-overs 
captain in India during January, the assistant coach, Paul Farbrace, has 
confirmed. Under the leadership of Jos Buttler, England secured an impressive
2-1 series win in Chittagong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/england-bangladesh-third-odi-match-report>
.

“He [Morgan] will definitely be captain in India,” said Farbrace, who had 
earlier in the tour expressed his “massive disappointment” with Morgan and 
Hales’s decision, echoing the sentiments of others in the England hierarchy. 
“There can’t be any way around it – he deserves it.”

Jos Buttler says England’s ODI series win in Bangladesh is ‘hugely satisfying’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/jos-buttler-england-odi-series-win-bangladesh-ben-stokes>
Farbrace said he had no concerns regarding the pair’s return, due to the 
tightness of England’s team. “The one-day team is particularly close,” he said. 
“There are a lot of mates in the team. That helps when those who haven’t been 
here come back in January, because it is close-knit.”

The ODI series, which ended Bangladesh’s run of six successive home-series 
wins, saw the emergence of the debutant Ben Duckett, who scored half-centuries 
in both of England’s victories, and Sam Billings, who played a decisive hand in 
the decider, scoring his maiden ODI 50. Farbrace said that was proof of the 
improvement in England’s white-ball depth and also a warning shot to those 
absent that no place – Morgan included – is safe.

“Every player in the squad knows that there is serious quality,” said 
Farbrace. “Duckett has come in and settled so well – better than any of us 
could have expected. His calmness around the game has shown he has the 
temperament. He has shown it straight away. Billings is another one – he enjoys 
the limelight. The competition we are seeing now, every player knows they need 
to play well to be successful.”

For now, attention turns to the two-match Test series against Bangladesh, 
which precedes five Tests against the new No1-ranked side, India. England’s 
warm-ups, comprising two two-day games, begin on Friday, and several selection 
issues remain unresolved. Farbrace confirmed that the 21-year-old Duckett finds 
himself in a “shootout” with Haseeb Hameed, 19, to open alongside Alastair 
Cook, who is at home for the birth of his second child. Buttler’s scintillating 
ODI form puts him in the mix for a recall too.

England will leave Bangladesh knowing more about roguish band of ODI tyros
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/13/england-leave-bangladesh-odi-tyros-paul-farbrace-jos-buttler>
“The way Jos has batted out here, he has looked like he’s been batting on 
different pitches,” said Farbrace, who flew home on Thursday afternoon as part 
of the coaches’ rotation policy but is due to return for the India Tests. “If 
he can play that way in red-ball cricket, there’s no reason he shouldn’t be 
seen as a batter. He’s on this trip as the second keeper to start with, but if 
he plays that way again, there is no reason he can’t get back into the side. If 
you’re here in the squad, you’ve a genuine chance of playing.”

Duckett and Hameed may both make their Test debuts next week, with the former 
slotting into the No4 spot currently occupied, but hardly with any certainty, 
by Gary Ballance. “It’s a shootout but they could end up both playing,” he 
said. “There’s no reason why Duckett couldn’t bat in the middle order, there 
are places going.”
 