
Eoin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan> is expected to 
return to his role as England’s one-day captain in India in January next year 
following his decision to miss the tour of Bangladesh for security reasons.

James Whitaker, the national selector, has cited Morgan’s role in revitalising 
England’s limited-overs sides since the 2015 World Cup as one of the chief 
reasons why, despite missing the trip that begins at the end of this month, his 
status should not be affected.

England call up Haseeb Hameed and Gareth Batty for Bangladesh tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/england-call-up-haseeb-hameed-gareth-batty-bangladesh>
In naming the one-day and Test squads for Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/england-call-up-haseeb-hameed-gareth-batty-bangladesh>
 on Friday morning, Whitaker echoed the sentiments of England’s director of 
cricket, Andrew Strauss, in stating his disappointment thatMorgan, along with 
Alex Hales, was not available 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/andrew-strauss-disappointed-eoin-morgan-alex-hales-bangladesh>
.

Their replacements – Ben Duckett and Sam Billings – have a chance to muddy the 
waters, however, before the limited-overs leg of the India tour begins in the 
new year.

“Eoin has done exceptionally well as captain,” Whitaker said. “Over the last 
couple of years he’s established a really good leadership base. He’s done a 
marvellous job.

“ It’s slightly disappointing that he’s turned this opportunity down. Other 
people will come in and put pressure on both those guys. We’ll review that, but 
at this stage we expect Morgan to be captain in India.”

While Hales is likely to remain a first‑choice one-day player, given his four 
centuries in the past 12 months, the 27-year-old’s Test spot for Bangladesh and 
India has passed over to either Duckett or Lancashire’s Haseeb Hameed.

Both were named in Alastair Cook’s Test squad and will vie for a place as his 
opening partner in the two-match series that begins on 20 October, with the two 
two-day warm-up fixtures beforehand representing a straight shootout for the 
pair while the captain, following a short spell training with the one-day 
squad, briefly returns home to attend the birth of his second child.

Asked if Hales, who averaged 27.28 from his 11 Test caps, would have made 
Cook’s squad had he not made himself unavailable, Whitaker replied: “I have 
spoken to Alex about his involvement and he wouldn’t have, no.

Haseeb Hameed’s perfect timing earns teenager chance to answer England call | 
Will Macpherson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/haseeb-hameed-england-squad-bangladesh-lancashire>
“By the time we sat down to select this group, we knew Alex wasn’t going to 
go. He’s shown signs in the summer of what qualities he has got but hasn’t 
quite taken his chance there. It’s not to say he couldn’t come again, he will 
play county cricket and remain in our thoughts.

“From a form point of view, we told him we would look at other options. He 
understood, he was frustrated, because clearly he knows he is a quality player. 
He has showcased it a lot of times, and I’m sure he will again.”

In Morgan’s absence, Jos Buttler will captain the one-day side for the 
three‑match series that begins in Dhaka on 7 October. While no vice-captain has 
been named, Whitaker is tipping Ben Stokes for the position.

He said: “We haven’t nominated a vice‑captain yet. But Ben Stokes is taking a 
leading role more and more in both forms of the game. He is an astute reader of 
the game and a very astute motivator of other players around him. Jos and [head 
coach] Trevor Bayliss will take a view, but Ben Stokes is a galvaniser of 
people.”
 