
Eoin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan>, upon resuming the 
captaincy of England’s one-day side in India, shrugged off the criticism that 
followed his decision to miss the tour of Bangladesh but revealed it did leave 
a number of his family “very offended”.

Morgan, 30, leads the side into the first of two warm-up fixtures against 
India A in Mumbai on Tuesday before the opening one‑day international in Pune 
on Sunday, with Jos Buttler, who deputised during his absence, returning to the 
ranks as vice-captain.

Eoin Morgan: Everyone I trust backed my decision to pull out of England tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/eoin-morgan-england-bangladesh-india-tour>
Morgan’s decision, along with that of the opener Alex Hales, to miss the tour 
of Bangladesh in October on security grounds provoked a mixed reaction with 
Andrew Strauss, the director of England cricket, placing on record his 
disappointment while two of Morgan’s predecessors, Nasser Hussain and Michael 
Vaughan, suggested the captain’s authority would be damaged as a result.

Asked about the fallout, Morgan told BBC’s Test Match Special: “To be honest, 
I didn’t see much of it. When things are announced like that, you can plan how 
to deal with it, and my way of dealing with it was to get away from things, 
which I did.

“So I didn’t see a great deal of it. I think my family saw a lot of it and 
were very offended, but that’s part and parcel of being in the limelight 
sometimes. Certainly standing here I don’t regret the decision. Since we 
arrived here three days ago, things have been really good, plenty of energy 
around the group, which is awesome.”

While Morgan and Hales were permitted to miss Bangladesh without any long‑term 
recriminations as regards future selection, the former finds himself needing to 
hit the ground running given both a personal sequence of only two 
half-centuries in 13 international innings and the plaudits that Buttler’s 
leadership earned during the 2-1 series win.

Even though a change of captaincy before the summer’s Champions Trophy looks 
unlikely given Morgan’s role in a reversal of England’s white-ball fortunes 
since the 2015 World Cup, he knows from his own ascension to the job, which 
came on the eve of that tournament, how things can change quickly.

“Nothing is a certainty, absolutely nothing,” said Morgan, who flew into India 
after a spell playing in Australia’s Big Bash League. “But I like to think 
things have gone pretty well for us over a period of time and we’ve had a 
little bit of success. You’re always out to prove how good you are. I’m always 
looking to win games of cricket and score runs.

“[Jos] was happy to hand back. I think he really enjoyed the role and the 
proof was in the performances he put in. I thought he was outstanding and look 
at how the senior players responded, like Ben Stokes.”

Morgan’s side face a strong India A side in Tuesday’s day-night fixture in 
Mumbai. The hosts will be led by MS Dhoni, who recently stood down as India’s 
one-day captain, and features experienced internationals in Yuvraj Singh, 
Ashish Nehra and Shikhar Dhawan.

England will be without Liam Plunkett, as he recovers from a calf injury, and 
Joe Root, following the birth of his first child over the weekend. The latter 
will arrive in India on Thursday, the day of second warm-up match at theCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club of India, but has one more 
wait on his hands with Alastair Cook’s future Test captain seemingly yet to be 
resolved.
 