
Eoin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan> has no regrets 
over his decision to miss the tour of Bangladesh on security grounds and will 
return to lead England’s one-day side in India after Christmas confident that 
his authority as captain remains undiminished.

Speaking publicly on the subject for the first time since he and Alex Hales 
pulled out of the October trip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/12/eoin-morgan-alex-hales-bangladesh-cricket-tour-england>
, Morgan remained entirely content with his decision after watching from home as
his vice-captain, Jos Buttler, led the side to a 2-1 victory in the one-day 
series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/england-bangladesh-third-odi-match-report>
 as a part of a five-week tour that passed without incident.

Eoin Morgan and Alex Hales should not be punished for making a choice | Ali 
Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/12/eoin-morgan-alex-hales-bangladesh-cricket-tour-england>
“It was a difficult decision to make and I don’t think a lot of people would 
have made it, but I am certainly happy with the decision that I have made,” 
said Morgan, who, like Hales, took up the option to miss the tour sanctioned by 
the England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board 
without recrimination.

In eschewing safety assurances given by the team’s head of security, Reg 
Dickason, Morgan was criticised by two of his predecessors, with Nasser Hussain 
stating it would undermine his captaincy and Michael Vaughan similarly claiming 
that he would be left unable to “look players in the eye”.

The 30-year-old, who is currently playing in Australia’s Big Bash League 
before the limited-overs series in India, said the response from the team at 
the time was a demonstration of their unity, however, and cares little for the 
opinions of those outside of his allies within the sport. “We’re a tightly-knit 
group who back each other’s decisions no matter what and in particular in this 
case where every decision for the individual was his own decision and whatever 
was right for him,” he said. “Everyone within the game that I trust has 
supported me, including players past and current who I lean on for big 
decisions.”

Asked if he spoke to Hales before their withdrawal was confirmed, Morgan said: 
“I think his doubts were similar to mine, but I didn’t speak to him directly. 
It was a completely individual decision, and part of me making it and going 
with what I felt was right was not to influence anybody in the wrong way.

England’s Andrew Strauss ‘disappointed’ as pair drop out of Bangladesh tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/andrew-strauss-disappointed-eoin-morgan-alex-hales-bangladesh>
“If I’d have toured and gone against my gut because I thought there was some 
need to captain the side out there, then it might have influenced somebody like 
him. He might have been afraid to make the decision if everybody else was 
going, or felt unnecessary pressure.”

Morgan’s own view was shaped by two past experiences on the subcontinent – a 
bomb blast during his time in the Indian Premier League in 2010 and a period of 
political unrest when playing domestic cricket in Bangladesh three years later 
– but having played in both countries since then, these reasons have been 
queried in some quarters.

While trying to address this, Morgan also highlighted that England were the 
first touring side since the terrorist attack in the capital of Dhaka on 1 
July, as well as Australia postponing their visit the previous year. He said: 
“If there is ever a doubt in my mind about travelling somewhere I have to 
consider my options. One thing that had changed from 2010 in India was that 
other teams had travelled there and security had increased. Also, since then 
there had been no terrorist attacks or threats to either a tournament or team.”

If Morgan is now hoping the issue of his withdrawal has been put to bed, then 
pressure remains in his need for runs.Ben Duckett, who made two half-centuries 
in Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/jos-buttler-england-odi-series-win-bangladesh-ben-stokes>
, was left out of the squad to accommodate the returning captain, who has 
scored two half-centuries in his past 13 innings.

Andrew Strauss, the director of England cricket, would be reluctant to make a 
change leading into the Champions Trophy in the summer with the one-day side’s 
impressive performances since the 2015 World Cup in part credited to Morgan’s 
leadership.
 