
An Eritrean refugee has died and another has been injured in a road accident 
involving a British lorry driver inCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais>, French officials have said.

About 50 people in the port city were trying to slow UK-bound traffic on the 
A16 motorway on Sunday by placing objects on the road to try and climb on to 
heavy goods vehicles.

A British driver trying to avoid the obstacles ended up hitting two Eritreans, 
a man and a woman, who were taken to hospital. The man later died.

The Préfecture du Pas-de-Calais said on Monday the driver was set upon by 
“migrants” but managed to continue his journey before reporting the case to 
police at the Channel tunnel.

Taking in 300 children from Calais camp would be good result, says Amber Rudd
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/10/300-children-from-calais-camp-good-result-amber-rudd>
The incident reportedly brings the death toll among refugees and migrants this 
year in the Calais area to 14.

It comes before the imminent demolition of a camp known as the Jungle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/uk-close-to-deal-for-transfer-of-child-refugees-from-calais-amber-rudd>
. The French president, François Hollande, said it would close before winter, 
with its 9,000 inhabitants dispersed around the country.

The camp on the city’s edge sprang up around a state-funded day centre that 
opened in April last year. Despite efforts to reduce the number of people by 
dismantling the camp’s southern section earlier this year, refugees from 
countries including Sudan, Syria andEritrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea> continue to arrive.

As France gears up for next year’s presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/10/sarkozy-juppe-france-presidential-election-republicans-primaries-eight-candidates>
, Hollande appears keen to adopt a firmer stance and close the rest of the camp.

The camp has become a symbol of his government’s failure to tackle Europe’s 
refugee crisis and a target of criticism from conservative and far-right rivals 
seeking to unseat him.

The actions of those attempting to enter the UK via the French port has caused 
relentless problems for British lorry drivers and led to repeated cross-Channel 
disruption for travellers.

Work continues on a UK-funded £1.9m wall in the city aimed at preventing 
people from boarding lorries heading to the port.

Under the closure plan people will be held at reception centres in regions 
acrossFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> for up to four months 
while authorities investigate their cases.

Those who do not seek asylum will be deported. The move has prompted vehement 
protests from many local conservative and far-right politicians, saying they 
fear the consequences of having refugees in their towns.

But Hollande has indirectly criticised their resistance and called for more 
solidarity, noting that neighbouring Germany has taken in a millions compared 
with just 9,000 being relocated from Calais.
 