
The landing site of a European spacecraft that was supposed to make a historic 
touchdown onMars <https://www.theguardian.com/science/mars> this week has been 
identified in images that suggest the probe suffered a violent collision at the 
surface.

Images from Nasa Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter 
<http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Space_Science/ExoMars/Mars_Reconnaissance_Orbiter_views_Schiaparelli_landing_site>
 show a large “fuzzy dark patch” that scientists think was caused by huge 
plumes of dust thrown up in a high-speed crash - and may even indicate the 
probe exploded on impact. Theprobe is believed to have gone down with full fuel 
tanks far faster than planned because its retrorockets, intended to slow it 
down, fired for only a few seconds before switching off prematurely.

Will the failure of the Mars lander scupper ESA's plans to launch a rover?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/21/will-the-failure-of-the-mars-lander-scupper-esas-plans-to-launch-a-rover>
A second, brighter, surface feature is thought to be the 12-metre-wide 
parachute, which the Schiaparelli lander jettisoned during descent.

The latest observations confirm what most European Space Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/european-space-agency> (ESA) scientists 
were already resigned to: that what was supposed to be a historic first 
scientific mission on Mars for Europe had been scuppered at the last moment. 
The rapid location of the craft is likely to come as a relief, however, and 
will help with the forensic analysis that is already underway.

The parachute was released from Schiaparelli ahead of its final landing 
sequence, during which its nine thrusters should have slowed it to a walking 
pace just above the surface.


But data beamed back from the lander to its mothership, the Trace Gas Orbiter, 
show that its thrusters only fired for three or four seconds rather than 30 
seconds as intended. Schiaparelli continued transmitting for a further 19 
seconds before going silent.

Scientists now think that after the thrusters switched off, Schiaparelli 
plummeted in freefall from a height of between two and four kilometres, and hit 
the surface at more than 300 km (186 miles) per hour. The fuzzy patch, which is 
roughly 15 by 40 metres in size, would indicate the halo of disturbed surface 
material.

“It is also possible that the lander exploded on impact, as its thruster 
propellant tanks were likely still full,” ESA said in a statement. “These 
preliminary interpretations will be refined following further analysis.”

A powerful camera called HiRISE on board the Nasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> probe will take more detailed images 
of the features next week.

Speaking before the lander was identified, Jorge Vago, the ExoMars project 
scientist, said it was critical for the team to work out what went wrong. “Of 
course we are disappointed that the landing didn’t go well ... The silver 
lining is we have a lot of detailed information,” he said. “I think we will be 
able to explain it.”

Total recall ... of unsuccessful attempts to land on Mars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/20/total-recall-of-unsuccessful-mars-lander-schiaparelli-exomars>
“It will take a few weeks to work out what happened,” he added. “People are 
very careful when something bad happens like this.”

Prof David Southwood, a space scientist at Imperial College London, noted that 
Mars missions seem particularly prone to mishap. “If one were superstitious, 
one would say it is a return of the Mars gremlin.” However, he added that the 
failed landing attempt should not detract from the more important element of 
the mission, which was always intended to be orbiter’s measurements of trace 
gases, such as methane, which might indicate the presence of alien life.

“Time and again the US Mars program faced failure and, like Robert the Bruce, 
straightforwardly went on with the task of overcoming setback,” he said. “Space 
exploration is tough. As long as we believe in its societal worth, Europe needs 
to do the same.”

The position of the dark mark shows that Schiaparelli impacted about five 
kilometres west of its intended landing point, but well within the 100 x 15 km 
landing ellipse it was targeting.
 