
The EU has hailed a plunge in the number of migrants crossing Niger to reach 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as a success for its 
anti-trafficking strategy, even as MEPs complained that the bloc’s figures did 
not add up.

The volume of migrants making the perilous journey across Niger’s desert fell 
from 70,000 in May to 1,500 in November, according toan EU statement released 
on Wednesday 
<https://eeas.europa.eu/sites/eeas/files/second-progress-report-1_en_act_part1_v11.pdf>
.

The EU’s foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini, said the bloc’s funding of 
anti-migration measures inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> was 
creating “positive results and important building blocks for new cooperation”.

Corruption stymies Niger's attempts to stem flow of migrants to Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/22/corruption-niger-attempt-stem-flow-migrants-europe-smugglers-sahara>
The Finnish prime minister, Juha Sipila, has called for the scheme to be 
extended to Iraq, Afghanistan and Somalia 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-europe-migrants-eu-finland-idUKKBN14318Q>. At 
an EU summit on Thursday, an announcement of thousands more “voluntary assisted 
returns” to Libya is expected.

But doubts about the probity of the figures for Niger cast a shadow over 
Wednesday’s announcement. The declared drop in migrants crossingNiger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/niger> is based on an assessment of just two 
monitoring points, and data that “does not reflect overall entries or exits to 
and from Niger”.

That assessment – by the International Organisation for Migration 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B3CEVcVlpFxORVdwSS02QlZ3S1E/view> – also 
suggests that migrants are avoiding key towns and transit points in Niger “for 
fear of repression”, casting further doubt on what EU officials had described 
as “a success story” for EU policy.

The Green MEP Judith Sargentini branded the European commission’s claim to 
have reduced migrant numbers in Niger as being “at least questionable, if not 
harmful for migrants”.

She said: “EU support for Niger’s border guards has made people smuggling even 
more profitable, as the prices of people smuggling rise due to increased border 
guards. Meanwhile, proposals for legal pathways for refugees and economic 
migrants are nowhere to be seen. In all aspects, this is a failing approach.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Feu-claims-success-curbing-migration-niger-scepticism-meps-international-organisation-for-migration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b1c10b350428478c27d4841706fd432577d5824%2F52_51_2487_1492%2F2487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20claims%20of%20success%20in%20curbing%20Niger%20migrants%20greeted%20with%20scepticism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Feu-claims-success-curbing-migration-niger-scepticism-meps-international-organisation-for-migration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20claims%20of%20success%20in%20curbing%20Niger%20migrants%20greeted%20with%20scepticism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Feu-claims-success-curbing-migration-niger-scepticism-meps-international-organisation-for-migration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b1c10b350428478c27d4841706fd432577d5824%2F52_51_2487_1492%2F2487.jpg>
 Migrants holding water containers sit on the back of an overcrowded truck at a 
local immigration transit centre in Agadez. Photograph: Akintunde 
Akinleye/Reuters 
Many migrants are thought to have travelled north through Niger to Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>, from where human smugglers ferry 
them to Italy on ramshackle boats.

Sargentini, a member of the European parliament’s development committee, 
pointed out thatmore people had died 
<https://www.iom.int/news/mediterranean-migrant-arrivals-2016-204311-deaths-2443>
 in the Mediterranean Sea this year than in 2015, and said that the EU’s pride 
at trends in Niger was misplaced. “If the EU really did reduce the number of 
people transiting through that country, where are those people now, and what 
state are they in?” she asked.

Senior EU officials insist it is too early to conclude that traffickers have 
diverted their routes via neighbouring Mali to avoid detection by EU-trained 
border guards. But one said that the bloc was “starting to see circumstantial 
evidence” of this.

By early next year, the EU wants to sign agreements linking aid to migration 
restrictions with five African countries – Niger, Nigeria, Mali, Senegal and 
Ethiopia. EU officials will then be deployed in these countries to help with 
measures such as the biometric registration of migrants passing through.

In a progress report for Senegal, EU sources say “a lot of work has to be done 
on the root causes of migration”, although they are hopeful of progress in 
Nigeria, where the readmission of deported EU migrants began in October.

In total, 4,430 people have been repatriated from Europe 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-4381_en.htm> under the migration 
pacts so far, and a further 2,700 people have been returned to priority 
countries.

However, Raphael Shilhav, Oxfam’s EU migration adviser, said the policy had 
been short-sighted in its depiction of migration as a negative phenomenon. 
“Migration is an important tool for development in western Africa and a vital 
coping mechanism for displaced peoples,” he said. “In the Lake Chad basin, we 
have millions of people displaced – including across borders – and an EU 
intervention to close down borders is problematic. These people need 
humanitarian assistance.”

Many NGOs and MEPs complain that existing development aid pledges are being 
diverted towards projects aimed at stemming migration. There are no reliable 
figures for how much of the contribution that EU countries make to a €2.5bn 
Africa Trust fund linked to migration curbs comes from existing development aid 
budgets.

“You can’t say that it is new [money],” said one EU official. “It may be 
additional funding that is being mobilised for this purpose.”
 