
Brexit has been referred to as the biggest foreign policy issue facing Britain 
since accession to the European economic community in 1973. In many ways, this 
is true of Ireland too. As the process unfolds, one of the biggest challenges 
for Ireland is how we maintain a strong and close relationship with our UK 
friends and neighbours while remaining at the heart of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. While we deeply regret the outcome of 
the UK referendum, Ireland remains, and will remain, a committed member of the 
EU.

Huge rise in Britons applying for Irish citizenship after Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/13/huge-rise-in-britons-applying-for-irish-citizenship-after-brexit-vote>
Since the referendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> I 
have engaged extensively with both my UK government counterparts and each of my 
foreign ministerial colleagues all across the EU. I’ve spoken to the UK foreign 
secretary, Boris Johnson, and the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, 
James Brokenshire, on several occasions, and I was pleased to welcome the 
secretary of state for exiting the EU, David Davis, to Dublin for discussions. 
Several other EU foreign ministers have also visited Dublin and last week, the 
EU commission’s chief Brexit negotiator,Michel Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/27/jean-claude-juncker-puts-michel-barnier-in-charge-brexit-talks>
, visited Dublin – the sixth capital he visited on his tour of 28. And 
Ireland’s taoiseach, Enda Kenny, has had extensive discussions with Theresa 
May, Angela Merkel, François Hollande, Donald Tusk and many others.

In my discussions with EU colleagues, I have emphasised the importance of the 
Irish and Irish-British dimensions to Brexit for our citizens, our economy and 
trading links, our common travel area with the UK and, of course,Northern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and its invisible 
border with the rest of the island. I’ve also stressed the need for a strong 
EU, characterised by partnership, peace and prosperity. I have been heartened 
by the strong support across Europe for the peace process and the understanding 
about our special circumstances on the island.

One of our key concerns about Brexit is any risk to the effective invisibility 
of the border between north and south

Overall, we will be working for special arrangements that take account of 
Northern Ireland’s unique circumstances. The process ahead is extremely complex 
and multi-layered. We are currently auditing and assessing the implications of 
Britain’s withdrawal from the EU across a range of sectors through dialogue 
between the north and south, between London and Dublin, through bodies such as 
the British Irish Council and with our EU partners. This in no way pre-empts 
the wider negotiations between the UK and the EU 27.

Ireland’s relationship with Britain is unique in every possible way – 
politically, economically, culturally, legally and in terms of people-to-people 
links. One in four people in Britain can claim Irish heritage, while in the 
business world almost 60,000 UK company directors are Irish-born. The 
Dublin-London route is thesecond busiest air route 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_busiest_passenger_air_routes> in Europe. 
We trade over €1.2bn a week between us, and Ireland is the UK’sfifth largest 
trading partner <http://www.finfacts.ie/irishfinancenews/article_1028937.shtml>
. We must do everything we can to protect these hard-won positive links.

Northern Ireland is a core priority for Dublin in terms of the Brexit process. 
While the peace settlement is by now well-established, we can never afford to 
be complacent. Twice in the two years after I became foreign minister, I have 
spent long periods of time in Belfast participating in political talks. These 
ultimately led to theStormont House agreement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-stormont-house-agreement> in 
December 2014 and theFresh Start agreement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/479116/A_Fresh_Start_-_The_Stormont_Agreement_and_Implementation_Plan_-_Final_Version_20_Nov_2015_for_PDF.pdf>
 last November. I witnessed at first hand how the still delicate political 
stability in Northern Ireland can be shaken.

The Good Friday agreement provides the framework for our engagement in 
Northern Ireland, and we have worked alongside the UK government and Northern 
Ireland’s political leaders to stabilise the devolved institutions in Belfast 
and deliver important initiatives. Last month, honouring commitments under the 
Fresh Start agreement, James Brokenshire and I signed a treaty to establish an 
independent reporting commission to help tackle the legacy of paramilitarism 
which continues to plague some vulnerable communities in NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. We want to see that scourge 
removed from people’s lives.

Brexit presents a substantial challenge to this remarkable but still 
incomplete progress. Across the UK as a whole, 52% of voters opted to leave the 
EU. However, in Northern Ireland, 56% voted to remain. The people of Northern 
Ireland are in a unique position both in the UK and the EU, entitled to define 
themselves as British, Irish, or both. Common British and Irish membership of 
the EU has been a fundamental element in the political context which allowed 
the peace process to move forward.

Ireland to set up 'rainy day fund' as buffer against Brexit shock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/ireland-to-set-up-rainy-day-fund-as-buffer-against-brexit-shock>
When the UK leaves the EU, Northern Ireland will be the only region that 
shares a land border with another EU member state. One of our key concerns 
about Brexit is any risk to the effective invisibility of the border between 
north and south. The Northern Ireland executive and the Irish and UK 
governments have been unanimous in their view that we must maintain the 
openness of the border which is enjoyed today.

The common travel area, where citizens of Britain and Ireland have enjoyed 
free movement in each other’s countries since 1922, is highly valued on all 
sides. The reinstatement of any kind of hard border would also have obvious 
negative consequences for cross-border trade and economic activity. Equally 
serious would be the effect of resurrecting a potent symbol of division in a 
society emerging from conflict where many communities and groups are working 
hard to foster greater reconciliation, shared understanding and partnership.

Future arrangements between the UK and Ireland, and between the Irish 
government and the Northern Ireland executive, will have to be placed in the 
wider framework negotiated between the UK and the 27 other EU members – 
including Ireland. The Irish government will work hard to make sure all sides 
are fully conscious of the need to work together to ensure the transformed 
Irish-UK relationship and the enormous achievements of the peace process are 
safeguarded for future generations.
 