
Jason knew he wouldn’t and shouldn’t get the job. Yet his jobcentre adviser 
told him to apply to the pharmaceutical warehouse anyway. The problem? “I’m a 
convicted drug dealer. They won’t even let me set foot in the place.”

Like many of the former prisoners I’ve met recently through my research for 
the Centre for Justice Innovation 
<http://justiceinnovation.org/portfolio/point-right-direction/>, Jason knows 
only too well the stigma of having done time. He’s also become aware of the 
limited advice out there for ex-prisoners wanting to make a fresh start.

Liz Truss calls for rapid completion of probation privatisation review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/06/liz-truss-calls-rapid-completion-probation-privatisation-review>
Ex-prisoners we spoke to held out little hope of receiving help from places 
like Jobcentre Plus and local authority housing teams. In fact, we heard 
stories of subtle discrimination from the very public sector bodies which they 
rely on. As one person told us: “They don’t have a clue … The moment you come 
through the door they’ve got a judgment on you.” Former offenders are being 
neglected by services that don’t understand their needs and are often labelled 
as problematic or aggressive.

This matters. People coming out of prison need all the help they can get. 
Ministry of Justice research 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/491119/re-offending-release-waves-1-3-spcr-findings.pdf>
 (pdf) has shown that former prisoners who have a stable home on release are 
15% less likely to reoffend. Those with a job are 20% less likely to commit 
another crime. In a climate where homes and jobs are scarce offenders need all 
the help they can get.Nearly two in five prisoners (37%)  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/278806/homelessness-reoffending-prisoners.pdf>
say 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/278806/homelessness-reoffending-prisoners.pdf>
 that they will need help finding a place to live when they are released 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/278806/homelessness-reoffending-prisoners.pdf>
(pdf).Three out of four don’t have a job lined up on release  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/449925/mi-addendum.pdf_-_Adobe_Acrobat_Pro.pdf>
(pdf).

The difficulties that former prisoners face are compounded by the shadow of 
their criminal past. Our research has uncovered many stories of prisoners 
facing discrimination and prejudice. Margaret, an articulate woman in her 
forties, was fired after several years working in a job, accused of lying about 
her criminal record on her original application form. In reality, no one had 
thought to ask. Then there’s Ahmed, whose health was suffering as a result of 
damp in his rented flat. When he asked the landlord to fix it he was forced to 
leave, on the spurious pretext that he was intimidating his neighbours.

If we are to reduce the £15bn annual cost of reoffending 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/565014/cm-9350-prison-safety-and-reform-_web_.pdf>
 we have to tackle this uncomfortable truth. Clearly, part of the solution is 
for welfare agencies to get better at working with people who’ve been to 
prison. In practice, the best way to tackle prejudice is to equip and expect 
prisoners to stand up for themselves.


In theory, the hundreds of voluntary advice centres around the country should 
offer a solution. Citizens advice bureaus (CABs), law centres and independent 
advice providers specialise in helping people to understand and challenge poor 
treatment. However, they have been hit by a perfect storm of funding cuts and 
rising demand. Even the most determined now find it hard to access these 
services. For former prisoners conditioned to expect disappointment, ploughing 
through the system often feels a waste of time.

The needs of damaged, vulnerable women are being ignored here in the probation 
service
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/08/probation-service-cuts-female-prison-offenders-privatisation>
We did find a few stand out, advice projects which work alongside probation 
and prisons.Ipswich Housing Action Group <http://www.ihag.co.uk/>, for example, 
has been running debt clinics in prisons for 10 years. They help prisoners to 
clear debts and rent arrears so they can find a place to live on release.
Coventry CAB <http://www.coventrycab.org.uk/> developed a dedicated advice 
clinic for people on probation, housing, debt, benefits and employment issues. 
However, resources for these services are scarce. Coventry’s dedicated clinic, 
like many others, closed with the restructuring of probation in 2015. Likewise, 
the Ipswich service has reduced its scope.

We would like to see probation and prisons, especially the newly autonomous 
prisons that are meant to be standard bearers for rehabilitation, to invest in 
advice for prisoners, both inside and on release. However, we recognise that 
the justice system is itself struggling with budget cuts.

There’s no quick fix. Perhaps we can learn from advice givers who are taking 
on the challenges of austerity.Hackney law centre <http://www.hclc.org.uk/> in 
London has trained up local clergy to provide a kind of advice first aid. With 
their links to people in the community the clergy are well-placed to diagnose 
and respond to the straightforward issues. People with more complex problems 
are pointed towards the right source of help. This has proved so effective, 
that plans are now afoot to turn the training programme into a smartphone app. 
Perhaps there’s something in this approach that probation could borrow in their 
work with offenders.

Our public services are looking at a future of being called on to do more for 
less. Apps and volunteers are by no means a silver bullet. But with imaginative 
training, simple technology and strategic investment, we can help former 
prisoners challenge prejudice and lay the foundations of a new life. 
Ultimately, that’s not just good for Jason, Margaret and Ahmed, it’s good for 
all of us.

 * Names have been changed

Stephen Whitehead is programme manager for the Centre for Justice Innovation 
<http://justiceinnovation.org/> and author of the report Point me in the right 
direction: making advice work for former prisoners 
<http://justiceinnovation.org/portfolio/point-right-direction/>.

 
<http://justiceinnovation.org/?post_type=portfolio&amp;p=2439&amp;preview=true>

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 