
Following its pausing of the use of WhatsApp data in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/08/facebook-pauses-whatsapp-data-sharing-after-ico-intervention>
, Facebook has stopped using data taken from its messaging service for 
advertising across Europe.


The social network had come under pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/whatsapp-pause-sharing-user-data-facebook-european-privacy-regulators-yahoo>
 from the pan-European data protection agency group, the Article 29 Working 
Party in October. The group of privacy watchdogs said it had serious concerns 
over Facebook’s use of the data, including user phone numbers. It asked the 
social network to pause its WhatsApp data collection.

Facebook has now halted the use of the collected data for advertising and 
product improvement purposes, which would enable it to link Facebook andWhatsApp
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> accounts for users who have 
both.

Why we should worry about WhatsApp accessing our personal information | 
Elizabeth Denham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/whatsapp-access-personal-information-privacy-facebook-consumers-information-commission>
Facebook’s European operations are based in Ireland, where it is regulated by 
the Irish Data Protection Commissioner’s office.

A spokesperson for the Irish privacy watchdog told the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/technology/facebook-ireland-not-processing-eu-data-from-whatsapp-1.2859069>
: “During our engagements with Facebook, it was confirmed that, for the moment, 
Facebook Ireland is not proceeding to process European user data from WhatsApp 
for the purposes of serving ads and enhancing the Facebook service.”

The Irish data protection authority said that it was investigating Facebook’s 
data practices regarding the sharing of WhatsApp data.

Facebook has also seen investigations launched into its data-sharing practices 
by Germany, France, Italy and soon Spain. The UK’s information commissioner, 
Elizabeth Denham, said that she had concerns that customers weren’t being 
properly protected byFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>.

Denham said: “I don’t think users have been given enough information about 
what Facebook plans to do with their information, and I don’t think WhatsApp 
has got valid consent from users to share the information.”

WhatsApp originally gave users of the messaging service a notice to allow them 
to opt out of the use of the data shared with Facebook for advertising 
purposes, but not to block its sharing.

That condition remains the same: Facebook will not halt the sharing of data 
between its main social network and WhatsApp, which is used for purposes other 
than advertising.

 * Why we should worry about WhatsApp accessing our personal information - 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/whatsapp-access-personal-information-privacy-facebook-consumers-information-commission>
 Elizabeth Denham
 