
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> has developed 
censorship software in an effort to get China to lift its seven-year ban on the 
world’s largest social network, according to reports.

The social network developed the software to suppress posts from appearing in 
users’ news feeds in specific geographies with the support of the chief 
executive,Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, according to the New 
York Times. The posts themselves will not be suppressed, only their visibility.

A Facebook spokesperson said: “We have long said that we are interested in 
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, and are spending time 
understanding and learning more about the country.

“However, we have not made any decision on our approach to China.”

The Cybersecurity Administration of China, the country’s internet regulator, 
did not immediately respond to request for comment. China’s foreign ministry 
declined to comment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffacebook-secret-software-censor-user-posts-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2ca059a35fff5a9832c79a63444a1dd997fc7f8%2F0_36_3244_1946%2F3244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facebook%20developed%20secret%20software%20to%20censor%20user%20posts%20in%20China%2C%20report%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffacebook-secret-software-censor-user-posts-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facebook%20developed%20secret%20software%20to%20censor%20user%20posts%20in%20China%2C%20report%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffacebook-secret-software-censor-user-posts-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2ca059a35fff5a9832c79a63444a1dd997fc7f8%2F0_36_3244_1946%2F3244.jpg>
 Facebook’s CEO Mark Zuckerberg applauds arrival of Chinese Premier Li Keqiang 
at a meeting at Great Hall of the People in Beijing in March. Photograph: 
POOL/Reuters 
China banned Facebook after the Urumqi riots in July 2009 in an effort to stem 
the flow of information about the unrest which left 140 people dead. The ban 
denied the social network access to the world’s largest population of internet 
users, which will be key to Facebook’s continued growth.

Facebook would offer the software to enable third parties to monitor popular 
stories and topics that gain visibility as users share them across the network. 
The third-party partners would have full control to decide whether those posts 
should show up in users’ feeds, but there is no indication that Facebook has 
offered the software to China yet.

US internet companies have a practice of complying with legitimate government 
requests to block posted information in keeping with local laws, subject to 
evaluation.

Facebook restricted content in a score of countries in the second half of last 
year, according to the company’s most recent transparency report.

In Russia it restricted content that authorities there said violated “the 
integrity of the Russian Federation and local law which forbids activities such 
as mass public riots and the promotion and sale of drugs.”

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
Access to items in Pakistan was restricted owing to allegations that local 
blasphemy laws were violated.

In France, Facebook restricted content reported under laws prohibiting denying 
of the Holocaust or condoning terrorism. It also removed posts of an image 
relating to the November 2015 terrorist attacks in Paris on the grounds they 
violated French laws related to the protection of human dignity.

Meanwhile, Facebook has come under fire in the past few months from those who 
accuse the social network of not having done enough to filter out fake news 
stores that may have swayed the outcome of the US presidential election.

 * Angry about Facebook censorship? Wait until you hear about the news feed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/11/facebook-censorship-news-feed-trending-topics>
 * Facebook announces new push against fake news after Obama comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/19/facebook-fake-news-mark-zuckerberg>

 * Facebook executive accuses UK parents of flouting age restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/22/facebook-executive-accuses-uk-parents-flouting-age-restrictions> 