
Taking a break from Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> 
can boost emotional wellbeing and life satisfaction, with the effects 
particularly pronounced among people who “lurk” on the social network without 
actively engaging with others, a study suggests.

The research by the University of Copenhagen showed the effects of quitting 
for a week were also strong among heavy users and those who envied their 
Facebook friends, suggesting that people who pore irritably over the posts of 
others may benefit the most.

The report’s author, Morten Tromholt, from the university’s sociology 
department, said the findings suggested that changes in behaviour – for 
example, heavy users reducing their time spent on Facebook, or lurkers actively 
engaging – could yield positive results.

Does quitting social media make you happier? Yes, say young people doing it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/21/does-quitting-social-media-make-you-happier-yes-say-young-people-doing-it>
But he indicated that people could find it difficult to change their behaviour 
– 13% of the study’s participants who were supposed to be taking a break 
admitted to using the social network – so quitting may be necessary.


The study, published in the journal Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social 
Networking <http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1089/cyber.2016.0259>, 
involved 1,095 people, 86% of whom were women. They were randomly assigned to 
two groups: one that continued using Facebook as normal and one that stopped 
using the social network for a week.

On average, the participants were aged 34, had 350 Facebook friends and spent 
just over an hour a day on the social network,which had 1.79 billion monthly 
active users 
<https://www.statista.com/statistics/264810/number-of-monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/>
 in the third quarter of this year.

Questionnaires conducted at the beginning and end of the week indicated that 
taking a break from the site increased life satisfaction and positive emotions. 
The effects of quitting were found to be greater among heavy users, passive 
users and those who envied others on the social network. There was no positive 
effect of taking a break for light users.

Mark Zuckerberg appears to finally admit Facebook is a media company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/22/mark-zuckerberg-appears-to-finally-admit-facebook-is-a-media-company>
Tromholt wrote: “To make things clear, if one is a heavy Facebook user, one 
should use Facebook less to increase one’s wellbeing.

“And if one tends to feel envy when on Facebook, one should avoid browsing the 
sections (or specific friends) on Facebook causing this envy. And if one uses 
Facebook passively, one should reduce this kind of behaviour.

“Due to habits, practicalities … it may be difficult to change one’s way of 
using Facebook. If this is the case, one should consider quitting Facebook for 
good.”

Previous studies have had mixed results on the link between Facebook use and 
wellbeing.Some garnered similar findings 
<http://guilfordjournals.com/doi/abs/10.1521/jscp.2014.33.8.701>, but others 
found no link 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233974105_Facebook_Depression_Social_Networking_Site_Use_and_Depression_in_Older_Adolescents>
 and some found that time spent on the social networkcan boost wellbeing.  
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21329447>


Brenda Wiederhold, the editor-in-chief of Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and 
Social Networking, said: “This study found that ‘lurking’ on Facebook may cause 
negative emotions. However, on the bright side … previous studies have shown 
actively connecting with close friends, whether in real life or on Facebook, 
may actually increase one’s sense of wellbeing.”

Tromholt suggested that future studies should investigate the effect of 
quitting Facebook for a greater length of time and look at other social 
networks, including Instagram, Snapchat and Twitter.
 