
In August 2015, Facebook rolled out a new feature: the ability to broadcast 
live video streams from the company’s app for power users, Facebook Mentions. 
Six months later, the feature, now brandedFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> Live, began a slow rollout 
for normal users, initially in the United States.

In classic Facebook style, the feature was late arriving, slow to roll out, 
and steadily demolished the competition. Meerkat, the company which ignited the 
live streaming craze, launched its mobile app in February 2015 and went 
meteoric at the South by Southwest Festival in March that year. But its time in 
the sun was limited: shortly after SXSW ended, Twitter subsidiary Periscope 
launched its own, technically superior, live-streaming service, eclipsing 
Meerkat almost instantly.

For almost a year, Periscope dominated live streaming, peaking, bizarrely, 
with the phenomenon of 20,000 people watching pedestrianstrying to navigate a 
large puddle in Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/06/the-internet-cant-stop-watching-this-livestream-of-people-trying-to-cross-a-puddle>
. But Facebook’s sheer scale ensures that when it sets its sights on an area, 
there’s very little most competitors can do to keep it from rolling over them 
like a juggernaut.
 A snapshot in time of Facebook Live. Photograph: Facebook 
Facebook has thrown resources at its live-streaming product. Extensive 
developer time, ad budget, and media partnerships are all devoted to ensuring 
that it’s a success, thanks in part to orders from the very top: its chief 
executive, Mark Zuckerberg, is said to personally support the product, which he 
sees as instrumental to the next stage of Facebook’s growth, and has been one 
of the most prolific users of the feature,periodically “going live” on his own 
Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/zuck/videos/10103353645165001/> to 
answer questions from users.

Beyond Zuckerberg himself, Facebook has secured the support of a number of 
other prominent users – partially by paying for them. Media organisations, 
including Buzzfeed, the New York Times, and the Guardian, have signed deals 
with Facebook to produce Live content, in exchange for large payments form the 
social network.

But power users and media firms do little to encourage other Facebook users to 
go live themselves – a key part of its long-term goal for the feature.

To that end, Facebook has also been on an ad blitz, coating key markets such 
as San Francisco, Los Angeles and London with adverts encouraging users to go 
live “when you see someone walking an animal that’s not a dog”, “while everyone 
is waiting for the first suitcase to drop” at an airport, and “when you’re just 
hanging out with friends or whatever”. The company has also taken a leaf out of 
archrival Snapchat’s book, offering a plethora of augmented reality “masks” to 
encourage users to play around with the tech.

But none of that had anything to do with the first viral hit to come from 
Facebook Live. In May 2016, a few months after the feature had launched in the 
US, 37-year-old Texan Candace Paynespent four minutes demonstrating a new gift 
she had bought for her son 
<https://www.facebook.com/candaceSpayne/videos/10209653193067040/>: a (real) 
mask of the Star Wars character Chewbacca, with a pre-recorded roar that plays 
when the wearer opens their mouth. The short video opens with a charming 
introduction from Payne, who quickly puts the mask on before collapsing into a 
fit of giggles which lasts, more or less continuously, for the next three 
minutes. It currently has 165m views on the social network.

In some ways, Payne’s video set the precedent for how Live videos would 
evolve. For one thing, although the video was broadcast live, the overwhelming 
majority of its viewers came long after she had put the phone down and stopped 
broadcasting: the difference from pre-recorded videos was evolutionary, not 
revolutionary. Payne doesn’t really interact with what audience there was 
watching her live, either, despite Zuckerberg’s earlier promises that “when you 
interact live, you feel connected in a more personal way”.

But in other ways, the major cultural impact of Facebook Live has little to do 
with Payne’s joyful short, nor really with the company’s own intentions as 
communicated through adverts and executive postings.

Perhaps the most important choice Facebook made in launching Live was to 
incorporate it directly into the main Facebook app, unlike Periscope’s initial 
launch as a standalone product. Facebook is no stranger to spinning popular 
features off into their own application – most notably with Messenger, in 2014 
– but the company’s decision here means that even users who have never felt the 
need to explore live streaming have the option if they suddenly find themselves 
in extraordinary circumstances.

One such circumstance, which has become almost emblematic of the feature’s 
social resonance, is that of a confrontation with the state. In July 2016, less 
than a month after Payne’s video went viral, a very different video was 
broadcast from Minnesota, where Diamond Reynolds documented the immediate 
aftermath of a police officer shooting her boyfriend, Philando Castile. The 
video showed Reynolds calmly telling the officer, and viewers, what had 
happened: how Castile had been asked for his license and registration, told the 
officer he was legally carrying a gun, and was shot seven times while 
subsequently reaching for his license.
 The death of Alfred Olango in a San Diego police shooting was documented on 
Facebook Live. Photograph: Facebook Live / Rumbie Mubaiwa 
Castile was just the first. Keith Scott Lamont was shot in September in North 
Carolina, andhis daughter streamed the immediate aftermath 
<http://heavy.com/news/2016/09/lyric-youradorable-scott-charlotte-police-shooting-facebook-live-video-streaming-stream-watch-north-carolina-cops-father-killed-daughter/>
.The death of Alfred Olango 
<https://fusion.net/story/351914/who-is-alfred-olango/>, shot by police in San 
Diego in September, was streamed by a bystander.

The association between Facebook Live and police killings is about more than 
just being the only camera available.Live streaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/live-streaming> has other features that 
make it appropriate for documenting the tense, dangerous moments in the 
aftermath of a death.

The immediacy of the broadcast can alert loved ones, while acting as a call to 
arms for the fight for justice. And once the video is uploaded, it’s hard to 
delete it: important when dealing with an untrusted adversary with the legal 
power to confiscate devices and suppress footage.

Even if police do manage to encourage Facebook to pull the video – as 
Baltimore police department did with the account 
<http://fusion.net/story/349533/twitters-transparency-report-remove-videos-block-police/>
 of Korryn Gaines, who live streamed her armed standoff against – by then, 
copies have likely been made elsewhere.

And Facebook’s own systems help. The site aggressively pushes video to the top 
of newsfeeds while it’s still live, in an effort to encourage the interaction 
Zuckerberg spoke of, allowing videos to snowball rapidly to large audiences.

But those audiences also outpace Facebook’s own ability to moderate content. 
While videos can be reported, for spam or offensive content, just like other 
posts, the real-time nature of the events seems to be beyond Facebook’s scope, 
meaning that videos are often taken down hours after they’ve already ended.

That’s useful to activists, who can spread word of a police shooting before 
the video gets taken down for being “threatening, violent or suicidal”. But it 
has also led to a second category of videos unique to the service, depicting 
crimes in process, fromthe torture of a disabled man in Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/facebook-live-stream-video-man-attacked-chicago-trump>
 toa double murder in the name of Isis in France 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/6/14/11930916/france-terrorist-larossi-abballa-facebook-live-video>
.

Facebook could solve that problem, to a certain extent, by throwing money at 
it:hiring more low-paid contract workers in the anglophone developing world 
<https://www.wired.com/2014/10/content-moderation/> to watch videos of murder 
and rape so you don’t have to. But that still doesn’t help the company’s larger 
aim, of making Facebook Live a thing normal people will want to use, not just 
to watch paid celebrities, but to broadcast their lives to their friends and 
family. There is a chance that that will never be something that spreads 
outside of a small niche: but history suggests it’s safer to bet on Mark 
Zuckerberg than bet against him.
 