
Facebook has agreed to invest $20m in affordable housing initiatives after 
facingintense criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/facebook-headquarters-expansion-menlo-park-california-housing>
 for failing to help low-income residents in Silicon Valley where the 
technology boom has exacerbated displacement and gentrification.

The corporation, which is pushing forward with a massive campus expansion in 
northern California, announced on Friday a partnership with community 
organizations aimed at funding affordable housing construction and assisting 
tenants facing eviction.

Housing activists who have long been critical of Facebook and its role in 
acceleratingincome inequality in the region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/14/silicon-valley-tech-firms-income-inequality-world-bank>
 said the investment marked an “unprecedented” collaboration between Silicon 
Valley corporations and advocacy groups and that the project could push 
neighboring tech companies to better address local poverty.

“I’m hoping this fund will be the thing that starts to move the rest of the 
region,” said Tameeka Bennett, executive director of Youth United for Community 
Action (Yuca), a non-profit in East Palo Alto that helped negotiate the new
agreement 
<http://www.publicadvocates.org/wp-content/uploads/ETB-Facebook-CBA-2016-Fully-Executed.pdf>
.

The housing shortage has reached crisis levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/07/silicon-valley-largest-eviction-rent-controlled-tenants-income-inequality>
 in Silicon Valley, which is also home to Google, Apple and many other wealthy 
technology firms. Rapid job creation combined with a lack of new housing has 
created an estimated shortfall of 22,000 homes, with the region building only 
26% of the housing needed for low-income people, according to non-profit group 
Public Advocates.

That means only the wealthy can afford to live near their Silicon Valley jobs, 
forcing an estimated70,000 low-income workers 
<http://www.sfgate.com/opinion/openforum/article/Suburbs-not-just-S-F-need-to-address-5455192.php>
 to commute more than 50 miles to work.

Facebook, headquartered in Menlo Park, has contributed to the problem in 
direct and indirect ways. The company sparked backlash after it beganoffering 
generous bonuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/18/facebook-offers-employees-10000-to-live-close-to-the-office>
 to employees if they live near campus, which advocates say has hastened 
gentrification. Local real estate managers have evicted low-income tenants en 
masse, explicitlymarketing units to Facebook employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/21/silicon-valley-eviction-facebook-trion-properties>
.

The funding announced this week is not simply a philanthropic donation from 
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, which is valued at 
$350bn. The corporation is legally required to fund certain community benefits 
as part of its ongoing expansion project, and activists have spent months 
pressuring the company to make substantial investments.

Facebook plans to add 126,000 sq ft 
<https://www.menlopark.org/995/Facebook-Campus-Expansion-Project> to its campus 
and bring 6,500 new employees to the area, increasing the Menlo Park workforce 
by 20%. Development laws mandated that the corporationcontribute 
<http://www.menlopark.org/DocumentCenter/View/10796> $6.3m to below-market-rate 
housing.

Still, non-profit leaders said the housing fund could have a significant 
impact and noted that Facebook executives have relied heavily on the input of 
local advocates with the kind of intensive collaboration advocates rarely see 
from corporations.

“The community groups that have the expertise really were equal players,” said 
Sam Tepperman-Gelfant, senior staff attorney at Public Advocates, which had
raised formal objections 
<http://www.publicadvocates.org/wp-content/uploads/Comments-on-Facebook-Campus-Expansion-DEIR-from-Public-Advocates-ACLU-Foundation.final-w-exh-list.pdf>
 to Facebook’s expansion proposal.

“I hope having one large prominent Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> company leading the way 
on this will be a wake-up call for all the other global corporations that the 
Bay Area is hosting and the need for them to work locally,” he added, “rather 
than just thinking of themselves as global corporations that exist online.”

In addition to investing $18.5m toward the creation and preservation of 
affordable housing, the company has offered $500,000 toward legal and rental 
assistance to tenants threatened with displacement.

A Facebook spokesman told the Guardian that the company doesn’t have 
projections on the number of housing units the partnership could fund, but 
noted that the $20m is an “initial contribution” and said the company hopes to 
“attract additional public, private and philanthropic entities to contribute to 
the fund”.

Kyra Brown, Yuca’s social justice program director, said it was critical that 
Facebook do a better job diversifying its workforce and hire locally in East 
Palo Alto, a historically black city. African American employees make up only3% 
of the corporation’s senior leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/14/facebook-diversity-report-silicon-valley-employment>
 in the US.

“Silicon Valley is known as this very innovative place when it comes to 
addressing everyday issues,” she said, “but my hope is that we also take that 
same innovation and apply it to social issues.”

Brown, who grew up in East Palo Alto, said the announcement was an important 
first step in the tech sector helping to address inequities in the communities 
they’ve entered.

“I’m glad that Facebook is thinking about the legacy it wants to leave 
particularly when it comes to communities of color,” she said.
 