
South Africa captain Faf du Plessis has lost his appeal against a charge of 
ball-tampering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/icc-disappointed-faf-du-plessis-appealing-ball-tampering-verdict>
, which stemmed from the recent second Test in Hobart, against Australia.

Du Plessis may have lost his appeal but will still be free to play in South 
Africa’s Boxing Day Test against Sri Lanka.

Du Plessis, lollygate and the airport scuffle: needless faff over a trivial 
issue | Geoff Lemon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/du-plessis-lollygate-and-the-airport-scuffle-needless-faff-over-a-trivial-issue>
Du Plessis was found guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/faf-du-plessis-to-face-icc-hearing-in-adelaide-before-third-test-with-australia>
 by match referee Andy Pycroft of changing the condition of the ball after 
being caught on camera applying saliva to the ball with a mint in his mouth

The 32-year-old was last month fined his full match fee and given three 
demerit points.

Du Plessis maintained his innocence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/faf-du-plessis-denies-he-is-a-and-claims-innocence-over-ball-tampering>
 and after feeling aggrieved at the verdict decided to challenge it, but the 
ICC’s independent commissioner Michael Beloff QC upheld the decision.

A statement on the ICC’s official website read: “Under the provisions of the 
ICC code of conduct, Mr Du Plessis was represented by legal counsel in the 
appeal hearing convened in Dubai on Monday that lasted two-and-a-half hours, 
which the player himself joined via video link.

“Having carefully considered the legal submissions made by the player and the 
ICC, Mr Beloff QC confirmed that Du Plessis was guilty of breaching article 
2.2.9 and that the original sanction of 100% of his match fee was appropriate.”

The ICC chief executive, David Richardson, said: “It is the duty of the ICC to 
ensure fair play on the cricket field.

“Although it was not picked up by the umpires at the time, when the incident 
came to our attention subsequently, we felt it was our responsibility to lay a 
charge in this case because the ICC can’t let such an obvious breach of this 
law pass without taking any action.”

Faf du Plessis becomes South Africa Test captain after AB de Villiers resigns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/ab-de-villiers-south-africa-test-captain-faf-du-plessis>
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> South Africa has accepted 
the decision and chief executive Haroon Lorgat said in a statement: “We are 
satisfied with the matter being given due consideration by a person independent 
of the ICC. Both CSA and Faf believed that this appeal was imperative 
considering the important principles at stake.

“In our view, the fact that Mr Beloff deliberated for some time after hearing 
complex legal arguments from both sides demonstrates that this matter does 
indeed require further consideration and clarification from the ICC and the MCC.

“Notwithstanding the outcome of the appeal and Mr Beloff’s helpful rulings on 
the matter, we hope that further reviews of the Code of Conduct and the laws of 
the game takes place as players will no doubt continue to seek clarification as 
to what is or is not permissible in the light of this case.”

Three years ago, Du Plessis was fined 50% of his match fee when he rubbed the 
ball on the zip of his trouser pocket.
 