
Smaller charities are watching developments following the government’s 
announcement last month ofnew measures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/putting-small-charities-at-the-heart-of-public-services>
 to help them leap the hurdles so often encountered in their bids to provide 
public services.


Small may be beautiful but it’s rarely seen that way in the world of public 
service commissioning, where scale and its expected efficiencies are usually 
prioritised. For charities with a turnover below £1m, and the nearly 150,000 
staff who work for them, this has often made bidding for and winning public 
service contractsextremely challenging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/dec/07/red-tape-small-charities-losing-funds-government-contracts>
.


Related: Red tape is starving small charities of funds from public contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/dec/07/red-tape-small-charities-losing-funds-government-contracts>

Smaller charities have  
<https://data.ncvo.org.uk/a/almanac16/income-from-government/>lost significant 
market share in recent years, depriving public services and the individuals 
that count on them of a degree of expertise and reach that often cannot be 
found in larger organisations or other sectors.

The government’s three-part initiative begins with the development of a 
“public service incubator” that aims to help small charities collaborate with 
commissioners in developing their services. The government says the incubator 
system will record the barriers that small charities encounter in this process 
and create guides to overcoming them.

Second, the government is exploring the development of a commissioning 
kitemark to set a best-practice standard, hopefully, encouraging commissioners 
to show their commitment to small charity-friendly commissioning.

Finally, recruitment will soon be under way for a new voluntary, community and 
social enterprise crown representative – the previous crown representative 
having left in October 2014 – which is to champion pro-smaller charity 
commissioning practices as well as functioning as an intermediary between 
government and charities.

The appointment of the crown representative has the potential to provide a 
strong voice for the voluntary sector within government. Complementing the 
existing Mystery Shopper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/mystery-shopper-scope-and-remit> 
service, it should offer a clear route for charity staff to raise issues of 
poor commissioning practice with government. Those with experience of public 
service contracting may even wish to apply for the position when it is 
advertised.

With the best will in the world, the norms of big institutions are slow to 
change.

The impact of the other two measures will not be felt on the front line 
immediately. It is not yet clear in which localities the public services 
incubator will operate. However, in the areas concerned, it should help charity 
staff to develop better relationships with commissioners, as well as other 
providers. That will create more opportunities for charities to bring their 
experience and expertise to bear on the design and delivery of public services 
that better fit the priorities of the people they support.

The long-term implications of these measures for charity workers are harder to 
judge. Commissioners and procurement staff must act according to legislation 
and regulation, but they are also heavily influenced by their personal 
experience and the approach of the public body they work for. The existing 
“rules of the game” are actually pretty flexible, it’s just that the key 
players tend to act in ways that disadvantage small charities.

 As its plans for public services develop, the government could decide that 
legal changes should be made – for example, by strengthening theSocial Value Act
 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/social-value-act-information-and-resources/social-value-act-information-and-resources>
. However, the indications are that it would rather try to influence the 
culture of commissioning, which is difficult. With the best will in the world, 
the norms of big institutions are slow to change.

If successful, the public services incubator could help overcome this inertia 
by providing convincing evidence about why commissioners should work with small 
charities and how they can make this happen. Meanwhile, the commissioning 
kitemark could set an achievable benchmark and a minimum standard that all 
self-respecting public bodies would want to meet.

These things won’t be easy and charity staff shouldn’t expect to see changes 
on the frontline any time soon. But, if this is just the start of the 
government’s programme, if it can maintain focus on this issue over the course 
of this parliament and, crucially, if commissioners themselves see the value of 
small charities’ work and commission accordingly, then the impact on how we 
work and those we work with could ultimately be substantial.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 