
Miracles do occur. People walk into auction houses with an old bit of art that 
has been in the attic for centuries and it turns out to be a masterpiece. It 
has just happened, apparently.

A drawing of Saint Sebastian that a French doctor brought to the Paris auction 
house Tajan isnow thought 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/11/arts/design/leonardo-da-vinci-lost-drawing-discovered.html>
 to be a lost work by Leonardo da Vinci. The auctioneer has the backing of 
Carmen C Bambach of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, one of the 
world’s most astute curators of Leonardo, in making this sensational claim. If 
they are right, this is an amazing find – a new drawing by one of the greatest 
geniuses in history. So are they?

All too many “sensational” artistic discoveries turn out to be wishful 
thinking or worse. The recent supposed find of a cache of lost drawings by 
Vincent van Gogh elicited a trenchant dismissal by the Van Gogh Museum and
justified ridicule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/15/newly-discovered-van-gogh-drawings-labelled-imitations-museum>
. Theclaim earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/apr/13/caravaggio-in-tolouse-attic-looks-like-a-fake>
 that a painting found near Toulouse is an original work by Caravaggio is 
controversial to say the least. Leonardo is no stranger to disputed 
authentications. A portrait known as La Bella Principessa has been put forward 
as an original Leonardo by the British art historian Martin Kemp. It is however
widely scorned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/30/leonardo-da-vinci-experts-painting-la-bella-principessa>
 as nothing of the kind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fleonardo-da-vinci-lost-drawing-tajan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93978ec7cdfb571a16f809d90d4914788737dc79%2F0_0_3010_4514%2F3010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20or%20fortune%3A%20is%20this%20lost%20Leonardo%20da%20Vinci%20drawing%20the%20real%20deal%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fleonardo-da-vinci-lost-drawing-tajan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20or%20fortune%3A%20is%20this%20lost%20Leonardo%20da%20Vinci%20drawing%20the%20real%20deal%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fleonardo-da-vinci-lost-drawing-tajan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93978ec7cdfb571a16f809d90d4914788737dc79%2F0_0_3010_4514%2F3010.jpg>
 The drawing in full. Photograph: Tajan, France 
So what makes the difference between fake and fortune (the Sebastian sketch is 
now valued at £12.6m) when it comes to Leonardo? The thing that immediately 
looks authentic in this drawing is the way blobs of ink have gathered on the 
figure’s raised arm and also to form his dark, shadowy belly button. That 
pooling of ink is so Leonardo. To me, that’s a massive clue. The colour of the 
ink is exactly the shade you would expect, and even more typical is the 
creative freedom and intellectual restlessness of the way the body has been 
drawn and redrawn, with it legs shown in alternative positions in the same 
drawing, just as Leonardo depicts a horse with multiple legs ina drawing in the 
Royal Collection 
<https://www.royalcollection.org.uk/collection/912336/a-rearing-horse>.

It would take not just a forger of genius but a whole panel of art historians 
to create a fake this subtle

The more you look, the more signs of Leonardo’s genius appear. The face is 
dreamy and expressive in a way that evokes his young men, but even more 
striking is the sensual, simple suggestion of eyes and mouth with the most 
delicate of graphic marks. Then look at the landscape. Hints of hills resemble 
the mountain backgrounds he loved to draw and paint. The hills even have the 
almost Chinese sugar-loaf effect found in such paintings asThe Virgin of the 
Rocks 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/leonardo-da-vinci-the-virgin-of-the-rocks>
. Leonardo advised artists to stare at random stains on a wall to get ideas for 
landscapes: the sketching out of a landscape here is strongly reminiscent of 
that surrealistic method.

There is a frame loosely sketched around the image, which suggests this is not 
just a random drawing but a design for a lost or never-completed painting of 
Saint Sebastian.Another sketch 
<http://www.allposters.com/-sp/Study-of-St-Sebastian-1480-81-Posters_i1735888_.htm>
 for this planned work by Leonardo also survives.

This image of a tied-up naked youth might make you think of another artist. It 
surely resembles Michelangelo’s sculptureThe Rebellious Slave 
<http://entertainment.howstuffworks.com/arts/artwork/michelangelo-sculptures12.htm>
 in the Louvre. In fact, someone in the past has written the name “Michelange”, 
French for Michelangelo, on it. Yet the style of this drawing has nothing in 
common with Michelangelo. It is much more Leonardo-like.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fleonardo-da-vinci-lost-drawing-tajan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff31cd3c04506deb0e47e8ecc7c2553de71473288%2F0_0_5279_3592%2F5279.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20or%20fortune%3A%20is%20this%20lost%20Leonardo%20da%20Vinci%20drawing%20the%20real%20deal%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fleonardo-da-vinci-lost-drawing-tajan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20or%20fortune%3A%20is%20this%20lost%20Leonardo%20da%20Vinci%20drawing%20the%20real%20deal%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fleonardo-da-vinci-lost-drawing-tajan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff31cd3c04506deb0e47e8ecc7c2553de71473288%2F0_0_5279_3592%2F5279.jpg>
 The reverse of the drawing, apparently showing a page from da Vinci’s 
notebooks. Photograph: Tajan, France 
If you think about it, this is a good clue. A forger would surely want to 
promote it as a Leonardo. In fact, the Michelangelo attribution suggests a 
perfectly honest mistaken identity rather than any attempt at forgery.
Michelangelo and Leonardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/25/lost-battles-jones-michelangelo-davinci>
 knew and influenced each other.

Turn over the sheet and the case is pretty much closed. The reverse is covered 
with scientific diagrams and notes in Leonardo’s distinctive script. So, it’s a 
beautiful drawing full of Leonardo’s unique touches on a sheet whose other side 
is an absolutely classic Leonardo notebook page.

This is obviously the real thing. How wonderful. The beauty of it is that the 
truth is so clear and apparent. It would take not just a forger of genius but a 
whole panel of art historians to create a fake this subtle. This is a Leonardo 
– because it looks like one.

By contrast, La Bella Principessa, also claimed as a Leonardo, does not have 
any of his typical stylistic brilliances. This should be a warning against 
obscuring the obvious. Today’s arsenal of supposedly scientific tests can 
create a completely false idea that art can be objectively analysed. In 
reality, our eyes and responses are the measure of great art and the best way 
to authenticate it it is by a sensitivity to the way artists draw and paint, 
which we can all learn by looking at art. This drawing has that special magic 
that all true drawings by Leonardo possess. It gets us close to one of the most 
marvellous minds that ever existed.
 