
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> has been entirely 
routed from Falluja, one of the jihadi group’s two major Iraqi strongholds, a 
senior Iraqi commander has declared, marking the end of a month-long operation 
during which tens of thousands of people fled the city.

Lieutenant General Abdul-Wahab al-Saadi, the head of the counter-terrorism 
forces in the operation, said on Sunday that Iraqi troops had entered the 
north-western Golan neighbourhood, the last area of Falluja to remain under 
Isis control.

Saadi said the operation, which was launched in late May by the Iraqi army 
backed by US-led coalition airstrikes and paramilitary troops, mostly Shia 
militias, was over and that the city was “fully liberated”.

He said 1,800 Iraqi fighters had been killed and as much as 30% of the city 
destroyed in the bloody battle to retake the city, which fell to Isis in 
January 2014.

Greater military resources will now be turned to the attack on Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>, the other major city held by Isis in 
Iraq.
Falluja map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/falluja-zip/giv-12515upe5XgBEcHvR>
Mosul is a considerably larger city, and the political alliance required to 
unify the forces seeking to oust Isis is more complex since it will involve 
Kurds and the Iraqi army. The US has for months been overseeing the planned 
operation for the full attack on Mosul.

Hailing the liberation of Falluja, a Sunni Muslim city 40 miles west of 
Baghdad, Saadi declared: “The Falluja fight is over.” He was flanked by 
military officers and soldiers. Some of the soldiers shot into the air, chanted 
and waved the Iraqi flag.

Iraq’s prime minister, Haidar al-Abadi, had previously claimed the city had 
been captured, but his claims were premature. In the meantime thousands of 
residents fled to camps on the outskirts.

Karl Schembri, an official with the Norwegian Refugee Council, which is 
running camps for displaced people, described the situation last week as 
deteriorating by the day and said the camps were “hell on earth”. Civilians 
were surviving on three litres of water a day in Iraq’s searing summer heat.

A spokesman for the local council, Salam Ajami al-Halbusi, said: “The 
percentage of damage in several areas of Falluja after they have been liberated 
from Isis control has been estimated to be around 30%. The damages were caused 
during the organised terrorist operations.”

He added: “Isis used thousands of IEDs [improvised explosive devices] and 
hundreds of booby-trapped vehicles. Isis also booby-trapped the houses of the 
army and police members, tribal leaders and everyone who objected to the 
terrorist organisation’s ideology.”

By contrast, the Iraqi defence minister, Khaled al-Obaidi, said 90% of Falluja 
was considered habitable because the relative speed of the fight had prevented 
large-scale destruction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Ffalluja-iraq-fully-liberated-from-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2081b7aafae20d5ccce6bed15fe1e6c2a69f2e38%2F0_0_2060_1236%2F2060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Falluja%20fully%20liberated%20from%20Islamic%20State&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Ffalluja-iraq-fully-liberated-from-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Falluja%20fully%20liberated%20from%20Islamic%20State&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Ffalluja-iraq-fully-liberated-from-isis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2081b7aafae20d5ccce6bed15fe1e6c2a69f2e38%2F0_0_2060_1236%2F2060.jpg>
 Smoke rises from clashes with Isis in the Golan district of Falluja. 
Photograph: Reuters 
The conflict with Isis, which also controls large parts of neighbouring Syria, 
has forced more than 3.4 million Iraqis to flee their homes. More than 40% of 
the displaced are from Anbar province, according to the UN.


The collapse or retreat in Falluja is the latest in a string of setbacks for 
Isis, which has recently comeunder sustained pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/isis-islamic-state-risk-losing-territory-caliphate-syria-iraq>
 on many fronts in Syria and Iraq.

The militants are close to losing one of their footholds in Syria, with 
US-backed Kurdish and Arab fighters besieging the town of Manbij in the 
province of Aleppo, an Isis outpost not far from the Turkish border which had 
allowed it to threaten rebel groups fighting the regime of Bashar al-Assad.

This year Isis lost Ramadi, the capital of the predominantly Sunni Anbar 
province, though much of the city was destroyed in the campaign. It is also in 
retreat in Sirte in Libya, in a collapse that came much more quickly than even 
the most optimistic western forces had expected.

During an insurgency waged by Isis’s militant predecessor, al-Qaida, against 
US forces inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, Falluja was the 
scene of some of the bloodiest urban combat. In 2004 more than 100 US troops 
died and another 1,000 were wounded fighting insurgents in house-to-house 
battles.

Isis declared an Islamic caliphate on the territory it holds in Iraq and Syria 
and at the height of its power was estimated to hold nearly a third of each 
country.
 