
Lawyers for the companies that manufactured and sold the rifle used to 
massacre 20 first-graders and six staff atSandy Hook elementary school in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/newtown-shooting> argued in a Connecticut 
court on Monday that attempts to regulate the firearm should be left to the 
legislature.

Bushmaster Firearms LLC said it was protected under a 2005 federal law and 
asked the federal district court judge that thelawsuit brought against them by 
the family members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/sandy-hook-victims-families-gun-manufacturer-records>
 of nine of the victims and one survivor of the Newtown shooting be dismissed.

Can the US break its cycle of gun control failure?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/20/gun-control-orlando-attack-newtown-mass-shooting>
“A personal injury case in front of a jury is not the place for a new policy 
to emerge on who should own firearms and what type of firearms,” James Vogts, 
an attorney for Remington Arms, told Connecticut superior court judge Barbara 
Bellis on Monday. Behind him in the small courtroom, thefamily members of 
several Sandy Hook victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/20/newtown-sandy-hook-shooting-lawsuit-gun-control-election>
 filled the wooden pews.

The Bushmaster XM15-E2S rifle, used by 20-year-old Adam Lanza in the massacre 
at Sandy Hook elementary school before killing himself, was purchased legally 
by his mother, Nancy Lanza, whom he killed before driving to the school. But 
the lawyers for the Sandy Hook families are not arguing that the single 
transaction was handled negligently. Rather, they’re making the case that the 
gun manufacturing and retail companies have for years been negligent by 
marketing a military-grade weapon of war to civilians.

“A weapon that was designed to be used in combat by military to assault and 
kill enemies of war in the fields of Vietnam and more recently in the streets 
of Fallujah, and there it was lying not on a battlefield but on the floor of 
Vicki Soto’s first-grade classroom,” Josh Koskoff, a lawyer for the Sandy Hook 
families, told the judge. Soto is remembered as a hero after she died 
protecting her students at Sandy Hook. Her mother, Donna, who wears a photo of 
Vicki on a square pendant around her neck, and 18-year-old brother, Matthew, 
were present at the hearing.

In addition to Bushmaster, the lawsuit also names Camfour, a firearms 
distributor; and Riverview Sales Inc, a localConnecticut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/connecticut> gun store that legally sold 
the rifle to Lanza’s mother, Nancy. Lawyers for the companies said that they 
are exempted from litigation by the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act 
(PLCAA), a 2005 law passed with the support of gun companies and the National 
Rifle Association that shields the industry from lawsuits when third parties 
“criminally or unlawfully misuse” their guns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fsandy-hook-newtown-victims-trial-gun-manufacturers-adam-lanza%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c2e35340e7c1b21bd4bf76e61199657f703e5b%2F0_0_2200_1149%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Families%20of%20Newtown%20victims%20take%20on%20gun%20manufacturers%20in%20regulation%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fsandy-hook-newtown-victims-trial-gun-manufacturers-adam-lanza%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Families%20of%20Newtown%20victims%20take%20on%20gun%20manufacturers%20in%20regulation%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fsandy-hook-newtown-victims-trial-gun-manufacturers-adam-lanza%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c2e35340e7c1b21bd4bf76e61199657f703e5b%2F0_0_2200_1149%2F2200.jpg>
 A Bushmaster rifle belonging to the Sandy Hook elementary school gunman is 
seen in this police evidence photo. Photograph: HANDOUT/Reuters 
“If the PLCAA does not prohibit this case against retribution against firearms 
manufacturers than what kind of case does the PLCAA prohibit?

Is it just a meaningless congressional act that really doesn’t prohibit much 
of anything?” Vogts, the Remington attorney said. “The PLCAA was enacted to 
prevent this very kind of case.”

Monday’s hearing comes just eight days after the deadliest mass shooting in US 
history <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/orlando-terror-attack>, when a 
gunman armed with an AR-15-style rifle opened fire at a gay nightclub in 
Orlando, killing 49 people and wounding more than 50 others.

Days after the shooting, Democratic senators led by Chris Murphy of Connecticut
staged a 15-hour filibuster in an effort to protest congressional inaction on 
gun violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/16/enough-senate-filibuster-ends-as-democrat-claims-gun-control-victory>
. In Washington DC on Monday, senators were poised to vote on a host of bills 
that would expand background check and prevent suspected terrorists from buying 
weapons.

Families of Sandy Hook victims go after 'untouchable' gun manufacturers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/20/newtown-sandy-hook-shooting-lawsuit-gun-control-election>
The lawsuit became a flashpoint in the Democratic race, with Hillary Clinton 
advocating her support for the case on the campaign trail. She put the fight 
for stricter gun control measures at the center of her campaign, and repeatedly 
castigated her Democratic opponent, Bernie Sanders, for voting in support of 
the PLCAA. Earlier this year, Erica Smegielski, the daughter of slain Sandy 
Hook elementary school principal Dawn Hochsprung, became a vocal advocate for 
Clinton and has appeared in a campaign ad.

Bellis, who has set an April 2018 trial date, will now decide whether the 
companies are indeed exempt under the statute.

Legal experts say the lawsuit has a remote chance of success. That the judge 
has yet to dismiss the case is in itself a “small” victory, the plaintiffs have 
said. A Colorado court recently rejected a negligent entrustment claim brought 
by the parents of a victim of the 2012 Aurora movie theater killing under the 
PLCAA law. Courts have rejected analogous cases brought against the 
manufacturers of products that proved dangerous.

Ahead of the hearing, the plaintiffs held a press conference outside the 
courthouse. Matthew Soto, the brother of Vicki Soto, expressed solidarity with 
the victims and families of those killed last week at a LGBT nightclub in 
Orlando.

“Because our country cannot come together on the issue of assault rifles, 
these mass shootings will continue in the future,” Soto said, reading from a 
notecard.

He continued: “My family and those represented here stand in solidarity with 
the families from Orlando and the community of Orlando. Our actions here are 
meant to bring about change. Sadly, that change did not come in time for your 
loved ones. This is why we’ll continue to fight for change.”
 