
The family of a murdered senior IRA and Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> figure who was also a British 
spy walked out of a court in protest over the Irish Republic’s delay in holding 
a full inquest into his killing, which is linked to a secret journal he had 
written.

Denis Donaldson was once a close ally of the Sinn Féin president, Gerry Adams, 
but wasexposed more than a decade ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/dec/18/northernireland.northernireland> as 
a long-term MI5 agent inside the republican movement.

He was shot dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/apr/05/northernireland.northernireland2> 
at an isolated cottage in County Donegal in 2006 by a relative of another top 
IRA man who had been killed by security forces during the Troubles. The Real 
IRA admitted they had murdered Donaldson.

His relations staged a walkout at Donegal coroner’s court on Wednesday after 
what was going to be the 20th delay to his inquest.

The Garda Siochána has been responsible for requesting the delays, which it 
says are due to its belief that Donaldson’s killers can still be caught.

However, the Guardian understands that what the Garda has described as 
“significant material” found in Donaldson’s cottage by Irish police officers is 
in fact a personal journal the former Sinn Féin administration chief in the
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> assembly was 
keeping. The information contained within this document is so sensitive that 
Irish detectives have continually asked for the delays.

Although the Real IRA <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/real-ira> tracked 
Donaldson down to his cottage near the Donegal beauty spot Glenties, the 
dissident republicans did not search the premises and failed to find the 
journal.

It was later discovered by the Garda, but despite repeated demands from 
Donaldson’s family it has not been handed over to their lawyers.

The contents could be made public and may contain potentially embarrassing 
information about Donaldson’s British state handlers, and political figures in 
NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

At the inquest in Letterkenny, Garda Michael Finan told the coroner Denis 
McCauley that his officers obtained the material last month. Finan asked for an 
adjournment of four months to enable detectives to pursue inquiries linked to 
this fresh evidence.

“I regret the number of adjournments but the investigation into the death of 
Mr Donaldson must be allowed to gain all available evidence and present it to 
the DPP,” Finan said.

But the Donaldson family’s lawyer, Ciarán Shiels, said they did not accept the 
“bona fides” of the application.

After the walkout, Shiels added: “There comes a point after so many 
adjournments, after the 10th anniversary, that the delay in commencing the 
inquest proper becomes intolerable.

“With that in mind the family instructed me to commence judicial review 
against the Garda commissioner, the coroner, the attorney general, the DPP and 
also the minister of justice. Today the family have walked out of the inquest 
and I have been instructed not to attend further until there is definitive 
ruling from the courts in the south.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffamily-murdered-ira-informer-denis-donaldson-protest-inquest-delays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c5c5506c9a79e00c4599835bb3216a1f91cc801%2F0_183_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20of%20murdered%20IRA%20informer%20protest%20against%20inquest%20delays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffamily-murdered-ira-informer-denis-donaldson-protest-inquest-delays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20of%20murdered%20IRA%20informer%20protest%20against%20inquest%20delays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffamily-murdered-ira-informer-denis-donaldson-protest-inquest-delays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c5c5506c9a79e00c4599835bb3216a1f91cc801%2F0_183_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
 The family’s solicitor, Ciarán Shiels, outside Donegal coroner’s court. 
Photograph: David Young/PA 
The family have also issued a complaint to the police ombudsman in Northern 
Ireland which includes a demand to have the journal made public during the 
inquest.

Donaldson was a key fixer for Adams and the Sinn Féin leadership. He was the 
party’s head of administration at Stormont when he was outed as an informer.


Before his exposure, he was used by Adams to undermine potential internal 
opponents within Sinn Féin. Donaldson saw to it that the former IRA gun smuggler
Gerry McGeough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/jan/07/politics.northernireland> did not 
win the nomination to stand for the party in Fermanagh and South Tyrone in a 
Westminster general election because the Sinn Féin leadership mistrusted 
McGeough.

Donaldson was also sent by the IRA leadership to hold talks with Hezbollah in 
Lebanon in the early 1990s with a view to securing the release of theBeirut 
hostage Brian Keenan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/aug/25/archive-beirut-hostage-brian-keenan>
.

All of Donaldson’s trips to the Middle East were known to both British 
intelligence and the RUC special branch at the time.

 