
Thousands of exhausted families will head off for a few days’ break from 
festivities this week in a holiday that travel firms have dubbed “Twixmas”.

Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> itself has 
traditionally been a time when friends and family come to visit, meaning lots 
of cooking and late nights that leave parents stressed and children fractious; 
while new year parties add to the strain but are primarily for the grown-ups, 
leaving the kids out of the picture. All of this leaves a gap for families to 
spend quality time together in a relaxed atmosphere – and that is where the 
Twixmas breaks have come in.

Research last month found that 32% of British adults will take a short break 
between Christmas and New Year, with their Twixmas destinations an average of 
72 miles away. Travelodge, which commissioned the survey, has seen double-digit 
growth for bookings in both the past two years and this year hotel chains and 
travel firms are aggressively marketing the four- and five-day breaks. Most are 
at country hotels in the UK or to easily reached European destinations.

Lee Hayhurst, head of news for Travel Weekly <http://www.travelweekly.co.uk>, 
said the rise of Twixmas was in part due to people deciding that the dead 
period between Christmas and New Year had often been waste of time off. “People 
are increasingly looking to use any time they have off work for quality family 
time together, and so they are now taking any opportunity,” he said.

“You get a lot of extended family groups going away for Twixmas, hiring 
cottages or going off to hotels together. The staycation phenomenon has also 
prompted people to rediscover places to go in the UK. But some people are 
taking very active Twixmas breaks that are very events-driven, so they will go 
to London for four days to take their kids to a show or a One Direction concert 
and build a family holiday around it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftwixmas-break-family-holiday-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419708430226%2F7486c8c2-6acf-45c9-8bcf-a45c019e4066-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Families%20find%20a%20haven%20with%20Twixmas%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftwixmas-break-family-holiday-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Families%20find%20a%20haven%20with%20Twixmas%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Ftwixmas-break-family-holiday-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419708430226%2F7486c8c2-6acf-45c9-8bcf-a45c019e4066-2060x1236.jpeg>
 One Direction at the BBC Music Awards at Earl’s Court, London, on 11 December, 
2014. Photograph: Nick Pickles/BBC/PA 
It is now one of the busiest periods of the year for hotels. Mat Finch, 
marketing director for hotels chain Warner Leisure, said he expected Twixmas 
booking to reach 95-96% of the group’s capacity.

“People have played a key role in the Christmas period with all the stress 
that goes into that, so they just want someone else to do the washing up and 
the hosting,” he said. “Also, Christmas is a family time, but the break between 
Christmas and New Year is an opportunity to see friends and neighbours who will 
also be off work. So as well as families, we are seeing a number of groups of 
four or six.”

Tabitha Aldrich-Smith from the British Hospitality Association, which 
represents hotels, said that one reason why people are taking Twixmas breaks is 
that most people now live in houses that are not big enough to accommodate 
extended families overnight. “And because families increasingly live further 
away from their relatives or friends than in previous generations, when 
everyone lived in the same town or even on the same street, they have to 
travel. So meeting somewhere in the middle for a family or friends gathering is 
very popular.”

One of the travel firms offering special Twixmas holidays is Leger, which 
operates breaks in European destinations. “Christmas can be very stressful, and 
a lot of people want to get away afterwards to unwind before the New Year 
celebrations kick in,” explained the firm’s managing director, Ian Henry. He 
added that people may not want to be away for Christmas or New Year itself, but 
they may want to make the most of bank holidays and time off work.

Some people are even managing long-haul destinations. Andrea Tarpey from 
hotels websiteLaterooms <http://www.laterooms.com> said the firm had seen 
notable growth in people heading off to hotter climates after Christmas. 
“Specifically, we’ve seen really significant growth in room nights in Thailand 
and UAE for the Twixmas period,” she said.

Among those staying in the UK will be Stephen Jordan, 36, and his wife, 
Alison, 36, who will be taking a break in the Lake District with their 
one-year-old daughter, Abigail. “With a young daughter we’ll have Christmas at 
home with the aunties and grandparents, then this trip will give us a few days’ 
break and back for New Year,” said Jordan, a sales rep from Greater Manchester. 
“Christmas and New Year can actually be very stressful times. Last year was our 
first with our daughter and I could already see the planning and organisation 
involved for this year. Previously we could come and go as we pleased but now 
it’s all around planning for feeding and presents and ‘we must go and see this 
person and this person and grandparents and aunties and uncles’. Things keep 
being added so it’s not as relaxing as it once was. I’m hoping this break with 
just the three of us will be that relaxing time.”
 