
Most of us will have know the problem of how to get rid of an unwanted 
possession, and lots of people are using online auction sites as the solution.
 A 'Lego Man' with dimensions to help your home improvement planning 
In Newcastle City Council's case, the unwanted possession is a series of 44 
six foot high stylised human figures made of re-enforced concrete and 
pebbledash weighing half a ton each, and they've decided toflog them off 
<http://www.ebay.co.uk/itm/Shoulder-Shoulder-Ray-Smith-Artwork-1-x-legoman-/320760786013?pt=UK_art_Sculpture_GL&hash=item4aaed52c5d>
 on ebay.

The figures, dubbed locally the "Lego Men", were part of an artwork by Ray 
Smith <http://www.raysmithartist.com> that stood next to Newcastle's Haymarket 
metro station between 1999 and 2008. Erected at a cost of £270,000, the works, 
officially called "Shoulder to Shoulder", stand near to the hexagonalBoer War 
memorial obelisk 
<http://www.roll-of-honour.com/Northumberland/NewcastleBoerWar.html> with its 
bronze statue of Nike as Winged Victory (although in 1978 her wings were 
replaced with fibreglass after being damaged by lightening). They acted as an 
effective barrier between the pedestrianised area round the metro station and a 
very busy road junction. Unfortunately the water feature of the work did not 
react well to squally weather, occasionally giving unsuspecting passers-by an 
unwelcome soaking. In 2008 they were removed (at a cost of a further £70,000) 
and stored on a piece of wasteland near the city centre.


The Newcastle Evening Chronicle, not a fan of the sculpture, was recently 
given one of the figures and, after a competition, handed it over to Laura 
Taylor, who plans to paint it in Newcastle United's black and white and Alan 
Shearer's number 9 andstick it in her garden 
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/north-east-news/evening-chronicle-news/2011/09/14/lego-men-prize-for-chester-le-street-woman-72703-29419114/>
 in Chester-le-Street.
 They also work nicely in pairs. Under the pear tree, perhaps..? 

Putting Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> United football 
colours on artworks is not new in these parts – some time ago the people behind 
Viz magazine somehow managed to winch a giant black & white shirt onto the 
torso of the Angel of the North.


Meanwhile, the first figure made £1254 on ebay when all the bids finished last 
week, up from its original start of 99p, and substantially more than the 
council was expecting. There are now four more figures up for sale – two pairs 
and two singles – with the auctions ending at midday on September 23rd. The 
proceeds from the sale will go to theNewcastle Fund 
<http://www.newcastle.gov.uk/benefits-and-council-tax/grants/newcastle-fund>, 
which gives money to local voluntary groups. Newcastle City Council leaderCoun 
Nick Forbes <http://www.nickforbes.org.uk> comments:

Whilst it is unrealistic to expect us to recoup our original investment, all 
previous options involved a cost to the council so it's good to see as much 
money as possible being raised for good causes across our city.

Get bidding now!

Any public sculpture you'd like to see on eBay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay> btw? Or to bid for? Please let us 
know...
 