
Dating a farmer is no joke. Just ask Jerry Miller, founder of FarmersOnly.com 
<https://www.farmersonly.com/>, the dating site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/online-dating> aimed at anyone who 
doesn’t count themselves as a city slicker. But Miller is thrilled when people 
stumble on his delightfully goofy commercials for the site. “People go on 
YouTube and Twitter and say it is the stupidest commercial, you have to watch 
it, and it spreads virally, and the jingle gets into people’s heads,” explains 
Miller.

The website’s first commercial <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6RvyFFjP7RE>, 
which has now been viewed over 1m times on YouTube, was made by going around 
local farms with a digital camera and asking the farmers he met to play its 
loveless subjects. These days, he can rattle off the celebrities that have 
gently poked fun at the site and its advertisements fromEllen Degeneres 
<http://www.ellentv.com/2010/09/24/ellens-guide-to-dating-sites/> to Carrie 
Underwood 
<http://hollywoodlife.com/2015/11/04/brad-paisley-carrie-underwood-cma-awards-hosts-funniest-moments/>
 toCarmelo Anthony 
<http://blacksportsonline.com/home/2015/01/ernie-johnson-sings-farmersonly-com-theme-song-to-melo-barkley-video/>
.

All that ribbing has translated into five million subscribers across the US 
and Canada since the site launched in 2005 with its silly homemade commercial 
and the tagline: “City folks just don’t get it.” The site attracts an even 
split of men and women and an age range across the spectrum, from young people 
looking for their first relationships to those looking to remarry after getting 
a divorce or being widowed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhzAwU_1JzYI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhzAwU_1JzYI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhzAwU_1JzYI&media=>
Miller, who works in agricultural marketing, got the idea to start the dating 
service when he kept meeting lonely farmers through his work. Living in a rural 
area where the nearest neighbor is miles away and everyone knows each other 
does not leave a lot of dating options. Suburban sprawl has wiped out a lot of 
small farms near urban centers, Miller explains, leaving fewer farms and 
farmers in the US. “They call us flyover country,” says Miller, “you look out 
the window when you fly from New York City to Los Angeles, and in the nighttime 
you see a couple of clusters of twinkling lights, small communities in the 
middle of nowhere.”

Love me Tinder – tales from the frontline of modern dating
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/27/tinder-online-dating-apps-blind-dates-love>
It’s not just the isolation and lack of choice that makes finding 
companionship difficult in rural areas, say Miller. It is also the rural 
lifestyle. Miller points to the original copy he wrote for the homepage of his 
site, in which he categorized all Americans into two groups, those in “high 
heels, blue suits, taxi cabs”, and those who like “wide open spaces and blue 
skies”.


While he recognized that his generalizations are just that, the odd hours and 
lack of weekends of farm life don’t make for easy dating. One of the original 
farmers who inspired Miller to start the site told him she tried regular online 
dating, but when prospective suitors would invite her to coffee at 9pm, she 
would have to explain that she needed to go to bed around that time so she 
could be up early to feed the animals, and the potential relationships would 
fizzle before they began.


Miller, the rural dweller’s biggest cheerleader, also cites a lack of 
understanding of not just the hours but the importance of farming and ranching 
by those outside the community as a hurdle to dating. A rancher Miller knew 
went to a singles party at the nearest city and when he told women he was a 
rancher, they looked at him in confusion. “They did not respect him and it hurt 
his feelings, so he never went back,” says Miller.

“These people don’t understand where their food comes from,” Miller tells me, 
indignantly. “They don’t respect all the hard work it takes to bring food to 
market.”

Not everyone turns their nose up at a rancher. Some tend to romanticize farm 
life – after all who hasn’t dreamed of giving up the rat race for a life 
cavorting with goats on a flower-speckled hilltop, but reality can make for a 
rude awakening. Magazines likeModern Farmer <http://modernfarmer.com/> with 
articles on miniature pigs and the joys of raising alpacas can make the 
lifestyle seem Pinterest perfect, but “you don’t just sit on the front porch 
and drink iced tea”, Miller points out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK6BuN0MOJuY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK6BuN0MOJuY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK6BuN0MOJuY&media=>
Reality TV shows like the Fabulous Beekman Boys 
<http://www.cookingchanneltv.com/shows/the-fabulous-beekman-boys.html>, about a 
successful couple from the city who gave up their careers to raise goats for 
milk, can make farming look easy, but the lifestyle shift would be difficult 
for most who were not raised with it. The dairy farmers Miller knows talk about 
not taking a single day of vacation for over 15 years, working seven days a 
week to keep their farms going.


These days Miller happily points to marriages that resulted from his website 
between like-minded individuals. While Miller does not push marriage, and is in 
fact happy if his site can provide companionship of any kind to subscribers, 
even if it is just someone to email, he is firmly against his site being used 
to facilitate hookups. In keeping with his emphasis on what he calls “serious 
relationships”, Miller rails against what he considers a high divorce rate, 
unsurprisingly attributing it to people with different backgrounds marrying 
each other.


Despite all his us-against-them talk and bewilderment when it comes to anyone 
working 9 to 5 in a fluorescent-lit office (Miller seems unable to comprehend 
how I can enjoy living in New York City), Miller himself bucks one stereotype 
of rural people. His website is for all rural dwellers, including gay and 
lesbian ones. It seems the days of Brokeback Mountain are long gone. At least 
when it comes to farmers, ranchers and other rural dwellers, “we are for 
everyone”, Miller explains.
 