
Hate crimes against Muslims shot up in 2015, according to new statistics 
released by the FBI, a rise which experts say was fueled by acts of extremism 
abroad andanti-Muslim rhetoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/dec/08/donald-trump-calls-for-complete-ban-on-muslims-entering-the-us-video>
 in Donald Trump’s presidential campaign.

According to the FBI 
<https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/2015-hate-crime-statistics-released>, the 
number of hate crimes against Muslims increased by 67% in 2015, compared with 
the year before. There were 257 incident of hate against Muslims in the US 
compared with 154 in 2014.

Claims of hate crimes possibly linked to Trump's election reported across the 
US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-spike-us-donald-trump-president>
Hate crimes overall grew by 6.8% to a total of 5,850 incidents throughout the 
year. While crimes targeting Muslims grew by the highest amount, incidents of 
hate against Jewish, black and LGBTQ people all increased last year as well.

“I wasn’t surprised to learn that anti-Muslim hate crime statistics spiked in 
2015.” said Jordan Denari Duffner, research fellow at The Bridge Initiative, a 
research project on Islamophobia at Georgetown University. “The officialFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> statistics confirmed what many of us 
predicted – that anti-Muslim acts, many of them violent, were on the rise.”

A report 
<http://bridge.georgetown.edu/when-islamophobia-turns-violent-the-2016-u-s-presidential-elections/>
 released by the Bridge Initiative in May also found a spike in hate crimes 
against Muslims in 2015. Brian Levin, the director of Center for the Study of 
Hate & Extremism at California State University San Bernardino, also noted a 
spike almost identical to that of the FBI’s in areport 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3110202-SPECIAL-STATUS-REPORT-v5-9-16-16.html>
 released last August.

Levin said that Muslims were now the most disdained social group in the US, 
and have subsequently been subject to widespread prejudice.

Hate crimes against Muslims peaked in 2001, following the 9/11 attacks which 
resulted in 481 anti-Muslim hate crime incidents that year. There have been 
between 105 and 160 incidentsper year since then 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/brian-levin-jd/fbi-hate-crime-up-68-in-2_b_12951150.html?section=us_politics>
, until 2015 which was the second highest since reporting began in 1992.

Levin and other experts believe that the attacks have seen an increase due to 
fear aroundIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, driven by terrorist 
attacks associated with fundamentalist groups such as the Paris attacks or San 
Bernardino.

“We’re also worried about non-quantitive things,” Levin said. “Like the fact 
that the militias have made Muslims among their top three targets of disdain.”

Groups, such as the Southern Poverty Law Center 
<https://www.splcenter.org/hatewatch/2016/11/14/anti-muslim-hate-crimes-surged-last-year-fueled-hateful-campaign#.WCnnbnGDfNA.twitter>
, have noted that Donald Trump’s presidential campaign created a hostile 
environment for Muslims. The president-elect called for a ban on all Muslims 
coming into the country, increased surveillance at mosques, andentertained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/19/donald-trump-muslim-americans-special-identification-tracking-mosques>
 the idea of creating a Muslim identification database.

His newly announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
 chief-strategist, Steve Bannon,often promoted 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/09/stephen-bannon-donald-trump-muslims-fear-loathing>
 anti-Muslim extremists and Islamophobic rhetoric on his site Breitbart News 
and radio show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Ffbi-anti-muslim-hate-crimes-rise-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5edaf910631d7ed24111d22fecb295c0342a943%2F0_12_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FBI%20reports%20hate%20crimes%20against%20Muslims%20surged%20by%2067%25%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Ffbi-anti-muslim-hate-crimes-rise-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FBI%20reports%20hate%20crimes%20against%20Muslims%20surged%20by%2067%25%20in%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Ffbi-anti-muslim-hate-crimes-rise-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5edaf910631d7ed24111d22fecb295c0342a943%2F0_12_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Steve Bannon, seen at a Trump rally on election day, has promoted Islamophobic 
views on his site Breitbart News. Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images 
Since Trump won the election, there have been several alleged incidents of 
hate reported on social media, including several incidents in which 
perpetrators invoked Trump’s name specifically. This includes racist graffiti 
as well as verbal and physical attacks. Trump told his supporters tostop 
harassing minorities 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/13/politics/donald-trump-60-minutes-first-interview/index.html>
 during his 60 Minutes interview.

Drawing a direct line of causation between Trump’s rhetoric and the spike in 
hate crimes is difficult. However, Levin notes in his August study that 
following Trump’s call for a ban on Muslims entering the United States, there 
were 15 reported hate crimes, an increase on the average of 12.6 per month in 
the five years prior. However, he also noted that 2015 did not see any increase 
in anti-Latino hate crimes – it remained unchanged – which is another group 
that was subjected to hateful speech during Trump’s campaign.

“Politics may play a role but there are many factors, because I think 
prejudice against Muslims is more fear based, and more widespread than that 
against Latinos,” Levin said.
 