
The FBI is trying to crack open another password-locked iPhone, this time 
belonging to Dahir Adan, the perpetrator of aknife attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/several-peope-injured-in-minnesota-mall-stabbings>
 on a Minnesota mall in which 10 people were stabbed.


At a press conference on Thursday, special agent Rich Thornton said that the 
FBI was “in the process of assessing our legal and technical options to gain 
access to this device and the data it may contain”, according toWired 
<https://www.wired.com/2016/10/fbi-wants-crack-another-dead-terrorists-locked-iphone/?mbid=social_twitter>
.

FBI investigates Minnesota mass stabbing as 'potential act of terrorism'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/minnesota-mass-stabbing-mall-fbi-terrorism-investigation>
Adan was shot and killed by police who attended the scene, and Isis later used 
social media to claim credit for the attack describing him as a “soldier of 
Islamic State”.

Thornton said that the FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> had 
“analyzed more than 780 gigabytes of data from multiple computers and other 
electronic devices” and is “conducting an extensive review of his social media 
and other online activity”.

“We continue to review his electronic media and digital footprint,” Thornton 
said.

The FBI has not yet filed a lawsuit against Apple, it said. But the case 
echoes the FBI’s attempts to access aniPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> belonging to Syed Farook, the 
San Bernardino shooter, in February.

In that case, the agency went to court to try to compel Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> to write a backdoor system which 
would allow it to bypass the phone’s four-digit password. The iPhone wipes all 
data if an incorrect password is entered a number of times.

But the case was eventually dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/28/apple-fbi-case-dropped-san-bernardino-iphone>
 because the FBI found its own way into the phone. Director James Comey said 
the FBI hadpaid about $1.3m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/fbi-apple-iphone-secret-hack-san-bernardino>
 for the hack, though it was not known where they purchased it. It was later 
speculated than an Israeli security firm was behind the hack, while a separate 
researcher in Cambridge also claimed to have found a method of bypassing the 
passcode.

'Worth it': FBI admits it paid $1.3m to hack into San Bernardino iPhone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/21/fbi-apple-iphone-hack-san-bernardino-price-paid>
The FBI has not disclosed whether Adan’s phone is the iPhone 5C, the same 
model as Farook’s, which would mean the FBI could use the same technique to 
bypass the password and access the phone. Later models of the iPhone added a 
“security enclave”, a piece of hardware that will have made it harder to bypass 
the password.

Adan was reportedly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/minnesota-stabbing-dahir-ahmed-adan-college-security-guard>
 en route to buy a new iPhone, his family have said. He was a resident of St 
Cloud, Minnesota, which is estimated to have the largest Somali community in 
the US. Both the local police chief and Minnesota’s governor have expressed 
concern at a possible backlash against the local community.
 