
The Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> has announced 
details of an ambitious set of plans to collect comprehensive national data on 
fatal police encounters, and has said it will also attempt to collect records 
of non-lethal use of force incidents.

Since the fatal police shooting of unarmed African American teenager Michael 
Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, the federal government has come under increasing 
pressure to collect accurate data on police use of deadly force. This pressure 
intensified in 2015 following the launch of the Guardian’s ongoing project,The 
Counted <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/counted-us-police-killings>
, which logs all officer-involved deaths through a model of verified 
crowdsourcing.

The US attorney general, Loretta Lynch, said on Thursday that such data was 
“essential to an informed and productive discussion about community-police 
relations” as she revealed further details of an FBI scheme,announced in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/09/fbi-launch-new-system-count-people-killed-police-officers-the-counted>
, to try to collect official use of force records from police departments 
around the US.

“The initiatives we are announcing today are vital efforts toward increasing 
transparency and building trust between law enforcement and the communities we 
serve,” Lynch said in a statement.

The FBI pilot scheme will begin in 2017 and is due to include around 178,557 
officers in some of the nation’s largest police departments, as well as some 
federal and state law enforcement agencies.

Individual departments will be asked to report virtually every time they use 
force through an online portal. As part of the trial, agencies will also 
voluntarily forward original records to the FBI, so that federal officials can 
see whether local officers are using the tool correctly.

“The goal of this review is to ascertain whether the agencies are applying the 
definitions and using the provided instructions in a uniform manner,”according 
to the proposal 
<https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2016/10/05/2016-24173/agency-information-collection-activities-proposed-ecollection-ecomments-requested-a-newly-approved>
.

The FBI’s expansive new system goes a step further than previous data 
collection attempts because it will track non-lethal force in addition to 
police killings. Every month, agencies will be asked to report each incident in 
which force caused death or serious bodily injury as well as every time 
officers fire a gun “at or in the direction of” a person.

The second phase of the trial program will include on-site visits to some of 
the involved agencies to “ascertain the level and source of underreporting of 
within-scope incidents”.

If the program is extended beyond the pilot to include all US departments, it 
will face a major limitation: reporting the data to the FBI will remain 
voluntary. This means that many police departments could simply opt out of 
reporting altogether and skew the national count. Voluntary reporting has been 
a significant constraint on past attempts to count police use of force.

A DoJ spokesman explained that mandating police departments to report use of 
force data via the FBI’s online portal would require an act of Congress. In 
2014, Congress did pass the Death in Custody Reporting Act, which mandates 
states and federal agencies to report in-custody deaths or risk losing federal 
funding. But that law has never been enforced, and doesn’t apply to non-lethal 
uses of force. 

Previous attempts by the FBI have relied on local police departments’ 
voluntary adherence to a scheme attempting to collect data only on “justifiable 
homicides”. In 2014 the FBI recorded just 444 of these deaths, a figure that 
was widely regarded as unreliable as hundreds of departments failed to report 
their records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/15/fbi-record-police-killings-tamir-rice-eric-garner>
. In 2015, the Guardian recorded 1,146 fatalities. The Counted has logged 847 
deaths so far in 2016.

“I don’t have the power to require people to supply us with data,” the FBI 
director, James Comey,said in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/09/fbi-police-killings-database-change>
, in the wake of harsh criticism of the bureau’s flawed count.

Last year, Comey said it was “embarrassing and ridiculous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/08/fbi-chief-says-ridiculous-guardian-washington-post-better-information-police-shootings>
” that the Guardian and the Washington Post, which runs a similar project 
documenting only police shootings, had better records than his own department.


On Thursday, Lynch said that the department would attempt to navigate around 
the lack of a statutory framework by partnering more closely with a range of 
law enforcement bodies around the country and hinted the department could fine 
states who do not comply.

The justice department’s data collection arm, the Bureau of Justice 
statistics, is running a concurrent scheme thatmore closely mirrors the 
Guardian’s methodology and has already begun a pilot phase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/13/justice-department-database-police-killings-counted-statistics>
. The BJS will track all arrest-related deaths, including deaths following 
force by law enforcement and those from natural causes and suicide. The BJS 
pilot does not depend on agencies to voluntarily report fatalities, but instead 
works to confirm media reports andrequires local police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/08/police-officer-related-deaths-department-of-justice>
 to provide additional details.
 