
Yesterday, Caroline Flint <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/caroline-flint>
 used parliament’s historic first debate on transgender equality to claim that 
gender-neutral toilets put women at risk. Responding to Maria Miller, chair of 
the women and equalities committee,Flint said she welcomed the debate 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2016/12/01/labour-mp-caroline-flint-claims-trans-friendly-toilets-are-dangerous-for-women/>
, “but would [Miller] agree with me that we also need to be mindful of creating 
neutral-gender environments that actually may prove more of a risk to women 
themselves?”

I can get where Flint is coming from. Many women are afraid of being sexually 
assaulted and I’m one of them. In 2009 I was harassed in a women’s toilet. A 
woman I did not know came up to me and asked me if my breasts were real. As a 
trans woman, I’m used to other people feeling like they have a right to 
interrogate me, so her rude and invasive questions weren’t a surprise but what 
happened next was. She pulled down my top and bra, exposing my nipple. There 
was someone else in the loo at the time, which added to my humiliation. I have 
a skin graft across my chest after I accidentally burned myself as a toddler. 
I’m no longer ashamed of my scar, but it’s an area I used to keep covered for 
years so I felt doubly mortified – and yes, violated.

How did bathrooms get to be separated by gender in the first place?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/11/gender-bathrooms-transgender-men-women-restrooms>
Forgive me, then, for not buying into this lovely idea that same-sex loos are 
magical places where bad things never happen. If only. In 2011, a trans woman 
calledChrissy Lee Polis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/28/baltimore-trans-attack-mcdonalds>
 was beaten until she had a seizure by two girls in a women’s toilet in 
McDonald’s, Baltimore. They dragged Polis out of the restroom by her hair as 
staff looked on and filmed the incident. As Polis lay on the floor convulsing, 
blood pouring from her mouth, onlookers warned her attackers to flee before the 
police arrived. She could have died. She’d have been in good company.

Trans people suffer terrible violence and discrimination: in the year to 30 
September at least295 trans people were murdered worldwide 
<http://www.gaystarnews.com/article/shot-beheaded-murdered-family-295-trans-people-murdered-year/#gs.c_5vZ1o>
 – including 16-year-old Kedarie/Kandicee Johnson, who was found dead in March 
in Iowa. Keisha Jenkins, 22, was shot in the back in Philadelphia, but not 
before she was beaten to the ground by a group of five or six men. Orange is 
the new Black’s Laverne Cox has accurately described the situation for trans 
people as a“state of emergency” 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2015/08/19/laverne-cox-declares-state-of-emergency-due-to-trans-murders/>
.

Research from the US reveals that trans women are nearly twice as likely 
<http://www.avp.org/storage/documents/ncavp_transhvfactsheet.pdf> to suffer 
sexual violence as other women: having reported such crimes, they are also 
considerably more likely to go on and experience violence from the police. 
Here’s another fact for you:48% of young trans people in Britain have attempted 
suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/19/young-transgender-suicide-attempts-survey>
. Not “thought about”. Attempted. But who cares about facts and figures on the 
violence and discrimination trans people face when we could just talk about 
people’s imagined fears instead?

Flint justified her concerns yesterday by bringing up the voyeurism conviction 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-norfolk-38094691> of student Luke 
Mallaband, who placed phones to secretly record women at a number of toilets 
and shower rooms – including female-only facilities. The SNP’s John Nicolson 
replied sensibly that: “The point that has just been raised is a matter for 
criminal law. This has nothing whatsoever to do with transgender equality.”

A message to bathroom legislators: trans people's existence is not up for 
debate | Angelica Ross
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/18/bathroom-choice-transgender-people-legislators-debate>
Miller also gave a very reasonable response: “It’s not a zero-sum game. Giving 
rights or enforcing rights that one group has does not mean that we have to see 
those rights taken away from another group … we have to be careful in this 
place that we don’t appear to be undermining the rights of trans people.”

The horrible truth is that, if a man wants to assault a woman, he can do so 
anywhere. The idea that making toilets gender-neutral puts women at risk is a 
classic “slippery slope” argument. Where’s the evidence? If Flint has proof 
that gender-neutral toilets put women at risk, I’m all ears. If not, I’m rather 
bored by people such as her playing devil’s advocate and whipping up 
unnecessary panic. Trans women like me have been using female toilets for 
decades without causing anyone any problems whatsoever. If you’re living in 
Britain in 2016 you have almost certainly used a public toilet at the same time 
as a trans person and not even realised. It doesn’t have to be a big deal 
unless you make it one.

The biggest irony? While making bathrooms more trans-friendly hasn’t led to 
any problems, the fabricated “debate” surrounding this progress has. Take 
22-year-oldAimee Toms 
<http://www.newstimes.com/local/article/Woman-mistaken-for-transgender-harassed-in-7471666.php>
, who was washing her hands in the women’s bathroom at a branch of Walmart in 
Connecticut when someone approached her and said, “You’re disgusting!” and “You 
don’t belong here.” Toms – who was born with a uterus and identifies as a woman 
– believes she was harassed because of the current panic about trans people in 
bathrooms.

A fuss about a problem that doesn’t exist has become a problem in and of 
itself, with more and more women who don’t look traditionally “feminine” now 
facing greater scrutiny in public. Earlier this year, a 16-year-old lesbian was 
thrown out of a McDonald’s in Hull because, she says,staff believed she was a 
boy 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2016/04/10/lesbian-teen-asked-to-prove-gender-ejected-from-mcdonalds-for-using-womens-toilet/>
 and she had been using the women’s toilets. McDonald’s said she was being 
disruptive.

It’s time to stop panicking about imaginary fears – and focus on the very real 
violence and discrimination gender-variant people face every day.
 