
Mike Hussey fears Australia’s Test debutants could be inhibited by the fear of 
being swiftly axed if they fail to make a big early score.

Matt Renshaw, Peter Handscomb and Nic Maddinson will pull on the baggy green 
for the first time in the day-night third Test against South Africa starting on 
Thursday afternoon.

Du Plessis, lollygate and the airport scuffle: needless faff over a trivial 
issue | Geoff Lemon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/du-plessis-lollygate-and-the-airport-scuffle-needless-faff-over-a-trivial-issue>
The batsmen, all aged in their early-to-mid 20s, are seen as part of a 
generational change for an Australian team struggling to rebuild after the 
retirements of key players including Michael Clarke and Mitchell Johnson and 
amidst a horror five-match losing streak.

With Callum Ferguson and Joe Mennie lasting only one Test in Hobart before 
being dropped, Hussey believes fear of a hovering axe could prove too much for 
the debutants.

“I just worry about what sort of messages that’s sending to the players – the 
ones gone and also the ones that have come in,” Hussey told 6PR.

“It’s difficult to build a culture, to build a winning culture ... when the 
team is changing so much and so vigorously.”

Australia have made five changes as it looks to avoid a whitewash against the 
Proteas, with Joe Burns, Ferguson, Adam Vogus (concussion), Peter Nevill and 
Mennie out of the side.

Renshaw’s opening batting predecessor Burns lasted a single Test on his 
recall, while second Test debutant Mennie, like Ferguson, was axed after 
failing to make an impact in Hobart.

“Now they’ve made these decisions, there’s going to be big pressure on them 
(the debutants),” Hussey said.

“I worry that some of them are just going try and worry about their own game 
and just try to do enough to keep their place in the team, which is not what 
you want.

“You want guys wanting to give for the team and do the team thing all the time.

“I hope the selectors now give these guys a good run at it.”

Matthew Hayden, the man Renshaw has drawn the most comparisons with, has urged 
his fellow Queenslander to temper his expectations as he prepares to faces his 
first ball in Test cricket.

Hayden has used his own stuttering early international career to warn against 
over-thinking the situation.

“I was crushed by my own expectations. That’s why I hope Matt just goes out 
and plays,” Hayden told News Corp Australia.

“I think he should realise it is a good opportunity but don’t think it is the 
be all and end all.

“Your own expectations are so high that the pressure can build up and self 
doubts can creep in.”
 