
It’s for real. Donald Trump, billionaire businessman, reality TV celebrity and 
– to his foes – bigot and demagogue will place his hand on a Bible, repeat a 
35-word oath and be sworn in as the 45th president of the United States.What 
began with a stunt, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-announces-run-president>
 lampooned as a joke and dismissed as a fantasy will at noon on Friday become 
historical truth. Trump will be the most powerful man in the world.

Related: Donald Trump starts MLK weekend by attacking civil rights hero John 
Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-john-lewis-mlk-day-civil-rights>

Only the wildest optimists believe his inauguration will deliver a moment of 
national healing and unity. It comes in the wake of another turbulent week that 
saw the publication of unverified documentsalleging covert links 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-russia-dossier-what-happens-next>
 between the Trump campaign and Russia. Achaotic press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-press-conference-twitter-media>
, in which Trump berated a CNN journalist for “fake news”, did little to 
instill confidence.

In Washington, hotels were booked and stands were erected in readiness for 
thousands of Trump loyalists, revelling in his upending of the political order, 
and thousands of protesters determined to gatecrash his coronation. Amid 
splendid pomp and pageantry, the capital is set to stage a battle for the heart 
of America.

“This is unlike any inauguration we’ve seen,” said Ben Wikler, Washington 
director of the progressive groupMoveOn.org. <http://front.moveon.org/> “We’ve 
never seen a counter-inauguration that dwarfs the crowd at the inauguration 
itself. It will be unmistakeable where the energy is. It will be in the broad 
and diverse movement to oppose the Trump agenda.”

It will be unmistakeable where the energy is. It will be in the broad and 
diverse movement to oppose the Trump agenda
Ben Wikler, MoveOn.org 
The eyes of the world will be on Trump, derided by critics as a crude 
vulgarian who eschews books but is now asked to deliver an inspiring inaugural 
address just as Abraham Lincoln, Franklin D Roosevelt and John F Kennedy did 
before him. There will also be a jarring contrast between him andoutgoing 
president Barack Obama, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/yes-we-did-obama-lifts-up-america-one-last-time-in-emotional-farewell-speech>
 who with his family will depart the US Capitol by helicopter.

Indeed, Trump and Obama’s inaugurations will be every bit as different as the 
men themselves. In 2009, amid the symbolism of America’s first black president, 
the prevailing theme was hope. Well in excess ofa million people braved the cold
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/20/barack-obama-presidential-inauguration-washington>
 to fill the National Mall. Yo-Yo Ma played the cello, Aretha Franklin sang and 
celebrity turnout was unusually high. Four years later, at Obama’s second 
inauguration, performers included James Taylor and Beyoncé.

Trump’s announced headliners are 16-year-old singer Jackie Evancho – who shot 
to fame on the reality TV show America’s Got Talent, the Mormon Tabernacle 
Choir and the Radio City Rockettes. Several leading entertainersdeclined 
invitations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/14/jennifer-holliday-cancels-trump-inauguration-performance>
 to perform. British singerCharlotte Church tweeted: 
<https://twitter.com/charlottechurch/status/818766435703025664> 
“@realDonaldTrump Your staff have asked me to sing at your inauguration, a 
simple Internet search would show I think you’re a tyrant. Bye.” Actor Meryl 
Streep spoke for many in Hollywood when sheeviscerated the president-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/meryl-streep-golden-globes-speech-donald-trump>
 at last weekend’s Golden Globe awards.
 Trump and Obama’s inaugurations will be every bit as different as the men 
themselves. Photograph: Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images 
Trump, who at 70 will be the oldest person 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/06/14/481991965/its-trumps-birthday-if-he-wins-hed-be-the-oldest-president-ever-to-take-office>
 ever sworn in as US president, this week promised a “very, very elegant day” 
with “massive crowds”, a familiar boast at his campaign rallies. The joint 
congressional committee on inaugural activities, which oversees all ceremonies, 
is expecting 700,000 to 750,000 people – well short of Obama’s total.

The Republican, however, has outgunned Obama financially. Trump’s presidential 
inaugural committee has raised a record sum, more than $90m in private 
donations, far more than Obama’s two inaugural committees, which brought in 
$55m in 2009 and $43m in 2013. It says any money left over will be donated to 
charity.

Tom Barrack, the lead planner, told reporters he wanted to avoid a 
“circus-like atmosphere” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/01/10/trump-will-be-surrounded-by-the-soft-sensuality-of-the-place-at-his-inauguration-organizer-says/?utm_term=.98a0ebd92b6a>
 in favour of a more “back to work” attitude that surrounds Trump “with the 
soft sensuality of the place”. Trump, whom Barrack described as “the greatest 
celebrity in the world”, is holding three inaugural balls. Obama had 10 after 
his first inauguration.

For the maverick businessman’s voters, it will be a day to savour. Michael 
Barnett, chairperson of the Republican party in Palm Beach, Florida, said: 
“I’ve never been to an inauguration before. We’ve worked so hard for the last 
15 months and now we get to see our effort pay off. I’m sure I’ll be lost in 
the moment and it will take a while to sink in. It’s going to be great but we 
know it’s just the beginning.”

Barnett, a 39-year-old African American lawyer, believes Trump can help build 
unity. “Your impression when you meet him face to face and talk to him is very 
different from what you see on TV,” he said. “He’s a really good guy and I 
really like him. He’ll do a good job.”

Related: Women's March on Washington set to be one of America's biggest 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/womens-march-on-washington-protest-size-donald-trump>

Benjamin Marchi, 38 and the owner of a healthcare business in Easton, 
Maryland, will also be present. “It’s going to be a great day, a wonderful day, 
full of excitement,” he said. “It might be similar to election night. He is 
truly our first independent president because of his willingness to not pander 
to segments of the Republican party that are typically pandered to.”

‘Fear is an even stronger emotion than anger’

But along with the celebrations, there will be a week of protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/14/inauguration-protests-guide-where-events-happening-donald-trump-president>
 against a man who insulted Mexicans and Muslims andboasted about groping women.
 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html?utm_term=.d2cbf10ef278>
 There were demonstrations against Richard Nixon in 1973 and George W Bush in 
2001, but nothing on the scale Trump faces in Washington, a liberal bastion 
where he took just 4% of the vote (even Bush managed 9% in 2000).
 About 30 groups have secured permits to protest before, during and after the 
inauguration. Photograph: Paul J. Richards/AFP/Getty Images 
Bill Galston, <https://www.brookings.edu/experts/william-a-galston/> a former 
policy adviser to Bill Clinton, said: “The tone and temper of the election 
campaign has people worried. There are a lot of people genuinely scared. Fear 
is an even stronger emotion than anger.”

About 30 groups have secured permits to protest before, during and after the 
inauguration. District police and the US secret service plan to have some 3,000 
officers and 5,000 national guard troops available, claiming this will be 
enough to ensure the inauguration goes ahead even if protesters try to disrupt 
it.

The social glue that holds politics together is under assault. It feels like 
we’re entering uncharted territory
Robert Schenkkan 
The biggest gathering will be on Saturday, the Women’s March on Washington, 
<https://www.womensmarch.com/> which organisers say could draw more than 
200,000 people. Actors Amy Schumer, Scarlett Johansson, America Ferrera and 
Felicity Huffman will be among those taking part. Its organisers did not 
respond to requests for comment but Wikler of MoveOn.org said: “The march will 
send a message to every policymaker in Washington that the public is mobilised 
and ready to fight.

“The public is overwhelmingly opposed to Trump’s attitudes on women’s rights, 
immigrants’ rights and LGBT rights. Progressives are banding together in a way 
we haven’t seen in a decade. People are dusting off their marching shoes. A 
massive march can show which way the political wind is blowing.”

Inaugurations are traditionally a time of bipartisan solidarity, and Trump’s 
will be attended by Clinton and his wife Hillary Clinton, the shock loser in a 
uniquely poisonous election campaign. But some Democratic members of Congress 
are boycotting the event, among them John Lewis, a distinguished civil rights 
leader who told NBC’s Meet the Press that hedoes not see Trump as a “legitimate 
president” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-john-lewis-mlk-day-civil-rights>
, arguing that Russian interference helped get him elected.

On Saturday, Trump made his feelings about Lewis clear, using Twitter to say 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/820255947956383744> that Lewis 
should stop “falsely complaining about the election results”. Such critics, he 
said, were “all talk, talk, talk – no action or results”.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Obama dedicates his final weekly address to the American people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/14/obama-dedicates-his-finally-weekly-address-to-the-american-people-video>
Robert Schenkkan, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/08/robert-schenkkan-lyndon-b-johnson-all-the-way-bryan-cranston>
 a Pulitzer prize-winning playwright whose latest work, Building the Wall, 
tackles the rise of Trump, said: “It’s a tricky balance for the Democratic 
party. How much of this transition should be honoured in traditional ways and, 
given this is not business as usual, how much we should not be playing by the 
old rules?

Related: Attempts to hold Trump to account only seem to make him stronger and 
stranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-press-conference-twitter-media>

“I’m among those who feel the Democrats are turning up at the gunfight at OK 
Corral with a knife. There is no polite resistance to this. There is nothing 
but all-out resistance.”

Schenkkan, 63, said this inauguration was different from any he can remember. 
“It’s a deeply divisive day. There will be people there who are exultant 
because they feel they’ve been wandering in the desert for the past eight 
years, but the majority of the country feels differently.

“The social glue that holds politics together in this country is under 
assault. It feels like we’re entering uncharted territory.”

The centrepiece of the day will be Trump’s inaugural address. He told friends 
that Ronald Reagan’s “style” and Kennedy’s articulation of grand national 
ambitions were key to the drafting of his own speech,the Washington Post 
reported. 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/12/28/trump-tells-visitors-hes-drafting-his-inaugural-speech-with-reagan-and-kennedy-in-mind/?utm_term=.31e21fde4c1e>
 Kennedy’s inaugural address, 56 years to the day before Trump’s, included the 
now celebrated line: “Ask not what your country can do for you – ask what you 
can do for your country.”

Bob Shrum, a political consultant, said: “Kennedy’s address widened and 
deepened the definition of what it is to be an American. It had a rare 
eloquence.

“I don’t think you can expect that of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.”
 