
Campaigns tend to treat the Federal Election Commission filing day like most 
Americans treat taxes, procrastinating to the end. And then they complain about 
it.


On Wednesday, Marc Elias, a campaign finance lawyer who works for Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats>, tweeted his complaint that 
federal regulators were not committing sufficient manpower to catching 
paperwork between the hours of 9pm and midnight.

The FEC commissioner, Ellen Weintraub, was having none of that. 

“C’mon, Marc, reporters have deadlines,” she tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/EllenLWeintraub/status/621348364286853120>. “File by 8 and 
everyone can see their kids tonight.”

Donald Trump boasts about '$10bn net worth' after filing financial disclosure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/15/donald-trump-net-worth-10-billion-fec-election>
Later she was asked how the commission was dealing with a filing by Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, who had bragged that 
FEC reports were “not designed for a man of Mr Trump’s massive wealth”.

“We’ve got our best people working on it,” Weintraub tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/EllenLWeintraub/status/621414890801119232>:
Ellen L Weintraub (@EllenLWeintraub) 
.@asmith83 <https://twitter.com/asmith83> we've got our best people working on 
it.pic.twitter.com/5sjcOl3tkG <http://t.co/5sjcOl3tkG>
 <https://twitter.com/EllenLWeintraub/status/621414890801119232> July 15, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/EllenLWeintraub/status/621414890801119232> 
Jeb Bush drew big support from Goldman Sachs. Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> cleaned up with donors 
named Goldman, not-Sachs


Reporters counted 56 donations to Bush from Goldman Sachs employees, not 
counting spouses not identified as employees. No candidate attracted comparable 
support from the investment bank (although the Hillary Clinton campaign had not 
filed, as of this writing). Bush donorsincluded 
<https://twitter.com/levinecarrie/status/621411857795010560> former Goldman 
Sachs managing director Robert Zoellick.

The Bernie Sanders campaign, meanwhile, cleaned up with donors named Goldman, 
not-Sachs, attracting donations from at least a half dozen of them, counting 
spouses. Laurie Goldman of Randolph, Vermont, for example,gave 
<http://docquery.fec.gov/cgi-bin/forms/C00577130/1015044/sa/ALL/2> $500.00.

Bobby Jindal outraised – by congressional campaigns

Louisiana governor Bobby Jindal’s star has fallen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/24/louisiana-governor-bobby-jindal-president-republican>
 in the Republican party since he was tapped to respond to Barack Obama’s first 
address to Congress in 2009. The former Rhodes scholar and 2016 presidential 
hopeful raised $578,758 in this period, less than a number of congressional 
campaigns including those of two non-incumbents, Democrats Salud Carbajal in 
California and Brad Schneider in Illinois. However, it wasn’t all bad news. A 
Super Pac supporting Jindal did announce that it had raised $8.6m.

Sanders’ grassroots support was deep and celebrity-infused

Sanders reported $15,247,353.43 in total receipts. More than three-quarters of 
that haul, just under $10.5m, came from donors who gave less than $200 in the 
two months since he announced his White House run.Jeb Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeb-bush>, by comparison, raised just 
$368,023 from small donors. The Clinton campaign, whose filing was not 
available at this writing, said that 91% of her donations were for amounts 
greater than $100.

Not only does Sanders have a lot of small donors – he has famous ones. The 
novelist Jonathan Lethem gave $250. The actor Mark Ruffalo contributed on seven 
different occasions, for a total of $825. There were maxed-out famous donors, 
too, including the film producer David Geffen and Will Ferrell collaborator 
Adam McKay.

Marco Rubio wept Dolphin tears

Marco Rubio is an obsessive Miami Dolphins fan 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/early-lead/wp/2015/04/13/marco-rubio-likely-is-the-biggest-miami-dolphins-fan-ever-to-run-for-president/>
 who has loved his hometown NFL team since he was a boy. However, he might be 
little crestfallen to discover that legendary Miami Dolphins coach Don Shula 
was a max donor to Jeb Bush.

Shula, an NFL Hall of Famer who oversaw all five Super Bowl appearances in 
Dolphins history including their back to back titles in 1972 and 1973, gave 
$2,700 to Bush, a fellow Floridian.

The whole Bush family passed the hat – except Neil


Most of Jeb Bush’s family gave the former Florida governor the maximum primary 
election donation of $2,700. Jeb’s father and mother, former president George 
HW and former first lady Barbara Bush, maxed out to their second son. Three of 
Jeb’s four siblings did so as well, George W Bush, Marvin Bush and Dorothy Bush 
Koch. However, Neil Bush did not donate at all to his brother.

Neil is perhaps more controversial than his brother. While the businessman has 
never launched an invasion of Iraq, he was the director of Silverado Savings & 
Loans in the 1980s. Its collapse cost taxpayers over $1bn. Further, in his 
divorce, he admitting to having sexual encounters with women who simply showed 
up to his hotel room door on trips to Thailand and Hong Kong. In a deposition, 
Bush said he didn’t know if the women were prostitutes, saying that they didn’t 
ask for money and he didn’t pay them.

The other fun detail is how the two former presidents in the Bush family 
describe themselves. While George W Bush lists his occupation as former 
President of the United States, his father simply describes himself as retired.

Donald Trump barely capable of squeezing wealth on to puny official form

On Wednesday afternoon, Donald Trump announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/15/donald-trump-net-worth-10-billion-fec-election>
 that he had filed a personal financial disclosure with the Federal Election 
Commission, the last step needed to secure his presence on stage in the first 
Republican presidential debate in Cleveland on 6 August. He announced that he 
had total worth of over $10bn and a 2014 income of $362m but raised one big 
issue with campaign finance laws. In Trump’s opinion, FEC disclosure forms were 
“not designed for a man of Mr Trump’s massive wealth”.

Bush gave himself more than small donors did


Small donors gave Jeb Bush $368,023.22 in the last fundraising period out of 
the $11.4m that the former Florida governor raised. This though is even less 
than the total that the candidate himself gave the campaign. Bush gave 
$388.720.15 in-kind donations for “research consulting and travel consulting”.

For Bush, it was planes, private planes and Uber-mobiles

The Bush campaign spent more than $1,400 
<http://docquery.fec.gov/cgi-bin/forms/C00579458/1015075/sb/23> on Uber rides – 
dozens of them – and$153,091.95 to The Johnson Co 
<http://docquery.fec.gov/cgi-bin/forms/C00579458/1015075/sb/23/2>, apparently 
for the use of the private aircraft belonging to the New York Jets owner.

Bush said 
<http://www.sfweekly.com/thesnitch/2015/07/13/man-of-action-jeb-bush-vows-to-hail-an-uber-in-sf-this-week>
 he would hail an Uber on a trip Thursday to San Francisco, where the company 
is based.

Rick Perry’s campaign manager helped him spend his money

Two-thirds of the $593,000 spent by the Perry campaign on the quarter were 
funneled to Russo Miller & Associates – the consulting firm in which Jeff 
Miller, Perry’s campaign manager, is a partner. The money appears to have gone 
mostly for media buys. In general, Perry posted an impressive burn rate among 
the candidates, blowing through more than half of his $1.14m intotal receipts 
<http://www.fec.gov/fecviewer/CandidateCommitteeDetail.do>. Easy come, easy go.

Lincoln Chafee was the last tin can dragging behind the car

The former Rhode Island senator and governor raised less than $30,000 in his 
first quarter as a candidate. Then he loaned his campaign $364,000. That’s a 
factor-of-10 difference in grassroots support versus self-support. Bush also 
gave his campaign more than small donors did. Bush has given $388,720.15 to his 
campaign, while raising just $368,023 from small donors.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F133511450&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F133511450>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F133511450&media=> 