
A woman stands at a butcher’s block, surrounded by kitchen implements that she 
slowly, methodically names in alphabetical order: apron, bowl, chopper etc. She 
wears an impassive expression, but as she demonstrates the use of each 
appliance her actions become increasingly aggressive, suggesting murderous 
intent. Brandishing a pair of knives, she signs off for the last letter of the 
alphabet with a Zorro-like flourish.

Martha Rosler’s Semiotics of the Kitchen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vm5vZaE8Ysc> is one of the seminal feminist 
artworks of the 1970s, and certainly one of the most anthologised. It will be 
shown at the Photographers’ Gallery in London from October until January, 
alongside the work of 47 other female artists working with photography and 
video, inan exhibition of feminist avant-garde works 
<http://thephotographersgallery.org.uk/feminist-avant-garde-of-the-1970s-works-from-the-verbund-collection-7-october-2016-8-january-20>
 from that era. All are on loan from theVerbund Collection 
<https://www.artrabbit.com/organisations/sammlung-verbund-vertical-gallery> in 
Vienna, which specialises in avant-garde and conceptual art.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffeminist-art-of-the-1970s-knives-nudity-and-terrified-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2c79770785e45b3466b4bf0909e57809dc5cb75%2F20_117_1263_758%2F1263.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Feminist%20art%20of%20the%201970s%3A%20knives%2C%20nudity%20and%20terrified%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffeminist-art-of-the-1970s-knives-nudity-and-terrified-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Feminist%20art%20of%20the%201970s%3A%20knives%2C%20nudity%20and%20terrified%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffeminist-art-of-the-1970s-knives-nudity-and-terrified-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2c79770785e45b3466b4bf0909e57809dc5cb75%2F20_117_1263_758%2F1263.jpg>
 A still from Martha Rosler’s groundbreaking 1975 video Semiotics of the 
Kitchen. Photograph: Martha Rosler 
Many of the artists are well-known, such as Cindy Sherman, Francesca Woodman, 
Hannah Wilke and Judy Chicago, while some are ripe for rediscovery. Many of the 
works, such as Rosler’s grainy, 1976 video, tap into female rage, though 
Semiotics does undercut its righteous anger with subtle humour: it’s clearly a 
parody of the kind of cookery show that was popular across US TV networks, and 
the big shrug the artist gives at the end is deployed to further deflect that 
anger.

Yet, when it was first shown, there were many who felt deeply discomforted, 
even threatened. “Some men really found this work frightening when it came out 
and that surprised me at the time, since it seemed so obviously a kind of 
burlesque,” Rosler recalls.

Though there isn’t much humour in Nil Yalter’s hugely influential 1974 film 
The Headless Woman (Belly Dance) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7qF-c2g8Fo>, 
it certainly exudes a simple and beguiling poetry. Yalter, an Egyptian-born 
Turkish artist who moved to Paris in 1965 and has lived there ever since, 
explores, like many of her American and European contemporaries, sexual 
objectification. Rather more uniquely, she explores orientalism. The object of 
our focus is a woman’s stomach on which text has been inscribed. As the woman 
begins her belly dance, all we see is the soft flesh of her undulating stomach, 
and the pulsing text.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffeminist-art-of-the-1970s-knives-nudity-and-terrified-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F322ccc0985b60c3cb33a4eca3726c79581007763%2F0_0_3543_2790%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Feminist%20art%20of%20the%201970s%3A%20knives%2C%20nudity%20and%20terrified%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffeminist-art-of-the-1970s-knives-nudity-and-terrified-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Feminist%20art%20of%20the%201970s%3A%20knives%2C%20nudity%20and%20terrified%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffeminist-art-of-the-1970s-knives-nudity-and-terrified-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F322ccc0985b60c3cb33a4eca3726c79581007763%2F0_0_3543_2790%2F3543.jpg>
 Still’s from Nil Yalter’s film The Headless Woman (Belly Dance). Photograph: 
Nil Yalter 
The Headless Woman references an old Anatolian ritual of female sexual 
humiliation: a woman who did not obey her husband or who was unable to conceive 
would be bought before the village imam; her head and face would be covered and 
her belly inscribed with a prayer. “Very often, the iman would make a mistake 
and he would lick off the mistake with his tongue,” Yalter explains.

Like Rosler, Yalter recalls the hostile reception to her film. “The reaction 
was very aggressive from men,” she says. “You also have to remember that in 
America there was more feminist artistic activity. Here, we were not at the 
centre of that.” It’s hardly worth mentioning that in France some of the issues 
the work raised in relation to the Arab or Muslim female body are still 
depressingly apposite.

Although many of the works will no longer generate the hostile reactions they 
once did, some pieces even now retain an air of danger.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffeminist-art-of-the-1970s-knives-nudity-and-terrified-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1da3e242ce33c96b0f8fe35874eaab85853f2a6%2F34_0_3475_3473%2F3475.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Feminist%20art%20of%20the%201970s%3A%20knives%2C%20nudity%20and%20terrified%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffeminist-art-of-the-1970s-knives-nudity-and-terrified-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Feminist%20art%20of%20the%201970s%3A%20knives%2C%20nudity%20and%20terrified%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffeminist-art-of-the-1970s-knives-nudity-and-terrified-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1da3e242ce33c96b0f8fe35874eaab85853f2a6%2F34_0_3475_3473%2F3475.jpg>
 Francesca Woodman: Untitled Rome, Italy, 1977-1978. Photograph: Francesca 
Woodman 
One artist whose work certainly hasn’t been tamed by time is VALIE EXPORT (the 
Austrian artist’s adopted name, after a brand of cigarettes, is capitalised). 
Photos in the exhibition recall her best-known performance, the aptly named 
Genital Panic, (1968), in which the artist wandered through a Munich arthouse 
cinema wearing crotchless trousers and a tight leather jacket. Her hair wild 
and unkempt, she no doubt resembled a feral predator as she roamed the rows of 
seated spectators, her exposed genitalia level with faces.

The infamous Genital Panic was certainly one way of gaining one-up-womanship 
with a contemporary Viennese art world then dominated by the often deeply 
misogynisticVienna Actionists 
<http://www.theartstory.org/movement-viennese-actionism.htm>, whose acts of 
ritualised sadism sexually debased the female rather than the male body. In 
fact, you might say the same about the exhibition as a whole: that it’s a 
necessary display of defiant redress.

Feminist Avant-Garde of the 1970s 
<http://thephotographersgallery.org.uk/feminist-avant-garde-of-the-1970s> is at 
the Photographers’ Gallery,16-18 Ramillies Street, London W1, 7 Oct to 15 Jan 
2017.
 