 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ffifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F13%2F1423853474428%2F585455b2-e82a-4abf-aa7d-97152cb05b42-1031x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fifty%20Shades%20of%20Grey%3A%20what%20BDSM%20enthusiasts%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ffifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fifty%20Shades%20of%20Grey%3A%20what%20BDSM%20enthusiasts%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ffifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F13%2F1423853474428%2F585455b2-e82a-4abf-aa7d-97152cb05b42-1031x2040.jpeg>
 Emily Sarah. Photograph: Felix Clay 
‘Real sex has spit and sweat’

Emily Sarah, 26, is a fetish model and performer who runs BDSM Healing 
<http://www.bdsmhealing.com/>, a business that combines techniques like reiki 
with sensory deprivation, bondage and spankings to deal with “the cathartic 
aspects of BDSM”. She discovered the fetish scene while at university in London.

I was shocked by how awful the film was. Ridiculous, really. The sex scenes 
were so vanilla. It didn’t look particularly kinky to me. There was a lot of 
beautiful equipment, but not much going on in terms of actual BDSM: it was just 
about Christian tying Anastasia up. In real BDSM relationships, there’s a lot 
more connection, a lot more talking, a lot more ritual. The play he did with 
her wasn’t hard play; it was sensation stuff. I switch between dominant and 
submissive, so I can see how she’d enjoy the scenes in the Red Room – but it 
didn’t show an authentic side to BDSM. It was more him stroking her for a bit 
with a whip, then lots of sex. That was it.

But real sex has smudged makeup and spit and sweat. It was too pretty. I 
noticed they used a condom though, which was good. And they mentioned the pill 
as well.

Anastasia is a virgin, and I have met virgins on the BDSM scene. My friend had 
“Teenaged Virgin” written on her back with a knife. She was on the scene for 
years before she actually had sex. Otherwise, both characters were completely 
unrealistic. She didn’t even know what a butt plug was. Most people do – and if 
they don’t, they wouldn’t be involved with a man like him. I don’t think he’d 
be interested in a woman like her, either: she’s clearly not up for BDSM, and 
he could find someone else to do it. That makes their relationship abusive.

I’ve met a few Christian Greys. As someone who, in the past, has experienced 
many unhealthy and abusive relationships, I would definitely stay away from 
him. They’re not capable of love; their whole way of viewing relationships is 
very selfish. It’s about getting a high out of the control, rather than any 
kind of genuine love. When Anastasia says, “Leave me alone”, he actually breaks 
into her house! That’s not consensual. He turns up unannounced when she’s with 
her mum.

I don’t think EL James <https://www.theguardian.com/books/el-james> has had a 
huge amount of real-life experience; I think these are probably her fantasies. 
I get the impression she hasn’t had much safe consensual S&M in her life.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ffifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F13%2F1423853621932%2F579da982-38d6-49dc-9ce8-646967dbde57-1124x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fifty%20Shades%20of%20Grey%3A%20what%20BDSM%20enthusiasts%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ffifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fifty%20Shades%20of%20Grey%3A%20what%20BDSM%20enthusiasts%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ffifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F13%2F1423853621932%2F579da982-38d6-49dc-9ce8-646967dbde57-1124x2040.jpeg>
 Ronald Elliston. Photograph: Felix Clay 
‘This film is very dangerous’

Ronald L H Elliston, AKA DJ Rubber Ron, was a member of the music group Black 
Britain when he discovered the fetish scene in 1983, through the club 
Maitresse/Skin Two. In 1989, he created Submission, the world’s first fetish 
dance club.

I’ve read Fifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fifty-shades-of-grey> and thought it was 
very Mills & Boon, very twee. The film was really bad, but it was very faithful 
to the book. If Christian Grey was older than 27 it would make more sense: 
there’s no way someone so young would have accumulated so much knowledge about 
BDSM. It takes years to acquire the level of expertise he’s meant to have.

If you wanted to find a partner for this kind of thing you could go via the 
modern social-media route, engaging in conversation over a period of time to 
find out if that person is on your level or not. You wouldn’t take someone who 
wasn’t into it and try to change them, as Christian does. Anastasia goes from 
being a virgin to being trussed up like a Bernard Matthews chicken in less 
than, what, a month? It’s not like she wants to explore her sexuality. He says, 
“Come into this room”, then she goes through the doorway and sees a dungeon! 
Most people would run away.

People like Anastasia usually get into the scene on their own in small steps. 
If the story had been about her discovering BDSM then meeting someone like him, 
it would tie in ... but someone that’s fallen in love, finds out the guy is 
basically a sadist, then engages in that world – it’s not realistic.

That makes this film very dangerous. Psychologically, certain guys could watch 
it and think, “All right, this is how we play it now, do we? This is what I 
need to do.” There’s no way on Earth I’d let my young niece near a guy like 
that.

Women who want to explore the naughty side of it will just see the sexual 
tension between the couple. That’s what they’re getting off on. They’re not 
getting the deep underlying storyline; they’re not understanding what the 
implications are. You’ve got to be very careful who you invite into the world 
of BDSM. It could all end in tears, huge tears.

As for my journey into the scene, I visited a famous dominatrix in Camden, and 
came out of that knowing full well I wasn’t a submissive! To be a good 
dominant, you need to have gone through that to understand the limits and be 
able to administer it in the correct way. Christian did do that, but he has way 
too much power because he’s with someone that’s falling in love with him.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ffifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F13%2F1423853688362%2F2d75438f-7fb1-40f3-82f7-47e505813276-851x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fifty%20Shades%20of%20Grey%3A%20what%20BDSM%20enthusiasts%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ffifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fifty%20Shades%20of%20Grey%3A%20what%20BDSM%20enthusiasts%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ffifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F13%2F1423853688362%2F2d75438f-7fb1-40f3-82f7-47e505813276-851x2040.jpeg>
 Jon Blue. Photograph: Felix Clay 
‘A 24/7 BDSM relationship is rare’

Father of three Jon Blue is a former academic with a PhD in reproductive 
physiology, who found the fetish scene after working in European universities. 
He calls it his Breaking Bad moment: “There are worse ways to express a midlife 
crisis.” Six years ago, he began organising libertine parties known as Little 
Liaisons, and now also hosts House of Shadows BDSM events.

This film is like an instruction manual for a psychopath. You’d never go near 
someone like that. If that was my daughter … I’d never let any young, naive 
woman near a man like that. Christian is manipulative, controlling, and has all 
the characteristics of a psychopath. At the end, he proved his point by beating 
her up, then being charming again. A 24/7 BDSM relationship is very, very rare. 
It would take years to build up that level of trust with someone, otherwise 
it’s abuse. Anastasia is sold on the idea that she’s in love with him, that he 
might be a lovely man, so she’s doing whatever he wants. She’s subjugating, not 
submitting.

Christian has lots of red flags, including low empathy. The way he manipulates 
has no place in BDSM. Unfortunately, there are some bad, predatory people on 
the scene, though. It’s about fantasy, exploring the opposite side to what you 
are in real life. I’m actually very soft and submissive, so I like to explore a 
dominant side. But I’d never explore that if I knew I was going to cause harm 
to somebody. A lot of people who have been abused get into BDSM: it actually 
helps them break that conditioning. But it has to be done with intelligence and 
communication – and there was no intelligence at all in that film.

As for the sex scenes – they needed his cock in them. It was all on the woman. 
That said, I’m glad to see any sexuality portrayed in the cinema because we see 
endless violence, and people can have their heads blown off at certificate 12A, 
and that’s quite normal. But sexuality’s more complex. Maybe this will break a 
taboo. Maybe it will stimulate someone to make a decent film about sexuality.
 