
Over the last 40 years social inequality has almost doubled 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/iv-drip/the-shocking-facts-about-uk-inequality-9059140.html>
 in the UK and it is showing no signs of slowing down. It is predicted that by 
20203.5 million children will be living in poverty 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-27734513> – and that is just the tip of 
the iceberg.

There are statistics telling us that gender equality is yet to be achieved 
<http://ukfeminista.org.uk/take-action/facts-and-statistics-on-gender-inequality/>
,ethnic minorities are at a disadvantage 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/iv-drip/the-shocking-facts-about-uk-inequality-9059140.html>
 and that poverty in on rise.

It's such a huge and wide-ranging issue, that is very difficult to confine to 
one list. Many individuals and organisations are fighting inequality while 
engaging with and sharing thought-provoking content on Twitter. In fact it was 
hard to choose five – so don't forget to add your suggestions below in the 
comment section. As always you are the real experts.

Joseph Rowntree Foundation, @jrf_uk <https://twitter.com/jrf_uk>

The Joseph Rowntree Foundation is a great place to start – they are the 
experts when it comes to poverty and their Twitter feed proves no less.

Their feed will keep you up to speed on poverty in the UK with regularly 
retweeted headlines, reports and statistics. They have also compiled agreat 
collection of lists <https://twitter.com/jrf_uk/lists> to keep up with research 
and the news agenda.

From pointing out thought-provoking news stories, sharing statistics or 
captivating case-studies the Joseph Rowntree Foundation are the ones to follow 
when it comes to understanding and engaging with the reality of social 
inequality.

Winnie Byanyima, @Winnie_Byanyima <https://twitter.com/Winnie_Byanyima>

Winnie is the executive director of Oxfam International – the worldwide 
development organisation that attempts to mobilise the power of people against 
poverty. She is also one of the few women heading up a charity.

Winnie's Twitter feed focuses on inequality in all its forms, highlighting 
injustice all over the world. It is a great resource to uncover what is 
happening globally – especially the stories and issues that the mainstream 
media may not cover.

The Fawcett Society, @fawcettsociety <https://twitter.com/fawcettsociety>

The Fawcett Society has been working, in the UK, for women's rights since 
1866, campaigning for gender equality on pay, politics, poverty, justice and 
pensions.

Their Twitter feed comments on the news agenda, keeping their followers in the 
loop on the state of gender equality, offers regular updates on current 
campaign progress and regularly fights the stereotypes feminists face. In fact 
the Fawcett Society regularly remind us that feminists come in all shapes and 
sizes by posting photographs of celebrity supporters Bill Bailey, Ken 
Livingstone, Tracey Emin and many more. 
https://twitter.com/fawcettsociety/status/346949184496205824

As the general election approaches, their feed will be one to watch as they 
comment on policy and political agendas, forever keeping in mind the fight for 
gender equality.

The Equality Trust, @equalitytrust <https://twitter.com/equalitytrust>

Self-coined as an independent, evidence based campaign working to improve the 
quality of life in the UK by reducing economic inequality, TheEquality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> Trust was co-founded in 2009 at 
the height of the recession.

On Twitter, the Trust publicises the content from it's blog – which covers 
inequality news, social injustice and campaigns from the wider sector.

The Trust tries to hold politicians and leaders to account and their feed is 
quite powerful – if someone is dodging Tax - they are not afraid to say so.

Joseph E. Stiglitz, @JosephEStiglitz <https://twitter.com/JosephEStiglitz>

Professor Joseph E Stiglitz is an American economist and professor at Columbia 
University. He is a former senior vice president and chief economist of the 
World Bank.

He is known for his critical view of the management of globalisation and his 
blogpost 
<http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/06/27/inequality-is-not-inevitable/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0>
 on the New York Times Opinionator Pages where he said that inequality does not 
have to be inevitable.

As well as highlighting interesting articles on inequality, Joseph offers 
nuggets of wisdom - explaining where the capitalist model went wrong and how 
inequality can be resolved.

Who would be in your top five? Share your favourite voices on inequality in 
the comments below or via the #beveridgerevisted hashtag on Twitter.

This article is part of the Beveridge revisited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2014/jul/07/-sp-beveridge-report-revisited-where-now-for-the-welfare-state>
 series from GuardianSociety Professionals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals>, revising Sir William 
Beveridge's five great social evils for the 21st century.Click here to find out 
what the evils are and read more from the Beveridge Revisited series. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/series/beveridge-revisited-21st-century-evils>
 