
In 1979, the Swiss art duo Peter Fischli and David Weiss 
<http://fischli-weiss.com/> strolled into a Zurich supermarket searching for 
art supplies. They stopped at the deli. “We saw the cold cuts in the glass 
vitrine, pointed to it and said: ‘Look, it looks like a carpet shop,’” said 
Fischli on the phone from the Guggenheim, where he is installing a 
retrospective. “We just bought it and made it.” The result was their first 
collaboration, the Sausage Series (1979), photographs in which luncheon meat 
was arranged to resemble a car crash or, indeed, a carpet shop, its deadpan 
humour typical of their work.

How to Work Better, the pair’s Guggenheim retrospective 
<http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/exhibitions/upcoming/fischliweiss-how-to-work-better>
, which opened in New York on Friday, shows the breadth of their artistic 
practice, taking in as it does sculptures, photographs, 96 hours of video 
footage and readymade objects including pizza boxes, car tires and cassette 
tapes. There are also three public pieces of art placed across the Manhattan – 
Haus,a miniature German office building 
<http://www.spruethmagers.com/exhibitions/26@@viewq12> on Fifth Avenue; Büsi, a 
three-minute video of acat lapping up milk in Times Square 
<http://www.timessquarenyc.org/times-square-arts/projects/midnight-moment/bsi-kitty/index.aspx>
 and a mural, How to Work Better,in Soho 
<https://www.publicartfund.org/view/exhibitions/6099_peter_fischli_david_weiss__how_to_work_better>
.

The exhibition’s title is taken from one of their most famous works, a 1991 
text piece inspired by a ceramics factory in Thailand. “It was the rules for 
the workers,” Fischli says. “We took a photo of it and for a long time, kept it 
in our studio as a little bit of a reminder for us.”

The list outlines 10 things that encourage workplace harmony, simple Big 
Brotherly phrases like “Do one thing at a time,” “Learn to ask questions” and 
“Be calm.” The one Fischli struggles with the most is “Distinguish sense from 
nonsense.” “I think that’s the hardest one to answer,” he says. “It speaks to 
all working people.”

Fischli and Weiss met in 1977 through a mutual friend, the artist Urs Lüthi, 
and were friends and collaborators until until 2012, when Weissdied of cancer 
aged 65 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/apr/30/david-weiss>; the 
pair had already started work on the Guggenheim retrospective.

The Sausage Series was their first work together, and after meeting up again 
in Los Angeles in 1980, their professional partnership was solidified as they 
got dressed up in animal costumes for their Rat and Bear series, including two 
films, a book and a sculpture. In the 1981 film The Least Resistance, the pair 
recline by a pool, visit an art gallery, argue and talk philosophy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGXrRC3pfLnE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGXrRC3pfLnE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGXrRC3pfLnE&media=>
The Guggeheim exhibition also naturally includes their masterpiece The Way 
Things Go <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Way_Things_Go> a 30-minute film 
shot in their studio in 1987. In the film, meticulously arranged junk including 
stepladders, tyres and a flaming bale of hay produce a spectucular chain 
reaction aRube Goldberg <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rube_Goldberg_machine> 
project.

“We first made a three-minute sketch, but we decided to make a longer movie 
and work deeper on it,” says Fischli. “It had its frustrating moments, like 
when things don’t happen the way you want them to. I see it as work, not only 
play.”

The art duo also claimed a copyright infringement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/may/27/advertising.uknews> in 2003, 
when Honda copied elements of their award-winning film for an ad campaign, 
though they never sued.

The dapper duo, who trotted the globe in collared shirts, worked mainly in 
their Zurich studio, where every day, they would meet between 9 and 10 am, make 
coffee and divide duties – Fischli alwaysanswered emails, while Weiss did the 
bookkeeping <http://www.zeit.de/2007/26/FISCHLI__WEISS/komplettansicht>.

Work arguments were inevitable. “If you don’t argue, it doesn’t make sense to 
work together,” said Fischli. “If you work with someone who always has the same 
opinion as you, you can do it alone. To argue is a very productive thing.”

The video of the cat in Times Square comes from a year the artists spent on 
the road. “When we were invited to do the Swiss pavilion in Venice [in 1995], 
we were interested in the idea of ‘What is work?’” says Fischli. “We decided to 
not work for one year; it was a year outside of the studio.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Ffischli-and-weiss-hamming-it-up-guggenheim-retrospective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa64e3e6dc1cd46b82bffe4c2999532c9f4d04b16%2F0_0_1600_1073%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fischli%20and%20Weiss%3A%20hamming%20it%20up%20at%20the%20Guggenheim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Ffischli-and-weiss-hamming-it-up-guggenheim-retrospective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fischli%20and%20Weiss%3A%20hamming%20it%20up%20at%20the%20Guggenheim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Ffischli-and-weiss-hamming-it-up-guggenheim-retrospective%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa64e3e6dc1cd46b82bffe4c2999532c9f4d04b16%2F0_0_1600_1073%2F1600.jpg>
 Peter Fischli and David Weiss , Untitled (Funghi 18), 1997-1998. Photograph: 
Guggenheim 
“When we saw something worth filming, we stopped the car and filmed it,” said 
Fischli. “I saw this street cat in a village, everyone was giving the cat food. 
Every morning, we gave the cat milk and we filmed the cat drinking the milk.”

The artists also visited tourist sites like the Coliseum in Rome, the Pyramids 
of Giza and Caribbean beaches for their travel photo series, Visible World.

“We were interested in making photos that already exist,” says Fischli. “We 
could have bought them from an image bank, but going there and making these 
photos, the act of spending time and making a photo that already exists, was 
interesting.”

The artists also made Airports series, photographing the most banal, 
unremarkable shots of the aviation industry – a series John Waters called 
“purposeful mediocrity”.

The Guggenheim exhibition closes on 27 April 
<http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/exhibitions/upcoming/fischliweiss-how-to-work-better>
, coincidentally the anniversary of Weiss’s death. Fischli declines to talk 
further about the sundering of such a long and productive artistic partnership. 
“It’s too long and a complex question to answer,” he says, before saying 
goodbye and hanging up the phone.
 