
Who can do the most pull-ups out of Rick Perry and Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>? Who can throw a football 
further? Whose dad would win in a fight?


These are questions that we have to consider now that Perry has challenged 
Trump 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/election-2016-rick-perry-to-donald-trump-you-me-pull-up-contest/>
 to a pull-up contest. Trump had said Perry lacked the “toughness” to be 
president.

Perry disagreed, and suggested they take the argument to that famous old 
leveller: the pull-up bar. Perry reckoned that this would prove who was the 
tougher man.

Never mind how you define toughness. Never mind that Perry shoots coyotes and 
snakes and doesn’t like “gays in the military” – all things that should mark 
him out as tough among the thick-necked hardcore Republican crowd. While Trump, 
in contrast, boasts of going to nightclubs andstrolling round 
<http://www.menshealth.com/best-life/5-life-tips-from-donald-trump> golf 
courses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Frick-perry-donald-trump-pull-up-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1856dbdd4cb2fa4d48230a25f5e647f88ec17f95%2F50_0_1077_1616%2F1077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fit%20for%20office%3F%20Trump%20and%20Perry's%20pull-up%20contest%20won't%20decide%20the%20best%20leader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Frick-perry-donald-trump-pull-up-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fit%20for%20office%3F%20Trump%20and%20Perry%27s%20pull-up%20contest%20won%27t%20decide%20the%20best%20leader&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Frick-perry-donald-trump-pull-up-contest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1856dbdd4cb2fa4d48230a25f5e647f88ec17f95%2F50_0_1077_1616%2F1077.jpg>
 Donald Trump outside his hotel at the Turnberry Resort in Scotland. 
Photograph: Russell Cheyne/Reuters 
But what does it matter anyway? Does physical condition really relate to a 
successful presidency? Should we do away with the popular vote and just have an 
arm-wrestling contest?

Luckily for us, America’s presidents have actually been ranked by fitness. It 
was done by Men’s Health 
<http://www.menshealth.com/fitness/fittest-american-presidents> last year and 
is entirely unscientific. They reckon that George Washington is the finest 
specimen to have assumed office, despite paintings showing “a pear-shaped old 
man with narrow shoulders and matronly hips”.

Men’s Health quote the breathless description of historian David McCullough in 
his book 1776 as evidence for Washington’s number one status.

“A strapping man of commanding presence, he stood six feet two inches tall and 
weighed perhaps 190 pounds.”

But how effective was Washington? Was he just a pumped-up jock? Let’s compare 
the Men’s Health listto a recent Washington Post survey 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2015/02/16/new-ranking-of-u-s-presidents-puts-lincoln-1-obama-18-kennedy-judged-most-over-rated/>
 of the best presidents ever. In that, Washington is deemed the second-best 
ever commander-in-chief.

Meanwhile the second fittest president, according to Men’s Health, was Teddy 
Roosevelt. And, lo and behold, T Roosevelt is the fourth-best president in the 
Post’s survey. Unfortunately the comparison breaks down thereafter, with former 
college footballer Gerald Ford third place in Men’s Health’s list, but only 
ranking at 24th in the Post’s.

And Franklin Delano Roosevelt is deemed to be the third-best president ever. 
Despite beingparalysed from the waist down 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/05/health/05docs.html?_r=0>.

Trump’s campaign refused to comment on the pull-up challenge. (A pull-up, by 
the way, is performed by grasping a fixed bar with both hands and pulling 
oneself off the ground, until your chin comes up and over the bar). A 
spokeswoman for Trump would not even say how many pull-ups Trump can do – 
although the answer is probably zero given he is a 69-year-old man who doesn’t 
look especially athletic.

The refusal probably means we will never know how many pull-ups Perry, no 
spring chicken at 65, can do either. The fact he called for the competition 
suggests he can perform at least one, but we don’t know this for a fact.

For now, then, we will just have to choose the president the old-fashioned 
way. Going on what they say. Instead of what they can bench.
 