
There are only 36 days left until the US election, and already America is 
tired. According to a Pew Research Centersurvey 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/07/14/most-americans-already-feel-election-coverage-fatigue/>
, 59% of Americans were already exhausted by the amount of election coverage in 
June, when D-day was four months away. As the election draws nearer and the 
media hysteria mounts, levels of fatigue are hovering around the “please induce 
a coma and wake me up when this is all over” mark.

Here’s the thing, though – nobody is forcing us to keep talking about the 
elections. We don’t live in Trumpenistan yet; we are not all legally obliged to 
mentionDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s name in 
every second sentence. The democratic process does not hinge on us spending 
hours writing long Facebook posts explaining our views on the candidates in 
block capitals to echo chambers of our own opinion. We are allowed to talk 
about other things. In fact, ’tis the season to talk about other things: there 
are some autumn conversations that are obligatory. Here are five to get you 
started and get your mind off the election.

The great pumpkin debate


Every year, pumpkin-flavoured drinks, capitalism’s way of ringing in the 
autumn, start appearing earlier and earlier. This is not a weird sign of 
climate change; it’s the sign of a weird national obsession. According to
Dunkin’ Donuts 
<http://fortune.com/2016/09/01/pumpkin-spice-lattes-summer-starbucks/>, “In the 
New York City area, pumpkin-flavoured drinks were available starting 18 August 
due to customer feedback that they wanted pumpkin even earlier.” However, 
pumpkin spice lattes – popularised byStarbucks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks>, but now peddled everywhere – 
really come into their own when the temperature starts to drop, as it has in 
the last few days in New York. For the next couple of weeks, millions of people 
are going to be pulling on their Lululemons and Uggs, grabbing their first PSL 
of the season and exclaiming: “Ah, now I really feel like it’s autumn!” 
Meanwhile, millions of PSL haters are going to inform you how abominable the 
beverage is, to ensure you know they’re not “basic”. Pumpkin spice lattes are 
the 2016 election in a cup. Divisive, disgusting and everyone’s got an opinion. 
Dammit, we’re back to the elections.

Harambe Halloween costumes


Americans take Halloween <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/halloween> 
almost as seriously as democracy. People spend weeks planning their outfits. 
Somewhere in the US right now, I can guarantee a group text like this is 
happening:

“Let’s all dress up as a sexy poop emoji or sexy Pokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> this year!”
“I dunno … What do you think about the sexy breast cancer awareness costume 
<http://www.kmart.com/women-s-pink-ribbon-costume/p-05038429000P?sid=KDx01192011x000001&gclid=Cj0KEQjwmri_BRCZpaHkuIH75_IBEiQAIG0rIa1jtaEUruvndQxJAxXmygXNtyLNEB5FQdw0dac_gPAaArqw8P8HAQ&gclsrc=aw.ds>
?”
“Some people might find that offensive. What about dressing up like Isis?”
“No, wait, I know! Let’s go as slutty Harambe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/12/harambe-the-meme-that-refused-to-die>
!”

Yes, there really is a sexy Harambe costume 
<http://www.dailydot.com/bazaar/sexy-harambe-halloween-costume/> because this 
is 2016. And if gorilla-style politics is not for you, there’s also asexy 
Donald Trump costume <http://www.yandy.com/Donna-T.-Rumpshaker-Costume.php> and 
asexy Hillary Clinton costume <http://www.yandy.com/Capitol-Hill.php>. Who says 
we need to make America great again? It’s already perfect.

Cuffing season


In New York, dating is a blood sport. When the temperature starts to drop, 
however, competition really hots up and “cuffing season” starts.Urban 
Dictionary explains 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Cuffing%20Season> that, as 
autumn begins, people “who would normally rather be single or promiscuous find 
themselves along with the rest of the world desiring to be ‘cuffed’ or tied 
down by a serious relationship”. Cuffing season is often accompanied by 
“zombieing”. This is when an ex long gone from your life rises from the dead 
(metaphorically speaking) and starts randomly liking your social media posts or 
sending you one-word texts such as “Hi”. If you go to a bar in New York during 
cuffing season, you will overhear long discussions about if “I should say ‘hi’ 
back?” (No.) You may also see already-cuffed couples in matching flannels 
discussing their apple-picking plans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fbored-us-election-pumpkin-spice-lattes-fantasy-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcad61b2c9af6116e56834ee1336247bc179f76bb%2F0_14_699_699%2F699.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20to%20talk%20about%20when%20you%E2%80%99re%20bored%20with%20the%20US%20election%20%7C%20Arwa%20Mahdawi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fbored-us-election-pumpkin-spice-lattes-fantasy-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20to%20talk%20about%20when%20you%E2%80%99re%20bored%20with%20the%20US%20election%20%7C%20Arwa%20Mahdawi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fbored-us-election-pumpkin-spice-lattes-fantasy-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcad61b2c9af6116e56834ee1336247bc179f76bb%2F0_14_699_699%2F699.jpg>
 Why not dress up as Harambe for Halloween? Photograph: PR company handout 
Fantasy football


According to a 2015 study 
<http://nypost.com/2015/09/05/nearly-75m-people-will-play-fantasy-football-this-year/>
, almost 75 million people, about a quarter of the US population, play fantasy 
football, spending $4.6bn (£3.5bn) on it. Meanwhileonly 9% of the US chose 
Trump and Clinton 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/08/01/us/elections/nine-percent-of-america-selected-trump-and-clinton.html?_r=0>
 as the presidential nominees. Fantasy football (I’m talking about American, 
no-feet-involved football, obviously) is an obsessive topic of discussion 
around this time of year. Unfortunately, I could not tell you what is being 
discussed; Trump’s policies make more sense to me than the ins and outs of 
imaginary leagues. And it turns out, though, you can’t even escape the 
nightmare of politics with the fantasy of football this year. Clinton isrunning 
ads on fantasy football websites 
<http://awfulannouncing.com/2016/hillary-clinton-runs-espn-ad-mocking-trump-as-fantasy-football-player.html>
, describing Trump as “like that guy in your fantasy league who talks trash all 
week and forgets to set his lineup”.

The weather

Ah, autumn. The leaves are changing colour, the air is crisp and the carbon 
dioxide is abundant. Environmental scientists recentlyannounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/the-world-passes-400ppm-carbon-dioxide-threshold-permanently>
 that climate change has reached the “point of no return”, with the levels of 
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere permanently passing the 400-parts-per-million 
threshold. Some people will tell you that this is a very real disaster of our 
own making.Others will tell you 
<http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2016/09/china-climate-change> that the 
concept of global warming was a conspiracy created by the Chinese to make US 
manufacturing non-competitive. Other people will post angry messages on social 
media asking: “Why doesn’t everyone who is worked up about Harambe start 
getting worked up about climate change, which really matters!” People have 
always enjoyed talking about the weather; it used to be a safe topic of 
conversation. Alas, this is no longer the case. Now if you tell someone “Gosh, 
it’s got cold recently”, there is a good chance they will reply with their 
unsolicited opinion on global warming. Which will lead you back to politics. 
Which will lead you back to the elections. There is really no escaping it, 
after all.
 