
Valentine’s Day can sometimes feel a bit of a drag – your bank account has 
just recovered from Christmas and inspiration is often hard to find. However, 
we are here to help. Here’s how to have a date that makes a difference.


Social enterprise cafes are perfect for a first date

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Ffive-charitable-ways-spend-valentines-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423151506703%2F536f50d7-2840-4d25-8b5d-c2a677feb159-1020x726.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20charitable%20ways%20to%20spend%20Valentine's%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Ffive-charitable-ways-spend-valentines-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20charitable%20ways%20to%20spend%20Valentine%27s%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Ffive-charitable-ways-spend-valentines-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423151506703%2F536f50d7-2840-4d25-8b5d-c2a677feb159-1020x726.jpeg>
 For coffee with a conscience, hunt out your local social enterprise cafe. 
Photograph: Getty Images/EyeEm 
If you have a new valentine this year, keep it simple and find a social 
enterprise cafe in your area. Community Diner provides training, qualifications 
and experiences for those with learning difficulties and disabilities in its 
community. Visit itsIslington location, Platform 
<http://www.communitydiner.co.uk/platform_islington_community_diner.htm>, for 
cake and coffee in modern, bright surroundings. For more London-based social 
enterprise cafes,click here 
<http://www.completelylondon.co.uk/londons-social-enterprise-cafes/>.

If you’re in Belfast, then nip into The Bobbin 
<http://www.belfastcity.gov.uk/tourism-venues/cityhall/bobbincoffeeshop.aspx> 
coffee shop. The cafe, based in City Hall, is part of theNow project 
<http://www.nowproject.co.uk/>, which reinvests profits in training and 
employment for young people.The Orchard Cafe 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheOrchardCafe> is also a hit with locals. 

Nestled away in Manchester’s northern quarter is the creative and friendly 
Nexus Art Cafe <http://nexusartcafe.com/nexus-art-cafe/>, which offers an 
alcohol free option for love birds. Or in Edinburgh there’sthe Engine Shed 
<http://www.theengineshed.org/>, a cafe that provides work experience and 
employment for people with learning disabilities. It also sells its produce at 
Edinburgh’s farmers’ market.

Gift idea: If it’s going well, get the coffee to go and offer them a lip lolly 
<http://www.cocoaloco.co.uk/index.php?route=product/product&path=74&product_id=128>
. This delightful chocolate lollipop can be purchased fromCocoa Loco 
<http://www.cocoaloco.co.uk/>, who offer a range of ethical chocolatey 
goodness. And just likeDivine chocolate <http://www.divinechocolate.com/uk/>, 
you can buy Cocoa Local treats from your local Oxfam shop. Find yourshere 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/shop/local-shops>.

Out and about options for the daytime dater
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Ffive-charitable-ways-spend-valentines-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423138320179%2Fd081dcf8-2e32-4a1c-90a6-8f3c55f68206-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20charitable%20ways%20to%20spend%20Valentine's%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Ffive-charitable-ways-spend-valentines-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20charitable%20ways%20to%20spend%20Valentine%27s%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Ffive-charitable-ways-spend-valentines-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423138320179%2Fd081dcf8-2e32-4a1c-90a6-8f3c55f68206-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A nice way to say take a hike. Photograph: Graham Uney/Alamy 
Grab your waterproof and head on out. If you’re really into fitness, perhaps 
it’s time you joined in withCupid’s Undie Run <http://www.cupidsundierun.com/>? 
People in cities across the US and Australia are running in this underwear-clad 
fundraiser.

Gift idea: If you’re a pair of avid walkers, gifting membership 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/get-involved/become-a-member.aspx> of the Ramblers’ 
Association is a wonderful way to help keep those routes you love open. Last 
year they helped tosafeguard 140,000 miles of pathways 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/get-involved/become-a-member/how-your-membership-helps.aspx>
.


But if you’re more of a country house connoisseur then a National Trust 
membership <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/membership/> could be a winner. Not 
only does membership preserve historical gems for the nation, it also offers 
good value days out if you make multiple visits.

Drinks and dinner for the traditionalists
 The Brigade Bar and Bistro in London helps those who were once or still 
homeless into employment. Photograph: Brigade 
Grab a cocktail or dine with a twist. The Brink 
<http://thebrinkliverpool.com/index.php>, Liverpool’s first dry bar and a 
social enterprise, offers a great range of mocktails (the Chocolate Cooler 
looks mouthwatering), dinner options and a lovely afternoon tea.

Brigade Bar and Bistro <http://www.thebrigade.co.uk/> in London is a social 
enterprise which also operates as a training kitchen for 20 apprentices each 
year. It works with Beyond Food, a charity that inspires people who are at risk 
of or have experienced homelessness to gain meaningful employment.

Try the Big Gay Lunch in Glasgow <http://www.tartan-partnerships.com/events/>, 
three courses with musical accompaniment and all funds raised go to theEquality 
Network <http://www.equality-network.org/> – a charity dedicated to supporting 
the LGBTI community in Scotland.

Gift idea: Go classic by ordering that red bouquet from Charity Flowers 
<http://www.charityflowers.co.uk/>. You can select your loved one’s favourite 
cause at the checkout and 15% from each purchase will be sent their way.


An ethical night in for chilled out couples
 Unicef receives a proportion of the Star Wars Humble Bundle profits. 
Photograph: Humble Bundle 
If there’s a gamer in your life this Star Wars Humble Bundle 
<https://www.humblebundle.com/> could be right on the money. The Humble Bundle 
website is offering a collection of Star Wars games in their latest 
pay-what-you-want promotion. In one day this bundle raised more than $1.3m 
(£854,000) in sales, with the US Fund for Unicef receiving a portion as the 
promotion’s charity partner.

And if gaming leaves you and your beloved parched, buy in some beverages – 
Tesco is offering aHelp for Heroes beer 
<http://www.tesco.com/groceries/product/details/?id=285943916> with 5p from 
each ale sold going to the charity.

Would like to meet ideas for the single pringles

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Ffive-charitable-ways-spend-valentines-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423154911393%2Fe611bd75-2a6d-4f1a-851f-69e22366a9b6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20charitable%20ways%20to%20spend%20Valentine's%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Ffive-charitable-ways-spend-valentines-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20charitable%20ways%20to%20spend%20Valentine%27s%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Ffive-charitable-ways-spend-valentines-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423154911393%2Fe611bd75-2a6d-4f1a-851f-69e22366a9b6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 You never know where you might meet that special someone. Photograph: 
www.maverickartsclub.com/Rex 
There’s a plethora of charity speed dating events. Milton Keynes and North 
Bucks RSPCA are organising a rather charmingspeed dating event with cats and 
rabbits 
<http://www.mkweb.co.uk/VALENTINES-Speed-dating-cats-rabbits-Milton/story-25841729-detail/story.html>
. You’re asked to spend a little time with a range of cats and rabbits who are 
looking for new homes, and in the words of the RSPCA branch find the 
“four-legged love of your life”. And while we all know that a rabbit is a 
girl’s best friend, in this case you’re asked to select a pair as they are 
sociable creatures. It’s a complete winner, as not only are animals unlikely to 
reject you, the RSPCA ensures they are all neutered.

For pedigree chums of the more human variety, here’s an event which requires 
you to bring your “most pedigree single mate”. TheLove Auction 
<https://queen-of-hoxton.eventcube.io/events/1894/the-love-auction> in Hoxton, 
London, invites you to auction off yourself and your single friend for charity 
and promises “micro dates, slow dances and hook ups galore”. Auction proceeds 
will be going toMarie Curie <https://www.mariecurie.org.uk/>. 


If you work in the charity sector, please join our free network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for charity professionals.
 