
1 Scotland has a history of excellent medical training

Scotland’s medical education and research institutions have produced 
pioneering figures in the world of medicine, fromElsie Inglis, the pioneering 
doctor and suffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/21/kate-adie-fighting-home-front>
, toAlexander Fleming, best known for his discovery of penicillin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/mar/12/penicillin-fleming-alexander-bacteriology>
. This tradition of quality and innovation in training and delivery of 
healthcare saw an independent 2015 OECD report describe Scottish medical 
training as “world class”.

NHS Education for Scotland and its medical training directorate Scottish 
Medical Training oversees the delivery and quality management of postgraduate 
medical training for 5,500 doctors across Scotland. By creating a nurturing and 
progressive training environment and by attaining the highest training 
standards set by the General Medical Council and Royal College, Scottish 
Medical Training consistently scores in the top percentile of the annual GMC 
trainee survey.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe79324b4c1cb5e0b3270560c00cdaa384b74b3d%2F0_136_3115_1869%2F3115.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20medical%20training%20in%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20medical%20training%20in%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe79324b4c1cb5e0b3270560c00cdaa384b74b3d%2F0_136_3115_1869%2F3115.jpg>
 Scotland’s scale means it is able to support a wide and rewarding range of 
career possibilities. Photograph: NHS Education for Scotland 
2 Small enough for collaboration, big enough for specialisation

Scotland’s population of five million is spread across cosmopolitan 
international cities and vibrant rural communities. Its health services cover 
everything from busy A&E wards in city hospitals to the challenges of 
delivering healthcare on isolated, windswept islands. Scotland’s scale means 
that it is able to support an exceptionally wide and rewarding range of career 
possibilities from hospital specialties to GPs to academia and research. For 
junior doctor training, there are over 50 GMC-approved medical training 
specialties to choose from.

GP Anna McDade said of training in Scotland:

As a medical trainee Scotland offers a range and depth of variety that’s hard 
to beat. Its regions aren’t too big, so you don’t have to move away from your 
family as your job rotates through specialties. Then there’s the population; 
unless you work in certain specific affluent areas or extremely deprived areas, 
there’s a huge mix of patients and pathology.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc73a0f03f116360f10dccef830364e476068e89e%2F0_182_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20medical%20training%20in%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20medical%20training%20in%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc73a0f03f116360f10dccef830364e476068e89e%2F0_182_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
 Scotland has a well-funded and progressive healthcare system, often taking a 
different approach to the rest of the UK. Photograph: John Young/NHS Education 
for Scotland 
3 Progressive healthcare system

With 160,000 NHS staff spread across 22 territorial and national NHS boards, 
Scotland has a well-funded and progressive healthcare system, often taking a 
different approach to the rest of the UK. Its patient safety programme has been 
internationally recognised and, working with the British Medical Association, 
the Scottish government is developing a new Scottish GP contract to come into 
effect from April 2017.

“In international perspective, Scotland has set the benchmark in recent years 
for complete and capable systemic approaches to health care improvement at 
large scale,” says Don Berwick, former president and chief executive of the 
Institute for Healthcare Improvement.

The biggest policy driver in recent years has been the integration of health 
and social care, breaking down the barriers between care provided by the NHS 
and care provided by local authorities and other bodies. Working together, NHS 
and local council care services will be jointly responsible for the health and 
care needs of patients, to ensure that those who use services get the right 
care and support whatever their needs, at any point in their care journey.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F402c41331424102001fb620cbeb7a8edfd3a1e3f%2F0_49_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20medical%20training%20in%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20medical%20training%20in%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F402c41331424102001fb620cbeb7a8edfd3a1e3f%2F0_49_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Scotland’s great outdoors offers a wide range of activities. Photograph: Paul 
Tomkins/VisitScotland 
4 Quality of life

Many people have been drawn to Scotland not just by the career opportunities 
but also by the appeal of enhancing their quality of life.

House prices are generally more affordable compared to UK averages, the 
commuting is easier and the quick access to Scotland’s great outdoors offers a 
wide range of activities from skiing and white-water rafting to mountain biking 
and walking in spectacular scenery. TheLiving In Scotland 
<http://www.scotland.org/live-and-work-in-scotland/living-in-scotland> website 
has a range of resources.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c37d3cb4b22c1032210ccb6de55c6326ff9ef98%2F0_134_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20medical%20training%20in%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20medical%20training%20in%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnhs-education-for-scotland-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ffive-things-need-to-know-medical-training-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c37d3cb4b22c1032210ccb6de55c6326ff9ef98%2F0_134_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Scotland was named as a ‘four star’ European nation for innovation on healthy 
ageing. Photograph: Murdoch Ferguson/Touch Bionics 
5 Research, innovation and excellence 

Scotland is home to some of the most prestigious medical schools in the world 
<http://www.gapmedics.co.uk/blog/2013/07/01/top-medical-schools-in-scotland/> 
and was recently named as a “four star” European nation for innovation on 
healthy ageing; this recognisedScotland’s leading edge digital solutions 
<https://www.holyrood.com/articles/news/scotland-named-%E2%80%98four-star%E2%80%99-european-reference-site-innovation-healthy-ageing>
 for helping citizens live active and healthy lives into old age.

International tennis star Andy Murray recently teamed up with one of 
Scotland’s leading innovation centres 
<http://www.news-medical.net/news/20160721/Andy-Murrayc2a0becomes-brand-ambassador-for-Scotlande28099s-DHI.aspx>
 to highlight the potential of technology to provide more efficient and 
effective health and care services beyond Scotland, to the UK and across the 
world.


Foundation (FY2) doctors can apply 9 November – 1 December for round 1 core 
and run-through specialty training in Scotland. Applications are for intake 
starting August 2017. NHS Education for Scotland offers training programs in 
over 50 GMC-recognised specialties, including GP Training. For more information 
on training in Scotland and to apply,see the NES website 
<http://www.scotmt.scot.nhs.uk/recruitment/specialty-recruitment.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=roadblock&utm_campaign=round1>
.



Content on this page is produced and paid for by NHS Education for Scotland
 