
Serial didn’t singlehandedly revive the podcast as a media format – the 
efforts of radio broadcasters and many independent producers have grown and 
sustained audiences in the years since podcasts were hyped as the next big 
thing in tech.

Yet, Serial has undoubtedly fuelled a surge in interest in spoken-word shows – 
which in 2016, are as likely to be listened to on a smartphone as a computer. 
And there are apps for that.

Not all of them are great: Apple’s standalone podcasts app, for example, only 
has a two-stars (out of five) customer rating on its own app store 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/podcasts/id525463029?mt=8>. But here are five 
podcatching apps worth looking at – or rather, listening to.

Overcast
iOS <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/overcast-podcast-player/id888422857?mt=8> 
(Free)

iPhone and iPad owners disgruntled with Apple’s app should definitely try 
Overcast. Developed by Marco Arment – who previously made popular read-it-later 
app Instapaper – it’s an excellent app for managing your podcasts and 
discovering new ones.

Overcast has all the basic features you’d expect: downloads for offline 
listening, push notifications when new episodes are available, and the ability 
to create a playlist of episodes for longer listening sessions.

Its Smart Speed feature enables you to speed up shows for quicker listening 
without turning them into episodes of Alvin and the Chipmunks. Meanwhile, Apple 
Watch owners will appreciate Overcast’s smartwatch app, which is a simple way 
to control listening from your wrist.

The app recommends podcasts in categories including news and politics, 
technology, comedy, and music, with a neat feature to link the app with your 
Twitter account to see what podcasts people in your network are enjoying.

Overcast is completely free to use with all its features. However, you can 
choose to become a “patron” by paying £2.29 for three months, £4.49 for six or 
£8.99 for a year to support its development. Its quality makes it well worth 
the money.

Pocket Casts
Android 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=au.com.shiftyjelly.pocketcasts&hl=en_GB>
 /iOS <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pocket-casts/id414834813?mt=8> (£2.49 - 
£2.99)

Overcast is iOS-only, which is a shame for Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> owners. Thankfully, they have 
the equally-impressive Pocket Casts to turn to – and it provides strong 
competition for Overcast on Apple devices too.

The cross-platform nature is one advantage: if you (as I do) use an iPad 
tablet but an Android smartphone, Pocket Casts will synchronise your 
subscriptions and preferences across your devices for you.

Unlike the audio-only Overcast, this also includes video podcasts, from TED 
talks to stand-up comedy. Although Pocket Casts lacks social recommendations, 
it has plenty of ways to find new podcasts, from charts to themed categories.

It’s a well thought-out app, anticipating needs such as restricting how many 
episodes of individual shows you want to keep on your device for offline 
listening, to its support for Apple’s AirPlay and Google’s Chromecast to stream 
podcasts to your nearby home-entertainment devices.

Pocket Casts also has a variable-speed option for impatient listeners. It’s a 
pay-upfront app: once you’ve stumped up your £2.49 (on Android) or £2.99 (on 
iOS) there are no more calls for payment.

Castro
iOS 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/castro-high-fidelity-podcasts/id723142770?mt=8>
 (Free)

Castro is another example of a neatly-designed podcatcher app that does the 
basic features very well, with plenty of customisation options for keener 
podcast listeners.

Offline listening, automatic downloads of new episodes, push notifications, a 
good search function and the ability to speed up (or slow down) podcasts all 
work well, while its News Mode setting deletes old episodes to save space on 
your smartphone.

Castro doesn’t recommend podcasts to you or group them into themes: you need 
to search for podcasts by name, or have their feed URL in your device clipboard 
ready to paste in. Even so, generic searches like “football” or “comedy” bring 
back decent lists of shows to check out.

Like Overcast, Castro uses a patronage system to make its money. The app is 
free, but you can choose to pay £2.29 every three months, £4.49 every six 
months or £8.99 a year to support its development.

Spotify and Deezer
Android 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.spotify.music&hl=en_GB> / iOS
 <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/spotify-music/id324684580?mt=8> (Spotify) and 
Android <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=deezer.android.app&hl=en>
 /iOS <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/deezer-music/id292738169?mt=8> (Deezer)

Finally, a pair of wild cards. Spotify and Deezer are both well known as 
music-streaming services, but both have recently added podcasts to their 
catalogues.

In Spotify’s mobile app, you’ll find them in the “Shows” section, which is 
where you’ll also find YouTube-style shortform video shows.

Tap the “Audio Shows” button to access the podcasts, with the ability to 
follow individual shows to keep abreast of new episodes, and to download shows 
for offline listening.

Deezer bought a podcast service called Stitcher in 2014 to supply its 
catalogue of spoken-word shows – its standalone app is still available too.

In the main Deezer app, podcasts can be accessed from the homescreen, with top 
100s in categories including business, comedy, news & politics and technology. 
Favouriting a podcast adds it to your “My Music” section of the app, for easy 
access when new episodes are out.

In both cases, Spotify and Deezer lack the fine-tuning features of dedicated 
podcasting apps for managing subscriptions and listening. Their appeal, though, 
is that you can access your podcasts from the same app as your streaming music.

That’s our selection, but what podcatching apps have we missed out? The 
comments section is open for your recommendations.

• The best Android apps of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/25/best-android-apps-2015-live-streaming-video>
• The best iPhone and iPad apps of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/25/best-iphone-ipad-apps-2015>
 