
This year will bring some exciting and, potentially, controversial 
developments and innovations to children’s social work and social care.

Children and social work bill 

When the children and social work bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-17/childrenandsocialwork.html> 
concludes there will be some provision for local authorities to test out new 
ways of working that don’t fit neatly into existing legislation. There aresome 
perfectly reasonable fears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2017/jan/10/children-social-work-bill-end-law>
 around this. However, we need to look carefully at any innovations and 
proposals that could improve the experience of children and families in the 
child protection system, and the outcomes for children who enter the care 
system. It is unacceptable for professional discomfort to get in the way of 
improving the chances for vulnerable children.


Innovation fund

The innovation fund will begin to announce the recipients of its new round of 
funding. It is particularly welcome that children in care and care leavers will 
be prioritised in this round. These are the children who we as a profession are 
responsible for. We must make the right decisions for them more often. We must 
provide permanence and stability sooner and ensure they have every chance to 
achieve their potential and go on to live successful and happy adult lives.


Accreditation scheme

The accreditation scheme for children’s social workers will come into effect, 
and a long overdue focus on a proper framework of continual professional 
development for them will be enacted. The characteristics of a vibrant and 
effective profession are that it continues to change, learn and grow, and 
responds to new evidence and approaches for creating better outcomes for 
children and families.

Related: My hope for 2017: change people's view of the care system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2017/jan/12/my-hope-for-2017-change-peoples-view-of-the-care-system>

Family support

The healthy debate about whether too many children are removed from their 
families will continue. New services such asPause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-care-winner-pause-southwark>
, thefamily group conference approach in Leeds 
<http://www.leeds.gov.uk/residents/Pages/Family-group-conference.aspx>, and the 
continuing rise in special guardianship orders to extended family members will 
all feature.

I hope to see a renewed focus on the support offered to birth parents when 
children are returned to them after a short period in care or a child 
protection investigation. This is a very weak area of practice and we as a 
profession need to do much better in supporting birth parents when children are 
returned to them to make sure that these placements are stable and secure and 
are able to meet the needs of the children fully and sustainably. It is vital 
that families are offered ongoing support and that their cases are not closed 
and then reopened as child protection or child in need cases if the birth 
parents put their hands up to request assistance. We would not do this for 
foster carers or adopters, so why must we do it with birth parents?

What Works Centre

We will see the launch of the What Works Centre 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/nicky-morgan-unveils-plans-to-transform-childrens-social-work>
, which will be very welcome. One of the great failings of children’s social 
care provision over the years has been the difficulty in rolling out successful 
work from one local authority to others. It would be good to see the What Works 
Centre begin to establish common models of service across both child protection 
and children in care social work. It is neither acceptable nor sustainable for 
us to continue to have such variations in systems and approaches; we must 
settle on a small number of evidence-based systems and make sure they are 
rolled out across the UK.

Finally, 2017 will see the first local authority fully contract out permanence 
services to a charity 
<https://www.peterborough.gov.uk/news/council/charity-to-run-city-s-fostering-and-adoption-services/>
. Tact is very much looking forward to working in partnership with Peterborough 
city council to demonstrate how this can make a profound and lasting difference 
to all children in residential care and in foster, adoptive and special 
guardianship/kinship families.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 