
In a year when our economy is supposed to be growing, poverty in the UK has 
rarely been out of the headlines. Many people are still struggling to pay 
energy bills, buy food and maintain rent or mortgage payments. Official figures 
show a drop in unemployment, but with the jobs market fragmenting and zero 
hours contracts, real wages have been forced down.

The English Housing Survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/english-housing-survey> shows a 
growing proportion of young people are being squeezed out of the housing 
market, and forced to rent privately. Meanwhile, the number of homeless people 
is rising.

Inequality also exists in health and nutrition. Millions of people are 
destined to die nine years earlier than they should and have their lives 
blighted by ill-health because of poverty. Across the UK, increasing numbers of 
people are relying on food banks to support their families.

Collaboration between the public sector and communities

Too often the positive role that communities and the public sector play in 
tackling these issues is ignored. Yet grassroots activism to tackle poverty and 
homelessness can be very effective.Our report 
<http://www.communityfoundation.org.uk/7341-shine-a-light> found that half of 
people in the UK think it's important to be an active part of the local 
community. More than 22 million people already give money to local causes, and 
would do more if it were easier to connect to with them.

Every day, community foundations <http://ukcommunityfoundations.org/> across 
the UK work with public bodies that invest in community-based work to tackle 
inequality, ranging from the police to local authorities. Our projects match 
philanthropic giving with limited public funds to reduce poverty, crime and 
homelessness. This doesn't require huge sums. It is collaboration that brings 
lasting change.

For example, police-funded projects that work with young people to reduce 
crime and antisocial behaviour will reduce the cost of antisocial behaviour to 
the police. Similarly, our work with food banks supports people out of poverty 
without relying on the state.

How to tackle inequality at a grassroots level

No one should be left to address inequality on their own. People working in 
the public sector to build community engagement have a critical role to play in 
tackling issues, but above all, preventing them from happening in the first 
place. And they will be more effective if they follow these tips:

• Speak with people on the frontline. Find out exactly where time and money is 
needed. Go to community events, talk and listen to understand the challenges.

• Be strategic. Community schemes are most effective if they work from the 
bottom up, connecting what already works.

• Focus on training and skills. Supporting people to develop their confidence, 
skills or knowledge is one of the best ways to help those struggling to find 
work.

• Learn from what has already worked. Don't try to reinvent the wheel; if 
there are existing projects and ideas out there that help address inequality, 
use them. Complement and grow existing work.

• Keep it local. Step back and listen. Use local knowledge to bring together 
voluntary and community groups.

Public managers have a vital role in tackling inequality across the UK. But it 
is only through working directly with communities that it's possible to deliver 
real social change.

Kate Stewart is partnerships director at the UK Community Foundations 
<http://ukcommunityfoundations.org/>

This article is part of the Beveridge Revisited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2014/jul/07/-sp-beveridge-report-revisited-where-now-for-the-welfare-state>
 series from GuardianSociety Professionals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals>, revising Sir William 
Beveridge's five great social evils for the 21st century.Click here to find out 
what the evils are and read more from the Beveridge Revisited series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/series/beveridge-revisited-21st-century-evils>
.
 