
Having worked with care leavers for eight years, I have seen first-hand the 
difficulties they can face atChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. Loneliness, isolation and 
financial hardship can be experienced by young people leaving care all year 
round, but the festive season heaps on extra anxiety and pressure. For housing 
and support providers, understanding this and putting support systems in place 
is a vital step in helping young people through this particularly tricky time.

According to the National Audit Office’s Care leavers’ transition to adulthood 
report <https://www.nao.org.uk/report/care-leavers-transitions-to-adulthood/>, 
looked-after children and care leavers’ paths through life can be unstable, to 
say the least. Only half of children in care have emotional health and 
behaviour that is considered “normal” and, according to the report, this has 
changed little in recent years. In addition, more than 40% of 19-year-old care 
leavers were not in education, employment or training – meaning they often face 
financial hardship too.

These issues can be compounded at Christmas as care leavers are bombarded with 
rose-tinted images of family get-togethers and “must-have” gifts.

Here are five things I’ve learned from supporting care leavers at Christmas.

1. Give young people the chance to come together, but don’t make it cheesy

Christmas can be a lonely time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2012/dec/20/christmas-care-leavers-reminded-family>
 for some care leavers, so it’s important to offer opportunities that bring 
young people together, without making it compulsory or patronising.

Across the country, there are great examples of this. In Birmingham, Service 
Birmingham and Corporate Parenting recently invited all children in care and 
care leavers in the city to a winter ball. It was a great opportunity for young 
people to come together to enjoy a free three-course meal, live music and 
entertainment. We had some fantastic feedback from some of the young people, 
who enjoyed travelling to the event in a limo.

Why I'm holding a Manchester Christmas dinner for 45 people who were in care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2013/nov/28/christmas-dinner-care-leavers-manchester-lemn-sissay>
Further afield, the Christmas dinner for care leavers – pioneered by Lemn 
Sissay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jun/02/childrens-homes-care-leavers-neil-morrissey-lemn-sissay>
 – originated in Manchester and has since spread to Leeds, London, Liverpool 
and Oxford. It uses crowdfunding and volunteers to create a special Christmas 
Day with fantastic food, presents and more.

2. Encourage practical gifts and work with others to make it happen

Every care leaver’s experience of Christmas is different and while some get 
gifts, others don’t. The young people I work with often tell me they want 
useful gifts that extend beyond Christmas Day. For example, one young person 
wants a juicer so they can be healthier all year round.

In Northern Ireland, White Stuff Belfast launched a Christmas appeal for 
charityVoice of Young People in Care <http://www.voypic.org/>, asking people to 
buy an extra Christmas gift for a young person in care or care leaver. Gift 
ideas included practical things such as toiletries and vouchers, meaning young 
people don’t end up with gifts they don’t want or need.

At Bournville Village Trust <https://www.bvt.org.uk/>, where I work, we start 
contacting local supermarkets and shops a couple of months before Christmas for 
donations of food and toiletries. We often have a good response and, in turn, 
young people don’t have to fork out financially. It also means they get to 
enjoy some of the more pricey festive food they couldn’t otherwise afford.

3. Ask young people what they want to do, don’t guess 

We start talking to the young people we support in the autumn, where possible, 
to understand what they want to do for Christmas. Some have family or friends 
to see and spend time with on Christmas Day, others don’t.

We ensure that everyone has a hamper and a gift – it’s our way of saying that 
they ​​aren’t forgotten.

It’s my team’s job to make sure we put the support into place to ensure 
Christmas is as close to what young people want as possible. Some years this 
may be a meal that everyone plays a hand in planning and cooking; other times 
it is something more unique to the needs of an individual.

It’s really important not to be prescriptive and give young people the 
opportunity to shape their Christmas as much as possible.

Regardless of where young people spend the day itself, we always ensure that 
everyone has a hamper and a gift. Of course, it doesn’t solve all the issues 
that care leavers face at Christmas, but it’s our way of saying that they 
aren’t forgotten.

4. Don’t presume that every young person wants to celebrate Christmas

It’s important to respect the fact that not all young people will want to 
celebrate Christmas. They may have particularly negative memories associated 
with it or just not feel in the right place emotionally at that moment in their 
life. When presents aren’t wanted, we offer money towards gas or electric bills 
as a practical way of providing support during this time.

5. Support young people after the festivities are finished

Fostering at Christmas: hard work and heartache, but worthwhile in the end
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/dec/23/fostering-at-christmas-hard-work-and-heartache-but-worthwhile-in-the-end>
Expectations of Christmas don’t always match up to the reality. For young care 
leavers, when things don’t go to plan – be it a family argument or a forgotten 
gift – the emotional fallout can be traumatic.

It’s vital to manage young people’s expectations and provide additional 
support so that they can recover when things do go wrong.

 * Alison Wilkinson is youth services manager at Bournville Village Trust 
The Social Life Blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written 
by people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write an 
article for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 