
Since his victory in the 8 November presidential election, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and his campaign have carried 
their unorthodox style into the transition process, with disregard for the 
press and seemingly unfiltered use of Twitter by the president-elect, as well 
as close involvement from the family members who will also run Trump’s business 
empire. The incoming president has also added to existing fears among 
minorities about their place in his America, with appointments and early 
cabinet nominations that echo the nationalist themes of his campaign.

Here are five ways in which Trump has defied the norms and conventions of US 
presidential transitions:

Trump picks Jeff Sessions for attorney general and Mike Pompeo for CIA chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
Twitter fire

Trump has regained access to the Twitter account he routinely used to attack 
critics and spread conspiracy theories during the course of his campaign. As a 
candidate, Trump’s use of social media was so volatile that aides reportedly 
wrestled control of his Twitter account in the final stretch leading up to the 
election. As president-elect, Trump has returned to attacking those who dare 
challenge him, such asthe New York Times, for its fact-based reporting on his 
transition team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-twitter-new-york-times>. 
He is also back to disseminating false information to bolster his image. On 
Thursday, Trump boasted on Twitter that the chairman of Ford Motor Company had 
informed him the automaker was suspending plans tomove a Kentucky-based plant 
to Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/donald-trump-takes-credit-saving-ford-factory-not-closing>
. But Ford had never planned to move the facility in question facility to 
Mexico.

Ditching the press

Tradition holds that presidents-elect set up a pool of reporters to trail them 
when they step out in public. ButTrump snuck out to a New York City steakhouse 
with his family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/16/donald-trump-goes-out-for-new-york-dinner-without-telling-press-video>
 this week, leaving the press pool behind. The break in protocol is anything 
but trivial for a soon-to-be president: the purpose of the pool is to ensure 
the press has access in the event of unexpected news. As Yahoo News White House 
correspondent Olivier Knoxrecalled in response 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/why-reporters-worry-about-trump-ditching-his-press-pool-173416077.html>
 to Trump’s actions this week, reports surfaced in 2007 that Dick Cheney’s 
plane had suffered a malfunction. Global panic ensued and was resolved by the 
protective pool traveling with the then vice-president, who clarified Cheney 
was indeed safe and the issue was not as serious as initially reported. On 
Thursday the Trump campaign, refused to allow reporters and photographers 
access toa meeting with the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/japan-confidence-trump-president-shinzo-abe>
. It was only when the Japanese government issued a photo that the US press and 
public learned Trump’s daughter Ivanka and son-in-law Jared Kushner had been 
present. It is unclear what a pool will look like under Trump, who, as a 
candidate, broke with precedent by refusing to allow his traveling press aboard 
his plane while campaigning across the country and at times started speeches 
without them.

Non-secure calls to foreign leaders

Trump and Mike Pence, the vice-president-elect, declared they had spoken with 
31 foreign heads of state since the election. But they appear to have done so 
without briefing materials from the state department and potentially on 
non-secure phone lines. Trump’s campaign said “appropriate security measures” 
were being taken to set up the calls, and that he was being briefed by members 
of his own team (although declined to name them). Trump’s method of contact 
with foreign leaders has also been atypical of outreach from past 
presidents-elect. He spoke with the Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, 
before reaching out to closer US allies, such as the heads of state in Britain 
and Germany. Trump also vowed in aphone call with the Russian president, 
Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/vladimir-putin-donald-trump-phone-call>
, to strengthen ties, causing alarm among members of his own party who have 
long cast Russia as one of America’s biggest foes. And he reportedly told 
Britain’s Theresa May:“If you travel to the US you should let me know.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/civil-servants-befuddled-trump-casual-invitation-may>
 Overseas visits by the British prime minister to the US cost hundreds of 
thousands of pounds and can take months to arrange.

Family affair

The proximity of Trump’s children to his pending administration has raised 
questions aboutpossible conflicts of interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest-business>
. Trump appointed three of his children Ivanka, Donald Jr and Eric Trump, to 
the executive committee of his transition team, allowing them to wield 
influence over who will serve in his cabinet and run key government agencies. 
The Trump children are also expected to take control of the family business 
through a “blind trust”, prompting concerns among ethics watchdogs over their 
dual roles. Trump is also reportedly weighing his son-in-law,Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/jared-kushner-ivanka-trump-transition-team-chris-christie>
, who is married to Ivanka, as a top White House adviser. While a federal 
anti-nepotism law bars presidents from appointing family members in 
administration posts, it’s unclear if the same rule would apply if the 
individual is named as White House staff.

Transition chaos

The broader view of Trump’s transition process has been characterized by a 
certain level of disarray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/donald-trump-transition-team-disarray-adviser-purge>
, in part because his own team did not expect him to win the election. There 
was a lapse in communication with the White House, where Barack Obama’s 
administration awaited paperwork and a list of contacts from Trump’s team to 
slip the transition between government agencies into gear. Since then, a Trump 
spokesperson has confirmed that the National Security Council, justice 
department, state department and department of defense are now connected with 
so-called “landing teams” from his transition committee. But there are also 
internal disputes, which led to the ousting of Chris Christie as the head of 
Trump’s transition team. Kushner was reportedly key in sidelining the New 
Jersey governor as an act of retribution for when then-US attorney Christie 
jailed Kushner’s father in 2004.
 