
She slept with men who only wanted to play Settlers of Catan. She slept with 
law students who had framed copies of the Constitution on their bedroom walls. 
She slept with sound architects, sound engineers, and the second baseman from 
her softball league. She hardly ever slept. Sometimes she took a pill, but 
often she lay awake next to a sleeping man, trying to read the Bill of Rights 
in the dark, then called a taxi and went home. She liked riding in the back of 
a taxi at night. It felt private, even with the driver up front. She liked 
recognizing the streets closer to her building, and she liked the deli where 
she sometimes went to get money to pay the driver. She’d grab a can of 
condensed milk, a hairnet. She wasn’t sure what for.

 The men never called. They sent her smiley-face permutations and pictures of 
their cocks, but not one had called her since the year 2004. That man had met 
her at a flash mob in a department store, then looked her up in the last phone 
book the phone company ever printed. She had lived in a different building 
then, had withdrawn cash at a different deli, and needed a landline to 
communicate with parents who didn’t trust cell phones yet. She and the man 
dated for five months, but things never got as good as figuring out that he had 
found her in the phone book.

She took long showers, ate avocados, stretched while chanting in Sanskrit, and 
slept her way through the phone book

 She slept with men who were sober for no reason. She found this more alarming 
than if they had once been alcoholics. She slept with recovering alcoholics, 
suffering workaholics, and a heroin addict who wanted them to have the same 
spirit animal. The heroin addict was writing a memoir about overcoming heroin 
addiction. Having a deadline for his memoir had stressed him out so much that 
he had started using heroin again.

 Some of the men carried condoms in their wallets, like it was the fifties. It 
was not the fifties. One day, it would be the 2050s, and she would have to do 
this all over again in a retirement community. In between, she’d get married, 
get widowed. She’d miss him, but would be grateful for all the years they’d had 
together. Where was she going to meet her future late husband? At work? At 
work, she’d met an anthropology professor by the copy machines who called her 
“little girl” in bed. She was thirty-two. But he was even older. He didn’t like 
what she had been photocopying, a text by a continental theorist whose opinion 
of history most straight men considered misinformed. Her students handed in 
papers about the theorist’s work that began, “This story confused me at first.” 
She didn’t sleep with her students. They were too confused.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fflash-fridays-by-tin-house-magazine%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fflash-friday-little-girl-by-rebecca-schiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c62e43dd7bee9835f345b2ba2c8651102e9ba36%2F0_0_818_1200%2F818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flash%20Friday%3A%20Little%20Girl%20by%20Rebecca%20Schiff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fflash-fridays-by-tin-house-magazine%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fflash-friday-little-girl-by-rebecca-schiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flash%20Friday%3A%20Little%20Girl%20by%20Rebecca%20Schiff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fflash-fridays-by-tin-house-magazine%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fflash-friday-little-girl-by-rebecca-schiff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c62e43dd7bee9835f345b2ba2c8651102e9ba36%2F0_0_818_1200%2F818.jpg>
 The Bed Moved by Rebecca Schiff Photograph: Random House 
 She slept with a man who didn’t keep any food in his house. He was a 
used-book dealer, and there were piles of signed first editions in his oven. 
Another used-book dealer had hair on the shaft of his penis and a panic attack 
in her bedroom. Used-book dealers, she decided, were the worst. She liked 
books, but she didn’t care about the edition. New things were okay with her. 
Everything got old soon enough anyway.

 She slept with younger men. She didn’t really have a choice. Men her own age 
were busy going bald, acquiring bald offspring. Men her own age had jobs like 
“head of school,” “program facilitator,” and “lawyer.” She tried to be excited 
that the men she slept with were younger, but she was just as excited if they 
were older, or the same age. Her body acted the same no matter who touched her. 
It had been that way since college, when she’d slept with a man who didn’t take 
his sweater off during the act. She’d found it a nice break from skin. He had 
later transferred. Some of the men she slept with had studied abroad, some had 
taken time off, but all of them had gone. Her body valued education.

 Her body valued her body. She took long showers, ate avocados, stretched 
while chanting in Sanskrit, and slept her way through the phone book. There was 
no more phone book, but she had names in her phone, first names only: Davids 
and Adams, Lukes, Sams. She’d get a message at night—What are you doing right 
now?—and go. What was she doing? Sometimes she didn’t know exactly who was 
messaging her and it would be a surprise when she got there: which David, which 
Sam. Some of the buildings had elevators and she enjoyed the anticipation on 
the ride up, the soreness on the ride down. What happened in between almost 
didn’t happen. She’d wind up back where she started, walk into the street, and 
hail a cab.

 * Extract from the book The Bed Moved 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/405809/> by Rebecca 
Schiff, copyright © 2016 by Rebecca Schiff. Published by arrangement with 
Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of The Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, a division 
of Penguin Random House LLC.

 * Rebecca Schiff graduated from Columbia University’s MFA program, where she 
received a Henfield Prize. Her stories have appeared in n+1, Electric 
Literature, The American Reader, Fence, and Guernica. She lives in Brooklyn.
 