
My husband Jack worked at the steel mill. The smell of diesel and sweat 
followed him home every afternoon like I once did, three years ago. He tucked 
his hands deep in his pockets the first time I saw him, so that I wouldn’t see 
the black half moons that wove under his fingernails.


 Ashamed, he told me later. 

 Of what, I murmured into the back of his neck, taking in the smell of 
Farfield from his skin: Go-Jo soap, gasoline, and the mill. I grew up in 
Farfield. I visited the mill for the first time when I was seven and helped my 
dad scrub the grease out of his ragged hair when I was even younger. Blackness 
was a part of every man’s life in this town, much like the sins that transpired 
most nights, after the lights shut down, when I was curled into bed and my 
father was curled around another woman behind the shadowed trees of Foster’s 
Park.

 Later, Jack told me that he scrubbed his hands raw that night. I can see him 
standing there, hands clasped around his small sink, feeling exhausted and 
ashamed in his apartment filled with books. He had rows and rows of them, like 
a tenuous second skin.

 * * * * * *

 The first time I stepped foot inside his house – our hands wound together, 
his sweat trapped between our palms – my eyes fixed on a tiny rip in the hem of 
my dress.

 He kissed me. 

 I laughed.

 He laughed too, the feel of his breath on my neck and the tiny clicks my 
fingers made the only sound as they slid down the spines.

 I love his laugh. His mouth twitches up and his eyes drop down to meet mine 
and his whole body shakes. Sometimes I picture him laughing at the mill, 
shaking with such intensity that one day, when the power line above his head 
broke and sparks began to fly, the snake-like wire was drawn to him, dancing to 
the sound of his laughter. But then I picture him afterwards, like a broken 
wind-up doll, laughing and laughing on the ground, while everyone else at the 
mill stood in a circle and watched as the smell of diesel and depression 
overtook them once more.

 * * * * *

 One month and then Jack was out of the hospital. Pressed against him, I could 
smell lavender soap and dead flowers. We walked slowly from the car to the 
front door of our apartment, his hand weighing down my shoulder. I’d gotten off 
early from my shift that day and bought one of those cold metal canes for him. 
That and some sunglasses.

 He tried them on, and then he gently set the glasses beside him and frowned, 
his lips pressed together as he thought.

 “Let’s get out of here, Gale. Just let go.” His lips were, thin, pretty, and 
so very close to the white foggy eyes that wouldn’t stop staring at me no 
matter how quiet I was.

 * * * * *

 Back in our bedroom, I leaned in, arms resting on his legs, to kiss him. But 
then he looped his arms around my back, and said, “You’re beautiful,” his voice 
deep and rough, like the red earth that ran in cracked waves outside of 
Farfield.

 “You can’t tell,” I replied, closing my eyes and running a finger from the 
corner of his eye and down his cheek.

 His hands shook when he settled his fingers, like birds perched on a wire, on 
my face. They travelled slowly; criss-crossing over my skin, showing me that 
the face he saw in his mind was still there, imprinted on his fingertips. Up 
and down they went, tracing the outline of my lips and my nose like 
paintbrushes until finally his fingertips rested on my closed eyelids. We both 
sat there like that, darkness seen by darkness, for a long time. It was as if 
he was trying to carve out something that was lost, while I was still right 
there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fflash-fridays-by-tin-house-magazine%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fflash-friday-departed-mckenzie-hightower%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff38b8faf972c2fcfe6381cf5a3b8c34b461dc924%2F0_0_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flash%20Friday%3A%20Departed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fflash-fridays-by-tin-house-magazine%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fflash-friday-departed-mckenzie-hightower%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flash%20Friday%3A%20Departed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fflash-fridays-by-tin-house-magazine%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fflash-friday-departed-mckenzie-hightower%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff38b8faf972c2fcfe6381cf5a3b8c34b461dc924%2F0_0_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
 ‘I can see him standing there, hands clasped around his small sink, feeling 
exhausted and ashamed in his apartment filled with books. He had rows and rows 
of them, like a tenuous second skin.’ Photograph: David Madison/Getty Images 
 “I want to go.” His glassy eyes stared past my shoulder. 

 “I could read a book to you. Tell me which one you want and I’ll get it for 
you.” I stepped away from him and went to the wall of books across the room. 
“John said he’d drop those checks by.” I looked at his clean hands and then 
added. “They all miss you.”

 “Gale.” He got up without his cane and stepped towards me, dust from his 
books rising into the air from the sudden jerk of my hand.

 “Do you remember our first date?” I said.

 “We should go find a house somewhere in Denton,” he said. 

 “You hid your hands.”

 “I could find a job there, Gale.” 

 “Why were you ashamed?” 

 “There’s nothing keeping us here. You understand that, right? Nothing.” 

 “It was just dirt. You didn’t need to hide it.”

 “Gale….”

 “Please put your glasses on. I can’t think.” 

 His fingers wrapped around the black glasses and he set them down. His eyes 
closed, the wrinkles on his face deepened, elongated.

 After a while I stepped out of the bedroom, leaving him there with his 
glasses and his darkness.

 I sat in one room of the apartment, my back pressed hard against the sofa, 
while Jack sat in the other, both of us counting moments by the clicks of the 
fan. Jack was waiting for me, waiting for some small sound, so I got up. But he 
couldn’t hear me, because the mill’s horn, signaling lunch, blew long and hard 
through the very walls of our house.

 * Mckenzie Hightower is a senior at the University of Notre Dame. She 
recently attended the Tin House Summer Writers Workshop and the New York State 
Summer Writers Institute this past July. Works from her unpublished short story 
collection, “We All Walk Away, But We Do Not Leave” have appeared in Bull 
Magazine: Men’s Fiction and are forthcoming in 30N. She has just accepted a 
Fulbright Student Fellowship and will be teaching English and creative writing 
in Poland for the next year.
 