
Martin Green <http://www.martingreenmusic.co.uk/about/> – accordionist, 
composer, inventor of oddball electronic instruments – has a small rehearsal 
space in the grounds of a castle near Edinburgh. It’s in an old stable block 
now variously occupied by car mechanics and carpenters who make breadboards and 
deckchairs. It’s handy, he says: he can pop next door to borrow spanners and 
saws.

On the morning of our interview, Green and four other musicians are dressed in 
matching brown outfits and shuffling around in the drizzle outside the stables.
Becky Unthank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/27/unthanks-folk-northumberland-interview>
 eyes the horizon with hands in pockets whilePortishead’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/13/portishead-on-music-misogyny-and-debunking-their-own-mystery>
 Adrian Utley stands bolt-upright in shades and Converse which seem a bit at 
odds with the general hessian garb. They’re posing for a band photo and have 
hung sheets of brown packing paper around the foliage for reasons that later 
become apparent. At first glance it’s a cryptic scene: Edwardian workers’ 
guild? Dustbowl abstinence society?

This is the cast of Flit: a new album of songs about migration and a 
stop-motion animation that premieres at theEdinburgh international festival 
<http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/flit#.V53wJ46Yw3E> next week before a UK tour in the 
autumn.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do3YxQCT1ND4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do3YxQCT1ND4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do3YxQCT1ND4&media=>
EXCLUSIVE: watch the video for the song Strange Sky from Flit 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o3YxQCT1ND4> 
We've created a paper world for the band to exist within, fragile and magic 
and universal and tragic

“The packing paper represents movement. Transience. Impermanence. People and 
things moving around the world,” says Ainslie Henderson, one half of 
Edinburgh-basedanimation duo White Robot <http://www.whiterobot.co.uk/>. “Let’s 
say that we’ve created a paper world for the band to exist within, 
simultaneously fragile and magic and universal and tragic.” He glances sideways 
at me. “Does that sound plausible?”

At the heart of the project is Green: his concept, his choice of musicians, 
his brooding, glitchy sound design permeating the songs. The “bedrock and 
common language” of the album, as he calls it, is synth-heavy textures full of 
thrumming bass drones and claustrophobic bleeps that he developed in “dark 
tonal jams” at Utley’s studio in Bristol. The pervading sound is warped and 
clattery, scarred and lush like a burned-out landscape. But those Bristol 
sessions were only the beginning. Flit is the work of many voices – you’d be 
hard-put to find an album crafted through more layers of collaboration. For 
Green, sharing out the authorship seemed the only way to tell the fragmented 
experiences of people forced into exile.


It started with his own family. “I was recording my 88-year-old gran talking 
about her life,” he explains while wolfing down a steak pie in the brief hiatus 
between photoshoot and afternoon rehearsal. “The idea was to save her stories 
for my kids, but I ended up finding out a whole lot during those conversations. 
And her stories seemed so operatic.”


Green’s family were Jewish refugees who fled Austria in the 1930s. His 
great-grandfather left first, ending up in a Jewish ghetto in Shanghai, then a 
few years later his grandmother went to London with her mother.

“At the end of the war my grandad was still in Shanghai and had met somebody 
else, but eventually he made his way to London and fell back into my great 
granny’s arms,” he says. That story became a galling, tender song called Roll 
Away.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fflit-martin-green-migration-journey-song-film-edinburgh-international-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b21a45406dba34fd321df9040c0c868e09df543%2F0_241_5760_3599%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flit%3A%20a%20journey%20in%20song%20through%20migrants'%20paper-thin%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fflit-martin-green-migration-journey-song-film-edinburgh-international-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flit%3A%20a%20journey%20in%20song%20through%20migrants%27%20paper-thin%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fflit-martin-green-migration-journey-song-film-edinburgh-international-festival-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b21a45406dba34fd321df9040c0c868e09df543%2F0_241_5760_3599%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘Ears and eyes’ … Adam Holmes, Adrian Utley, Will Anderson, Martin Green and 
Becky Unthank. Photograph: Mike Guest 
Green started to record other stories. A man of Portuguese descent whose 
father fled from Goa. A woman who grew up in East Germany and watched the wall 
come down as a child. Members of his wifeInge Thomson 
<http://www.ingethomson.com/>’s family talking about the exodus from Shetland 
when there wasn’t enough food on the islands. None of these stories are 
directly quoted on the album: instead Green sent them to a team songwriters –
Anaïs Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/14/anais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus>
, Karine Polwart,Aidan Moffat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/arab-strap-return-gigs-20th-anniversary-the-first-big-weekend-2016>
 and Sandy Wright – who turned testimonials into verse and worked his musical 
bedrock into tunes. When the songs were ready, Green handed them over to singers
Becky Unthank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/27/unthanks-folk-northumberland-interview>
, Adam Holmes andJohn Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/feb/01/new-band-john-smith> to give 
them voice.


All that’s just the album, which is only one element of the live show. The 
other half is stop-motion/digital animation and 3D mapping – essentially videos 
projected on to various non-flat surfaces around the musicians – by White 
Robot. Green recalls first being drawn to their work because of its “humanity 
and DIY gorgeousness”, particularly in their Bafta-winning short filmThe Making 
of Longbird <http://www.themakingoflongbird.com/>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvwatB40Ft08&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvwatB40Ft08>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvwatB40Ft08&media=>
Martin Green, Ainslie Henderson and Will Anderson discuss Flit in a trailer for 
Edinburgh <https://youtu.be/vwatB40Ft08> 
“It’s not only about bringing inanimate objects to life,” he says. “I mean, 
Will and Ainslie could make you fall in love with this fork if they wanted to” 
– he brandishes the utensil at them – “but I also liked that their work refers 
to its own creation. It makes the audience more aware of the graft and marvel 
that goes in, and it adds to the poignancy.”


It's like playing in the middle of a painting

In return, the animators recognised a “fellow messy experimenter” in Green. 
“We found an online clip of Martin building his Sporkatron 4000,” Henderson 
says, referring to an instrument/midi-controller made of forks and spoons that 
has become a fixture of gigs with Green’s regular trio Lau. “We could 
definitely relate to his bash-things-together spirit.”


White Robot have created a humble, whimsical paper world from which characters 
can be ripped and crumpled and transplanted. Henderson describes finding a way 
to depict the moment when Green’s grandmother left her grandparents in Austria 
because they were too old to travel (they would end up in a death camp). That 
memory is told, though not explicitly, in a song called Smallest Plant while 
on-screen figures are physically torn from their surroundings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fflit-martin-green-migration-journey-song-film-edinburgh-international-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4585419107e26aa5f69bae0d68c4314dcac44eab%2F0_0_3000_1497%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flit%3A%20a%20journey%20in%20song%20through%20migrants'%20paper-thin%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fflit-martin-green-migration-journey-song-film-edinburgh-international-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flit%3A%20a%20journey%20in%20song%20through%20migrants%27%20paper-thin%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fflit-martin-green-migration-journey-song-film-edinburgh-international-festival-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4585419107e26aa5f69bae0d68c4314dcac44eab%2F0_0_3000_1497%2F3000.jpg>
 Martin Green with his Sporkatron 4000 at 2014’s End of the Road festival. 
Photograph: Andy Sheppard/Redferns via Getty Images 
Lunch is over and the band is heading back to the stables to rehearse in the 
little room full of wired-up saws and sample-triggering hosepipes, but before 
he goes, Green sits back down with a perturbed expression. “Tell me something,” 
he ventures. “People expect a lot of visual stimulation to keep them 
entertained these days, and part of me worries that audiences find it boring 
going to a gig without any visual, you know, pizzazz.”

It’s a conundrum he finds himself mulling over a lot, because while folk music 
is supposed to be the great leveller, free from the kind of image prerogatives 
that drives much of the music industry, Green is the first to admit that he’s 
drawn to pretty things. In many ways Flit is a natural step in his ongoing 
pursuit to expand the aesthetic parameters of the genre. His trio with Kris 
Drever and Aidan O’Rourke,Lau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/31/lau-review>, haven’t just shaken 
up the sound of a traditional jigs-and-reels set list — they’ve also upped the 
look of their shows from three lads wielding folk instruments to a whole 
handsome stage set with bespoke lighting and backlit string quartets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fflit-martin-green-migration-journey-song-film-edinburgh-international-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32472ef93089d2d11f8b6c313fb91761be620a3f%2F269_169_2724_1634%2F2724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flit%3A%20a%20journey%20in%20song%20through%20migrants'%20paper-thin%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fflit-martin-green-migration-journey-song-film-edinburgh-international-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flit%3A%20a%20journey%20in%20song%20through%20migrants%27%20paper-thin%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fflit-martin-green-migration-journey-song-film-edinburgh-international-festival-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32472ef93089d2d11f8b6c313fb91761be620a3f%2F269_169_2724_1634%2F2724.jpg>
 Lau on stage in 2013. Photograph: Rob Ball/WireImage 
“And yet,” Green runs a hand anxiously through his hair, “hearing someone 
playing solo piano, badly lit, through a crappy PA, that is still potentially 
life-changing. And the day that is not enough because we’ve come to rely on all 
this visual bling, that’s when we lose the ability to just listen.”

So why did he feel the songs and stories of Flit weren’t enough on their own? 
“You mean why am I adding to the problem?” he shrugs. “Because I find it 
exciting. Because I’ve always been about ears, and now I can be about eyes too. 
I’ve spent more than 20 years thinking about pure music, abstract music, and 
now my creative world has exploded into multidimensional technicolour.” He gets 
up and makes for the door. “Actually it’s breathtaking. It’s like playing in 
the middle of a painting.”


 * Flit is at the Edinburgh international festival, 10-11 August 
<http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/flit#.V6CGFTYrKrM>, then touring the UK 
<http://www.martingreenmusic.co.uk/gigs/> in the autumn 
 