
For 10 days next spring a dense fog will envelop the new Tate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> building while, inside, 
visitors might enter a conceptual nightclub, follow elephants to their 
graveyard or learn how todance kizomba 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6WOVBNULkYc>.


The gallery has announced details of what it called a “new departure in the 
concept of the art exhibition”. For “Ten Days Six Nights”, the first BMWTate 
Live exhibition 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/ten-days-six-nights> 
will stage participatory art that will combine installation, performance, film, 
video, sound, smell and talks.

Some of the art will be difficult to explain ahead of the experience, admitted 
Tate Modern director Frances Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/22/frances-morris-takes-tate-modern-helm>
, “because the language with which to talk about this work is still emerging. 
It has not been done before … it is a really exciting moment.”

A key part of the exhibition will be an immersive fog sculpture on the terrace 
outside the gallery’s Switch House extension. It will be created by the 
83-year-old Japanese artist Fujiko Nakaya, the daughter of the man credited 
with inventing the artificial snowflake.

Nakaya has been making fog sculptures for more than 50 years and has talked 
about thejoy people get from walking through fog 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-bristol-31446975>. “People love the feel 
of fog on their skin, immersed, wet and cold, but gentle and soothing. It’s a 
primary experience.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffog-on-the-tate-gallery-seeks-to-reshape-idea-of-what-an-art-show-can-be%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc95973e8d5d39276f446efe0b946b002be557b8%2F4_163_4982_2990%2F4982.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fog%20on%20the%20Tate%3A%20gallery%20seeks%20to%20reshape%20idea%20of%20what%20an%20art%20show%20can%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffog-on-the-tate-gallery-seeks-to-reshape-idea-of-what-an-art-show-can-be%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fog%20on%20the%20Tate%3A%20gallery%20seeks%20to%20reshape%20idea%20of%20what%20an%20art%20show%20can%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffog-on-the-tate-gallery-seeks-to-reshape-idea-of-what-an-art-show-can-be%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc95973e8d5d39276f446efe0b946b002be557b8%2F4_163_4982_2990%2F4982.jpg>
 Switch House at Tate Modern, London. Photograph: View Pictures/REX/Shutterstock
Her artificial fog next to the Thames will be free during the day and then be 
part of paid-for ticketed events going on for six evenings when other artists 
will be staging work in the fog.

In the lobby outside the gallery’s Tanks 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-modern/tanks>, the Dominican-born artist 
Isabel Lewis will be organising what some might describe as a party, although 
she prefers to call them occasions.

There will be food, drink, plants, music, talks and lessons for people to 
learn kizomba – a style of dance originating from Angola. Catherine Wood, the 
gallery’s performance curator, said it would be a multi-sensory environment as 
much about pleasure as it is about ideas.

Lewis is in her early thirties and Wood said the juxtaposition of younger 
artists with older artists such as Nakaya was deliberate.

Many performance artists in the 1960s and 1970s were anti-institutional in a 
way artists today are not, she said. “What’s interesting now is that artists of 
this generation understand … what is an institution?

“It is just a way of doing things, an organisation of people that have certain 
kinds of behaviours and certain rules and forms of etiquette and you can work 
on those and change them. Artists see a lot of potential in working in the 
structure.”

Other artists taking part in the exhibition include Carlos Casas, who will 
present work exploring the idea of the elephant’s graveyard and offering, 
curators said, a new way for audiences to experience film; and Lorenzo Senni, 
who will turn the space into a kind of conceptual nightclub with fog, light and 
sound.

The exhibition will be free during the day and ticketed for six nights, when 
the gallery will be open late. There will also be a bar.


Wood acknowledged that the idea of collective, participatory art might not 
immediately appeal to everyone. “The phrase audience participation can be a 
terrifying prospect,” she said. “I myself never want to sit at the front of a 
theatre … but it is not that kind of participation. It is more ambient, it is 
not picking someone out to do something specific, it is about creating an 
environment which is shared somehow.”

Tate Modern <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> has been 
active in staging live and performance art for a number of years and created 
the Tanks as the world’s first museum space dedicated to performance, film and 
installation.

The Live Exhibition was an experiment, said Morris, the next chapter in 
“changing the narrative of the museum” from the “rather old fashioned static 
model of paintings on the wall”.

Some of the other artists taking part next year will be Wu Tsang, Fred Moten, 
Melanie Bonajo, Ian Cheng, Ligia Lewis, Paul Maheke, Phill Niblock and Pepa 
Ubera.

Achim Borchardt-Hume, the gallery’s director of exhibitions, said culture was 
always changing, so exhibitions must change too. “We have the ambition to 
become a museum of the 21st century and this is an essential cornerstone in us 
achieving that.”

 * BMW Tate Live Exhibition, 24 March-2 April 2017, Bankside, London.  