
I wonder if the swallows that nest in the chimney of my Suffolk farmhouse have 
the faintest idea how profoundly they affect my emotions. When they first 
arrive from the south in spring, and I hear the thrumming of their wingbeats 
amplified to a boom by the hollow brickwork, my heart leaps. They seem to bless 
the house with the spirit of the south; the promise of summer. Swallows have 
such a strong homing instinct that it is quite possible this same family of 
birds, by now an ancient dynasty, has been returning here to nest for the 450 
summers since the chimney was built.

Everything about swallows says “South”. They are a shiny, metallic, 
gregarious, nomadic tribe, decked in magenta and ravishing deep blues like the 
Tuareg <http://africa.si.edu/exhibits/tuareg/who.html> and Bedouin, whose 
deserts they must cross as they set out in September to fly due south all the 
way to Cape Town on their winter migration. As they gather talkatively on the 
telegraph wires, they seem no more afraid of the great distances they must 
travel and the hardships they will encounter on the way, than you or I making a 
long-distance phone call. They speak a glittering desert tongue, calling to 
each other incessantly across the chimney tops.

When the household swallows fly away to Africa, I get restless. I suppose I 
envy them. I certainly miss standing by the fireplace at night, eavesdropping 
on their dormitory conversations in the mud nests above. Swallows never fail to 
stir the nomad in me, too.

I belong to the generation whose migrations south began at Victoria Station. 
It wasEM Forster who said, in Howards End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/18/howards-end-em-forster-classic>
, that everyone who has lived in a great capital has strong feelings about its 
various railway termini. “They are,” he writes, “the gates to the glorious and 
the unknown. Through them we pass out into adventure and sunshine, to them, 
alas! we return.” Architecturally, Victoria had less character than some of the 
other great London stations, but it had by far the most romantic trains: the 
all-Pullman Golden Arrow (which connected in Paris with the Orient Express) and 
the Blue Train, which I rode each year of my early teens to the south of France 
to visit my pen-friend, Jean-François, in Menton. I suppose both of us must 
already have had travelling in our blood, because our fathers worked for the 
railways and our exchange had been arranged through the British and French rail 
unions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432813621751%2F90bf6390-ca94-48af-8100-d261b7ccaafa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Follow%20the%20swallows%3A%20Roger%20Deakin's%20days%20hitchhiking%20to%20the%20sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Follow%20the%20swallows%3A%20Roger%20Deakin%27s%20days%20hitchhiking%20to%20the%20sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432813621751%2F90bf6390-ca94-48af-8100-d261b7ccaafa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘When we bathed in Menton, shoals of small fish skidded across the harbour’s 
clear water like shadows.’ Photograph: Scott E Barbour/Getty Images 
The Channel crossing on the ferry, sometimes rough, slipstreamed by seagulls, 
not swallows, and the sight of the mailbags being hoisted ashore in huge nets 
by the Calais cranes, the dockside alive with blue dungarees and stevedores, 
already conferred the status of rite of passage on that first journey. For an 
English adolescent, the Train Bleu provided the full range of initiation rites: 
the customs, the crossing of Paris by Métro from the Gare du Nord to Paris-Gare 
de Lyon, the need to utter the first halting words of classroom French. At the 
Gare de Lyon I walked up the platform admiring the high, blue carriages of the 
Compagnie International des Wagons-Lits and the enthralling roster of the Blue 
Train’s itinerary: Paris, Dijon, Châlons, Lyon, Marseille, St Raphaël, 
Juan-les-Pins, Antibes, Cannes, Nice, Monte-Carlo, Menton. Sometime in the 
night I drifted out of sleep to hear the insistent ghostly voice of the station 
announcer’s “Dijon! Dijon!” and later still “Lyon!” At breakfast time, I was 
woken by stewards clattering along the corridors. I peeped under the blind and 
saw the Mediterranean on fire as we steamed along the coast past the empty 
beaches of Fréjus and St Raphaël. Everything was so much brighter and clearer 
than in my cool native suburb near the Kodak factory north of Harrow, and the 
sky was a deep, bold blue I had never seen before: more like Kodachrome, in 
fact. Shadows were inky black and had sharp edges. Suddenly, in Menton, the 
French of my textbooks came vividly, even deliciously alive.Café, croissant, 
pain chocolat, la mer, le soleil, la table: all took on a vivid brilliance. 
Along the rocks towards Cap Martin, men in bright blue denim trousers twitched 
silver-backed olive leaves bound on sticks to lure the wily octopi from their 
lairs. When we bathed in Menton, with shoals of small fish skidding across the 
harbour’s clear water like shadows, I felt I was being baptised into a new life.

I was not the first Englishman to feel that way. Entering Italy for the first 
time through the birth canal of the Mont Cenis tunnel, the Bloomsbury painter 
and writerAdrian Stokes  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/yourpaintings/artists/adrian-durham-stokes>felt born 
into a new world and ever after experienced a new vitality in the south, both 
emotionally and in his work. His contemporary, the composer William Walton, 
reacted to his first sight of Italy in an almost identical way. His train went 
into a tunnel and when it came out on the Italian side he found the most 
marvellous sun, and the brilliance illuminated the rest of his life like
Belshazzar’s Feast 
<http://www.choirs.org.uk/ozchoirs/prognotes/Walton%20Belshazzars%20Feast.htm>.

I had lucked out, of course, in landing a pen-friend with a place in Menton. 
The Villa L’Hermine was on a steep hill behind the town, surrounded by orange 
orchards, olives and prickly pears. At night, geckos strolled across the 
ceiling as we dined, serenaded by crickets and tree frogs. Jean-François and I 
would creep up in the dark to the concrete irrigation tanks that served as the 
frogs’ echo-chambers and catch in our torch beam rows of vivid green males with 
their bubble-gum larynxes comically inflated. In the mornings, the cicadas took 
up the song in the Corsican pines, cranking up like old gramophones as the sun 
rose higher.

It was these raucous creatures who lent their name to Cyril Connolly’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview2> 
Cicada Club at Oxford in the early 1920s; the half-dozen members dedicated 
themselves to flouting the English convention of visiting the Côte d’Azur in 
winter, choosing instead to roast themselves on the beaches of Villeneuve or 
Menton at the height of summer, when the rasping song of the cicadas hits the 
top notes in its frenzy.

In those pre-Thatcher days, people thought it was pretty selfish to go bowling 
along alone with empty seats in your car

Never mind magnetic north, it was the south that drew us like iron filings. My 
appetite for the sun now fully aroused, and my French somewhat improved, my 
later migrations as a teenager and a university student were as a hitchhiker. I 
was a Cicada Club member by nature, willing to venture south regardless of 
season or convention whenever I had money in my purse and time to spare. The 
French have the perfect phrase for this “I will arise and go now” impulse to 
drop everything, walk out one midsummer morning, and head south. It isà la 
derive, adrift.

In the late 1950s and in the 60s, hitchhiking was a dependable means of 
transport. It was an age of considerable trust and hitchhiking, for me and my 
friends, was an education in human kindness. At the time, we saw it in more 
practical terms: getting a foot in the car door, getting your bottom on a seat. 
In those pre-Thatcher days, a surprising number of people thought it was pretty 
selfish to go bowling along alone with empty seats in your car when there were 
bums aplenty waiting beside the road. After several days hitching south and 
sleeping rough, most of us soon transmogrified into the other kind of bums: 
bums with thumbs. Hence the expression bumming a lift, I suppose. Quite why one 
thumbs a lift I’m not sure. Perhaps because the thumb is the least aggressive, 
or suggestive of the digits, the other four being reserved for varying degrees 
of sexual innuendo.

The favourite gateway for the southbound hitchhiker was the Newhaven-Dieppe 
ferry, because you could then follow a route through Rouen, Chartres and 
Orléans that took you to the Route Nationale Vingt – the N20 – and bypassed the 
hitchhiker’s graveyard, Paris. There were no lifts to be had there. At Dieppe, 
your thumb would join the forest of others raised aloft at the roadside in a 
mass demonstration of faith in the essential goodness of human nature and its 
willingness to chauffeur every last one of us south. Right from the start you 
would have to face the eternal hitchhiker’s dilemma: whether to choose a good 
spot, beside a lay-by for example, stay put and risk appearing lazy; or whether 
to plod on southwards, as if preparing to walk the 700 or 800 miles to the 
Mediterranean, in the hope of inspiring sympathy and approval. The latter 
course had two disadvantages – either it meant having your back to the oncoming 
traffic, depriving motorists of the opportunity to study in advance your eager, 
open, honest features, or you turned to face them, with the consequent risk of 
walking backwards into a milestone, pothole or parked car.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432813795076%2F6ccf76e3-de5a-4938-9fe7-64fb99adf814-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Follow%20the%20swallows%3A%20Roger%20Deakin's%20days%20hitchhiking%20to%20the%20sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Follow%20the%20swallows%3A%20Roger%20Deakin%27s%20days%20hitchhiking%20to%20the%20sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432813795076%2F6ccf76e3-de5a-4938-9fe7-64fb99adf814-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Citroen DS, goddess of the roads. Photograph: Eric Estrade/AFP 
Like angling, hitchhiking required patience and cunning. We were fishers of 
cars, and we were all connoisseurs of the varied species of our quarry. Most of 
them are now long-extinct: the Simca, the Panhard Tiger, the slender Renault 
Dauphine, the hilariousFiat Topolino 
<http://www.caranddriver.com/features/fiat-topolino-the-original-500-archived-feature>
, the stylishCitroën 15CV – as driven by Inspector Maigret 
<http://www.lucies-cars.co.uk/-maigret-citroen-light-fifteen-1955>. The only 
survivors seem to have been the two real eccentrics: the ubiquitous 2CV and the 
car you most hoped to ride in, the Citroën DS, known colloquially on the road 
as “le crapaud” – the toad – with its wide-mouthed bonnet and all its sleek, 
invisible power somehow concentrated in the car’s slender haunches.

But this astonishingly advanced and beautiful car was also known by the 
punning pronunciation of the initials DS in French as “La Déesse” – the 
goddess. The philosopherRoland Barthes <http://www.id-ds.com/CitDBarthes.htm>, 
who was later killed in a car crash, compared the genius of the design of the 
Déesse to the building of the great French medieval cathedrals as a supreme 
expression of the spirit of the age. He mentions the many-spired cathedral of 
Chartres, an ever-fixed mark to which we steered across the yellow oceans of 
maize and sunflowers from Rouen, and in which I once spent the night hidden 
between pews in a sleeping bag. Modern France’s new religion of mobility was 
all there in the Déesse.

And Barthes was right. The Déesse was a kind of miracle, and a lift in one 
after a long, dusty vigil in the sun could feel like divine providence. Perched 
on the Déesse’s sighing white leather seats, hugging our rucksacks, we 
marvelled at the way the steering wheel appeared to float like a halo, 
magically suspended by an almost invisible stalk. Shakespeare wrote “My 
mistress when she walks treads on the ground.” You’d never say that about the 
Déesse. The car floated, gliding forward effortlessly, having levitated with 
unhurried dignity from its parked stance, slumped on all fours. You wouldn’t 
choose a DS for a bank robbery. And there was so much glass. No car had ever 
been this transparent. Even the headlights swivelled about like two eyes, 
mysteriously coordinated with the steering, so the Déesse had the uncanny, 
almost supernatural ability to see round corners at night. The ineffable design 
still remains outside time, more modern, more confident, than anything that has 
come since.

The main roads south, the routes nationales, were wildly dangerous then. 
Traffic hurtled along in both directions either side of a common central 
overtaking lane. Saying a prayer out loud, our chauffeurs pulled into the face 
of the oncoming traffic, willing it into submission, hoping to dive back in 
again to their side with a nanosecond in hand. We prayed too, and held our 
breath; 1 August, the opening of the holidays, was a gigantic national game of 
chicken.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432819977858%2F132f5d21-b733-4069-b9c3-1f456687a1ac-1674x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Follow%20the%20swallows%3A%20Roger%20Deakin's%20days%20hitchhiking%20to%20the%20sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Follow%20the%20swallows%3A%20Roger%20Deakin%27s%20days%20hitchhiking%20to%20the%20sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432819977858%2F132f5d21-b733-4069-b9c3-1f456687a1ac-1674x2040.jpeg>
 Roger Deakin never tired of the journey south to the sun. Photograph: Penguin 
But however dangerous, those pre-motorway roads were beautiful. The endless 
avenues of overarching plane trees dappled the tarmac with shadow as you 
bounced along in the back of a 2CV. Cyril Connolly wrote inThe Unquiet Grave of 
“peeling off the kilometres to the tune of ‘Blue Skies’, sizzling down the long 
black liquid reaches of the National Sept, the plane trees going sha-sha-sha 
through the open window, the windscreen yellowing with crushed midges”.

Songs on car radios figure prominently in my recollections of these journeys. 
French idols such as Johnny Hallyday andFrançoise Hardy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/artists/d2a79d20-1304-47fd-a998-b4fe1ec78373>: “
Tous les garçons et les filles de mon âge / Se promènent dans la rue deux par 
deux.”

And the exhilaration of the Who’s “I Can See For Miles” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q0iqg2UanEc> in an old Peugeot, as we drove 
full tilt out of Blois towards a first bathe off the sandbanks of the sparkling 
Loire.The Beatles’ “Baby You Can Drive My Car” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Ts2U1mkfz4> booming out of a Morgan Plus 4 
along the coast road from Narbonne to Perpignan one July night, with the moon 
reflected in the salt pans beside the Mediterranean.“Good Vibrations” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eab_beh07HU> trailing from the open windows of 
a Citroën Safari, driving through the hill villages of the Corbières one hot 
evening towards Limoux from Carcassonne, families sitting out on kitchen chairs 
before their shadowy front doors, girls in espadrilles and cotton housecoats 
and the clink of boules beneath the village trees.

Like any serious addiction, my need to go south kept on deepening over the 
years. I had to go further. I followed the swallows across the Pyrenees into 
Spain, then on into Morocco, past the Atlas mountains, to the beginnings of the 
Sahara. Here, I experienced the local Berber techniques of hitchhiking from the 
motorist’s point of view. Driving a Renault 4 towards the little town of
Tafraoute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/may/25/tafraoute-morocco-berber-heartland-restaurant>
 in the Anti-Atlas mountains, my 10-year-old son and I were halted by a 
tortoise in the road. Springing out to rescue it, we discovered it was attached 
by a string around one hind leg to two small boys hidden behind a rock. They 
demanded a lift and as we drove towards their village they slyly smacked their 
lips and explained how very much they were looking forward to enjoying the 
little reptile for dinner. My son duly expressed a desire to rescue it, and 
having paid over a hefty ransom in Polo mints and fruit gums, we eventually 
settled into room 11 at the Hotel Redouane in Tafraoute with our new companion. 
We fed it on lettuce and tomato, and eventually released it in the remotest 
desert place we could find, far away from boys or roads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432814120108%2F339284c0-69c9-43b5-bf94-62f2c2ee2a24-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Follow%20the%20swallows%3A%20Roger%20Deakin's%20days%20hitchhiking%20to%20the%20sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Follow%20the%20swallows%3A%20Roger%20Deakin%27s%20days%20hitchhiking%20to%20the%20sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffollow-swallows-roger-deakin-hitchhiking-to-the-sun%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432814120108%2F339284c0-69c9-43b5-bf94-62f2c2ee2a24-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The festival at Saintes-Marie-de-la-Mer, Camargue. Photograph: Alamy 
Travelling thousands of miles on such serial migrations, one builds up a 
cumulative debt of gratitude to one’s hosts, and it is always good to find the 
opportunity to pay some of it off now and again. One Easter in the mid-1960s, I 
travelled south with a friend to theCamargue and the great festival of nomads 
at Saintes Maries de la Mer 
<http://www.avignon-et-provence.com/saintes-maries-de-la-mer/gypsy-pilgrimage/gypsy-pilgrimage.htm#.VWXgamTF_5o>
. Thousands of Gypsies had gathered from every corner of Europe for the annual 
celebration of the miraculous landing on the shore near the little town of the 
three Saint Marys on their storm-tossed voyage from the Holy Land.

On the first evening, after enthusiastically joining in the festivities, I 
went for a stroll under the stars and fell into the Rhône, fully clothed and 
wearing an overcoat. The current was strong and the water deep and muddy. I 
clambered out somehow and made my way back to the hotel, where my companion had 
already sensibly retired for the night. I stood fully clothed in the shower to 
wash off the mud, then crept up to the flat roof above, undressed, and laid out 
my clothes to dry in the next morning’s sun. I also solemnly laid out all the 
10-franc notes from my pockets in the stillness of the night and retired to bed.

Early next morning, a sea breeze swirled my francs into the air above the 
streets, distributing them from the heavens among the Gypsies, who must have 
thought it another miracle, as banknotes and swallows wheeled above them.

• This essay by the late Roger Deakin was originally read as a radio talk. It 
appears in the latest Five Dials.fivedials.com <http://fivedials.com/>
 