
I shouldn’t think even millionaires could eat anything nicer than new bread 
and real butter and honey for tea.

I Capture the Castle, Dodie Smith

---

Because our mum and dad lived in separate houses when we were growing up, my 
sister Luce and I were forever ‘missing’ some or other of our parents, even 
when we knew that we could just walk a handful of streets and visit them. But 
it was my moving to London that marked the first time I ever lived apart from 
her, my constant companion and partner in crime.

Luce was in England in June, and we had a wonderful week exploring the Kent 
coast, and testing recipes for my book in London. Like my trip to visit her in 
Seattle last year, it was brilliant fun but only served to illuminate how much 
we miss each other by not being in the same country. We happily spend hours 
together in kitchens, restaurants, or driving around in aimless circles, 
singing at the top of our lungs. It is the loss of these things that Skype and 
Whatsapp will never make up for. Of course we can stay in touch, but it’s just 
not the same.

So this week’s recipe is for Luce. And, in honour of my extraordinary sibling, 
it had to be from my favourite book about sisters: I Capture the Castle. 
Cassandra and Rose are nothing like us, but I find it intensely comforting to 
read about any sisterly relationship; about jealousy and frustration, and about 
camaraderie and unconditional love. With her so far away, it helps me remember 
that no matter how long we go between visits, we have and will always fall back 
into those old patterns immediately.

Food in books: macaroni cheese from Excellent Women by Barbara Pym
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/may/26/food-in-books-macaroni-cheese-from-excellent-women-by-barbara-pym>
I approach the making of bread and butter with the same sense of comfort and 
certainty, that things will work as anticipated, no matter how long it’s been 
since I last baked my own loaf. Unlike pastry, which struggles in the summer 
heat, or a cake, which might collapse in the oven, bread is predictable. 
Whether I am homesick, or lonely, or missing my sister, my bread will still 
rise. Sometimes, especially on cooler days, I just have to be patient, and go 
for a swim, or have a long bath, or read a good book, while it rises slowly but 
surely against the cold. And if it doesn’t rise quite as much as last time, I 
try not to panic. I shape it, let it rise again, score it and bake it.

I enthusiastically recommend making your own butter- it is so simple, as long 
as you have an electric whisk of some sort. Apparently you can make it by 
shaking cream in a jar, but I imagine my arm would be close to falling off by 
the time clumps of primrose-yellow butter had formed. And don’t forget to hold 
on to the buttermilk too, to use when making scones, pancakes or ricotta.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffood-in-books-bread-butter-and-honey-from-i-capture-the-castle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4dd62402fa3f9ae84b2da917b7885b4741f161dc%2F0_0_1976_1976%2F1976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20bread%2C%20butter%20and%20honey%20from%20I%20Capture%20the%20Castle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffood-in-books-bread-butter-and-honey-from-i-capture-the-castle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20bread%2C%20butter%20and%20honey%20from%20I%20Capture%20the%20Castle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Ffood-in-books-bread-butter-and-honey-from-i-capture-the-castle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4dd62402fa3f9ae84b2da917b7885b4741f161dc%2F0_0_1976_1976%2F1976.jpg>
 ‘Apparently you can make butter by shaking cream in a jar, but I imagine my 
arm would be close to falling off...’ Photograph: Kate Young of The Little 
Library Café 
Bread and Butter

Makes 1 large loaf and plenty of butter

Ingredients 
Bread 
450g strong white bread flour 
340g tepid water
7g salt
7g fast action yeast 
Butter
200ml double cream 
1tsp flaked sea salt
 To serve
 Honey

Equipment 
Mixing bowl 
Tea towel 
Baking tray 
Electric hand whisk

1. Place the flour in a large bowl, and add the salt on one side and yeast on 
the other. Try to keep the yeast and salt apart for as long as possible, as 
salt can stop the yeast working.

2. Add the water to the dry ingredients. It should be about blood temperature 
- if you put your finger in and can’t tell whether it’s hot or cold, then it’s 
just right. Mix the flour and water with your hand until everything comes 
together in a ball in the mixing bowl. Cover the ball with a wet tea towel and 
leave in a warm place for an hour until it has obviously increased in size.

3. Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured bench and knead it until it is 
elastic, no longer sticky, and bounces back quickly when prodded. You can knead 
by stretching, slapping or folding the dough - whatever works for you. Once the 
dough is ready, you’re ready to shape it into a ball. Pinch one side of the 
dough, stretch it out and fold it across the rest of the dough. Continue to 
work your way around the dough, repeating this four times. Flip the dough over 
and bring your hands together underneath it, twisting as you do so. Keep 
twisting until the dough is a firm ball.

4. Sprinkle a baking tray liberally with flour and place the dough on it, then 
leave it to prove for a final hour. It should have doubled in size and will 
spring back when touched. Around twenty minutes before the bread is ready, 
preheat the oven to 210C.

5. Once the bread is ready, score it a couple of times with a serrated knife 
and transfer the bread to the oven on a low shelf for around 40 minutes, until 
the it is a deep golden brown, and sounds hollow when tapped on its underside. 
Remove from the oven and leave to cool.

6. While the bread is baking, you can make the butter. Pour the cream into a 
mixing bowl and start to whisk it. It’s going to take a little while - you need 
to take it beyond stiffly whipped until it starts separating. Eventually you’ll 
start seeing little yellow flecks swimming in a creamy liquid. Stop whisking at 
this point.

7. Reach your hand in and, using it as a sieve-of-sorts, press the yellow 
solid pieces against the side of the bowl, draining off the liquid. Continue 
with the rest of the cream, removing the yellow clumps to a bowl. Once you have 
collected them all, sprinkle them with salt (you may like more or less, 
depending on your taste) and squidge the whole lot together. Voila. You have 
butter. Place in the fridge to harden a little.

Serve the bread and butter with the nicest honey you can find. The liquid 
leftover from the butter is buttermilk - keep this in a bottle in the fridge 
and use within a couple of days.
 