
It is a curious fact that novelists have a way of making us believe that 
luncheon parties are invariably memorable for something very witty that was 
said, or for something very wise that was done. But they seldom spare a word 
for what was eaten. It is part of the novelist’s convention not to mention soup 
and salmon and ducklings, as if soup and salmon and ducklings were of no 
importance whatsoever, as if nobody ever smoked a cigar or drank a glass of 
wine. Here, however, I shall take the liberty to defy that convention and to 
tell you that the lunch on this occasion began with soles, sunk in a deep dish, 
over which the college cook had spread a counterpane of the whitest cream, save 
that it was branded here and there with brown spots like the spots on the 
flanks of a doe.

A Room of One’s Own <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/room-of-one-s-own.html>, 
Virginia Woolf

---

Mary, Dickon and Colin’s picnics in their secret garden, Miss Maudie’s famous 
Lane Cake, the clam chowder that warms Ishmael and Queequeg, Bruce Bogtrotter’s 
monstrous chocolate cake – I’m forever finding meals (more than 120 so far) 
that jump off the page, demanding to be eaten. In the past week, I have 
re-read, or re-scanned, if we’re being fair, upwards of thirty of my favourite 
books. Alongside a weekly post here, I’m currently working on a cookbook that 
will be published next year, and my finalised recipe list is due next week. 
Just when I feel confident I’ve not missed anything and save a “final draft” of 
the Excel spreadsheet, I spot an old forgotten tome in a bookshop, or someone 
presses an as-yet-unknown story into my hands, certain I’ll find something 
delicious in its pages.

The reality is, though, for every mouth-watering mention of Turkish Delight 
(eaten on a sleigh in Narnia), there are countless writers who are guilty of 
just what Woolf discusses above – declining to write about the meals their 
characters consume as they gossip, or fight, or woo. For some, there are more 
important details to address. Often, vague allusions to “dinner” or “platters” 
or “drinks” are enough for the writer, who knows the imaginations of their 
readers will fill in the blanks. Despite countless events occurring during 
mealtimes inSense and Sensibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/16/sense-and-sensibility-jane-austen-elena-ferrante-anonymity>
, we are left to imagine for ourselves what Marianne and Elinor Dashwood may 
have eaten in their Devonshire cottage, at dinner with Sir John and Lady 
Middleton and Mrs Jennings, or during the heartbreaking trip to London.

Not so, Virginia Woolf <https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf>. The 
three-course luncheon in A Room of One’s Own is rich in detail. The importance 
of this meal lies in its stark contrast to the one served at the all women’s 
college. While the Oxbridge men have sole, partridge, a “retinue of sauces and 
salads” and a “confection that rose all sugar from the waves,” the women at 
Fernham eat clear soup, beef, greens and potatoes and prunes with custard. The 
few paragraphs about these two meals has long been one of my favourite pieces 
of food writing. I’m excited to be recreating this second meal (I will be 
taking significant creative license with the details) at a supper club in the 
coming months.

In the meantime, the evocative description of the sole above, covered in a 
“counterpane of the whitest cream” and “branded here and there with brown spots 
like the spots on the flanks of a doe” still leaves some decisions to the 
reader/cook. Is the cream sauce dotted with mushrooms or shrimp? Is it 
thickened with a roux in order to be “spread”? Are the brown spots some brown 
butter perhaps – a common sole accompaniment? I decided to keep the sauce 
simple, so that the sole could shine. I also added some tiny green-brown 
capers, a favourite of mine when eating anything from the sea.

Dover sole with white sauce: the recipe

Serves 4 (as a decadent starter, or a main)

Ingredients
4 Dover sole, gutted (if you don’t have access to Dover sole, substitute with 
other types of sole or flounder)
100g flour
Coarse sea salt and black pepper
2tbsp butter
2tbsp vegetable oil

Sauce
1tsp butter
2 cloves garlic
1 shallot
150ml dry vermouth
150ml fish stock (homemade is great if you have it – I cook up a batch 
whenever I have a good collection of raw fish bones/heads after preparing a 
meal, and store it in ice cube trays in my freezer)
120ml double cream
2tbsp capers, drained

Equipment
Small knife
 Medium-sized saucepan
 Wooden Spoon
 Flat bowl
 Wide, shallow frying pan
 Tongs

1 First, prepare the fish. Place it dark-side up and make a cut through the 
skin, perpendicular to the spine, just above the tail. Peel the skin back 
slowly, using the point of the knife to help you start. Once you have a piece 
of skin large enough to grip, rub some coarse salt between your fingers and 
grip the skin firmly with one hand. Place the heel of your other hand firmly on 
the tail, and then pull back the skin, being particularly careful once you 
reach the head, or you may end up with a headless fish.

2 Flip the fish over, and repeat with the pale skin on the other side. Put the 
fish aside for a moment while you prepare the sauce.

3 Finely chop the garlic and shallot. Place a medium sized saucepan over a 
low-medium heat, and melt the butter for the sauce. Add the garlic and shallot, 
and cook for 2-3 minutes.

4 Pour in the vermouth, and simmer until the liquid reduces by half. Add the 
fish stock and, once again, reduce the liquid by half. Remove from the heat, 
sieve the sauce (discarding the garlic and shallots) and stir in the cream and 
capers. Return the sauce back to the saucepan - do give it a wash out first - 
ready to warm through once the fish is ready.

5 Put the flour for the fish in a wide, shallow bowl, and add a grinding of 
pepper. Sprinkle a pinch of salt over each side of the fish. Put one fish into 
the flour, and then flip it over, so that both sides are lightly covered in 
flour. Give the fish a shake to get rid of any excess, and repeat with the 
other three.

6 Place your widest saucepan over a medium heat. Warm the oil, then add the 
butter and, once the butter is foaming, add as many of the fish as will fit in 
the pan. Cook for around four minutes, until golden, then carefully flip the 
fish over using a fish slice or egg flip. Cook for a further four minutes on 
the second side. If you can’t fit all the fish in the pan at once, pop them in 
a low oven to keep them warm (once done) while you finish the second batch.

7 Place the fish on individual plates and warm the sauce through. Bring fish 
and sauce to the table and eat immediately.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Ffood-in-books-sole-with-white-sauce-from-a-room-of-ones-own-by-virginia-woolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb7d1bede2cced8e2d63b8b282ce6d10231e83e8%2F0_0_2262_2262%2F2262.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20the%20sole%20with%20white%20sauce%20in%20Virginia%20Woolf's%20A%20Room%20of%20One%E2%80%99s%20Own&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Ffood-in-books-sole-with-white-sauce-from-a-room-of-ones-own-by-virginia-woolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20the%20sole%20with%20white%20sauce%20in%20Virginia%20Woolf%27s%20A%20Room%20of%20One%E2%80%99s%20Own&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Ffood-in-books-sole-with-white-sauce-from-a-room-of-ones-own-by-virginia-woolf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb7d1bede2cced8e2d63b8b282ce6d10231e83e8%2F0_0_2262_2262%2F2262.jpg>
 ‘The three-course luncheon in A Room of One’s Own is rich in detail. The 
importance of this meal lies in its stark contrast to the one served at the all 
women’s college.’ Photograph: Kate Young  