
Three Chimneys <http://www.threechimneys.co.uk/>, Colbost, Skye
 The Three Chimneys Restaurant at Colbost on Skye. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
Shirley Spears' Three Chimneys on Skye has that atmosphere that often 
surrounds food destinations. Excited anticipation emanates from those here to 
celebrate; a honeymooning couple arrive shortly after we do. And there's no 
denying the place is special, housed in a lovely old crofters' cottage and 
reached by roads twisting across wild moorlands, set againstMacleod's Tables 
<http://www.walkhighlands.co.uk/skye/macleodstables.shtml>. The guest rooms in 
the "house over by" are nicely turned out, contemporary and comfortable, all 
with views of Loch Dunvegan. Come dinnertime, it's a short stroll to the 
restaurant next door.

We had the tasting menu. Starting with langoustines (on miniature crisp tattie 
scones) - too often exported from Scotland in the past, this is changing, 
thanks to the likes of Spears who championed eating locally long before it 
became fashionable - the menu focused, happily, on seafood. A crab risotto was 
wonderfully juicy, using both brown and white meat, one solitary scallop was 
enormous, its coral roe glowing invitingly under an inspired crust of hazelnut.

A showcase of wonderful Broadford cold and hot smoked fish needed more than 
the single quail egg to break it up, while some tiny whelks accompanying 
another dish were pickled to a springy texture that didn't win us over. But 
these were tiny details - overwhelmingly, fresh ingredients were treated 
imaginatively. Oysters came mouth-slappingly fresh, with cucumber jelly and 
trout roe sparkling like tiny pink opals; venison was paired to splendid effect 
with rhubarb; the classichot marmalade pudding 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/05/hot-marmalade-pudding-recipe>
 - in this incarnation souffled - was surprisingly light and delicious.

A superb kedgeree with peat smoked salmon graced the breakfast table the 
following morning. My dad, a porridge aficionado if ever there was one, was 
unimpressed with the variety, favouring the pinhead oatmealthat traditionalists 
use <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2005/jan/02/foodanddrink.shopping>. 
Happily, he recovered with freshly baked scones and muffins.

• Twin/double rooms from £295, seven-course tasting menu, £85pp. Book online 
<http://www.threechimneys.co.uk/house-over-by.php>

Ullinish Country Lodge <http://www.theisleofskye.co.uk/>, Straun, Skye
 One of the rooms at the Ullinish Country Lodge, Skye. 
Over on the western edge of Skye lies the dramatic Ullinish peninsula, where 
the handsome Ullinish Country Lodge stands between no less than three lochs, 
the source for fresh pre-dinner crab canapes. The hotel has been 
sympathetically restored by the lovely owners, Pam and Brian Howard, and is 
tastefully done out, boasting big solid dark Jacobean beds, but with a cheerier 
feel than that style sometimes suggests, thanks to warm hospitality from the 
owners.

The kitchen sources locally - venison from Orbost Estate, mussels from nearby 
Loch Eishort, John Dory all the way from - shock, horror - Mallaig. The hotel's 
young chef, Craig Halliday, handles the produce well, poaching a fillet of John 
Dory in olive oil to better effect than this description suggests, rendered 
succulent and glistening without being oily, and accompanied by pomme purée 
that was so filthily good I can only conclude Robuchon's 50% butter technique 
had been employed. I enjoyed lightly spiced doughnuts, popcorn ice cream and 
puff candy (think posh Crunchie), though the cinnamon milk "shot" on the side 
was less convincing. Interesting breads - moist and light beetroot bread and 
cumin spiced rolls - are turned out of the hotel kitchen, as is the lovely 
shortbread with which Pam greeted us by the fireside on arrival.

After gorging on a meat-fest-breakfast of black pudding, thick cut bacon and 
local sausages, you might want to do as we did and take a hike. At low tide, 
there's a cracking hour-long walk past the causeway up to the peak ofOronsay in 
Loch Bracadale <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oronsay,_Loch_Bracadale> - it's 
not too taxing and the views of this beautiful melancholic peninsula are well 
worth it.

• Room, dinner, B&B from £95 a person. Book online 
<http://www.theisleofskye.co.uk/tariff.php> 

Kinloch Loch Hotel <http://www.kinloch-lodge.co.uk/Default.aspx>, Sleat, Skye
 Kinloch Lodge, Skye. 
At the foot of Kinloch Hill and on the shoreline of beautiful Loch Na Dal in 
Sleat, sits Kinloch Lodge, seat of the Clan Macdonald, owned by the high chief 
of the clan Donald (Lord Macdonald of Macdonald to you and me, though his
cookery writing wife Claire 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=ntt_athr_dp_sr_1?_encoding=UTF8&search-alias=books-uk&field-author=Baroness%20Claire%20Macdonald>
 will probably be of more interest to foodies). In other words, it's still a 
seat of power and influence, belied by an overwhelmingly down-to-earth and 
friendly welcome. Most of the rooms have views of the loch or hills and all are 
scattered with antique pieces and prints. There's a lot of history in these 
walls, beautiful big lounges, spiral staircases, log fires, and ancestors 
staring down from many a hallway; diners eat under watchful eyes of Macdonalds 
past in the dining room, a fact not lost in me as I enjoy their hospitality 
with guilty Campbell blood running through my veins.

Marcello Tully presides in the kitchen, a Brazilian Scot trained under Michel 
Roux. He earned Kinloch Lodge the Isle of Skye's only Michelin star, and turns 
out some beautifully balanced dishes such as Mallaig sea bass with monkfish 
wrapped in pancetta and served with pink grapefruit lightly singed with a 
blowtorch. Marcello succeeded where my dad has failed for decades and converted 
me to porridge - pinhead oatmeal soaked in water overnight (it can only help 
that the hotel's water supply is piped from a natural spring running through 
peat), simmered in milk with nutmeg and cinnamon. It was creamy and sweet and 
won our porridge award for the trip. Lady Macdonald runscookery courses and 
private demonstrations <http://www.kinloch-lodge.co.uk/Cookery.aspx> and 
there's a little shop selling gadgets, cookery books and home made preserves.

• Dinner, B&B ranges from £99 to £250 a person. Book online 
<http://www.kinloch-lodge.co.uk/Tariff.aspx>

Out and about in Skye
The Old Inn <http://www.carbost.f9.co.uk/>, near the Talisker distillery is 
perched right on Loch Hartwot, a pub with a few tables in a tiny box room which 
does its best to hide the view. It is, however, worth a pit stop on the whisky 
trail. We followed a big pea and ham soup and salmon (hot smoked out the back) 
with a delicious lemon posset, raspberry and shortbread, sticky toffee pud, and 
decent coffees, all for under £25. Stop in onArriba 
<http://www.cafearriba.co.uk/cafe.html>, a funky little cafe in the main town 
of Portree: friendly staff, good unprocessed food and great coffee, all with a 
view of the harbour.
Susan Smillie

• For more information on places to eat and stay in Scotland, check out Visit 
Scotland <http://surprise.visitscotland.com/>

Hand & Flowers, Marlow, Buckinghamshire <http://www.thehandandflowers.co.uk/>
 The Limousin Suite at the Hand and Flowers pub in Marlow, Bucks. 
Tom Kerridge has been a hero on the Great British Menu, something that he 
celebrates on his own menu with slow cooked duck breast with Savoy cabbage, 
duck fat chips and gravy. There were peas in place of the cabbage in the 
original dish, but Mr Kerridge moves with the seasons to get the best out of 
whatever is available.

His technical skill is unmistakably French, but his taste is as unmistakably 
English as the black beamed and white walled pub in which his food is served. 
He has that enviable ability to create dishes that combine a taste for robust 
flavours balanced with the lightest of touches. This is food that satisfies the 
epicurean as well as the trencherman or woman.

After which, if you are lucky, you can slope off to one of the four suites, 
which are neatly named after breeds of cattle – Angus, Dexter, Charolais and 
Limousin, - where you can contemplate the pleasures of the plate in perfect 
luxury. And lunch at £12.50 for 2 courses and £16.50 for 3 is one of the finest 
bargains in the country.
Matthew Fort

• Rooms from £140, book by phone 01628 482 277 or email 
theoffice@thehandandflowers.co.uk <mailto:theoffice@thehandandflowers.co.uk>

Out and about in Marlow
Michael Macdonald's Vanilla Pod <http://www.thevanillapod.co.uk/> (31 West St) 
has been highly rated since it opened in TS Eliot's former house in 2002.
Burgers of Marlow <http://www.burgersartisanbakery.com/> (The Causeway) has 
been supplying the Thames Valley with Black Forest Gateaux, Florentines, fancy 
breads, chocolates and other delights even longer, since 1942. There's a Tea 
Shop as well, if you're not buying to take away. If you want to see how beer is 
made, nip up toThe Loddon Brewery <http://www.loddonbrewery.com/> in Dunsden, 
Oxfordshire, and theWatermill at Mapleduram House 
<http://www.mapledurham.co.uk/history/watermill/> is the oldest working 
watermill in the country.

The Hambrough <http://www.thehambrough.com/>, Ventnor, Isle of Wight
 View from The Hambrough hotel, Ventnor, Isle of Wight. 
Anyone that has visited a farmers' market in south east England has probably 
noticed that good things come from the Isle of Wight:oak-roasted tomatoes 
<http://www.thetomatostall.co.uk>, smoked garlic 
<http://www.thegarlicfarm.co.uk>, rare-breed meat 
<http://www.chinashoprarebreeds.co.uk> to name three, and the island has 
embraced organic food and farming, working towardsbecoming an "eco island" 
<http://www.eco-island.org.uk/default.htm> by 2020. But until recently, the 
eating out scene was less satisfying. Now Ventnor boastsThe Hambrough 
<http://www.thehambrough.com/>, a restaurant with rooms (some of which overlook 
the sandy beach) with a Michelin star and three AA Rosettes.

The young chef, Robert Thompson, uses local produce to create an inventive 
menu that stays just the right side of fussiness. Not everything works - foie 
gras samosa was a once-in-a-lifetime experience, and not in a good way - and 
there might be a tad too much "truffle" this and "jus" that for some, but it 
was truly exciting to see what was coming next (we had a 10-course tasting 
menu). Meat and fish, including oysters, scallops, brill and duck, were treated 
with respect and cooked simply, while vegetables were a showcase for different 
cooking techniques: pressed, pickled, made into ravioli. Desserts veered 
between an angelic granny smith sorbet and a devilish chocolate and banana 
"kromeski".

Out and about
There's a decent deli <http://www.theislanddeli.com/> in the town, a great 
fishmonger on the esplanade and in the neighbouring village of Bonchurch, a 
20-minute walk away, is the Hambrough's sister restaurant,The Pond Cafe 
<http://www.thehambrough.com/hotels/23/the-pond-cafe.html>. Don't be deceived 
by the name: it's a serious restaurant, not a casual caff. From the homemade 
bread to the petit fours, everything was perfect. The standout dish was the 
twice-baked gorgonzola soufflé (though perhaps they should usingIsle of Wight 
blue <http://www.isleofwightcheese.co.uk/> instead). We thought it might just 
have the edge on the Hambrough, but then we do have simple tastes.

After a scenic two-hour stroll from Ventnor, past Appuldurcombe House 
<http://www.appuldurcombe.co.uk/> and farms with woolly piglets and miniature 
Shetland ponies, you reach Godshill, all thatched cottages and tourist tat. 
It's worth a visit for theGodshill Cider Company 
<http://godshillisleofwight.co.uk/isle-of-wight-cider/home.php>, the Taverners 
pub and store <http://www.thetavernersgodshill.co.uk/>, and, just outside the 
village,Godshill Organics <http://www.godshillorganics.co.uk/> farm shop.

• A two-night B&B break at The Hambrough 
<http://www.robert-thompson.com/the-hambrough/> costs from £200pp, including 
returnWightlink <http://www.wightlink.co.uk/> (0871 376 1000) car ferry 
crossings. Wightlink also operates a foot passenger catamaran service. Ferry 
and catamaran services depart from Portsmouth and Southampton
Rachel Dixon

Northcote Manor, Lancashire <http://www.northcote.com/>
 Northcote Manor hotel. 
There's something Edwardian about the hospitality at Northcote Manor. True, 
there's plenty of serious panelling and proper fires in proper grates and deep 
armchairs to sink into. But it has more to do with the sense of generosity and 
warmth. The spirit of the place is as well-upholstered as the fixtures and 
fitting.

The bedrooms may be decked out in the acme of contemporary bed- and bath-time 
technology, but the beds are ineffably comfortable and the pillows plump, and 
there are gew-gaws galore decking out most surfaces. It's the opposite of 
Pawson-esque minimalism. Nigel Howarth, the legend of the Ribble Valley, king 
of theLancashire hotpot 
<http://www.visitlancashire.com/site/food-and-drink/best-of-lancashire/lancashire-recipes/hotpot-by-nigel-haworth>
, rules in the kitchen, although the spritely Lisa Allen drives the team along, 
and they make a formidable duo.

The food is never less than thoughtful, intelligent and long on flavour. At 
its best it as fabulous as any in the country. It is rooted in local 
ingredients and classic techniques but it evolves all the time, taking what it 
needs from the fads and fashions of modern culinary developments, but always 
bending them to Northcote's distinctive style in such dishes as shavings of 
radholme wild duckling with smoked foie gras snow, pomegranate, black pudding 
crumble and watercress; or warm loin of Herdwick mutton, capers, Jerusalem 
artichoke purée, honey and mint dressing.

• Prices start at £215.50 for a double room, with a range of gourmet breaks 
also available. Checkthe website <http://www.northcote.com/> for details
Matthew Fort

Out and about
There's a great deal for the intrepid gastronaut in the area, much of it 
listed on theRibble Valley Food Trail <http://www.ribblevalleyfoodtrail.com> 
website. There are four excellent pubs run by the Northcote team which go 
collectively by the nameRibble Valley Inns <http://www.ribblevalleyinns.com/>. 
Individually, they areThe Three Fishes <http://www.thethreefishes.com/>, (nr 
Whalley);The Highwayman Inn <http://www.highwaymaninn.co.uk/> (Burrow, Kirkby 
Lonsdale);The Clog and Billycock <http://www.theclogandbillycock.com/> 
(Pleasington, Blackburn) andThe Bull at Broughton 
<http://www.thebullatbroughton.com/> (nr Skipton, North Yorkshire).
 