
Then there was a cold chicken. Then there was a salad in a big pudding-basin. 
Then there was an enormous gooseberry tart. Then there was a melon...

Swallows and Amazons <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swallows_and_Amazons>, 
Arthur Ransome

---

I’ve spent time today in Clapham Common, taking part in a pretty epic water 
fight, and enjoying the sun by the pond. In the coming weeks, there will be 
picnics and pedalos, backgammon and ball games. We’ll make pancakes and waffles 
on a regular basis, and the kids will have time to get involved with the 
preparation of sushi, toad-in-the-hole and lamb chops in the evenings. 
September, and the eventual return to school, seem a long way off.

This year, for the first time in a long time, I am observing the summer 
holidays first hand, through my job as a nanny. It is encouraging me to think 
back to the long, hot summers of my youth. Like so much of my childhood, my 
memories of Brisbane in the 90s are mixed in with flashes of other times, other 
cities, and other families – the ones in my favourite books.

Food in books: syllabub from Brambly Hedge Summer Story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/mar/10/food-in-books-syllabub-from-brambly-hedge-summer-story>
All four of our parents worked, so Luce and I spent our holidays hopping 
between grandparents, friends from school, aunts and uncles, neighbours, our 
parents’ places of work (where we’d find employ as receptionists or laboratory 
lackeys) and various football camps or holiday programmes. We played, and swam, 
and cooked, but mostly I remember reading a lot – sometimes more than a couple 
of books a day – heading off on fictional adventures from the comfort of a 
beanbag. I became acquainted with children who packed up picnic baskets and 
rucksacks and headed off on their own, into the English countryside, and was 
desperate to join them. Sure, we rock-hopped and camped and wandered through 
rainforests, but we did so with our parents at our side. It’s not quite the 
same.

Along with the Famous Five, who spent every one of their school holidays 
uncovering some sort of crime, I most longed to live alongside the Swallows and 
Amazons, sailing across the Lakes. I imagined a time where I could disappear 
for a day or two with my sister, and some homemade treats in a basket.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Ffood-in-books-gooseberry-tart-from-swallows-and-amazons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e4122f20e1009358105cd0015fd61ba2e00cc51%2F0_0_2084_2084%2F2084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20gooseberry%20tart%20from%20Swallows%20and%20Amazons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Ffood-in-books-gooseberry-tart-from-swallows-and-amazons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20gooseberry%20tart%20from%20Swallows%20and%20Amazons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Ffood-in-books-gooseberry-tart-from-swallows-and-amazons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e4122f20e1009358105cd0015fd61ba2e00cc51%2F0_0_2084_2084%2F2084.jpg>
 Photograph: Kate Young 
Gooseberry tart

Serves 8-10

Ingredients 
Pastry 
250g plain flour
 30g icing sugar
 Pinch of salt
 125g cold butter 
1 egg yolk
 1tbsp cold water 
Filling
 3 eggs
 70g honey
 200ml double cream 
1tsp elderflower cordial
 250g gooseberries

Equipment 
Mixing bowl 
Cling film 
20cm tart case (at least 2.5cm deep)
 Greaseproof paper
 Dried beans/rice
 Small knife
 Rolling pin
 Mixing jug 
Whisk

1. First, make your pastry. Put the flour, salt and icing sugar in a bowl and 
chop the butter into small cubes. Toss the butter in the flour and then rub 
together with your fingertips (not your palms - you want to keep everything 
cool) until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Add the egg yolk and mix with 
your hand, until the pastry comes together. If you need more liquid, add a very 
small amount of the iced water. Don’t overwork the dough; as soon as it has 
come together, wrap it in cling film and place it in the fridge.


2. After an hour in the fridge, place the pastry between two pieces of 
greaseproof paper. Roll it out until it is large enough to fit in your tart 
tin, with a bit of overhang. Move into the tin, easing the pastry into the 
corners, and ensuring it is pressed into the ridges. Trim the edge with a 
small, sharp knife and prick the base with a fork. Lay a sheet of greaseproof 
paper (one of the ones you rolled it between would work) in the base and fill 
it with rice or dried beans. Return the tart case to the fridge for 30 minutes. 
Preheat the oven to 200C and place a baking tray in the oven to heat up.

3. Place the tart in the oven, on the baking tray, and bake for 15 minutes. 
After this time, remove the greaseproof paper and beans and return the pastry 
to the oven for an additional five minutes, until dry and golden.

4. While the pastry is in the oven, prepare the filling. In a mixing jug or 
bowl, whisk the egg yolks with the honey until combined. Whisk in the cream and 
cordial. Trim the tops off the gooseberries.

5. When the tart case is baked, tip the gooseberries into it. Fill it up with 
the custard, being careful not to completely submerge the fruit. Bake for 40 
minutes, until the custard is set in the middle. Allow to cool for ten minutes 
in the tin, and then 30 minutes on a wire rack. Dust with icing sugar, wrap in 
greaseproof paper and a cloth, and add to your picnic basket.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Ffood-in-books-gooseberry-tart-from-swallows-and-amazons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa35485dd145d7dabbf983262c86a324314062fe5%2F0_0_2217_2217%2F2217.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20gooseberry%20tart%20from%20Swallows%20and%20Amazons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Ffood-in-books-gooseberry-tart-from-swallows-and-amazons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20gooseberry%20tart%20from%20Swallows%20and%20Amazons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Ffood-in-books-gooseberry-tart-from-swallows-and-amazons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa35485dd145d7dabbf983262c86a324314062fe5%2F0_0_2217_2217%2F2217.jpg>
 Photograph: Kate Young  