
Then he made himself lunch, which consisted of coffee and open sandwiches, and 
sat in the garden, where he was typing up the notes of his conversation with 
Pastor Falk. When that was done, he raised his eyes to the church.

The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Girl_with_the_Dragon_Tattoo>, Stieg Larsson

---


Last weekend, a year after my first visit, I returned to Billingsgate Market. 
The end of June means the longest days of the year, so rising at 4am to head 
for the East London Docklands doesn’t feel quite as challenging as I imagine it 
would in mid-winter, when I’d be out of bed long hours before the sun. On a 
fine blue morning, with the sun peeking over the horizon and the promise of 
bacon and scallop rolls at end, I was actually looking forward to it.


That first time, I shopped slowly; seeking out crabs, some sole, a handful of 
oysters, a few prawns and my big ticket item: a side of salmon. As anticipated, 
a couple of the stalls waved me on when my requests for two fish, rather than 
two boxes of fish, wasn’t worth opening a box for. But what struck me then, as 
it did again last weekend, was just how many people are there as part of their 
regular weekly shop. I had always assumed it was for bulk buying, and the odd 
solitary cook. Nothing could be further from the truth.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-gravlax-on-rye-from-the-girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17782e23c720453cd3fc681d56806c29a83a2d03%2F0_0_1958_1958%2F1958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20gravlax%20on%20rye%20from%20The%20Girl%20with%20the%20Dragon%20Tattoo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-gravlax-on-rye-from-the-girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20gravlax%20on%20rye%20from%20The%20Girl%20with%20the%20Dragon%20Tattoo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-gravlax-on-rye-from-the-girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17782e23c720453cd3fc681d56806c29a83a2d03%2F0_0_1958_1958%2F1958.jpg>
 ‘I’ve been visiting markets early on Saturday mornings since my teenage years’ 
... Salmon from London’s Billingsgate Market. Photograph: Kate Young 
I’ve been visiting markets early on Saturday mornings since my teenage years. 
Mum would get me out of bed before 6am with the promise of a flat white, a 
pastry and some time in the driver’s seat of the car – very early mornings, 
when almost no one else was on the road, were the ideal time to learn. We drove 
to the West End markets and loaded the back of our car with boxes of tomatoes 
or mangoes or anything that was in season. I’m positive I moaned about getting 
out of bed every Saturday, but I look back on it now with great affection. We 
walked back into our kitchen at 7am to unpack our goods, and still had the 
whole day ahead of us.


Last weekend, I visited the market in a different context – as a 
professional(ish) cook, hunting out hundreds of whole sardines to serve at a 
supper club at the London Review Bookshop over the weekend. I bought boxes of 
them, packed them with ice and wheeled them home in my suitcase (which I fear 
may forever be slightly fishy from this point forward). I walked with a heavy 
heart past the salmon, unable to spare the room in my bag. But I’ll be heading 
back soon, while the mornings are still light. In the meantime, the memory of 
this gravlax will have to do.


Gravlax: the recipe

 Serves at least six, with leftover fish (which can be frozen)

Ingredients
Gravlax
 1kg salmon (my side of salmon was about 2kg - see Step 1 below for details) 
 15g black peppercorns 
 70g coarse sea salt
 70g granulated sugar
 100g dill

Pickled cucumbers 
 3 medium-sized cucumbers 
 250ml cider vinegar 
 2tbsp fine sea salt 
 100g caster sugar 
 2tbsp coriander seeds 
 3tbsp dill fronds 

To serve 
A loaf of Diana Henry’s black bread 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/9203097/Black-bread-recipe.html>
 (my goodness, it’s glorious)
Some butter

Equipment
 Large flat dish that will fit in your fridge 
 Second dish to fit on top, and something heavy to put in it (I used tins of 
tomatoes)
 Mortar and pestle
 Cling film 

 Two large jars
 Mandolin 
 Knife and chopping board
 Measuring jug
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-gravlax-on-rye-from-the-girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ad3698d40a974513c9ccb125c0e3374c3f7db16%2F0_0_2301_2301%2F2301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20gravlax%20on%20rye%20from%20The%20Girl%20with%20the%20Dragon%20Tattoo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-gravlax-on-rye-from-the-girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20gravlax%20on%20rye%20from%20The%20Girl%20with%20the%20Dragon%20Tattoo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-gravlax-on-rye-from-the-girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ad3698d40a974513c9ccb125c0e3374c3f7db16%2F0_0_2301_2301%2F2301.jpg>
 Gravlax in the making. Photograph: Kate Young 
1 If you’ve bought a whole side of salmon, you’re going to need to select 
which part to turn into gravlax. You’ll need two equal(ish) sized pieces that 
have a similar thickness, otherwise you’ll end up with bits that are over- or 
under-cured. Leave the skin on, but do de-scale if this hasn’t been done 
already.


 2 A fishmonger should be able to tell you whether you’re buying sushi-grade 
salmon - the type you can confidently eat raw. If you’re not sure, then freeze 
it for 24 hours before adding the cure. This will kill any parasites. I managed 
to freak myself out, forget what the guy at Billingsgate had said, and froze 
mine just in case. It still tasted glorious.

 3 Defrost your salmon (if you’ve frozen it) and place both pieces skin side 
down on the bench. In the mortar and pestle, pummel your pepper, then add the 
salt and sugar and mix thoroughly. Chop the dill.

 4 Place half of the dill on top of one of the pieces of fish, then pack the 
salt, sugar and pepper mix on top. Cover with the other half of the dill, then 
place the other piece of fish (skin side up) on top. Place the whole dill/fish 
sandwich into the flat dish and cover with cling film. Place another dish on 
top, push down, and weigh down with tins. Place in the fridge.

 5 The gravlax will need to sit with its cure for 48 hours. Turn it every 12 
hours, draining away the liquid, then replacing the cling film and weight each 
time. In terms of timing, turning it before and after work worked for me. You 
don’t have to follow the 12 hour rule religiously - I was home a bit late one 
night, but it survived (full disclosure: I was a little full of gin, and nearly 
forgot about it completely, but I reckon it would have been OK if I had).

 6 When your gravlax is ready to eat, prepare the cucumber pickle. Slice the 
cucumbers very finely (a mandolin is handy here, but not compulsory). Dissolve 
the sugar and salt in the vinegar. Layer the cucumber slices, dill fronds and 
coriander seeds in the jars, then pour the vinegar mixture to the top. Turn the 
jar over a couple of times to ensure the vinegar has reached the bottom. Leave 
for at least 30 minutes to pickle slightly, though the leftovers will be great 
too, for at least a couple of weeks.

Food in books: the Yuk Hwe (Korean beef tartar) in The Vegetarian
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/jun/16/food-in-books-yuk-hwe-korean-beef-tartar-from-the-vegetarian>
7 To serve, scrape the cure off the salmon. Slice perpendicular to the bench, 
lifting each slice away from the skin. Slice it to your taste – I like it much 
thicker than it usually comes when packaged. Butter slices of the bread, top 
with salmon, the cucumber and a dribble of the pickling juice. Serve with 
coffee.
 