
What was sickening about a tomato sandwich? Harriet felt the taste in her 
mouth. Were they crazy? It was the best taste in the world. Her mouth watered 
at the memory of the mayonnaise.

Harriet the Spy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/392229/>, Louise 
Fitzhugh

---

England smells of summer this week. Of newly mown grass, of rain hitting hot 
tarmac, of the wisteria that hangs from brick walls, and of fields of wild 
garlic. I’ve been walking a lot – even in the rain – soaking it all in. At the 
greengrocer, the produce has shifted too, and space has been cleared for 
asparagus and radishes and punnets of strawberries. And, of course, English 
tomatoes.

Such is our desire for the ubiquitous tomato that they are available 
year-round, in corner shops, farm shops and supermarkets. From November to 
April, their insipid orange-red hue is useful in alerting us to their sub-par 
taste. Winter tomatoes are a disappointing sibling of their glorious summer 
cousins – they may as well be a different food. It’s a time to reach for the 
tinned variety, which carry me through the colder months. But when May arrives, 
with longer evenings and warmer days, the smell of tomatoes is overwhelming, 
and I am rarely without a bag or box of them in the kitchen.

Food in books: fish and chips from The Bear Nobody Wanted by Janet and Allan 
Ahlberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/apr/07/food-in-books-fish-and-chips-the-bear-nobody-wanted-janet-allan-ahlberg>
When I was at school, my mum was famous for her sandwiches. They were 
spectacular feats of engineering, loaded high with chopped salad and some form 
of meat, fish or cheese. They were also as far from soggy school sandwiches as 
it is possible to be; somehow the lettuce always stayed crisp, and she wrapped 
slices of tomato and tinned beetroot separately for us to add ourselves once 
morning tea rolled around (I could never save them for lunchtime). At my 
sister’s Hen’s night a couple of years ago, a friend of hers revealed that she 
frequently used to swap her tuck shop money for “Deb’s sandwiches”, leaving 
Luce with a meat pie, while her friend enjoyed my mum’s packed lunches. A very 
funny discovery, years after the fact, but I couldn’t help thinking that you’d 
have had to prise those sandwiches out of my cold, dead hands.

I have never quite had the knack my mum had, and so my years of packed lunches 
have mostly consisted of leftovers, batch cooking, or salads. Now freelance, 
and working next to a kitchen all day, I am rediscovering a love for lunchtime 
sandwiches. After all, when you’re eating it immediately after assembly, it 
matters less that the ingredients might make the bread a little soggy. And so, 
though I had hundreds to choose from (books, especially those for children, are 
littered with mentions to sandwiches), I wanted to recreate Harriet’s favourite 
tomatoes sandwiches this week.

A final note: mayonnaise is endlessly flexible in terms of flavours – play 
around with what works for you. If you prefer olive oil, use that. If you’d 
rather lemon juice or white wine vinegar in place of the cider vinegar, do so. 
If you don’t like English mustard, put Dijon in instead, or try it with a spot 
of Wasabi. There are so many options. It’s so quick and simple that I’m forever 
looking for excuses to make another batch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ffood-in-books-the-tomato-sandwiches-in-harriet-the-spy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf86fe5a6fc30b98d31c919f86a7d33936b0c9ba%2F0_296_1723_1163%2F1723.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20the%20tomato%20sandwiches%20in%20Harriet%20the%20Spy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ffood-in-books-the-tomato-sandwiches-in-harriet-the-spy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20the%20tomato%20sandwiches%20in%20Harriet%20the%20Spy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ffood-in-books-the-tomato-sandwiches-in-harriet-the-spy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf86fe5a6fc30b98d31c919f86a7d33936b0c9ba%2F0_296_1723_1163%2F1723.jpg>
 ‘Books, especially those for children, are littered with mentions to 
sandwiches.’ Photograph: Kate Young 
Tomato sandwich: the recipe

Serves 1 (with leftover mayonnaise) 

Ingredients
Mayonnaise
1 egg yolk
2tsp cider vinegar
150ml good rapeseed oil
¼ tsp hot English mustard
Sea salt
Black pepper

Sandwich
Two slices sourdough (I used the fennel sourdough from Bread Ahead in Borough 
Market)
2-3 of the freshest tomatoes you can find

Equipment
Mixing bowl
Jug
Whisk
Bread knife
Chopping board
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ffood-in-books-the-tomato-sandwiches-in-harriet-the-spy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6e6dea3777f70177f970c0d27240450b54ff525%2F0_138_1744_1325%2F1744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20the%20tomato%20sandwiches%20in%20Harriet%20the%20Spy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ffood-in-books-the-tomato-sandwiches-in-harriet-the-spy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20the%20tomato%20sandwiches%20in%20Harriet%20the%20Spy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ffood-in-books-the-tomato-sandwiches-in-harriet-the-spy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6e6dea3777f70177f970c0d27240450b54ff525%2F0_138_1744_1325%2F1744.jpg>
 ‘When May arrives, with longer evenings and warmer days, the smell of tomatoes 
is overwhelming, and I am rarely without a bag or box of them in the kitchen.’ 
Photograph: Kate Young 
For this to be a really great sandwich, all ingredients (those for the 
mayonnaise, as well as the tomatoes and bread), need to be at room temperature.


1 To make the mayonnaise, put the egg yolk in the bowl. Whisk it for a minute 
or so until it is sticky and has bubbles. Add one teaspoon of the vinegar and 
whisk again until combined. Put your oil into a jug or bottle that is easy to 
control.

2 Start dribbling the oil into the egg yolk, one drop at a time, whisking 
continuously. Keep your eye on the oil, not on the bowl. The moment you take 
your eye off it, you’ll accidentally pour a great big glug in – trust me.

3 Keep whisking until the egg and oil mix resembles thick cream. Once it does, 
you can start being a little more generous with the oil, adding up to a 
teaspoon at a time. When you have about 2tbsp of oil left, add the second 
teaspoon of vinegar. Whisk well. The consistency should be thick and 
spreadable, and stiff enough to hold the pattern that forms when you drag the 
whisk through it. If it is not quite there, gradually add as much of the extra 
oil as you need.

4 Try the mayonnaise and add mustard, pepper and salt to taste.

5 Spread some mayonnaise on one piece of the sourdough. Top with lots of thick 
slices of tomato. Put a thin spread of mayonnaise on the underside of the other 
piece of bread and place it on top. I mean – you probably don’t need me to 
explain this bit. It’s a sandwich…

Eat it immediately. No cling film, no lunchbox, no soggy bread.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ffood-in-books-the-tomato-sandwiches-in-harriet-the-spy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf11d87fb2322caa0332aa7ee5d3e126a593a2e0%2F0_414_1775_1065%2F1775.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20the%20tomato%20sandwiches%20in%20Harriet%20the%20Spy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ffood-in-books-the-tomato-sandwiches-in-harriet-the-spy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20the%20tomato%20sandwiches%20in%20Harriet%20the%20Spy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Ffood-in-books-the-tomato-sandwiches-in-harriet-the-spy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf11d87fb2322caa0332aa7ee5d3e126a593a2e0%2F0_414_1775_1065%2F1775.jpg>
 ‘At the greengrocer, the produce has shifted too, and space has been cleared 
for asparagus and radishes and punnets of strawberries. And, of course, English 
tomatoes.’ Photograph: Kate Young  