
But as a new dish was served he was silenced. “Incredible!” he told himself. 
“It is Blinis Demidoff!” He looked round at his fellow-diners. They were all 
quietly eating their Blinis Demidoff, without any sign of either surprise or 
approval, as if they had been doing so every day for thirty years.

Babette’s Feast, Isak Dinesen <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karen_Blixen>

---

I have been obsessed with Babette’s Feast for years. The film 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babette%27s_Feast> first, thanks to repeated 
Sunday afternoon viewings, and then the tiny, sparsely-written novella. Though 
small, it is not slight, exploring themes of religion, sacrifice, friendship 
and pleasure. After 14 years spent living with two puritanical sisters in a 
Norwegian village, the titular character, a talented chef and refugee from 
France, wins 10,000 franc in the French lottery. Instead of using the money to 
return to Paris, she spends it all on a dinner for 12 of the local villagers, 
who have subsisted on little but fish and soup throughout their lives. The act 
of feasting together repairs rifts and infuses the small group with love and 
warmth for each other. It is, in short, a magical meal.

It has long been my plan to do some version of this feast for my 30th 
birthday, though significant changes would need to be made. The turtle soup 
that starts the meal would need to become mock turtle soup - and so I would 
need to get my hands on a calf’s head. The main dish involves dispatching 12 
small birds – ortolans – in a particularly awful (and, rightfully, now illegal) 
manner, so an alternative would be needed. Happily this dish, the blinis, can 
be served just as it is in the book. At least once, I’d quite like to do the 
thing properly, and that means proper caviar and vintage Veuve Clicquot - but 
that would involve more disposable income than I generally have floating 
around. In the meantime, good herring roe and crisp, dry prosecco make 
excellent substitutes.

Food in books: salted caramel brownies from A Confederacy of Dunces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/oct/13/food-in-books-salted-caramel-brownies-from-a-confederacy-of-dunces>
I have only eaten caviar once before in my life. My mum and Granny visited for 
Christmas in 2014 from Australia, and were here for New Year’s Eve. That night, 
after a matinee show, we returned to my little London flat to watch films and 
sit on my couch, and ate an extraordinarily extravagant meal. Granny had 
scouted London for a pot of good caviar, and served it with soft boiled eggs, 
tiny boiled potatoes and the best butter she could find. Mum grilled fillet 
steaks, and made a rich mushroom sauce. We drank champagne, and toasted the 
beginning of 2015. It was warming, and memorable, and delicious: a magical 
meal. This year, so much has changed. I’ve moved out of the flat, left the 
theatre job, and am now writing about food and books. Sadly, mum and Granny 
won’t be joining me in December. But there is still much to celebrate, and so 
this year’s NYE caviar is going to come with these blinis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffood-in-books-blinis-demidoff-from-babettes-feast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87f474cc6a3f815bfc2ebc9bed34fb160150a9ab%2F0_0_1852_1676%2F1852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Blinis%20Demidoff%20from%20Babette%E2%80%99s%20Feast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffood-in-books-blinis-demidoff-from-babettes-feast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Blinis%20Demidoff%20from%20Babette%E2%80%99s%20Feast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffood-in-books-blinis-demidoff-from-babettes-feast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87f474cc6a3f815bfc2ebc9bed34fb160150a9ab%2F0_0_1852_1676%2F1852.jpg>
 Photograph: Kate Young 
Blinis Demidoff

Makes around 30 blinis

Ingredients 
60g buckwheat flour 
60g strong white bread flour 
Pinch salt 
Pinch sugar 
100ml milk 
10g fresh yeast (or 3g easy action yeast)* 
75g sour cream
 1 egg yolk 
2 egg whites 
30g butter 

To serve
 Caviar or fish eggs 
50g sour cream

Equipment 
2 mixing bowls
 Whisk 
Small saucepan
 Spatula 
Frying pan
 Tea spoons
 Egg flip or palette knife

*I love the flavour of fresh yeast here, and am lucky enough to be able to buy 
it at the supermarket. If you can’t get your hands on any, easy action yeast 
will work well too.

1. Whisk the flours, salt and sugar together in the mixing bowl. In the 
saucepan, warm the milk to blood temperature, then stir in the yeast until it 
dissolves. Whisk in the sour cream, and the egg yolk.


2. Pour the liquid ingredients into the flour and whisk thoroughly to combine. 
Cover the bowl with a tea towel and put it in a draught-free place to rise for 
an hour. It will almost double in size.

3. After an hour, beat the egg whites to stiff peaks, and then fold them into 
the frothy mixture. Cover the bowl with the tea towel again and leave to rise 
for another hour. It should be very light and full of bubbles - almost like a 
foam.

4. After it has risen, warm half a tablespoon of the butter in the frying pan. 
Without stirring the mixture (you want to retain some of those bubbles), drop 
teaspoons of the batter into the pan. When the top of a blini is covered with 
bubbles, flip it over. Cook the blinis in batches until all the batter is used 
up.

Serve each blini warm or at room temperature with a dollop of sour cream and a 
little spoonful of roe or caviar. They can be warmed through in the oven, but 
are best fresh, if you can serve them straight away.
 