
Presently, Cook and Clara went away to get dressed for their own Christmas 
party downstairs; and then Nana took Posy to bed. After that, although they had 
supper of cold turkey and meringues, the day was terribly finished...

Ballet Shoes <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ballet_Shoes_(novel)>, Noel 
Streatfeild

---

Where I grew up, in Brisbane, Christmas happens in summer. Santa is depicted 
in board shorts and flip-flops, we sighed wistfully at any mention of snow in 
carols, and I generally spent at least a portion of the days itself in the 
pool. More often than not, we feast on prawns and salad, rather than turkey and 
roast potatoes. But, despite the heat, we always have a Christmas pudding, 
dotted with silver sixpence pieces my great-grandmother passed down, with 
custard and brandy butter. I love it, even while sweating profusely. It’s 
tradition.

In the days surrounding Christmas, at family lunches and dinners with friends, 
you’re much more likely to find pavlova on our table. In fact, there’s also 
likely to be one on the table on Christmas Day, for those who don’t fancy a hot 
pudding. A huge white mound of meringue and cream, covered with kiwi and 
passionfruit, is about as Christmassy a sight as I can imagine, traditional in 
its own, Australian way.

The Christmas that Pauline, Petrova and Posy celebrate in Ballet Shoes comes 
at the end of a busy year - one full of change. They have new classes, new 
teachers and a gruelling schedule. But they note that, although the day is 
perhaps more welcome than in preceding years, it isn’t all that different. I 
find comfort and reassurance in this; those Christmas traditions we carry out 
every year. So much of it is the same each time - the canapés fromNigella’s 
Christmas 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Nigella-Christmas-Family-Friends-Festivities/dp/0701183225/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1481111104&sr=8-1&keywords=nigella+christmas>
, the same decorations that are placed carefully back on the tree, the films 
that are watched over and over.

Food in books: Blinis Demidoff from Babette’s Feast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/nov/17/food-in-books-blinis-demidoff-from-babettes-feast>
There are, of course, as many traditions as there are families and individuals 
who celebrate Christmas. In Ballet Shoes, the Fossil girls enjoy a traditional 
roast dinner, a game of hide-and-seek, and then cold turkey and meringues for 
supper. I’ll beeating blinis in my pyjamas, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/nov/17/food-in-books-blinis-demidoff-from-babettes-feast>
 watching It’s a Wonderful Life and Skyping with my family in Australia. I’ll 
also be cooking lunch for the Cotswolds-based familywho take me in at Christmas 
<http://thelittlelibrarycafe.com/blog/2015/12/21/crystallised-ginger-the-adventure-of-the-christmas-pudding>
, including an individual pavlova for my Cotswolds brother Tom, who hates 
“hidden raisins” in desserts. It’s just like every other year - except for the 
people whose absence will be felt. This Christmas, I’ll be missing my Cotswolds 
sister Anna, who is working in Brazil, our cousin Mia, in Sweden with her 
family, and my sister Lucy, who is celebrating with her husband in Seattle. And 
so I’m going to re-read Ballet Shoes. So far from much of my family, I find the 
story of these three girls, sisters in everything but blood, an immensely 
comforting read.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-pavlova-from-ballet-shoes-by-noel-streatfeild%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b3e0f8e1be2c9c0b1bcf8cbf2d0bf12632a50c%2F0_0_2007_2007%2F2007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Christmas%20pavlova%20from%20Ballet%20Shoes%20by%20Noel%20Streatfeild&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-pavlova-from-ballet-shoes-by-noel-streatfeild%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Christmas%20pavlova%20from%20Ballet%20Shoes%20by%20Noel%20Streatfeild&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-pavlova-from-ballet-shoes-by-noel-streatfeild%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b3e0f8e1be2c9c0b1bcf8cbf2d0bf12632a50c%2F0_0_2007_2007%2F2007.jpg>
 Photograph: Kate Young 
Christmas Pavlova

Serves 4 

Ingredients 
Pavlova 
2 egg whites
 110g caster sugar (even better if it is vanilla scented - store your sugar 
with a couple of split vanilla pods for a few weeks)
 1tsp cornflour
 1/2tsp cream of tartar 
Syrup 
1 pomegranate 
Up to 50g caster sugar
 Topping
 1 pomegranate 
300ml double cream

Equipment 
Greaseproof paper 
Pencil
 Baking tray
 Electric hand whisk or mixer
 Spatula
 Knife and chopping board 
Small saucepan 
Potato masher 
Fine sieve
 Whisk

1. Preheat your oven to 180C. Draw four 10cm circles on a sheet of greaseproof 
paper, flip it over, and use it to line a baking tray.

2. In a spotlessly clean bowl, beat your egg white to soft peaks. You can do 
this by hand, but if you have a mixer or electric whisk, now would be the time 
to employ it. Once at soft peaks, start adding the sugar, a tablespoon at a 
time. Beat on a high speed for another three minutes until the meringue is 
smooth, glossy and stiff.

3. Take a pinch of the meringue between your fingers and rub it. If you can 
still feel the grains of sugar, beat it a bit longer - the undissolved sugar 
will make your pavlovas weep in the oven. Once the sugar is completely 
dissolved, sprinkle the cornflour and cream of tartar over the meringue and 
gently fold it in.

4. Divide the meringue evenly between the four traced circles, and create a 
slight indent in the middle of each one, where the filling will sit. Transfer 
the tray to the oven, immediately reduce the temperature to 140C and bake for 
50 minutes. When the pavlovas are crisp on top, turn the oven off, leave the 
door ajar and allow them to cool completely.

5. While the pavlovas are baking, prepare the syrup. Put the seeds of the 
pomegranate into the saucepan and place over a low heat. Mash them until they 
release their juice, and then push them through the fine sieve, until you’re 
left with only pulp and seeds. Weigh this juice, and return it to the saucepan, 
along with the same weight of sugar. Place back over a low heat, bring to the 
boil and allow to cool.

6. Release the seeds from the second pomegranate. Whisk the cream to soft 
peaks. Serve each pavlova with some cream, pomegranate seeds, and a drizzle of 
the syrup.
 