
One of the best things about visiting the Suffolk coast is the abundance of 
scenic walks. There are little wooden signs all over the place enticing passers 
by up bridle paths, along creeks or into thick pine woods. Which is lucky, 
because there's an awful lot of good food to be scoffed and there's nothing 
like a stroll to ease digestion and burn off a few excess calories.

Happily, the area's food producers are as inviting as the landscape. Local 
farmers, smokers and bakers will proudly tell their stories to anyone who'll 
listen.Aldeburgh Food and Drink Festival 
<http://www.aldeburghfoodanddrink.co.uk/>, which takes place on Saturday 24 and 
Sunday 25 September (with fringe events continuing over the following 
fortnight) provides a good opportunity to see the main players in action and 
sample their food as well as get involved in a whole lot more foodular 
activity. But if quiet and leisurely is more your style, the area is perfect 
for a gluttonous weekend away, out of season.

The obvious place to start exploring the region's edible attractions is the 
farmer's market atSnape Maltings 
<http://www.snapemaltings.co.uk/eat/farmers-market/> (built in the late 19th 
century to malt barley for brewing) which happens on the first Saturday of 
every month. It's teeming with intriguing produce (even the obligatory chutney 
stall piques our interest – more on Anchor Farm Preserves later) and, being out 
of town, has a villagey feel. Everyone seems to know each other, or at least 
they all know local food expert Polly Robinson, the brains behindFood Safari 
<http://www.foodsafari.co.uk>, who whisks us - and anyone else who wants to 
book - around to meet local producers who share their skills, from shucking 
oysters to preparing and cooking game.

Our first taste of the county is of rich and creamy Suffolk Gold cheese 
<http://www.suffolkcheese.co.uk> and we meet a woman who is passionate about her
Red Poll <http://www.redpoll.org/> cattle which she farms for both milk and 
beef. Raising these dual-purpose animals means that male calves, which would be 
disposed of were they born into a dairy herd, are raised for beef, and the 
breed (which originated in the area) is"finished" on grass 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2008/jun/05/whatsthebeefwithlowercarb>
 as opposed to industrially produced concentrates. All very eco-conscious and 
surely to be applauded.

The market closes at lunchtime, after which we ravenously drive seven miles 
south west towards Woodbridge, for lunch at theBritish Larder 
<http://www.britishlardersuffolk.co.uk/>. It has only been open a year, but the 
gastropub (and then some), has already established itself as a key Suffolk 
foodie destination. Many of the producers you meet at the farmer's market, such 
as Sutton Hoo chickens and Butley Oysters, see their output showcased on the 
menu there. The pub is run by chefs Madalene Bonvini-Hamel and Ross Pike who 
run arecipe website <http://www.britishlarder.co.uk/#axzz1WhrouESF>, have a 
book in the offing and plan to run cookery courses.
 Tasting platters at the British Larder, Woodbridge, Suffolk. Photograph: Amy 
Fleming 
Too greedy to commit to single courses, we share two "tasting platters" - the 
Dingly Dell (named after the nearby pig farm) for pork, and the Orford 
Smokehouse fish selection, both arranged beautifully on thick, wooden slabs and 
garnished with curly pea shoots. The former includes a smoked ham scotch egg 
that is, from the crunchy crumb through to the yielding yolk; perfect.

Another highlight is the ham hock and Sutton Hoo chicken terrine. I don't 
usually go in for terrines but this is sensational. The smoked prawns and 
creamy mackerel pâté are also to die for. The puddings are well worth carrying 
a few extra pounds for - the treacle tart filling oozes in its short, thin 
pastry shell, all toasted and caramelised on top, served with Suffolk Meadow 
vanilla ice cream. And the cherry and brown sugar meringue mess is gorgeously 
topped with three whole horns of meringue, powdery on the outside and sticky 
within.

After lunch, we pootle coastwards to take in Orford's offerings. With its 12th 
century castle 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/daysout/properties/orford-castle/> and a 
coastal nature reserve just across the river, it is stupendously picturesque. 
The short walk to the quay from the castle is a beautiful route to the river, 
which is hidden by a little hill on the approach, so you hear it and smell it 
and detect its reflected light before you see it.

Pinney's quayside store makes for an interesting stop. The company have been 
smoking fish in Orford since the 1950s, much of it caught in the North Sea by 
their own boats. The smoking still takes place out at Orford Ness, and they 
have a restaurant (Orford Butley Oysterage) in the middle of the village. It is 
intimidatingly quiet in the shop when we enter, but as soon as you break the 
silence and ask about the products and Pinney's history, the man the behind the 
counter opens up like a book. We buy treacly smoked traditional Suffolk black 
bacon (possibly an acquired taste, this one), and hot smoked (Scottish) salmon 
cutlets. Lurking in quiet Bakers lane is another smokehouse,Richardsons 
<http://www.richardsonssmokehouse.co.uk/> – where they smoke and sell on the 
same premises - their bacon, without the sweet cure, is reasonably priced and 
more to my taste.

We've already sampled some of the wares of our next stop, Pump Street Bakery 
<http://www.pumpstreetbakery.com/>, because they supply the British Larder. The 
place has a light, modern feel to it, including the café where customers 
congregate around one vast table. A glance at the menu tells you that 
everything they sell is a bit special – from the cherry and hazelnut Bircher 
muesli to the green pea and lovage soup, with Tuscan olive oil and a mini 
baguette.

Before we head up the coast to find our digs in Aldeburgh, there's time for a 
brief detour just outside Orford to visit High House Fruit Farm, whose shop is 
manned by nothing more than a set of scales and an honesty box. Our visit hits 
the end of the asparagus season and there are some beautiful fresh specimens 
that are hard to resist - along with some lovely apple juice (it's the cloudy, 
unfiltered stuff, and they sell it by variety: James Grieve, Cox & Bramley, 
Discovery and Russet).

Unsurprisingly, come dinner time, we're just not that hungry so we hole up at 
theBrudenell hotel <http://www.brudenellhotel.co.uk/default.aspx>, sheltering 
from the blustery wind coming in from the sea, which it overlooks. (They kindly 
allow us to park our spoils of the day in their fridge overnight.) Our 
favourite comestibles there turn out to be the cocktails made with spirits from 
the newAdnams distillery 
<http://adnams.co.uk/spirits/adnams-southwold-distillery> (the brewery a little 
further up the coast in Southwold started distilling premium spirits in 2010), 
and the lovely home-made jams, served at breakfast – all rich and runny.
 Fishing boats on the beach at Aldeburgh, Suffolk. Photograph: Amy Fleming 
The perfect start to Sunday morning is a stroll along the beach to the Fish 
Shack, where fishermen sell their catch fresh off the boats at bargain prices: 
five flounders for a pound or large Dover sole for £6.90 a pound (about £15 a 
kilo in new money).

Before the long drive home, some light country rambling is in order so we 
stock up on picnic food at another must-visit in Aldeburgh. A quick nose around 
Lawson's Delicatessen on the high street reveals a good mix of local artisanal 
produce (from ripe cheeses to freshly picked fruit and veg), specialist 
ingredients from further afield (such as Spanish salted almonds), and fine food 
made in their own kitchens – from soups and salads to glazed local pork and 
sweet pastries. When we finally, reluctantly set off on our journey, we are 
hungry for more.

Don't leave east Suffolk without trying ...

The Artisan Smokehouse's <http://www.artisansmokehouse.co.uk/> smoked British 
beef fillet is amazing. The carpaccio is dry cured, then cold smoked over 
maple, and is best eaten on its own. Their smoked Westcombe Cheddar is also 
pretty damn moreish.

Anchor Farm Preserves, which you can buy at the Farmer's Market, do a great 
line in chilli tomato ketchup – it's like brown sauce, Tabasco and ketchup all 
rolled into one. And the delightfully spicy mango and apricot chutney is a must 
for the larder of any curry fan.

Calvors <http://www.calvors.co.uk/> lagers are made "naturally", by 
traditional methods, on a family farm – and boy do they quench a thirst.

High House Fruit Farm's <http://www.high-house.co.uk> cox and bramley apple 
juice – tangy enough for the discerning, grown-up palate.

Adnams distillery <http://cellarandkitchen.adnams.co.uk/page/adnams-spirits> – 
we've all tasted their beer, but the gin is pretty spectacular (they do vodka 
and limoncello too!). You can visit them in Southwold, and see how it's made.

Paddy and Scott's <http://www.paddyandscotts.co.uk/> strong yet palatable 
"morning coffee" blend.

St Peter's <http://www.stpetersbrewery.co.uk/> ales and bitters are for 
drinkers not afraid of yeasty, hoppy, dry beverages. And they have unusually 
tasteful bottles – make of that what you will.

Pump Street Bakery's <http://www.pumpstreetbakery.com/> sourdough bread, which 
is delicately decorated with rings of flour

Grain Brewery's creamy stout (OK, they're actually across the border, in 
Norfolk, but you'll see plenty of their stuff in Suffolk too).

Lawson's Delicatessen's Blythburgh pork, apple and rosemary pasties. They are 
made in house – wash one down with someAspall Suffolk Cyder 
<http://www.aspall.co.uk/>, or some local ale or apple juice. Heaven.
 