
... there were two roast sliced chestnuts which they would eat like toast with 
butter and a cold boiled chestnut which Pod would cut like bread; there was a 
plate of hot dried currants, well plumped before the fire; there were cinnamon 
breadcrumbs, crispy golden, and lightly dredged with sugar, and in front of 
each plate, oh, delight of delights, a single potted shrimp.

The Borrowers <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Borrowers>, Mary Norton

---

When I moved to the UK, I started to spend my holidays with my second family 
in Gloucestershire. I havewritten before 
<http://thelittlelibrarycafe.com/blog/2015/12/21/crystallised-ginger-the-adventure-of-the-christmas-pudding>
 of their extraordinary generosity, and the wonderful relationship that we 
have. Whenever I am there, it is inevitably with some or all of my adopted 
siblings, and a fridge that is bursting at the seams with food. After Swedish 
Christmas, English Christmas and Boxing Day, we take it in turns to hunt out 
leftovers and turn them into something new. Roasts find their way into pies and 
risottos, root veg is mashed or diced to provide some sort of breakfast fodder 
– but more often than not, we will organise a ‘hotch potch’, where we pull 
everything out of the fridge and assemble it in the middle of the table. This 
meal in The Borrowers feels just like a ‘hotch potch’ dinner. Some chestnuts, a 
handful of raisins, crumbs of cinnamon toast and a single potted shrimp - food 
that doesn’t quite go together, but that a hungry family would make short work 
of.

I have been through a lot of ingredients in the past week - while cooking over 
50 recipes from my forthcoming book, I’ve bought kilograms of butter, over 100 
eggs and 10 litres of milk. In the past couple of days, after the last of the 
leftover ingredients and dishes were slowly put to good use, I opened the 
fridge to discover that I was down to the bare minimum: eggs, milk, butter and 
bread. I could have reverted to my standby: scrambled eggs on toast, but I have 
been dreaming about cinnamon toast since re-reading The Borrowers earlier this 
year, and quickly latched onto that idea.

Traditional cinnamon toast (the one I remember from childhood) is heavily 
buttered white toast, sprinkled liberally with sugar and cinnamon. This one is 
a little more substantial, slightly more grown up and - most importantly - used 
up what I had left in the fridge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffood-in-books-cinnamon-french-toast-from-the-borrowers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90e14863d0d7dfda69bdf4d9411a10fe778b461e%2F0_60_1797_1304%2F1797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20cinnamon%20French%20toast%20from%20The%20Borrowers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffood-in-books-cinnamon-french-toast-from-the-borrowers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20cinnamon%20French%20toast%20from%20The%20Borrowers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffood-in-books-cinnamon-french-toast-from-the-borrowers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90e14863d0d7dfda69bdf4d9411a10fe778b461e%2F0_60_1797_1304%2F1797.jpg>
 Ingredients for cinnamon French toast. Photograph: Kate Young of The Little 
Library Café 
Cinnamon French toast

Serves 2

Ingredients
 2 large slices slightly stale bread 
2 eggs 
2tbsp milk 
Pinch salt 
2tbsp butter
 1/2tsp icing sugar 
1/2tsp ground cinnamon
Pinch nutmeg

Equipment
 Flat dish 
Fork
 Frying pan 
Sieve

Food in books: the crab, avocado and mayonnaise in Sylvia Plath's The Bell Jar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/jun/09/food-in-books-crab-avocado-and-mayonnaise-sylvia-plath-the-bell-jar>
1. In the flat dish, whisk the eggs, salt and milk together. Push the slices 
of bread into the mixture, leaving them for around a minute before turning them 
over. The time here is really down to how robust your bread is - sourdough can 
take a minute a side (it would be fine if you forgot about it for a good few 
minutes, actually), softer bread will need less time.


2. Melt the butter in the frying pan over a medium heat until it is frothing, 
then lay the bread in the pan. Cook for around two minutes, until golden 
underneath. Flip over and cook the other side for two minutes too. The butter 
will brown during this time – if you’d rather it didn’t, you can use clarified 
butter, but I quite like the nutty flavor that brown butter lends.

3. Remove the toast from the pan, then sprinkle with the icing sugar, nutmeg 
and cinnamon. Serve immediately.

 * Kate Young is taking over the Guardian Cook Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_cook/> on 30 and 31st of July.  