
Mrs Jubb, who might have been a good cook with any encouragement, must have 
lost heart long ago. Tonight she set before us a pale macaroni cheese, and a 
dish of boiled potatoes, and I noticed a blancmange or ‘shape’, also of an 
indeterminate colour, in a glass dish on the sideboard. Not enough salt, or 
perhaps no salt, I thought, as I ate the macaroni. And not really enough cheese.

Excellent Women <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Excellent_Women>, Barbara Pym

---

Not for the first time this year, I have happened across a book I feel I 
really should have read sooner. Thanks to the wonder that is Twitter, and the 
book fans who lie therein, I have finally discovered Barbara Pym. Excellent 
Women truly is excellent - witty, cleverly observed and with a wonderfully 
nuanced central character. I enjoyed it enormously.

Barbara Pym's Excellent Women: 'One of the 20th century’s most amusing novels'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/apr/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview30>
Though I wish I’d read Pym’s books years ago, I do feel that this week, as I 
enter my 30th year, is the ideal time to meet Mildred Lathbury, the titular 
excellent woman. Sensible and self-sufficient, she is ‘useful’ in a crisis - 
from helping resolve marital spats to knowing the correct placement of items at 
a jumble sale. But she is also constantly reminded of the things she assumed 
would be part of her life in her 30s that haven’t happened: a husband and 
family. Reading Excellent Women, I was so aware of the young men in England who 
didn’t return from the war, and the generation of women who were left behind. 
Though regularly laugh-out-loud funny, the book is also achingly sad, in a way 
I’m not sure my teenage self would have appreciated.

It seems only right, in terms of this recipe, that my first read of Excellent 
Women should fall on the same day as my first attempt at macaroni cheese. The 
little ones I nanny for had requested it for a Friday night treat, and I had to 
admit to them that it would be a new one for me. On moving to the UK, I did 
live, for six months, with a close friend who ate pasta and cheese multiple 
nights a week, often making me a bowl too. But macaroni cheese is something 
different. Gooey, rich and salty, it is, unsurprisingly, pure comfort in a dish.

Unfortunately, Mildred is rather disappointed with hers. It is served with 
potatoes, and is lacking in both salt and cheese. In fact, the book is full of 
references to food made when war rationing in England was still in force. She 
eats tins of baked beans, rubbery spaghetti she struggles to wind around her 
fork, endless mediocre cakes at church events and my favourite, a ‘melancholy 
luncheon’:

“...a dried-up scrap of cheese, a few lettuce leaves for which I could not be 
bothered to make any dressing, a tomato and a piece of bread and butter, 
followed by a cup of coffee made with coffee essence. A real woman’s meal, I 
thought, with no suggestion of brandy afterwards...”

And so I’ve made some changes to her disappointing dinner. The addition of 
bacon is a no brainer (and lends the dish an almost carbonara-esque vibe), and 
the sauce needs plenty of cheese too, ideally of a couple of different 
varieties. You could add some peas as well, as my friend Anna does for her 
nannying charges, but mine won’t touch the things, so they get this as is. With 
something green - a crisp salad, for me - on the side.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ffood-in-books-macaroni-cheese-from-excellent-women-by-barbara-pym%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F015151674545b47ab1e34fa3fb2c0edeef9534a1%2F0_0_1790_1700%2F1790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20macaroni%20cheese%20from%20Excellent%20Women%20by%20Barbara%20Pym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ffood-in-books-macaroni-cheese-from-excellent-women-by-barbara-pym%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20macaroni%20cheese%20from%20Excellent%20Women%20by%20Barbara%20Pym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ffood-in-books-macaroni-cheese-from-excellent-women-by-barbara-pym%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F015151674545b47ab1e34fa3fb2c0edeef9534a1%2F0_0_1790_1700%2F1790.jpg>
 Macaroni Cheese from Excellent Women by Barbara Pym Photograph: Kate Young 
Macaroni cheese: the recipe

Makes 4 small or 3 generous portions

Ingredients
 125g diced pancetta or lardons
 230g dried macaroni 
Generous pinch salt 
50g salted butter 
50g plain flour 
300ml whole milk 
50g grated sharp cheddar 
75g grated mozzarella 
Generous grating nutmeg
 2tbsp breadcrumbs 
1tbsp grated parmesan cheese

Equipment 
Small frying pan
 Wooden spoon
 Two saucepans
 Whisk
 Colander
 Ovenproof dish - I used one that is 25cm x 15cm x 4cm deep, but you should 
use whatever size you have

1. Preheat your oven to 200C. Warm the frying pan over a medium heat and tip 
in the lardons/pancetta. Fry them gently for around 15 minutes, while you get 
on with the rest of the dish. Return to give them a stir every now and then, to 
ensure they don’t burn. Don’t add any butter or oil to this pan - any necessary 
fat will come from the lardons.


2. Fill one of the saucepans with water and bring to the boil. Once it is 
bubbling enthusiastically, add a generous pinch of salt and pour in the 
macaroni. Cook until the pasta is tender but still has a little bite - which 
should be around seven minutes. Drain and set aside.

3. In the meantime, melt the butter in the second saucepan and, once it is 
bubbling, tip in the flour. Stir with the wooden spoon for three minutes, to 
cook off the taste of the flour. Pour in the milk and whisk until the sauce 
thickens. Don’t worry if this takes a couple of minutes; it will happen very 
suddenly, so do keep an eye on it and keep whisking, or it will become lumpy.

4. Over a very low heat, whisk in the cheese until it melts and the sauce 
becomes stringy. Remove from the heat and add the nutmeg.

5. Tip the pasta and lardons (and their fat) into the cheese sauce, and stir 
well until the ingredients are distributed evenly. Scoop the whole gooey lot 
into the greased ovenproof dish.

6. Top with breadcrumbs and grated parmesan and bake for 20 minutes, until the 
cheese sauce is bubbling and the dish is browned in patches on top. Sort out a 
salad or drinks before bringing the dish to the table, giving the molten cheese 
time to cool a little.

If it makes your life easier, you can make big batches of this, bake it and 
then freeze it. When you want to eat it, put it back in the oven to bake again 
until the cheese sauce is bubbling.
 