
Last year was characterised by sudden, unpredicted change. Some certainties 
unravelled overnight, as polls turned out not to reflect votes, others had been 
building for some time.

The crisis in health and care services is being dangerously accelerated by 
cuts, but you can trace its roots back to decades-old failure to take seriously 
the ever-growing gap between what services can deliver and the growing demands 
on them. It is easy to believe that all the future holds is the loss of 
services. But the future will be whatever we choose to make it.

Theresa May recognises social care crisis – but solution seems far off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/21/theresa-may-recognises-social-care-crisis-but-solution-seems-far-off>
There is a time for tweaking and refining the existing model, but perhaps the 
middle of the widespread collapse of health and care services is not that time. 
We need significant central government investment to avoid crisis becoming 
catastrophe, but then what?

Sustainability and transformation plans (STPs), which were the big headline of 
NHS change in 2016, are for the most part prime examples of how we lack a model 
for radical change in public services. They are the system responding to crisis 
by doing what we always do – just faster, at bigger scale and with more 
anxiety. The more urgent and important the work, the less leaders feel able – 
or obliged – toinvolve a wide group of organisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/nov/25/citizens-must-get-say-nhs-sustainability-transformation-plans>
, let alone people who use services and their families.

Most STPs express what leaders were already intending to do, with little of 
the involvement of new people that would have led to new aims, approaches and 
behaviour. Lack of collaboration has bred suspicion, but they are not the 
secret cuts plans they have been dubbed: they are more likely to avoid talking 
about cuts that have been inevitable for years.

Where they say the right things about community-based care or prevention, many 
are essentially works of fiction with no model for the culture, power and 
economic changes needed.

There is much talk of scale in public service delivery, but nearly always this 
is the industrial age’s need to operate in large units. Our large 
organisations, silted up with the governance requirements that must accompany 
any big budget, are not the place where change will happen.

What does 2017 hold for social care?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2017/jan/03/what-does-2017-hold-for-social-care>
The real challenge is to scale those bureaucracies down to be human and 
family-sized again. The lesson of successful models – such aspersonal budgets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/27/personal-budgets-control-their-own-support-and-their-own-lives>
,Shared Lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/may/23/shared-lives-community-based-supporting-adults>
, community enterprise,Buurtzorg 
<https://www.rcn.org.uk/about-us/policy-briefings/br-0215>, local area 
coordination and Homeshare – is that we avoid the prototype-then-replicate 
approach and instead create enough infrastructure for people to form similar 
but entirely individual relationships everywhere. This is the scaling model of 
the internet age.

The only kind of change you can make happen suddenly, on a large scale, is 
destruction, whereas creation of anything real and valuable starts small, but 
ambitious. For real change to take hold, you need to involve people who don’t 
always agree with each other and you need a tolerance for messiness: the neater 
the plan, the more fictional it is.

There many kinds of people who care about each other and who already change 
the world around them: hundreds of Homeshare households, thousands of community 
entrepreneurs, 10,000 Shared Lives carers, tens of thousands of timebankers and 
millions of unpaid family carers. Can those overlooked groups join together, 
gradually and messily, to become a national movement that chooses to build a 
better, more human future? Do we still have time?

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 