
When the railways were privatised in the mid-1990s, ministers took it in turns 
to say this would mean that government would no longer be able to interfere. 
Tell that toChris Grayling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>
, the Conservative transport secretary, who is set to be the most politically 
motivated of recent transport ministers, and seems to be spending most of his 
time playing with trains.

The leak of a letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/07/chris-grayling-accused-of-putting-politics-over-people-in-rail-letter-leak>
 he wrote to Boris Johnson, the then Conservative London mayor, three years ago 
expressing his opposition to handing over more of London’s suburban rail 
services to a future Labour mayor, demonstrates that political considerations – 
rather than a desire to improve the lot of benighted commuters – appear to 
dominate Grayling’s decision-making process.

Plans for Transport for London to take over capital's rail lines ditched
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/transport-for-london-plans-ditched-chris-grayling-sadiq-khan>
It is no coincidence that this letter emerged in the week that Grayling 
thwarted plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/transport-for-london-plans-ditched-chris-grayling-sadiq-khan>
 for Sadiq Khan’s mayoral administration to take over a chunk of rail services 
that run entirely, or mostly, in London. The precise lines that would have been 
taken over were unclear – though the Labour mayor had produced a lengthy wish 
list – and the timing was dependent on when the particular franchises run out, 
but broadly the plan had cross-party acceptance. Johnson, Khan’s predecessor, 
had pretty much signed off on the deal, but the conclusion was postponed until 
after the May 2016 mayoral election.

On Tuesday, however, Grayling killed off the plan, citing the fact that there 
would be a democratic deficit for people in, say, Guildford if their train 
services were run by the mayor of London. This is a laughable excuse since the 
deal had beenapproved by Kent and Surrey councils 
<http://www.thisislocallondon.co.uk/news/14949144.No_TfL_takeover_planned_for_Southeastern_services/>
, and the good people of Surrey have absolutely no say whatsoever over the 
present franchise agreement between the government and South West Trains.

The mischievous leak of the letter – could it have been by its recipient, 
Boris Johnson? – exposed Grayling’s tenuous excuse as utterly fraudulent, since 
in it he says he has concerns about handing over services to a – shock horror – 
Labour mayor.

Yet, if ever there were a case for a change in the structure of the railways, 
thecontinuing debacle over Southern rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/southern-railway-failing-customers-cancellations-staff-shortages-delays>
 makes it incontestable. It was precisely because of meddling from the 
Department for Transport, a ham-fisted approach by management and obdurate 
unions that the dispute has lasted so long. Contrast this withLondon 
Overground’s move to dispense with guards 
<http://www.railtechnologymagazine.com/Rail-News/guards-to-be-cut-from-london-overground-trains>
 a few years ago, which was carefully negotiated with Bob Crow’s RMT and 
introduced with just one token day’s strike.

'As justice secretary he sold off the probation service, something even 
Margaret Thatcher might have thought unwise'

One suspects that poor old Grayling has taking out his frustration on Khan 
because he can’t do what he would like to with the rest of the rail network. 
Grayling is an ideologue, with an obsessive dislike of the public sector – 
which, in his eyes, is an evil that should be done away with. As justice 
secretary hesold off the probation service, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/02/chris-grayling-probation-service-privatisation>
 something even Margaret Thatcher might have thought unwise. Yet, now he is in 
charge of Network Rail, one of the biggest public bodies remaining in 
government hands, and it seems obvious that he would love to privatise it.

But as his rather pathetic series of measures announced this week shows, his 
hands are tied and he can’t do it. His “big” plans, putting passengers at the 
heart of the railway and all that usual guff, amount to little more than 
another round of tinkering with the structure of the railways when only major 
surgery can cure its ills.

In particular, he has rightly identified that the separation of infrastructure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/new-fully-privatised-rail-line-chris-grayling-plans-oxford-cambridge>
 – run by the publicly owned Network Rail – from train operators such as 
Virgin, Arriva and Stagecoach, is at the heart of the rail industry’s 
overspending and inefficiencies. However, ideological to his little toe, he 
cannot propose a merger of the two under public ownership, which is Labour’s 
suggestion, because it would effectively mean renationalisation.

So instead, he is proposing ill-defined “alliances” that would still leave two 
very separate entities running the railway with differing incentives. And even 
those are coming under fire from a private sector that is not actually rushing 
in to run the railways, since it is becoming harder and harder to attract 
bidders. Stagecoach, a key player in the industry, has alreadyexpressed doubts 
<http://howldb.com/p/stagecoach-chief-warns-grayling-on-rail-shake-up-plans-financial-times-1hfp4f>
 about the integration plans.

Grayling’s dream would be to break up Network Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail> and privatise it in 
sections, but this would require primary legislation for which there is no time 
given the demands of Brexit.

Moreover, while the public may be happy for a few more private contracts to be 
handed out – such as his proposedEast West Rail between Milton Keynes and 
Cambridge <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/jun/25/transport.politics> – any 
attempt to recreate a privatised infrastructure company, like Railtrack, would 
raise widespread concerns about safety, given theseries of accidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/jun/27/transport.uk> that occurred 
under its control in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Grayling, therefore, is 
hamstrung by ideology and public feeling, leaving Khan as the target of his ire 
– and London’s rail passengers as its victims.
 