
Call of Cthulhu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/jul/29/sciencefictionfantasyandhorror.nicholaslezard>
, a tabletop role-playing game based on the work ofHP Lovecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hp-lovecraft>, includes in its rules a 
system called “sanity points”. In most other role-playing games, such as
Dungeons and Dragons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/03/happy-40th-birthday-to-dungeons-and-dragons>
, you become more resilient with each adventure. But inCall of Cthulhu, you can 
be driven out of your wits by your experiences. According to the original 
rulebook, published in 1981, sanity points, once lost, can never be regained. 
Later editions permit you to try psychoanalysis.

The sanity points system is an adaptation of one of the quintessential 
premises of Lovecraft’s fiction: that sanity is not a fixed personal attribute 
but rather a scarce resource that must be carefully guarded. “Life is a hideous 
thing,” he writes in one story, “and from the background behind what we know of 
it peer daemonical hints of truth which make it sometimes a thousandfold more 
hideous … Its reserve of unguessed horrors could never be borne by mortal 
brains.” Many of his protagonists end up in asylums. Danforth, one of the 
Antarctic explorers inAt the Mountains of Madness, glimpses an ancient 
monstrosity out of an aeroplane window and suffers a breakdown in which “his 
shrieks were confined to the repetition of a single, mad word … ‘Tekeli-li! 
Tekeli-li!’”

That, of course, is how mad people in books tend to behave. In Ford Madox 
Ford’sThe Good Soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/07/fiction.julianbarnes> – 
my favourite novel, celebrating its centenary this year – a character called 
Nancy Rufford meets a similar fate after she learns of a loved one’s suicide. 
“In a darkened room, my poor girl, sitting motionless, with her wonderful hair 
about her, looking at me with eyes that did not see me, and saying distinctly: ‘
Credo in unum Deum omnipotentem.... Credo in unum Deum omnipotentem’ ... those 
are the only words, it appears, that she ever will utter.” Like Danforth, she 
has used up all her sanity points.

In fact, all the characters in The Good Soldier seem to be playing by Call of 
Cthulhu’s system. “Unguessed horrors” are an ever-present threat. If they don’t 
drive you insane, they’ll give you a heart attack. The American narrator, John 
Dowell, is told by doctors that if his wife, Florence, “became excited over 
anything or if her emotions were really stirred her little heart might cease to 
beat. For 12 years I had to watch every word that any person uttered in any 
conversation and I had to head it off what the English call ‘things’ – off 
love, poverty, crime, religion and the rest of it.” Mere attention, mere 
sensation, is enough to end you. No violence is necessary. It is as if the 
world is full of basilisks and Medusas.

Much like many of Lovecraft’s stories, The Good Soldier is narrated by a 
survivor – broken, faithless, sitting alone in a dark house, unable to 
comprehend what he has seen. “I know nothing – nothing in the world – of the 
hearts of men,” Dowell says. “I only know that I am alone – horribly alone. No 
hearthstone will ever again witness, for me, friendly intercourse. No smoking 
room will ever be other than peopled with incalculable simulacra amidst smoke 
wreaths.” Here, for comparison, is the narrator of Lovecraft’s original “The 
Call of Cthulhu”, published 11 years later: “I have looked upon all that the 
universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flowers of 
summer must ever afterward be poison to me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fford-madox-ford-good-soldier-scary-hp-lovecraft-cthulhu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438862699520%2F0c9454f4-284d-4ce2-b951-ca632c64e286-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ford%20Madox%20Ford%3A%20as%20scary%20as%20HP%20Lovecraft%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fford-madox-ford-good-soldier-scary-hp-lovecraft-cthulhu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ford%20Madox%20Ford%3A%20as%20scary%20as%20HP%20Lovecraft%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fford-madox-ford-good-soldier-scary-hp-lovecraft-cthulhu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438862699520%2F0c9454f4-284d-4ce2-b951-ca632c64e286-1020x765.jpeg>
 Lovecraft’s Cthulhu PR 
Ford and Lovecraft are not often discussed in the same breath. But in fact 
they are very similar. The difference is that Lovecraft appears to be writing 
about cosmic horror but is really writing about sex, whereas Ford appears to be 
writing about sex but is really writing about cosmic horror. Another way of 
putting it is that they are writing about exactly the same thing: the feeling 
that if you peel back the skin of everyday reality, what you will see 
underneath is something so alien that it will burn away all your sanity points 
in an instant.

What has driven Nancy Spufford to madness – and what has also driven Dowell, 
if not to madness, at least to distraction – is finding out what life is really 
like at the extremes. Nancy’s beloved guardian, Edward Ashburnham, has cut his 
throat out of despair. Dowell’s wife Florence has turned out to have been 
sleeping with Ashburnham, Dowell’s best and only friend, for nine years. 
Neither of our two innocents ever suspected that any such dreadfulness was 
possible. “If everything is so nebulous about a matter so elementary as the 
morals of sex,” says Dowell, baffled and despairing, “what is there to guide us 
in the more subtle morality of all other personal contacts, associations and 
activities? Or are we meant to act on impulse alone? It is all a darkness.”

A darkness that a hundred years of sexual liberation has scarcely illuminated. 
One of the reasons whyThe Good Soldier is such a timeless book is that nearly 
all of us have Dowell’s experience at least once: when we first discover, 
probably by accident and in the most bathetic circumstances, that while we have 
been playing the game of sex, as it were, according to the original rulebook, 
some of those close to us seem to have been using a newer edition in which very 
different tactics are permitted – that we are all of a sudden in a world 
of realpolitik,krav maga, free-market economics, and our old assumptions are 
now very much out of date. We are righteously indignant and painfully envious 
at the same time. And we hurry to catch up. Because we still have time. Unlike 
the 46-year-old Dowell. For him, it’s too late ever to come to terms with sex.

You expect a boring novel about Edwardian marri­ages. But The Good Soldier is 
a gothic melodrama with a high body count

Actually Ford seems to have been pretty relaxed about what he once wryly 
called “the one unmentionable thing”. In terms of personality type, the better 
comparison is between Lovecraft, the real person, and Dowell, the fictional 
character.Stephen King <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> has 
argued that Lovecraft’s stories “are about sex and little else, and when 
Cthulhu makes one of its appearances... we are witnessing a gigantic, 
tentacle-equipped, killer vagina from beyond space and time.”

Alan Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore> observed in an 
interview that “Lovecraft was sexually squeamish and would only talk of 
‘certain nameless rituals’. Or he’d use some euphemism: ‘blasphemous rites’. It 
was pretty obvious, given that a lot of his stories detailed the inhuman 
offspring of these ‘blasphemous rituals’, that sex was probably involved 
somewhere along the line.” In 2011, Moore published a Lovecraftian comic called
Neomonicon, in which an FBI agent investigating a serial killer is captured by 
a Dagonite cult. Trapped in the sewers of Salem, Massachusetts, she is forced 
to take part in a horrific sexualWalpurgis 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walpurgis_Night>. This is precisely John 
Dowell’s nightmare: that beneath the genteel surface of the Protestant 
north-east, his friends and neighbours are having orgies day and night.

And yet fear of sex, much as we may mock it, is in some respects an 
existentialist fear. Sex is a reminder that we are nothing but bodies, nothing 
but livestock, nothing but atoms in space. InThe Good Soldier, one of the 
prodromes of Nancy’s madness is a revelation she has in front of a fireplace in 
Ashburnham’s estate that “the burning logs were just logs that were burning and 
not the comfortable symbols of an indestructible mode of life”. When Dowell is 
obliged for the first time in his life to imagine his intimates undressed and 
rutting, he is having a revelation of just the same kind. To quote Lovecraft’s 
poem“Nemesis” <http://hplovecraft.narod.ru/book/Nemesis.htm>, he has “seen the 
dark universe yawning / Where the black planets roll without aim / Where they 
roll in their horror unheeded / Without knowledge or lustre or name”. Sex is 
a tiding of something much greater. Anarchy in sex, anarchy in the universe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fford-madox-ford-good-soldier-scary-hp-lovecraft-cthulhu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438621423803%2Fe9462bbf-0191-4b6e-b435-bae6176fd033-1290x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ford%20Madox%20Ford%3A%20as%20scary%20as%20HP%20Lovecraft%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fford-madox-ford-good-soldier-scary-hp-lovecraft-cthulhu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ford%20Madox%20Ford%3A%20as%20scary%20as%20HP%20Lovecraft%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fford-madox-ford-good-soldier-scary-hp-lovecraft-cthulhu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438621423803%2Fe9462bbf-0191-4b6e-b435-bae6176fd033-1290x2040.jpeg>
 ‘Are we meant to act on impulse alone? It is all a darkness’ … Ford Madox 
Ford. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
I probably never would have read The Good Soldier if I hadn’t been given it as 
a birthday present. Glance at the Penguin Classics version and you expect a 
boring novel about Edwardian marriages. This could not be more misleading. It’s 
a gothic melodrama with a high body count. It’s a construction of weird 
geometry and deep shadow, like the extraterrestrial city of At the Mountains of 
Madness. Above all, it’s a work of shattering modernist nihilism that could fit 
on the shelf betweenBeckett <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/beckett> and 
Céline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/15/celine-journey-cutting-edge-literature>
, and should therefore be repackaged in an edition that intense young men will 
want to be seen reading in cafes. “Are all men’s lives like the lives of us 
good people,” Dowell asks, “like the lives of the Ashburnhams, of the Dowells, 
of the Ruffords – broken, tumultuous, agonied, and unromantic, lives, periods 
punctuated by screams, by imbecilities, by deaths, by agonies? Who the devil 
knows?”

Halfway through the novel, we find Nancy’s monstrous father in conversation 
with “an Italian baron who had had much to do with the Belgian Congo. They must 
have been talking about the proper treatment of natives, for I heard him say: 
‘Oh, hang humanity!’” Naturally, our minds go straight toHeart of Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/28/100-best-novels-heart-of-darkness-joseph-conrad>
, the 1899 novel by Ford’s great friend and collaboratorJoseph Conrad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/josephconrad>. Marlow, the narrator of that 
book, admits to his relief when he is so preoccupied by his maritime duties 
that “the reality – the reality, I tell you – fades. The inner truth is hidden 
– luckily, luckily. But I felt it all the same; I felt often its mysterious 
stillness watching me.” Marlow may draw back his “hesitating foot” from this 
inner truth. But not the ivory trader Kurtz, who lies on his deathbed with a 
“stare, that could not see the flame of the candle, but was wide enough to 
embrace the whole universe, piercing enough to penetrate all the hearts that 
beat in the darkness. He had summed up – he had judged. ‘The horror!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fford-madox-ford-good-soldier-scary-hp-lovecraft-cthulhu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438621474167%2Fa97aa9b0-a790-4230-8c78-6a855c6c8877-1471x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ford%20Madox%20Ford%3A%20as%20scary%20as%20HP%20Lovecraft%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fford-madox-ford-good-soldier-scary-hp-lovecraft-cthulhu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ford%20Madox%20Ford%3A%20as%20scary%20as%20HP%20Lovecraft%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fford-madox-ford-good-soldier-scary-hp-lovecraft-cthulhu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438621474167%2Fa97aa9b0-a790-4230-8c78-6a855c6c8877-1471x2040.jpeg>
 Sexually squeamish … HP Lovecraft. Photograph: Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy 
What Ford means by his Italian baron is that, with all due to respect 
to Conrad, you don’t need to go all the way to the jungle to find the heart of 
darkness. You only need to go as far as a spa in Hesse, or a country house in 
Hampshire – or indeed anywhere there are human beings. In fact, Conrad comes 
close to acknowledging this with Marlow’s famous observation that London, too, 
“has been one of the dark places of the earth”, because of course the reader is 
not so naive as to think that London has stopped being a dark place just 
because it’s on all the maps now. And then Ford quotes that line right back at 
Conrad inThe Good Soldier, when Dowell suggests that his wife’s attempts to 
educate Ashburnham in high culture are “Florence clearing up one of the dark 
places of the earth”. The inner truth, the unguessed horrors, are inside every 
one of us. Dowell is Kurtz. By an agony of stammering and circumlocutionThe 
Good Soldier drags out to 200 pages that final croak: “The horror! The horror!” 
“Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!” “Credo in unum Deum omnipotentem … Credo in unum Deum 
omnipotentem.”
 