
Revelations about the tax affairs of David Cameron’s late father are a 
sideshow in thePanama Papers <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama-papers> 
saga, diverting attention from an offshore heist that has seen billions of 
dollars siphoned out of Africa.

For 15 years, the continent’s vast wealth of natural resources have been a 
magnet for foreign investment, much of which has been channelled through 
offshore centres including theBritish Virgin Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/british-virgin-islands>.

Huge fortunes have been made but the benefits have bypassed ordinary Africans, 
with money that could have been used for schools, health clinics and 
infrastructure disappearing through a warren of offshore accounts.

What the Mossack Fonseca leak  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
has done is shine a light on the secret world that has made it all possible – a 
world where the boundaries between legitimate business and illicit finance have 
become increasingly blurred.

Consider the case of Beny Steinmetz, a prominent name in the Panama Papers 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/africa/2016/04/04/Panama-Papers-Steinmetz-Guinea-deal-pried-open>
. In 2008, Steinmetz’s British Virgin Islands registered company, BSG Resources 
(BSGR),secured rights to a 50%  
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/2013/jul/30/africa-guinea-mining-bsgr-steinmetz>
stake in Guinea’s Simandou mine – one of the world’srichest iron ore deposits 
<http://www.economist.com/news/business/21635522-africas-largest-iron-ore-mining-project-has-been-bedevilled-dust-ups-and-delays-crying-foul>
 in one of theworld’s poorest countries 
<http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/GIN.html>.

BSGR said it had acquired the stake on the promise of a $165m investment in 
the exploration of the area with “no guarantee of success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/30/africa-guinea-mining-bsgr-steinmetz>
”. But two years later it sold half of the stake to the Brazilian mining giant 
Vale for $2.5bn – a sum equivalent to roughly twiceGuinea’s annual budget 
<http://www.unhcr.org/4922d41b0.pdf>.

 The Sudanese philanthropist, Mo Ibrahim, described the Guinean deal brokers 
as “idiots, or criminals, or both”.

 The deal was negotiated under the rule of authoritarian president Lansana 
Conte 
<http://www.economist.com/news/business/21635522-africas-largest-iron-ore-mining-project-has-been-bedevilled-dust-ups-and-delays-crying-foul>
. After his death in 2008 the country’s first democratically-electedgovernment 
launched an investigation 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2014/apr/09/guinea-strips-beny-steinmetz-bsg-resources-mining-contracts-corruption>
 which claimed to discover “precise and coherent evidence 
<http://www.contratsminiersguinee.org/blog/declaration-concernant-titres-VBG.html>
” that BSGR had used intermediaries to pay bribes to Conte’s wife, through 
another British Virgin Islands registered company.

Guinea to strip Beny Steinmetz company of mining concessions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/09/guinea-strips-beny-steinmetz-bsg-resources-mining-contracts-corruption>
Authorities in the US are also investigating the corruption charges 
<https://next.ft.com/content/54f47586-2707-11e5-9c4e-a775d2b173ca>. Steinmetz 
denies paying any bribes or wrongdoing – but the lack of transparency among the 
British Virgin Island registered companies has obstructed a full investigation.

Another name listed in the Panama Papers is that of Dan Gertler 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/1.713130>, who has close ties to the 
president of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Joseph Kabila.

Two years ago the Africa Progress Panel 
<http://www.africaprogresspanel.org/publications/policy-papers/africa-progress-report-2013/>
 (APP), headed by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and anti-corruption 
group Global Witness, investigated five major mineral mining concession sales 
involving Gertler’s companies.

In each case, the companies secured the concessions at prices well below what 
the APP estimates to be credible market rates. The deals, which took place 
between 2010 and 2012, were estimated to have cost the state $1.4bn in revenue 
– almost double the combined annual budget for health and education in a 
country with one of theworld’s highest child mortality rates 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.DYN.MORT> and 7 million children out of 
school.

 No credible account has been provided to explain why valuable assets were 
transferred on the cheap, but it is offshore secrecy that makes it impossible 
to determine whether DRC’s political leaders were ever beneficiaries of 
Gertler’s companies.

Gertler disputes the accusations and has said that his offshore companies 
<https://www.globalwitness.org/en/campaigns/oil-gas-and-mining/congo-secret-sales/>
 are solely for the benefit of his family.

‘Tax planning’

Some of the companies named in the Panama Papers have used offshore centres 
for “aggressive tax planning” – a euphemism in some cases for outright 
avoidance.

This includes accountants operating for Heritage Oil and Gas, who according to 
the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35985463> were seeking to avoid 
paying $400m in capital gains tax to Uganda by moving the company’s 
registration from the Bahamas to Mauritius – which doesn’t levy the tax.

Heritage insists that the move was part of a “re-domiciling” of a subsidiary 
that began long before any tax dispute withUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>.

African elites 

Although not directly linked to the Panama Papers there is also evidence that 
corrupt African elites have used offshore opportunities to stash public money. 
In 2014,for example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/28/tanzania-prime-minister-mizengo-pinda-alleged-fraudulent-payments-energy-contracts>
, 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/global-development/2014/nov/28/tanzania-prime-minister-mizengo-pinda-alleged-fraudulent-payments-energy-contracts>
 senior Tanzanian political figures and foreign businessmen were accused of 
shifting $120m from the state’s energy provider Tanesco to offshore bank 
accounts.

The scandal prompted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/28/tanzania-cabinet-reshuffle-energy-scandal-jakaya-kikwete>
 international donors to withhold aid and four national politicians to resign.


Tanzanian PM under pressure to resign over alleged fraudulent payments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/28/tanzania-prime-minister-mizengo-pinda-alleged-fraudulent-payments-energy-contracts>
Then there’s the case of Teodorin Obiang 
<https://www.one.org/international/blog/9-insane-things-teodorin-obiang-spent-his-allegedly-embezzled-money-on/>
, the son of Equatorial Guinea’s president and the country’s education 
minister. At a time when the younger Obiang had a reported salary of $100,000, 
he used offshore companies to purchase a $30m mansion in Malibu, a fleet of 
luxury cars, a jet, and $3m worth of Michael Jackson memorabilia – including 
the original Thriller glove.


In 2001 Obiang was investigated by the FBI which accused him of buying the 
luxury items with looted money and was ordered hand back $30m of assets to 
EquatorialGuinea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/guinea> – although he got 
to keep the glove.


Questions raised 

The Panama Papers have raised other questions that deserve answers. Why did 
the Rwandan governmentestablish an offshore company  
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/panama-papers-reveal-african-connections/article29581445/>
to lease aeroplanes for its leaders?

And why is the second highest ranking judge in Kenya linked to at least 11 
companies 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/news/Rawal-among-high-profile-Kenyans-with-firms-in-tax-havens/-/1056/3144804/-/13ux1ad/-/index.html>
 listed in the British Virgin Islands?

 Not all offshore activity is harmful to Africa’s interests but the absence of 
transparency blurs the lines between legitimate and illicit activity.

 Next month Cameron will host an anti-corruption summit in the UK. What better 
opportunity to galvanise action? It is time to draw back the cloak of secrecy 
and demand that offshore territories linked to the UK establish full public 
registries.

Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> has plenty of homegrown 
corruption problems that need national solutions, but the Panama Papers have 
turned the spotlight on an international problem that demands international 
action.

A version of this article 
<http://www.odi.org/comment/10385-hidden-heist-%E2%80%93-offshore-plunder-hurting-africa>
 first appeared on the Overseas DevelopmentInstitute 
 