
The former England bowler Ken Higgs has died, aged 79.

Higgs, a stalwart of both Lancashire and Leicestershire, took 71 wickets at an 
average of just 20.74 in 15 Tests. In a first-class career that spanned 28 
years, including a brief successful comeback forLeicestershire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestershire> in his late 40s in 1986, 
Higgs finished with 1,536 wickets at 23.61.

The seamer made his England debut at The Oval against South Africa in 1965, 
and won his final cap on his then home ground at Old Trafford in his second 
Ashes Test three years later, having also faced Australia at Brisbane.

“Leicestershire County Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Club is extremely saddened to learn of the passing of the great fast-medium 
opening bowler Ken Higgs,” read a statement from the county. The Leicestershire 
chairman, the former batsman Paul Haywood, voiced his personal recollections of 
playing with a “truly great bowler”. He said: “I had the great pleasure of 
playing alongside Ken, and he was a truly great bowler who had a wonderful 
career record.

“Ken was well respected by everyone at Leicestershire County Cricket Club, and 
we would like to offer our condolences and best wishes to his family.”

David Lloyd, the former Lancashire all-rounder and England coach turned 
broadcaster, wrote on Twitter: “So sad to hear that Ken Higgs ,Lancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> , Leicestershire England has 
passed away . A great man #mentor.”

Higgs took more than a thousand wickets for Lancashire before initially 
retiring from county cricket in 1969. After two years of league cricket he was 
persuaded out of retirement by Ray Illingworth and notably helped 
Leicestershire to two Benson & Hedges Cup finals.They beat Yorkshire in the 
inaugural final 
<http://static.espncricinfo.com/db/ARCHIVE/1970S/1972/ENG_LOCAL/B+H/LEICS_YORKS_B+H_22JUL1972.html>
, in 1972, with Higgs taking two for 33, but lost to Surrey in 1974 despite 
Higgs taking a hat-trick.

In August 1977, he and Illingworth shared a last-wicket partnership of 228 
against Northamptonshire, helping Leicestershire recover from 45 for nine to 
273. Higgs made 98, his highest first-class score, in what remains the largest 
10th-wicket County Championship partnership since before the first world war.

Flags at both Grace Road and Old Trafford, where England face Pakistan in a 
day-night NatWest Twenty20 international on Wednesday evening, were flying at 
half-mast as a mark of respect from both clubs.
 