
An IRA <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> informer who spied for the British 
at the height of the Troubles has been found dead in his flat in England after 
living for 30 years under a fake identity.


Supergrass Raymond Gilmour’s badly decomposed body was found by his 
18-year-old son on Friday. Police are not treating the death of the 57-year-old 
as suspicious.


Originally from Derry <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/derry>, Gilmour was 
recruited by the Royal Ulster Constabulary in 1976 to inform from within the 
Irish National Liberation Army (INLA), a republican paramilitary group. In 1980 
he moved into the ranks of the IRA and started feeding information to British 
intelligence services. His cover was blown in 1982 when police used information 
he supplied to recover a machine gun.


Two years later, Gilmour became the focal point of one of the so-called “show 
trials” of the early 1980s inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. The series of high-profile, 
large-scale trials saw dozens of suspected terrorists charged and tried based 
on evidence from individual spies known as “supergrasses”.

At the time, there was widespread belief within republican communities that 
the trials were based on evidence from witnesses who had been offered deals and 
cash incentives by the British to spur them into spying.

In 1984 Gilmour was the only witness in a trial of 31 suspected republican 
terrorists – a trial that became notorious when the then lord chief justice 
dismissed the informer’s evidence as “unworthy of belief”. Once his evidence 
was deemed useless, Gilmour fled Northern Ireland, and was given a new life and 
identity in England by his handlers,MI5 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5>.

Gilmour is believed to have suffered from alcoholism and battled mental health 
problems in the years prior to his death.

One of his friends and a fellow spy, Martin McGartland, has slammed MI5’s 
handling of Gilmour. Speaking to the Belfast Telegraph, he said: “It is 
disgraceful that Ray died in these circumstances. He spent years begging MI5 
for financial and psychological help. Instead they turned their backs on him. 
He was a broken man, a wreck of a human being, and they left him to die in the 
gutter.”
 