
Four in five UK local authorities have insufficient care for older people in 
their area, with the shortage most acute for some of the most vulnerable in 
society, research suggests.

The Family and Childcare Trust surveyed councils across the country and found 
they are struggling to meet needs amid a background of growing demand, budget 
cuts and recruitment difficulties.

The survey is published on the same day as an undercover investigation by BBC 
Panorama is to be broadcast, exposing shocking neglect at two Cornwall care 
homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/20/neglect-uncovered-care-homes-cornwall-bbc-panorama>
, including vulnerable people being left unattended and a nurse saying she will 
use morphine to “shut up” a resident.

The deficit identified by the Family and Childcare Trust means more than 6.4 
million people aged 65 and over are living in areas that do not have enough 
older people’s care to meet demand.

Only one in five councils reported having enough older people’s care in their 
area to meet demand, the survey found.

Just under half (48%) of the 182 councils (out of 211) that responded said 
they had sufficient availability of home care and a similar proportion (44%) 
reported having enough places in extra care homes, which allow people to live 
independently with 24-hour emergency or on-site support.


Only a third of local authorities said they have enough nursing homes with 
specialist support fordementia, which is predicted to affect one million people 
in the UK by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
.


Claire Harding, head of research at the Family and Childcare Trust, which 
works closely with the government and local authorities, said: “It is 
inexcusable that vulnerable people are left unable to find the care that they 
need.


“We urge government to make sure there is enough care for everyone who needs 
it. In order to do this, we need robust data on where there are gaps in care, a 
funding system that truly meets the cost of providing care, and clear 
information for families.

“Without these steps, families will continue to struggle to find care and to 
meet the numerous care costs on their shoulders.”

The survey also highlighted large regional variations, with just 7% of outer 
London councils reporting enough older people’s care to meet demand. The only 
area where more than half of local authorities reported sufficient care was the 
north-east, where 57% responded positively.

The findings will add to the sense of crisis surrounding social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/social-care-services-facing-existential-crisis-say-council-leaders>
, withdelayed transfers of care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/10/nhs-bed-blocking-rises-sixth-month-patients-hospital>
 – when patients are medically fit to leave hospital but unable to be safely 
discharged – at record levels. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/10/nhs-bed-blocking-rises-sixth-month-patients-hospital>

Council and NHS leaders, as well as the Care Quality Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/care-quality-commission>, have called for 
urgent action, with the chancellor, Philip Hammond, facing pressure to increase 
social fundingin Wednesday’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/philip-hammond-autumn-statement-ifs-inflation>
.

Inner London councils pay the highest rates for residential care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/06/council-tax-offset-care-cuts-widen-gap-rich-and-poor-kings-fund>
 for older people, at £649 a week per place, compared with the lowest rate of 
£464 in north-west England, according to the survey. The UK average for a 
residential place was revealed to be £27,113 a year.


A Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
spokeswoman said: “This government is committed to making sure older people 
throughout the country get affordable and dignified care. That is why we are 
significantly increasing the amount of money local authorities have access to 
for social care, by up to £3.5bn by 2020.”

Monday’s Panorama sees reporters go undercover at Clinton House in St Austell, 
and St Theresa’s, in Callington, near Plymouth, both owned by the Morleigh 
Group.

Hidden camera footage captured one resident left on a bed pan for 40 minutes 
and an out-of-date prescription supplement relabelled for use by another 
resident.

Clinton House is being closed as a result of safety concerns and St Theresa’s 
is under investigation by authorities along with two other Moreleigh Group 
homes.

Moreleigh Group said it had already removed the staff involved and reviewed 
its systems and procedures, prior to receiving information from Panorma.Cornwall
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/cornwall> council apologised for the 
failings.
 