 Algiers still celebrates to-day, like a painted clown in a tragedy, as the 
poor French nation stumbles into the night. The news from Corsica has swept 
through the city like a trumpet call and only a few thoughtful citizens, only a 
few apprehensive soldiers seem to realise how gloomy and how gigantic are the 
elements it is summoning.
The Corsican revolution, it seems clear, was hatched in Algiers. The 
parachutists whose ominous energies mounted a coup inAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> have taken a stride towards France. 
The authority of Paris has been defied again. Force has been used against the 
armed representatives of the Republic, and this blithe Algerian movement has 
brought France at last to the edge of the precipice.

A sickly haze of optimism still hangs over the city. For the colons, Corsica 
sets a seal upon French supremacy in Algeria. For the Gaullists it is another 
labour pain in the birth of a newFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>. For the soldier it promises the 
resurgence of French glory and the redemption of old disgraces. "Merci, la 
Corse," the crowd shouted this morning when a group of girls paraded in 
Corsican costumes and to-night in the forum on the hill we shall have yet 
another ecstatic celebration. And the generals and the politicians will wave 
from the balcony, the flags will fly and the bands play, the paratroopers look 
benevolently on, and the poor people delude themselves that this is a moment of 
happiness. Algiers listens in the gathering dark and only the Cassandras fancy 
they see the horizon smudged and smoky or hear a drum beat above the folk songs.

 The course of events has shifted and the future of Algeria is now only a 
footnote, as it were, to the text of the French drama. "Vive l'Algerie 
Francaise," the crowds cry, expressing their own homely and perspective 
inspirations, but if the colons are thinking of Algeria, the world is thinking 
of France. So are the revolutionaries.

 M. Arrighi to-day sent a fraternal message to M. Soustelle, the hero of 
Algiers. It mentioned General de Gaulle, and it mentioned the brave 
paratroopers and it mentioned the committees of public safety and it ended 
"faithfully yours," but it made no reference to the future of Algeria. We have 
moved to-day from one degree of crisis to another, from the grave to the 
terrible, from the forgivable to the irrevocable, from Algiers by way of 
Corsica to the threshold of civil war.

If you happen to be in Algiers to-day you cannot escape the word. The generals 
here have challenged the Republic by the force of their paratroopers' arms and, 
M. Pflimlin is not alone in wondering whether their military ambitions reach to 
Paris itself. In his speech last night he drew a dividing line between the 
patriotic insurrection in Algiers - "an expression of the will of compatriots 
to remain French" - and yesterday's coup in Corsica - "a menace against our 
public liberties," but if he discovers that the Corsican affair was in fact 
arranged in Algiers he can scarcely elude the responsibility of impeaching the 
generals and their associates for treason. Unless General de Gaulle is returned 
to power and the Committee of Public Safety are thus appeased we must prepare 
for the worst, and be ready for a deliberate confrontation of strength between 
the French in Paris and the French in Algiers. Consider the dark implication of 
this prospect; the opportunities offered to Moscow both in Europe and among the 
Algerian rebels here, the Communists able to pose both as the true defenders of 
the Republic and the champions of liberty; a menace of a Popular Front; the 
possibility of intervention, dividing the world, as the Spanish war divided 
Europe twenty years ago; the dangers of a clash in NorthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> with the Tunisians or Moroccans; 
disintegration of N.A.T.O.; the hideous consummation, thus provided, to the 
theory of Western decline.

 And who would win, anyway? Many of the Ã©lite troops of the French army are 
here in Algeria, including most of the formidable parachutists, but most of the 
armoured forces are in Europe and most of the aircraft. The armies in Algeria 
already have a war on their hands against the rebels in the mountains and get 
their supplies from France, but the Government in Paris must be inhibited by 
the presence in France of 50,000 anxious soldiers' families. Moreover, if the 
loyalty of the forces in France may be open to question, so is the 
battle-fervour of the conscripts serving with the army in Algiers. This would 
be a brother's war with a vengeance, more tragic and mixed up and suicidal than 
the war of the North against the South.

 It is disagreeable to think about these things, and the Algiers crowds 
prancing up the hill for a manifestation are still resolutely ignoring them, 
but if you sit at a rickety table in the Casbah this evening and sip the sweet 
thick coffee and listen to the alien Arab quarter tones from the wireless and 
watch the thin Arab figures huddled earnestly at the tables of the cafe, it is 
easy enough to feel that we stand at a corner in history, as France squabbles 
and stumbles towards chaos.
 