
The president-elect’s favorite term of abuse is “loser” – lobbed more than 200 
times <http://www.trumptwitterarchive.com/#/archive/loser/ttff> from his toxic 
Twitter account, at victims from Jeb Bush to Rosie O’Donnell. When people like 
him are winners, “loser” might be an insult worth reclaiming. There’s a 
photo-collage from 1920, the first Francis Picabia ever made, in which the 
French artist tears apart his face, sutures it with hastily pasted papers, and 
brands his chin with the all-caps wordRATÉ: a loser, a failure, a man defeated. 
And yet he flashes a crafty smirk, peeking out from under one of those pasted 
scraps. A “loser”, claimed Picabia in the years after the first world war, was 
the finest thing you could be; it meant you had failed to obey the dictates of 
a society that had lost its collective mind.

Dalí in a diving helmet: how the Spaniard almost suffocated bringing 
surrealism to Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/01/dali-exhibition-surreal-encounters-edinburgh>
This week the Museum of Modern Art in New York opens its monster Picabia 
retrospective <https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/1670>, six years in 
the making – a boisterous, scruffy feat of a show, and one that should help 
refashion the reputation of Dada’s trickiest misfit. (The show is co-organized 
with the Kunsthaus Zürich,where it first appeared this summer 
<http://moussemagazine.it/francis-picabia-kunsthaus-zurich-2016/>.) It is the 
first major show of Picabia in the US since 1970, and it includes not only his 
early Cubist works and his collaborations with Dada buddies Marcel Duchamp and 
Man Ray, but also wayward later paintings of pin-up girls and biblical babes, 
abhorred in their day.

With more than 120 paintings, plus a film, recordings, magazines and even a 
couple of carpets, you may at first get the impression that Picabia was 
clowning around – that he jumped from one style to another so wantonly that he 
couldn’t have had any convictions. That isn’t true, but you’ve got to look past 
style to see why. His discordant, self-contradicting art, in which wispy 
watercolors and hi-tech pistons could hang side by side, had a clear 
conviction: to crush distinctions between high and low, elegance and kitsch, 
and to force us all to the limits of taste.

He was born in Paris in 1879, to a Cuban father who made a killing on a sugar 
plantation and a French mother with her own fortune. (Though he was happy to 
play up his “exotic” heritage if it served his career – a New York Times critic 
in 1912 called him “the Cuban who out-cubed the Cubists 
<http://www.philamuseum.org/collections/permanent/51074.html?mulR=714222105%257C1>
” – it was the family money that really helped.) His early paintings, of 
Notre-Dame cathedral or of some wind-bent trees in Cannes, are 
Impressionist-lite renderings in the manner of Monet, Sisley or Pissarro. But 
they’re flat, unresponsive pictures, and if you find them insincere, you’re on 
to something. Where Monet and his colleagues workeden plein air, Picabia 
painted these early works from postcards – taking a readymade landscape and 
translating it into a readymade style. He wasn’t following Monet; he was 
bootlegging him.

As Europe tipped into war, Picabia began to paint large-scale Cubist canvases 
that rendered women, couples and dancers as interlocking curved planes. By 
1914, he had been conscripted into the French army, but with his father’s help 
he got a plush assignment in Havana – and then went Awol in New York. The Big 
Apple, like the Dada capital of Zurich, was a haven for European artists in no 
mood to fight, and here Picabia met Duchamp, Man Ray, and also the photographer 
Alfred Stieglitz, whoseavant-garde magazine 291 
<http://sdrc.lib.uiowa.edu/dada/291/index.htm> featured Picabia in yet another 
style. A “portrait” of Stieglitz takes the form of a metal contraption 
featuring a retractable metal grille. A “nude American girl” appears as a 
hydraulic cylinder, drawn with the exactitude of a technical diagram. Bodies 
that Picabia once depicted as planes of color now appeared as complex machines, 
kitted out with pumps and valves, greased by desire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffrancis-picabia-moma-retrospective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facc3c72f2bb323b3f76d8b8ce65d02ba9fee6649%2F0_0_2618_3000%2F2618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Francis%20Picabia%3A%20the%20art%20'loser'%20who%20ended%20up%20winning%20it%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffrancis-picabia-moma-retrospective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Francis%20Picabia%3A%20the%20art%20%27loser%27%20who%20ended%20up%20winning%20it%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffrancis-picabia-moma-retrospective%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facc3c72f2bb323b3f76d8b8ce65d02ba9fee6649%2F0_0_2618_3000%2F2618.jpg>
 Tableau Rastadada (Rastadada Painting). 1920. Photograph: The Museum of Modern 
Art, Peter Butler/© 2016 Artist Rights Society (ARS), New York/ADAGP, Paris 
“Francis Picabia always attacks himself,” the artist wrote in 1920, the height 
of his Dada years, and those attacks were merciless. That chopped-and-screwed 
self-portrait, the one in which he designates himself as a “loser”, also 
proclaims him a “joker” and, in a complex pun, arastaquouère 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=buIPM8IPAm8>: a nouveau-riche foreigner. (The 
photograph itself was probably shot by Man Ray.) A printed handbill shouts that 
“Francis Picabia is a stupid Spanish professor”, a “funny guy”, and simply 
“nothing!” And when he exhibited, he was more likely to shoot himself in the 
foot than to aim for approval. The best gallery of this show recreates much of 
a 1922 solo exhibition in Barcelona, in which Picabia hung wholly abstract 
drawings of circles, rings and oblongs alongside delicate, campy portraits of 
Spanish women, included to undercut the abstracts’ credibility. For some of his 
contemporaries, non-objective painting was a holy thing. For Picabia, it was 
just one style among many, and hit hardest when he deflated it most.

Dada fizzled by the early 1920s, and when Picabia took up painting again he 
went as far as his bad taste could take him. Instead of oils he used commercial 
house paint, and his “Monster” paintings of this time feature embracing lovers 
or carnival characters covered in garish zigzags and polka dots. (There’s alsoa 
landscape of the Promenade des Anglais 
<http://artgallery.yale.edu/collections/objects/74403>, in Nice, whose palm 
trees are rendered with glued-down macaroni.) Even more vulgar were his 
so-called transparencies, in which trashy biblical figures are overlaid with 
outlines of other bodies. If you’re really attached to Picabia’s great Dada 
years, you may try to justify these garish paintings as yet another imposture – 
as a decades-long ironic commentary on the fiction of originality. The more 
likely explanation is that he was so restless, so unwilling to stick with a 
single style, that ugliness offered the most space to run wild.

Me, I love the Monsters; those Picasso-mocking ladies equipped with extra 
pairs of eyes have the hell-for-leather disarray of his best Dada works. But 
the transparencies, with their layered figures in dreary browns, are harder to 
esteem. And as forhis nudes of the 1940s 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/exhibitions/37/francis-picabia-the-nudes/view/> – 
unloved in their day though now, in this era of scrambled high and low art, 
more appreciated – what else is there to say except that they look like Nazi 
porn? Working from soft-core magazines, Picabia painted a whole series of buxom 
blondes in the altogether, sometimes with men, in one case chilling in bed with 
a bulldog. Their photographic sources put them in a lineage that stretches all 
the way back to those postcard-sourced landscapes, but their icy flesh and 
kitschy poses rhyme, defiantly, with the fascistic painting of the day. One 
quintet of bathers looks disconcertingly like the marmorealAryan nudes of Adolf 
Ziegler 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/jonathonkeats/2014/05/14/see-the-kitschy-triptych-that-hung-over-hitlers-fireplace-and-how-it-impacted-german-art-at-this-new-york-exhibit/#3eda3bf24058>
, Hitler’s favorite artist.

Picabia, who stayed in southern France during the war, made some blandishments 
to Marshal Pétain in the press, and he spoke less than kindly about Jews. Yet 
if his late girl-on-girl paintings make us uncomfortable today, it’s not 
because they’reactually propaganda; it’s that they’re slippery enough that, in 
another context, theymight be. For an artist who hated consistency, even the 
wickedest of styles was worth picking up for a time, if you could dismantle its 
preconceptions by doing so. That, this historic show affirms, was how Picabia 
thought of style: not as an outgrowth of his own creation, but as a readymade 
set of procedures that he could fiddle with, turn inside out, and finally break 
apart. His fraudulence was his greatest genius. He was the loser who won it all.

 * Francis Picabia: Our Heads Are Round So Our Thoughts Can Change Direction 
is at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, through 19 March
 