
They call it Sir Paul’s Cathedral – and walking past the Francis Crick 
Institute <https://www.crick.ac.uk/> on a glorious winter’s day it is easy to 
see why. The sun bounces off the enormous coloured panes that stretch high 
above the streets around St Pancras, illuminating what will soon be one of 
Europe’s largest biomedical research facilities, while its solid, ochre facade 
echoes the immutable exterior of many an ancient edifice.

Navigating through the construction site, hard hat perched on my head, I enter 
the interior. It is hardly less ecclesiastical – a vast nave cuts through the 
centre of a cavernous atrium, intersected by what looks suspiciously like a 
transept, while its basement – reaching four floors beneath my feet and set to 
house a multitude of sensitive scientific instruments – bears more than a 
passing resemblance to a tremendous network of vaults.

“I do think architecture matters,” says Sir Paul Nurse, former president of 
the Royal Society, Nobel laureate and now director of the Crick – to which his 
name has somewhat wittily been attached – when we meet in his temporary office 
at the Wellcome Trust. “You need to go into a building and feel inspiration. 
That is what is so beautiful about a medieval cathedral – you are inspired 
whatever your religious beliefs might be.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4e331d70fc39395e1fbae8388ba2f840b548bc1%2F1267_0_1836_2754%2F1836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Francis%20Crick%E2%80%99s%20%C2%A3700m%20altar%20to%20biomedical%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Francis%20Crick%E2%80%99s%20%C2%A3700m%20altar%20to%20biomedical%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4e331d70fc39395e1fbae8388ba2f840b548bc1%2F1267_0_1836_2754%2F1836.jpg>
 Sir Paul Nurse, director of the Crick Insitute. Photograph: Linda Nylind for 
the Guardian 
For £700m, however, it isn’t surprising that Nurse is hoping the building will 
do more than lift the spirits. Boasting state-of-the-art equipment, 
high-containment labs and animal facilities to house rodents,zebrafish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/sep/15/zebrafish-human-genes-project> 
and even opossums, the Crick’s ambitions are as lofty as its rafters. With 
around 1,500 scientists and staff tackling areas ranging from cancer research 
to neuroscience, pandemics, and even bold new projects to usegenome-editing 
techniques on human embryos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/01/human-embryo-genetic-modify-regulator-green-light-research>
, life itself will be under the microscope.

It’s certainly a feat of teamwork. A joint endeavour between six founding 
bodies – the Wellcome Trust, Medical Research Council and Cancer Research UK, 
together with King’s, University and Imperial Colleges, London – the swish 
institute will supersede what were venerable, but ageing, MRC facilities at 
Mill Hill, north London, and the two sites that made up Cancer Research’s London
Research <https://www.theguardian.com/education/research> Institute, bringing 
together their existing staff with newly recruited researchers and seconded 
university academics. It’s a point Nurse is quick to seize on. “People forget 
that the money is already there – it is not new money for the operations,” he 
says. “It is new money for the buildings, but it is just replacing what’s 
there.”

But there are perhaps inevitably concerns. “I think one of the biggest risks 
is that we have got some of the biggest funders supporting the Crick institute, 
and I think there is a danger they are going to want to support things 
happening in that institute and perhaps we are going to create even more of a 
have/have not scientific society,” says Professor Jenny Southgate, director of 
the Jack Birch unit for molecular carcinogenesis at the University of York.

Robert Kelsh, professor of stem cell and developmental genetics at the 
University of Bath, also has mixed feelings: “I think the Crick is great; it 
will do tremendously well,” he says. “[But] I think people, especially outside
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, have some concerns about it – 
just the total amount of grant funding that it will inevitably be able to 
attract.” After all, when it comes to landing grants “the Crick has all the 
advantages,” he adds, comparing the extent of the institute’s resources to 
those of universities.

I do think architecture matters. You need to go into a building and feel 
inspiration.
Sir Paul Nurse 
Experiments lie at the heart of the Crick – and Nurse is embarking on a very 
large one of his own. Sweeping away departmental divisions ubiquitous in 
academia, he hopes to hand the purse strings back to the institute’s 120 group 
leaders rather than having them controlled by a few departmental “barons”. The 
need to chase grant after grant, a common chore for scientists to raise cash 
for their studies, will be mitigated by a pot of core funding for each lab. 
Publishing pressures will be diminished, too, with researchers freed from the 
need to repeatedly jump over the hurdles of peer review to garner support, 
allowing them instead to focus on adventurous, longer-term research. “We will 
capture high-profile papers too, but what the focus is [on] is not using 
surrogates, not using theNature reviewing process to judge your own work,” 
Nurse says, adding that with a senior management team including winners of the 
prestigious Louis-Jeantet Prize and a veritable gaggle of fellows of the Royal 
Society to sniff out good research: “We have pretty good noses”.

And there’s more. Instead of departments, scientists will flit between 
so-called “interest groups” as their work develops, while researchers in 
different fields have been carefully allocated offices and labs in a manner 
that would rival the most painstaking of seating plans. The upshot, Nurse 
hopes, will be “gentle anarchy”. It could be a description of Nurse himself. In 
the midst of his explanations, he looks around for a way to illustrate his plan 
to hasten the translation of promising research into innovations and therapies. 
I proffer my pen but he seizes instead on a selection of mugs that he proceeds 
to scatter over the table. “Let’s say this table represents knowledge,” he 
begins, rapidly shuffling his props around like a magician embarking on the 
three-cup trick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc37fb79d7cd5a34109f2040270c985ad1669c393%2F0_277_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Francis%20Crick%E2%80%99s%20%C2%A3700m%20altar%20to%20biomedical%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Francis%20Crick%E2%80%99s%20%C2%A3700m%20altar%20to%20biomedical%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc37fb79d7cd5a34109f2040270c985ad1669c393%2F0_277_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 On completion the new Crick insitute will stretch over 12 levels, eight above 
ground level and four below. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
His idea turns out to be far less convoluted than his method of explanation. 
Instead of embracing purely blue-sky research, or focusing on the pursuit of 
distant goals, the Crick, says Nurse, will take a different tack. Here, 
scientists will work closely with a team of experts as they pursue their 
research, helping to spot and develop discoveries with clinical potential or 
that could prove handy in other fields. “We actually reward people who make 
discoveries, but we always look to see whether those discoveries can lead to 
translation too.”

What’s more, Nurse adds, collaborations with pharmaceutical companies will 
offer Crick scientists the chance to benefit from the expertise of industry. I 
suggest that not everyone will warm to the idea of cosying up to big pharma, 
but Nurse – unsurprisingly – isn’t buying it. “What we are doing is saying 
there is creative work going on in the big companies with creative people, we 
are creative people working often with somewhat different objectives – there 
can be no harm in mixing us together, we control our IP [intellectual 
property].”

It’s a daring vision, but not an entirely unprecedented one. “The Crick’s idea 
is not completely new at all, but I would also argue it is proven,” says Kelsh, 
citing his own experiences of a similar interdisciplinary approach at other 
laboratories. Nurse, too, believes the Crick is built on solid foundations. 
“All I have done is stolen best practice as I see it from around the world,” he 
says, citingNew York’s Rockefeller University <http://www.rockefeller.edu/> 
(where he was president for eight years) and theEuropean Molecular Biology 
Laboratory <http://www.embl.de/> among his inspirations. His plan, however, is 
embedded not only in the ethos of the Crick, but in the building itself. 
Gleaming staircases snake up to the uppermost floors, encouraging chance 
encounters between scientists and – it is hoped – new collaborations. Sleek, 
white-topped benches await the arrival of their many and varied workers, while 
walls open out like the secret cabinets of a speakeasy bar to reveal 
whiteboards for the scribblings of what, its creators no doubt fervently hope, 
will be the musings of spontaneous genius.

But you can only lead a horse to water. “To an extent I think it is marvellous 
putting everyone together. There should be massive synergy from having such a 
lot of different expertise, people with different skills, different thoughts, 
different backgrounds, it should be fantastic,” says Southgate. “But you can’t 
force people to work together, and just putting them in the same room doesn’t 
mean that is going to happen.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a65802553ea0ff038413ffd6c1bb1b9a99d883a%2F0_345_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Francis%20Crick%E2%80%99s%20%C2%A3700m%20altar%20to%20biomedical%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Francis%20Crick%E2%80%99s%20%C2%A3700m%20altar%20to%20biomedical%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a65802553ea0ff038413ffd6c1bb1b9a99d883a%2F0_345_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The new Crick Institute near St Pancras, London Photograph: Antonio Olmos for 
the Observer 
Might scientists elsewhere in the UK also be a bit, well, miffed that London 
has yet another plump institute to its name? “What is the engine room of 
research? It is 20-35-year-olds,” Nurse parries. “They like London. Let’s be 
blunt about it. And if I am trying to attract from New York or Tokyo or Berlin 
I am not going to do it if I am somewhere in the sticks.” Not only will the 
location allow scientists to easily visit or receive guests from other 
institutes around the country but, Nurse insists, the Crick will fuel research 
nationwide by pumping out imaginative, risk-taking researchers, as many of the 
new group leaders will be recruited for a fixed stint of 12 years. “It is a 
training institute that takes scientists at a rather early stage in their 
careers, where they are often creative but can be vulnerable, a bit green, 
[and] gives them really good training, good mentoring, good support,” says 
Nurse. “We then try to export them to universities elsewhere in the country.”

However, as Southgate points out, the approach brings pressures of its own for 
researchers. “They are going to have six years, and a potential further six, 
living in London with no security of tenure, knowing that they are going to 
have to move and find something after that. I think that creates pressures, I 
don’t think it is very family friendly.”

Enticing bright young researchers to London is one thing; making it affordable 
in a city of soaring housing costs is another. His dream, Nurse says, is to get 
hold of a set of apartments to house newcomers to the UK while they find their 
feet. “I tried to get that money from funders but they weren’t prepared to do 
that.” He looks a little dejected, but he hasn’t quite given up on his scheme. 
“[It’s] back in my head,” he says, prodding his somewhat dishevelled mop of 
white hair. Other hurdles have been met with a more bullish resilience. At the 
mention of Crossrail 2, the proposed train line that will cut across the city, 
he bristles. “When we put the building up, Crossrail 2 was going south of the 
Euston road. And then what happens is Crossrail 2 changes its mind and drives a 
tunnel right under our most sensitive part.” That, he says, would be 
disastrous. “It will stop us working probably during construction, maybe for 
years.” The line, Nurse maintains, will simply have to find another route. 
“They are really angry with us because they are having to think about it,” he 
says. It isn’t only the rail companies that have attempted to undermine the 
Crick. Some, I point out, are concerned it will become an institute simply too 
big to fail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67cb4b00ef43bcac2f72b77e37b0da6f89d15b2f%2F0_314_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Francis%20Crick%E2%80%99s%20%C2%A3700m%20altar%20to%20biomedical%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Francis%20Crick%E2%80%99s%20%C2%A3700m%20altar%20to%20biomedical%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ffrancis-crick-institute-biomedical-science-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67cb4b00ef43bcac2f72b77e37b0da6f89d15b2f%2F0_314_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Dr James Briscoe, left, Dr Caroline Hill, and Professor Nick Luscombe, 
researchers at the new Crick Institute. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the 
Observer 
“Actually, I coined that term,” he interjects with something verging on 
amusement. “I said it will be too big to fail because we have to make it work.”

And if it doesn’t? “If a university stops working properly, they sort it out. 
If a hospital doesn’t work properly, they sort it out. If this doesn’t work 
properly, you’d sort it out,” he says. Nurse is nothing if not pragmatic. “If 
the philosophy is wrong, we will learn from it and change it. I am not 
chiselling this into my tombstone. I think we should try this and if it works 
then it will be, I think, a big step forward. If there are aspects that don’t, 
then we can modify them. And if it all doesn’t work, they can sack me.”

Quite what success will look like is another matter – particularly with 
traditional metrics, such as publishing records, given less credence. Nurse, 
however, is blunt. “We will be reviewed every five years by our funders, so if 
we haven’t succeeded by producing high-quality work – some of which will be in 
those high-profile journals, of course – we will have failed. We have to pass 
and in my view we have to pass it at a higher level of standard than any 
university in the land, otherwise there is no point in having us.”

In many ways, the Crick is the natural home for big thinkers. Named after one 
Nobel laureate and directed by another, it’s garnered support from some of the 
biggest names in science. Indeed, among its donors is Francis Crick’s DNA 
co-pioneer, James Watson, who offered a donation to pay for a portrait of his 
friend to hang in the institute.

“Typically Jim, he was making jokes and saying wouldn’t it be fun to have 
Crick in his bath,” says Nurse.

The plans for the final portrait, however, are rather less eccentric. Leaning 
out from in front of a blackboard, his hands resting on his seminal papers, 
Crick gazes forth. A tie bearing the double-helix is looped around his neck. 
And on his face, it seems, is a look of quiet expectation.
 