
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will face 
immediate pressure when he takes office in January to implement a variety of 
conservative policy proposals designed to erase much of President Obama’s 
legacy.

Registry used to track Arabs and Muslims dismantled by Obama administration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/22/nseers-arab-muslim-tracking-system-dismantled-obama>
The most ardent conservatives on Capitol Hill hope Trump’s anti-establishment 
attitude could be a signal that the president-elect will carry forth their 
agenda to roll back the modern regulatory state.

In particular, the Freedom Caucus in the House of Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/house-of-representatives> – who have long 
been thorns in the side of Republican leadership in that chamber – will push 
Trump to move swiftly to enact much of their agenda.


The president-elect has already announced that he will nominate one of the 
Freedom Caucus’s founders,Mick Mulvaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/17/mick-mulvaney-trump-office-management-budget>
 of South Carolina, to become head of the Office of Management and Budget, 
where he can oversee federal spending.

The Freedom Caucus came out with an extended wish list 
<http://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000159-020c-d78a-a5dd-1f9c53400001>, detailing 
228 regulations and executive orders that they would like to see Trump revoke 
immediately upon taking office in January. These are five of the policy areas 
that would immediately be affected.

Climate change

The Freedom Caucus outlined a number of steps to curb the United States’ 
efforts in combating climate change. Their list includes: having the United 
States pull out of the Paris climate accord; eliminating regulations requiring 
government agencies to consider the impact of climate change; getting rid of 
efficiency standards for various electrical appliances; and expanding fossil 
fuel exploration on federal land.


Net neutrality

The conservative group is also pushing for Trump to overturn the rule 
implanted by the Federal Communications Commission that treats broadband 
internet as a utility. In particular, net neutrality means that internet 
service providers must treat all content equally and cannot block or slow 
rivals content. The regulation was opposed by some on the right who see it as 
government interference with the internet. The Freedom Caucus claims that the 
rule was made with a “lack of economic rigor and will thus have an impact far 
greater than envisioned”.


Labor

There are also a number of proposals to undermine workers’ rights and the role 
of organized labor. The Freedom Caucus proposed revoking rules to expand 
eligibility for overtime pay, for treating independent contractors as employees 
under labor law as well as waiving the requirements of the Davis-Bacon Act, 
which requires federal contractors to be paid “a prevailing wage”.


Export-Import Bank

Trump calls on US to 'greatly strengthen and expand' nuclear weapons capability
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/22/donald-trump-tweets-expand-nuclear-weapons>
The Freedom Caucus also goes after a long-time bogeyman, the Export-Import 
Bank, calling for the removal of a regulation which establishes the bank as the 
official export creditor of the US. Fights over the bank, which many 
conservatives view as an example of corporate welfare, have prompted government 
shutdown fears in recent years, as well as continued intra-party conflict, as 
manyRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> view the 
government corporation as a force for good, playing a crucial role in helping 
American businesses compete overseas.

Supersonic flight

There is currently a ban on overland supersonic flight. Originally set in 1973 
as Concorde was being first rolled out for commercial uses, it aimed to protect 
Americans from the dangers of sonic booms, created when an object goes faster 
than the speed of sound. The Freedom Caucus would aim to replace this with a 
noise standard in order to “Make Sonic Boom Again”.

 