
Bowing to public concern that suspected terrorists on government watch lists 
are legally allowed to buy guns, House Republican leadersagreed last week to 
vote on a bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/30/house-of-representatives-gun-control-terror-watch-list-vote>
 that would give law enforcement officials power to delay these sales.

It was the one piece of gun control legislation that House Republicans said 
would see a vote – even asHouse Democrats continued to stage public protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/05/house-democrats-pressure-republicans-vote-gun-control>
 over the lack of any votes on other, broader gun control measures.

Now, even that single vote may not happen, due to opposition from House 
Republicans’ own Freedom Caucus. Citing Congressional aides and sources in 
Republican leadership, Politico reported on Thursday afternoon that the Freedom 
Caucus’ concerns over the bill would delay a vote,perhaps “indefinitely.”  
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/house-gop-indefinitely-delays-gun-control-votes-225234>

In a statement, Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nancy-pelosi> slammed the delay.

“There are truly no limits to the Republican Majority’s fanatical refusal to 
keep guns out of the hands of suspected terrorists,” she said. “The collapse of 
their own bill shows that HouseRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> are completely untethered 
from the reality of gun violence in our country.”

The legislation 
<http://www.speaker.gov/press-release/counterterrorism-bill-provides-new-tools-protect-our-homeland>
 tackling the issue of suspected terrorists buying guns, introduced by House 
Majority leader Kevin McCarthy last Friday, had been scheduled for 
consideration sometime this week.

Virginia Congressman Morgan Griffith, a member of the Freedom Caucus, told 
Guardian US that he had heard a vote on the bill “would be delayed until next 
week”.

Beyond that, he said, it wasn’t clear what the bill’s future would be. “As 
written, it just won’t work,” he said.

“We shouldn’t let terrorists change the United States of America into a land 
we don’t recognize.”

AshLee Strong, speaker Paul Ryan’s spokeswoman, would not confirm whether 
Republican opposition from the Freedom Caucus had delayed a vote on the 
legislation.
“The speaker was clear that we’re working on a package and want to get it 
right, no timeline announced,” she wrote in an e-mail.

Democrats called McCarthy’s legislation, which was closely modeled on a 
National Rifle Association-approved measure that the Senate rejected last 
month, “cynical” and unworkable.


“Bringing up a bill authored by the NRA just isn’t going to cut it,” Drew 
Hamill, a spokesman for Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi, said in a statement 
last week.


Rather than blocking any sale of guns to suspected terrorists on government 
watch lists, the legislation would have given law enforcement officials three 
days to delay a gun sale and convince a judge to block the sale permanently. 
The prospective gun purchaser would have been able to participate in the court 
hearing.

Democrats argued this legislation was not strong enough, while Freedom Caucus 
members criticized it as an overreach. Some lawmakers on both sides agreed that 
the legislation’s proposed process to block gun sales would not work in 
practice.

Griffith said on Thursday that the bill’s three-day time period for delaying a 
gun sale was implausible. “There’s just not time to get an attorney and have a 
hearing where your due process is protected in that time period,” he said.

 The House Freedom Caucus, a group of conservative legislators that “gives a 
voice to countless Americans who feel that Washington does not represent them”
released a statement 
<http://jordan.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=398031> on 
Wednesday opposing the Republican majority leader’s legislation for “failing to 
do enough to address the threat of radical Islamic terrorism and because of the 
inclusion of gun control provisions that fail to adequately protect due 
process”.

The Freedom Caucus also criticized the rushed approval process for parts of 
the bill, which was released two days afternationwide protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/29/gun-control-day-protest-action-congress-legislatio>
 by House Democrats, who had slammed Republicans for doing nothing to stop 
suspected terrorists from buying guns. In Chicago, Democratic House whip Steny 
Hoyer hadput a spotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/29/gun-control-day-protest-action-congress-legislatio>
 on terrorists’ access to guns. “No fly--” he chanted. “No buy!” a crowd of 
supporters chanted back.


In a press conference Thursday morning, Speaker Paul Ryan said he was not 
going to “rush” the consideration of the bill.

“Lots of our members, when we posted the bill, have given us many suggestions. 
So we’re trying to get this legislation right,” he said. “We’re trying to 
reflect the consensus of our conference so that we can bring a bill to the 
floor that deals with this violence, that deals with terrorism, that deals with 
these issues. And we’re not going to rush it.”

Griffith said he thought the legislation was fixable. 

“There’s a lot of amendments floating around out there that I think would make 
it better,” he said. Among potential fixes, he said, would be focusing on only 
restricting gun purchasing for non-US citizens, or changing the current 
legislation to do more to protect the due process rights of Americans.

“My hope is that, behind the scenes, we can iron something out,” he said. “We 
all want to be protected from terrorists.”
 