
Photographs have emerged of armed French police confronting a woman on a beach 
and making her remove some of her clothing as part of a controversial ban on 
the burkini.

Authorities in several French towns have implemented bans on the burkini, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/nice-becomes-latest-french-city-to-impose-burkini-ban>
 which covers the body and head, citing concerns about religious clothing in 
the wake of recent terrorist killings in the country.


France's burkini ban row divides government as court mulls legality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/25/frances-burkini-ban-row-divides-government-court-mulls-legality>
The images of police confronting the woman in Nice on Tuesday show at least 
four police officers standing over a woman who was resting on the shore at the 
town’s Promenade des Anglais, the scene of last month’sBastille Day lorry attack
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bastille-day-truck-attack>.

After they arrive, she appears to remove a blue long-sleeved tunic, although 
one of the officers appears to take notes or issue an on-the-spot fine.

The photographs emerged as a mother of two also told on Tuesday how she had 
been fined on the beach in nearby Cannes wearing leggings, a tunic and a 
headscarf.

Her ticket, seen by French news agency AFP, read that she was not wearing “an 
outfit respecting good morals and secularism”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Ffrench-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fb3874296589ce1359cf631be478cceda6ff89f%2F0_206_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=French%20police%20make%20woman%20remove%20clothing%20on%20Nice%20beach%20following%20burkini%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Ffrench-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=French%20police%20make%20woman%20remove%20clothing%20on%20Nice%20beach%20following%20burkini%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Ffrench-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fb3874296589ce1359cf631be478cceda6ff89f%2F0_206_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
 The woman was on the beach when the police arrived. Photograph: Vantagenews.com
“I was sitting on a beach with my family,” said the 34-year-old who gave only 
her first name, Siam. “I was wearing a classic headscarf. I had no intention of 
swimming.”

I created the burkini to give women freedom, not to take it away | Aheda 
Zanetti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/i-created-the-burkini-to-give-women-freedom-not-to-take-it-away>
A witness to the scene, Mathilde Cousin, confirmed the incident. “The saddest 
thing was that people were shouting ‘go home’, some were applauding the 
police,” she said. “Her daughter was crying.”

Last week, Nice became the latest French resort to ban the burkini. Using 
language similar to the bans imposed earlier at other locations, the city 
barred clothing that “overtly manifests adherence to a religion at a time when
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> and places of worship are the 
target of terrorist attacks”.

The Nice ban refers specifically to the truck attack in the city on 14 July 
that claimed 86 lives, as well as themurder 12 days later of a Catholic priest 
near the northern city of Rouen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/26/men-hostages-french-church-police-normandy-saint-etienne-du-rouvray>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Ffrench-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc6ca3a0d59e8d64fb45e69f3edd1dccc16f9a8c%2F0_142_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=French%20police%20make%20woman%20remove%20clothing%20on%20Nice%20beach%20following%20burkini%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Ffrench-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=French%20police%20make%20woman%20remove%20clothing%20on%20Nice%20beach%20following%20burkini%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Ffrench-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc6ca3a0d59e8d64fb45e69f3edd1dccc16f9a8c%2F0_142_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
 Nice banned the burkini last week. Photograph: Vantagenews.com 
The ban by several towns will come before France’s highest administrative 
court on Thursday following an appeal by the Human Rights League, a French NGO. 
It is challenging the decision by a lower court in Nice, which upheld a ban on 
the outfit by the town of Villeneuve-Loubet.


Villeneuve-Loubet, just west of Nice, was among the first of 15 towns to ban 
the burkini, triggering a fierce debate in France and elsewhere about the 
wearing of the full-body swimsuit, women’s rights and secularism.


A Corsican mayor has also banned burkinis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/corsica-mayor-bans-burkini-violence-beach-protests-sisco-france>
, amid tensions on the island and violent clashes between villagers and three 
Muslim families. Skirmishes at a beach in the commune of Sisco earlier this 
month left four people injured and resulted in riot police being brought in to 
stop a crowd of 200 Corsicans marching into a housing estate with a high 
population of people of North African origin, shouting “this is our home”.

A police investigation is under way to determine the cause of the violent 
brawl, although there has been no confirmation from authorities as to whether 
anyone on the beach was wearing a burkini at the time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Ffrench-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04a6ae954523e9e413e554ee5ce5f365ce78f1eb%2F0_51_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=French%20police%20make%20woman%20remove%20clothing%20on%20Nice%20beach%20following%20burkini%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Ffrench-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=French%20police%20make%20woman%20remove%20clothing%20on%20Nice%20beach%20following%20burkini%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Ffrench-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04a6ae954523e9e413e554ee5ce5f365ce78f1eb%2F0_51_4252_2551%2F4252.jpg>
 Tensions have risen in the area since the Bastille Day attack in July 
Photograph: Vantagenews.com 
Nevertheless the local Socialist mayor, Ange-Pierre Vivoni, banned the 
garments, describing the measure as necessary to “protect the population”.

The Nice tribunal ruled on Monday that the ban in Villeneuve-Loubet was 
“necessary, appropriate and proportionate” to prevent public disorder after a 
succession of jihadi attacks in France.

Women in burkinis and men in suits | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/women-in-burkinis-and-men-in-suits>
The burkini was “liable to offend the religious convictions or (religious) 
non-convictions of other users of the beach,” and “be felt as a defiance or a 
provocation exacerbating tensions felt by” the community, it added.

The ruling by the state council, France’s highest administrative court, will 
provide a legal precedent for towns to follow around the country.
 