
“Could you murder your wife to save your daughter?” That’s the hook for a 
novel that has enabled self-published author Adam Croft, writing from his back 
bedroom, to pay off his mortgage in just 20 weeks, selling 150,000 copies and 
winning a book deal with Amazon.

Croft, who lives in Flitwick, Bedfordshire, was running an internet marketing 
company when he wrote his first novel, Too Close for Comfort, in 2011. At 
first, he wasn’t sure what to do with the thriller, in which new recruit DS 
Wendy Knight takes on a sadistic serial killer. “It didn’t cross my mind to 
send it to a publisher – I thought it was my first one and it wouldn’t get 
picked up,” says the 29-year-old. He looked into Amazon’s self-publishing 
programme Kindle DirectPublishing <https://www.theguardian.com/books/publishing>
, which offers royalties of up to 70%, depending on pricing. “I just wanted 
someone to pick it up and read it. I didn’t know I could self-publish until two 
weeks before I did it.”

Sales “trickled” in at first, until they took off enough for Croft to decide 
that he would write full-time. Croft has since self-published eight more books, 
seven of which are parts of his Kempston Hardwick and Knight and Culverhouse 
series. Amazon does not release sales figures, but Croft says he had sold 
around 350,000 books in five years, until the gamechanger: his most recent 
novel, Her Last Tomorrow. This thriller has sold 150,000 copies in just five 
months, and Croft estimates that he’s on target for £1m ($1.4m) of sales in 
2016, compared with £20,000 ($29,000) in 2015. To put this in context, a 2014 
survey of almost 2,500 working writers in the UKfound that the professional 
author’s median income was just £11,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/08/authors-incomes-collapse-alcs-survey>
 ($16,000), while a 2015 survey of US authors foundthe median fell below the 
poverty line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/15/income-for-us-authors-falls-below-federal-poverty-line-survey>
 – a plummet attributed to “several factors related directly to Amazon’s role 
in the current publishing landscape”.

Publishers have had it very easy for a long time – since presses were 
introduced, there’s been very little change
Adam Croft 
“It went a bit mad to say the least,” says Croft of his last book. “I went 
from just about paying the bills to making around £2,000 ($2,900) a day in 
royalties. It got into the top 10 in the Amazon digital chart and last week was 
No 12 on the overall Amazon paperback chart, fiction and non-fiction combined. 
We’ve paid the mortgage off just 20 weeks after not having a pot to do the 
proverbial in. It’s totally blown everything through the roof in the space of a 
few weeks.”

Croft’s success comes in the wake of a new report from Enders Analysis, 
published by the Bookseller 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/insight/evaluation-consumer-book-market-330678>, 
which found that 40 of the 100 top-selling ebooks on Amazon US in March were 
self-published. Self-publishing is “only going to grow more attractive” as an 
option for writers, said the report, which went on to warn that it was “the 
largest threat to incumbent publisher businesses in the medium term ... and 
publishers cannot be complacent”. However, the medium has not won over everyone:
founder of Profile Books Andrew Franklin said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/11/self-published-ebooks-20-per-cent-genre>
 an “overwhelming majority” of self-published books “are terrible – unutterable 
rubbish” while author Jonathan Franzen said Amazon’s self-publishing model 
favoured “yakkers and tweeters and braggers”.

For me, traditional publishing means poverty. But self-publish? No way
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/mar/21/for-me-traditional-publishing-means-poverty-but-self-publish-no-way>
“I’m happy enough for the traditional publishers to be sniffy about 
self-publishing – they’ve been sticking their heads in the sand for years and 
it’s to their detriment,” says Croft. “Publishers have had it very easy for a 
long time – since presses were introduced, there’s been very little change. For 
years we’ve been saying that this is the way things are going, that they’re 
changing. We’re not saying this for our own benefit, because we’re already 
embracing the change.”

The author has signed a deal with Amazon’s crime imprint Thomas & Mercer, to 
republish Her Last Tomorrow and release his next novel, provisionally titled 
Only the Truth, in 2017. “We’re delighted that Adam has chosen to join the 
Thomas & Mercer imprint – we’re looking forward to helping bring his pacy, dark 
thrillers to a wider audience,” said Eoin Purcell, UK leader of Amazon 
Publishing. “Adam is an exciting voice in one of the most interesting genres in 
crime writing right now, whose work really explores the psychological depths of 
his characters. We’re excited to help introduce him to new readers.”

14 hour days, marketing and dealing with snobbery: my life as a self-published 
bestseller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/30/self-publish-and-be-damned-rachel-abbott-kindle>
The paperback of Her Last Tomorrow is currently 29th in Amazon.co.uk 
<http://amazon.co.uk/>’s bestseller list, just behind A Game of Thrones. It has 
almost 1,300 reviews from readers, around 1,000 of those five-star, and Croft 
says it’s been the biggest-selling independent book this year so far. “Little 
old me, doing it myself from my back bedroom, has outsold people like Stephen 
King and Lee Child over quite a few weeks this year.”
 