
We wish to make an apology. Five weeks ago we remarked that, although we knew 
our Government would not make a military attack in defiance of its solemn 
international obligations, people abroad might think otherwise. The events of 
last week have proved us completely wrong: if we misled anyone, at home or 
abroad, we apologise unreservedly. We had not realised that our Government was 
capable of such folly and such crookedness.

Whatever the Government now does, it cannot undo its air attacks on Egypt, 
made after Egypt had been invaded by Israel. It cannot undo the deliberate 
deployment of haste so that our nearest allies had no opportunity to express 
disagreement. It can never live down the dishonest nature of its ultimatum, so 
framed that it was certain to be rejected byEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>. Never since 1783 has great Britain 
made herself so universally disliked.

It is for every individual in this country who is against the Government’s 
attack on Egypt to say so in writing to his Member of Parliament, lobbying him, 
demonstrating in every legitimate way. Nations are said to have the governments 
they deserve. Let us show that we deserve better.

Key quote
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Ffrom-the-observer-archive-this-week-in-1956%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb136e8b2cd82e2a4f3df8b2e5a7e936423fd19b6%2F0_226_2931_1759%2F2931.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20Observer%20archive%3A%20this%20week%20in%201956&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Ffrom-the-observer-archive-this-week-in-1956%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20Observer%20archive%3A%20this%20week%20in%201956&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Ffrom-the-observer-archive-this-week-in-1956%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb136e8b2cd82e2a4f3df8b2e5a7e936423fd19b6%2F0_226_2931_1759%2F2931.jpg>
 A prime minister at bay: Anthony Eden) broadcasts to the nation at the time of 
the Suez conference convened to discuss the future ownership of the Suez canal. 
Photograph: Picture Post/Getty Images 
“We are not at war with Egypt… We are in an armed conflict.”

Prime minister Sir Anthony Eden​

Talking point

Televisual coverage of the War of Eden’s Ego has been, so far, inevitably 
rather scanty. Perhaps the most dramatic single moment was last Monday’s 
anticipatory, when Associated Rediffusion inserted a rudely printed notice to 
announce the Israeli invasion. For all its rather old-fashioned crudity, this 
was a good idea. It gave viewers the feeling, however illusory, of being in the 
know, of being treated like Cabinet Ministers at a private dinner party.Observer
 TV review
 