
Paul Nash <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/paul-nash> is arguably the 
greatest war artist Britain has produced. The works that first earned him real 
renown, We Are Making a New World and The Menin Road, are iconic images of the 
trenches: with their splintered tree stumps and lumpy mud seas, they shockingly 
captured the annihilation of nature at bomb-blasted Ypres and Passchendaele. 
Nash found a new style of art to represent a new horror. Two and half decades 
later, more esteemed than ever and a war artist once again, he painted the 
unforgettable ocean graveyard of crashed German planes,Totes Meer.

Nash is also one of the most interesting British landscape painters of the 
20th century, much loved for his pictures that divine the “spirit” of Avebury, 
Wittenham Clumps and other English places with which he felt a strong, almost 
mystical, connection. His workWood on the Downs (1929), a study of beech trees 
and chalklands, has been subject to constant reproduction since first 
exhibited, and its popularity is unsurprising: it is a hugely pleasing coming 
together of Englishness and modernistic art. His pictures found a refreshing, 
contemporary way to express a deeply felt communion with the English 
countryside – trees, paths, birds, hills.

Nash’s transformations of reality were the product of a visionary sensibility 
that harked back to William Blake and Samuel Palmer; he searched for inner 
meanings in the landscape, what he called the “things behind”. Yet he also was 
constantly on the lookout, as he said, for “a different angle of vision”, and 
as such was alert to the new movements transforming art on the continent, 
including abstraction and surrealism. His solutions to the problem of how to 
represent the forms and patterns of nature changed throughout his career. One 
thing stayed the same, however: his pictures are strange, unsettling and rather 
melancholy, and are so appealing preciselybecause of their strangeness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ceb9922b42c83567eec48a51282d1dad9911cee%2F0_0_2097_1595%2F2097.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20English%20woodlands%20to%20war%3A%20the%20pioneering%20paintings%20of%20Paul%20Nash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20English%20woodlands%20to%20war%3A%20the%20pioneering%20paintings%20of%20Paul%20Nash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ceb9922b42c83567eec48a51282d1dad9911cee%2F0_0_2097_1595%2F2097.jpg>
 Paul Nash’s Wood on the Downs (1930). Photograph: Aberdeen Art Gallery & 
Museums Collections 
It is impossible to consider Nash without the influence on him of modernism, 
which began as early as the 1917-18 war pictures with the zig-zag vorticism of
Christopher Nevinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/nov/21/brilliance-artists-david-haycock-review>
 – geometric planes and night skies sliced by searchlight beams. Nash’s 
engagement with abstraction and surrealism took different routes through the 
late 1920s and 30s – in the exceptionalWinter Sea, for example, begun in the 
mid-20s in Dymchurch, Kent, where moonlit waves become recessive straight lines 
and firm-edged blocks of colour.

The dreamscapes of Magritte and De Chirico redirected his 1930s work – Blue 
House on the Shore 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/nash-blue-house-on-the-shore-n05048> is 
lovely and disquieting, seemingly conjured in a reverie; while one oil,
Nocturnal Landscape, seemed so Freudian that Nash said its interpretation would 
offer “jam for the psycho boys”.Equivalents of the Megaliths is different 
again, a meeting of deep history and maths: the standing stones at Avebury are 
reimagined as solid, abstract forms – cylinders, a girder and a white gridded 
screen – set down in a Wiltshire cornfield.

While critics have recognised this engagement with modernism, many have 
preferred to dwell on Nash as a painter with a personal response to landscape, 
and to emphasise that his version of continental experimentalism was thoroughly 
domesticated. Several of the newspaper reviews of the last majorNash 
exhibition, at Tate Liverpool in 2003 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-liverpool/exhibition/paul-nash>, were 
typical in suggesting that he is best seen as part of an English tradition, 
that his efforts at surrealism are clunky (a Betjemanesque version of 
Magritte), and that the cubism he practised was merely a decorative, salon 
variety. His interest in abstraction and surrealism was not at his core, it has 
been argued, and such borrowed styles conflicted with his native gift.

The exhibition about to open at Tate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> challenges this head on. 
With over 160 works (the biggest show since the 1975 Tate retrospective), it is 
large enough to accommodate any interpretation of Nash, but it underlines his 
importance as a pioneering figure of the British avant garde. Here he is not 
only a romantic individual communing with the land, but a highly varied artist 
at the centre of networks of experimental creators. According to the curator 
Emma Chambers, the goal “is not simply to move consideration of his art beyond 
the war work, but also to show aspects of his work beyond landscape. In the 
1930s, still life, surrealism, found objects are all areas that Nash explored, 
and this is also a moment when he expanded his use of media into photography, 
collage and assemblage.” The effect is to round out a major artist and make him 
even more beguiling.

Unsettling and melancholy, Nash’s pictures are so appealing precisely because 
of their strangeness

In his writings of the late 1920s and early 30s, Chambers points out, Nash 
attacked the insularity of British art, and robustly defended abstraction; he 
was clearly on the side of the experimenters. Looking for new inspiration, he 
castigated what he called the “safety first” tendency of domestic art; the 
French, on the other hand, had “reached out, they have real mental daring”. 
Over a decade, he responded with vigour to the ideas ofPicasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pablo-picasso>, Cocteau, Ernst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ernst> and other leading continental 
figures.

Three episodes in his career are given special consideration in the new Tate 
show. In 1933, Nash helped found Unit One, a group that included the artistsBen 
Nicholson <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ben-nicholson>, Henry Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/henry-moore>, Barbara Hepworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/barbara-hepworth> and Edward Burra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/nov/18/edward-burra-transgressive-painter>
 and the modernist architect Wells Coates. Announcing its creation, Nash wrote 
that “Unit One may be said to stand for the expression of a truly contemporary 
spirit”; an exhibition toured the country over the next couple of years. A room 
at the Tate brings together works from the Unit One artists, and showcases 
their catalogue. Though it remains difficult now to apprehend just how 
embattled they felt – what outliers they were in the English art world of the 
1930s – this is a valuable attempt to relive what Chambers calls “an important 
moment” for Nash, “staking out a place for modernist art in an unsympathetic 
environment”.

Three years later, Nash was an organiser of the International Surrealist 
Exhibition in London, which featuredDalí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/dali>, André Breton and Miró 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/joan-miro>, and caused something of a 
stir. One article dubbed Nash “English surrealist-in-chief”. The Tate gives 
this episode some prominence too, and includes treatises on surrealism 
published at the time, as well as a number of Nash’s paintings that were on 
display to the thousands of intrigued visitors in 1936. In one of these,Harbour 
and Room, a Magrittian meditation on sleep, dreams and death, a ship sails into 
an interior space and water laps towards a fireplace and mirrored wall. Outside 
meets inside, and it is odd indeed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05029a08034a7922562508f86905f8fa4f4ee450%2F0_0_5398_4478%2F5398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20English%20woodlands%20to%20war%3A%20the%20pioneering%20paintings%20of%20Paul%20Nash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20English%20woodlands%20to%20war%3A%20the%20pioneering%20paintings%20of%20Paul%20Nash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05029a08034a7922562508f86905f8fa4f4ee450%2F0_0_5398_4478%2F5398.jpg>
 Nash’s Event on the Downs (1934). Photograph: Government Art Collection, UK 
Nash had a passionate affair in the mid-1930s with the surrealist artist 
Eileen Agar; together they looked about them, in town and country, for 
suggestive shapes and juxtapositions. The Tate presents a number of her 
photographs and objects (rocks, shells, wood, bones) alongside those of Nash, 
not least to highlight the variety of the nature art he was making – partly 
thanks to her. Found objects played a central role in many of his best-known 
surrealist works, for instance inEvent on the Downs the gnarly tree stump and 
giant tennis ball in front of the white cliffs of the Dorset coast – where Nash 
and Agar first met.

Asked to identify two significant lesser-known works in the Tate show, 
Chambers first identifies the urban still lifeDead Spring 
<http://artuk.org/discover/artworks/dead-spring-70498> from 1929, which depicts 
a dead pot plant and set of drawing instruments on the window sill of Nash’s 
London flat overlooking an empty St Pancras advertising hoarding. This is the 
“observed reality”, but the canvas is also a working through of cubist ideas of 
overlapping planes and multiple viewpoints.

Chambers’s second choice is the amusing Forest (1936-7), a surrealist wooden 
relief “made from glove stretchers slotted into a wooden backing; the 
stretchers metamorphose into tree forms while continuing to suggest hands”. The 
work reflects Nash’s interest in Ernst, who also metamorphosed landscapes and 
natural objects into “strange and contradictory states”.

***

Nash’s official identification with the surrealist movement was short-lived, 
though its ideas lasted longer. That it spoke to him at all was no doubt 
because he always had a kind of surrealist sensibility, one that emerged in his 
earliest paintings (“Surrealism found me,” he later claimed). From the 
beginning, after a mentor advised him to “go in for Nature”, his work had a 
metaphorical quality, with things standing in for or implying something else 
(“I have tried … to paint trees as though they were human beings,” he said).

The first room of the Tate exhibition has a dozen or so of the delightfully 
spooky ink and watercolour works that the young Nash made in 1911-13, and the 
lines of continuity between, say,The Pyramids in the Sea and his later work are 
clear to see. Here already is a kind of tension of opposites: a peculiar 
meeting of geometry and stormy waves, it shows the influence ofBlake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/william-blake> and Yeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wbyeats> and symbolism; Nash at the time 
described the eclipsed moonlight as “uncanny”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c738c298c70f309e537ebbe24a07a2606855759%2F0_0_1536_1070%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20English%20woodlands%20to%20war%3A%20the%20pioneering%20paintings%20of%20Paul%20Nash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20English%20woodlands%20to%20war%3A%20the%20pioneering%20paintings%20of%20Paul%20Nash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c738c298c70f309e537ebbe24a07a2606855759%2F0_0_1536_1070%2F1536.jpg>
 Nash’s Equivalents for the Megaliths (1935). Photograph: Paul Nash/©Tate 
Then came the war, which was slow to affect him, but when it did caused 
emotional devastation. The Tate show doesn’t include many of his wartime works 
but has several of the most important ones; it is a testament to their power 
that they remain disturbing despite their familiarity. When 25-year-old 
Lieutenant Nash first arrived at the Ypres trenches in the spring of 1917 he 
wrote home expressing something like ecstasy. As an artist drawn to new ways of 
seeing nature and landscape, the battlefields offered a strange vision – 
“wonderful ruinous forms”. And in fields pocked with shell holes, with trees 
torn to shreds and reeking of poison gas, flowers bloomed everywhere: “This 
place is just joyous, the dandelions are bright gold over the parapet.”

Late in May, he fell heavily, broke a rib and was sent home. Just a few days 
later, his unit was engaged in an offensive and was almost wiped out; he knew 
how lucky he had been. When he returned to Flanders in the aftermath of 
Passchendaele, this time as an official war artist, he no longer found any 
trace of beauty or rejuvenation. That was when he wrote the haunting, often 
quoted letter to his wife, Margaret, that is on display at the Tate:

Black Dog: Dave McKean delves into the dreams of war artist Paul Nash – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2016/may/27/black-dog-the-dreams-of-paul-nash-dave-mckean>
I have seen the most frightful nightmare of a country more conceived by Dante 
or Poe than by nature, unspeakable, utterly indescribable … Sunset and sunrise 
are blasphemous, they are mockeries to man … The rain drives on, the stinking 
mud becomes more evilly yellow … the black dying trees ooze and sweat and the 
shells never cease … I am no longer an artist interested and curious, I am a 
messenger … Feeble, inarticulate, will be my message, but it will have a bitter 
truth, and may it burn their lousy souls.

The years after the Armistice were difficult; Nash was, in his own 
description, a “war artist without a war”; he suffered a nervous collapse, and 
was visited by terrible images; poison gas had damaged his lungs. What’s more, 
he had money worries and enemies in the art world. With the exception of the 
angular bleakness ofThe Shore and other Dymchurch paintings, along with his 
illustrations for an edition of Genesis, his work during much of the 1920s 
indicates he took a long time to recuperate.

Late in the decade he started to respond to a new visual stimulus, as 
exhibitions of avant-garde international art began to be staged in London. His 
imagination was set free once more. A man who had a fervent attachment to the 
English land but never a settled home, he lived in various locations – Iden, 
Rye, Swanage, Hampstead – finding particular places that spoke to him and new 
ways of representing them. Even after his most obvious surrealist phase was 
over, he continued to think about “objects as personages”, for instance in his 
late-1930s photos of animal-like fallen trees, which he called ‘“monsters”. 
During his life he identified different kinds of monsters, from rusted anchors 
to Dorset dinosaurs to bomber planes; it was another way of rendering the 
English pastoral uncanny.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F671ad591a28d0241a54446cc52fedf43d9d176f1%2F0_105_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20English%20woodlands%20to%20war%3A%20the%20pioneering%20paintings%20of%20Paul%20Nash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20English%20woodlands%20to%20war%3A%20the%20pioneering%20paintings%20of%20Paul%20Nash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ffrom-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F671ad591a28d0241a54446cc52fedf43d9d176f1%2F0_105_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
 Flight of the Magnolia (1944) by Paul Nash. Photograph: © Tate 
The disorientations of surrealism also prepared him for painting the wreckage 
of shot-down German planes when another war arrived in 1939 and he was attached 
to the RAF and Air Ministry. The Tate exhibition includes photos he took of the 
twisted metal carcasses of wrecked enemy aircraft at a vast dump at Cowley, 
near Oxford. These fed directly intoTotes Meer, and are of more interest than 
Nash’s more naturalistic and propagandist pictures of planes. The set piece
Battle of Britain, with its swooping vapour trails against vivid blue, and 
Battle of Germany, with its fiery explosion-red sky and huge moon, are among 
his late masterpieces, though given their subject matter they seem to offer 
almost too much beauty.

Nash painted right up to his death in 1946, and the work in the final room of 
this marvellous show is bold and surprising, and certainly visionary – how else 
to describe a huge sunflower head spinning down a hill, or a great magnolia 
flying in the sky? He had been ill for a while, and the “aerial flowers” were a 
presentiment of death, though the sun paintings refer to eternal cycles of 
nature and rebirth. These late pictures are less cerebral, and have an air 
about them of letting go; the brushwork is freer too. The direct influence of 
modernism was now in the past, but he was caught up, as ever, in looking at the 
world and seeing patterns and mysterious “things behind”. An artist both full 
of wonder and wonderful, knowing the end was near, painted pictures that were 
stranger than ever.

• Paul Nash opens at Tate Britain, London SW1, on 26 October. 
tate.org.uk/visit/tate-britain <http://tate.org.uk/visit/tate-britain>.
 