


 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jPK9wmNH_CI>The first time I met Corbusier 
was in Bombay in 1952 at a diplomatic party when my host begged me to go and 
talk to “that great lanky fellow over there, standing by himself with a glass 
of brandy. He speaks no English and I have no time to entertain him; he is 
French, do help out.” My host had not told me who the tall, handsome, elderly 
man was.

I suggested we sit down and asked the tall man what he was doing in Bombay. He 
was furious and began to unburden himself at once. His trouble was money. 
“Indians are cheating me. I am going to Delhi to tell Nehru. Non, ça ne se 
passera pas comme ça!” The Reserve Bank of India had raised objections to his 
remitting toFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> the money which 
had been paid to him by Mrs Sarabhai - the widow of a well-to-do Ahmedabad mill 
owner.

 The next time I met Corb was in the plane going to Delhi the very next day. 
We naturally sat together and I mentioned that I was a journalist. This opened 
a new floodgate of recriminations. Corb was obviously suffering from some sort 
of persecution complex where the press was concerned. The press was after him: 
they made money out of him, they never gave him money when they interviewed 
him; indeed it was the reporter who made the money, this was unfair. And to cap 
it all they misquoted him; this had happened more than once over his conception 
of the Maison Soleil. The words “Maison Soleil” gave me the clue to his 
identity.

As we were getting off the plane he asked me what I was doing that evening: 
“Catching a train, I am afraid,” I said. “ Pity. You are fat and I like my 
women fat. We could have spent a pleasant night together.” He said this quite 
casually. He was not being offensive, he was being factual, so involved in his 
own ego that it did not occur to him that it might have been better put and 
more gallant to spend some time on preliminaries. So gigantic was Corb’s 
egotism that he probably considered it enough of an honour for a humble mortal 
to provide a genius like him with a night’s relaxation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fle-corbusier-india-architecture-1965%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410345048322%2F71ff5396-8d34-4e59-95c7-e726523d0be5-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20awkward%20interview%20with%20Le%20Corbusier%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%2011%20September%201965&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fle-corbusier-india-architecture-1965%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20awkward%20interview%20with%20Le%20Corbusier%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%2011%20September%201965&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fle-corbusier-india-architecture-1965%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410345048322%2F71ff5396-8d34-4e59-95c7-e726523d0be5-1020x612.jpeg>
 Taya Zinkin, foreign correspondent for the Manchester Guardian. Photograph: 
picture library 
That evening I was catching the train to Chandigarh where the “Manchester 
Guardian” was sending me to write about the new capital for the Punjab whichLe 
Corbusier <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/lecorbusier> was building, 
together with Jane Drew, Maxwell Fry, and Pierre Jeanneret, according to a 
master plan prepared by the American town planner Albert Mayer. I spent a few 
exciting days as the guest of Jane Drew - in those days there was no hotel and 
no really comfortable place to stay in Chandigarh, which was still much in its 
embryo. On the third day Jane said, with that deep, warm, throaty, voice of 
hers: “Taya, you are in luck. Corb is coming tonight, and you will meet him at 
Jeanneret’s for drinks. Put on a nice dress and if I can give you a tip do not 
talk shop to him at the party. He hates that. Just be nice and try to get an 
appointment with him in his office.”

Corb was almost gay. He had seen Nehru, who had given orders to the Reserve 
Bank, and he liked my dress. In fact, he was almost gallant. He spent the 
evening discussing women, prostitution, the impotence of Indian males, and his 
own wife. “I absolutely fail to understand her. Of course she is pretty stupid, 
mais quand même.

I give her all the money she wants but that is not enough for her. No. Madame 
wants children! She keeps pestering me for children. I hate children. She 
already has a little dog, that should be good enough. Take another dog, have 
two dogs by all means, but leave me alone is what I say to her.”

And he told me with chuckles of glee how Mrs Sarabhai had pleaded with him for 
railings or some sort of garde-fou on the terrace and balconies of her house in 
Ahmedabad. “The good woman was afraid that when her sons get married their 
children would fall off and kill themselves, as if I cared. As if I, Le 
Corbusier would compromise with design for the sake of her unborn brats!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjPK9wmNH_CI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjPK9wmNH_CI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjPK9wmNH_CI&media=>
 Le Corbusier, Chandigarh, India. 
When I told him how much I had liked the drawings and compositions of bulls he 
had given Jane Drew, he beamed. “People do not know it because they are 
hypnotised by categories, but I am a much greater artist than Picasso; a much 
better draftsman.” By the time he had had a few drinks he was paying me the 
sort of compliments Rubens must have paid Hélène Fourment when she was far gone 
with child. Had I not studied medicine I would have found his anatomical 
precision embarrassing. I had always known that I was fat, but I had not 
realised before that I looked as fat as all that. Taking advantage of his 
enthusiasm for my curves I asked if I could come and see him in his office the 
next day to ask questions about Chandigarh. He squeezed my hand, gave me a 
time, and warned: “ Don’t be late. I hate waiting.”

 At the appointed hour I was there, my list of questions written out not to 
waste the great man’s time. “There you are. We are not going to discuss 
architecture. I hate talking shop to a woman. That blasted blind will not come 
down and the air-conditioning does not work. Besides, there is no convenient 
place. You had better come to my room in Maiden’s Hotel in Delhi tomorrow 
evening and if you are a sensible girl before you go you can choose one of 
those bull drawings you said you liked. Now run along, don’t stand there 
wasting my time.” It had all been said so fast and with such complete 
matter-of-factness that it was impossible to take offence. To strike a 
Victorian pose would have been ridiculously melodramatic. I simply walked out.
 