
A pair of octogenarian siblings were two of the first visitors to the recent 
opening of the former Stony Island State Savings Bank on Chicago’s South Side. 
They were last inside the building nearly 70 years ago, when their Greek father 
ran a small food stand in one of its alcoves, back when it was still a bank. 
Today, the building has awoken from a decades-long slumber of dereliction and 
abandonment as theStony Island Arts Bank 
<http://rebuild-foundation.squarespace.com/stony-island-arts-bank/>, an art 
gallery, community arts space and archival library.

It’s the showpiece of Chicago artist Theaster Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/03/theaster-gates-artist-chicago-dorchester-projects>
, who’s parlayed his art world star power to develop a handful of arts-focused 
community projects that mix art-making with neighbourhood development. Trained 
as an urban planner, he’s one of a growing group of artists who are turning art 
into urban regeneration, and urban regeneration into art.


The two siblings wandered through the main gallery space, currently housing a 
cardboard building frame-like installation by the artistCarlos Bunga 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/features/carlos-bunga-artist-i-work-with-an-open-mind-and-do-not-know-what-exactly-will-happen-10026154.html>
. And while they seemed impressed with the building’s renovation, they were 
even more affected by the changes that had taken place in the neighbourhood 
outside. “Everything’s been torn down,” one said.


But that’s not quite right. Though there are vacant lots and some of the 
telltale signs of disinvestment, the neighbourhood is still very much there. 
It’s just that, like so many parts of so many cities, the heavily African 
American South Side of Chicago has endured decades of disenfranchisement and 
discrimination. As Gatesrecently told Architectural Record 
<http://archrecord.construction.com/news/2015/10/151016-Biennial-Dispatch-Theaster-Gates-Restores-Derelict-Chicago-Bank-into-a-Community-Hub.asp>
, the neighbourhood has “an amazing history of racism, segregation [and] a 
history of redlining and housing covenants that work against the poor, and 
against black and brown people.” His projects aim to redirect resources – 
especially access to the arts – that are typically lacking in these areas.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445862491889%2Fd1ff4abd-1a35-4d4c-8391-402c81d796e7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Theaster%20Gates%20to%20Assemble%3A%20is%20there%20an%20art%20to%20urban%20regeneration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Theaster%20Gates%20to%20Assemble%3A%20is%20there%20an%20art%20to%20urban%20regeneration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445862491889%2Fd1ff4abd-1a35-4d4c-8391-402c81d796e7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 It has taken $4.5m in renovations for the Stony Island Arts Bank to become a 
usable public space. Photograph: Sara Pooley/White Cube 
The Stony Island Arts Bank is the largest and most visible of these projects. 
It was on the brink of demolition in 2012 whenChicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago> Mayor Rahm Emanuel sold the 
building to Gates for $1. After $4.5m in renovations, it’s now open and free to 
the public. With granite walls and three-story columns on its front façade, the 
building is 1920s neoclassical civic architecture, a conspicuous building 
across the street from a strip mall and next to a vacant lot.


Inside, some of the decayed ceiling and plaster has been kept for posterity, 
but the rest of the building has been transformed into a modern archival and 
arts facility. A massive double-height reading room hosts the archives and 
research library of the Johnson Publishing Company, including the full run of 
its magazines Jet, Ebony and Negro Digest. Another room holds a long library 
file of art and art history glass slides from the University of Chicago and the 
School of the Art Institute of Chicago. Another room holds the record 
collection of the late house music pioneer Frankie Knuckles.


“What was here was very much a commercial centre that had just been 
systematically dismantled over the past few decades, and this building is one 
of the last vestiges of that time,” says Ken Stewart, CEO of the Rebuild 
Foundation, Gates’s non-profit. “For Theaster, when he understood that this 
building was going to be demolished, it wasn’t like ‘Oh, I gotta get a home for 
all these albums and books.’ It was like ‘I gotta save this building.’”


“All of our projects make use of existing structures in the neighbourhood,” 
Stewart says. “So an opportunity presents itself to do something interesting 
and we try to figure out what that interesting thing is.”


Other projects reusing space in the neighbourhood include the Black Cinema 
House <http://rebuild-foundation.squarespace.com/black-cinema-house/>, a 
community theatre in an old beer distribution house, and theDorchester Art + 
Housing Collaborative 
<http://rebuild-foundation.squarespace.com/dorchester-art-housing-collaborative/>
, a mixed income block of 32 rehabilitated townhouses for local residents and 
artists that was developed in partnership with the Chicago Housing Authority. 
Recently, after an 1880s-era church was torn down nearby, Gates salvaged its 
bricks. They’ll soon be used to build an installation in the vacant lot next to 
the Stony Island Arts Bank, designed by the architectFrida Escobedo 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2015/05/28/frida-escobedo-aztec-installation-landscape-victoria-albert-courtyard-london/>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42ffd97c103e69f628c052834134cd4044b47f76%2F57_39_2187_1312%2F2187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Theaster%20Gates%20to%20Assemble%3A%20is%20there%20an%20art%20to%20urban%20regeneration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Theaster%20Gates%20to%20Assemble%3A%20is%20there%20an%20art%20to%20urban%20regeneration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42ffd97c103e69f628c052834134cd4044b47f76%2F57_39_2187_1312%2F2187.jpg>
 Arts Bank reading matter. Photograph: Nate Berg 
And Gates is taking this approach beyond Chicago. For a project now showing in 
Bristol, Gates has transformed the shell of a bombed out 14th-century church 
into the venue for a continuous 24-day, 552-hourprogramm 
<http://sanctumbristol.com/>e <http://sanctumbristol.com/> of sound and 
performance art. For Gates and the Rebuild Foundation, reusing space is as much 
about creating art as it is connecting people with their neighbourhood.

On Chicago’s South Side, this approach continues to manifest itself in the 
built form of the city. “We think of ourselves as developers of arts spaces in 
the neighbourhood, not just as developers,” says Stewart. “The term developer, 
I think, comes with a lot of connotation and baggage. We’re not here to 
necessarily change things other than to make buildings that are dark light 
again.”

In Los Angeles, another star of the contemporary arts is using his commercial 
success to improve access to art and community services in one of the city’s 
underserved neighbourhoods.Mark Bradford 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/06/22/what-else-can-art-do>, known for 
his large-scale abstract paintings, openedArt + Practice 
<http://artandpractice.org/> in February in LA’s Leimert Park Village, a 
historic African American neighbourhood and commercial district that has seen 
many of its small businesses dry up in recent years. Art + Practice has taken 
over 20,000 sq ft of commercial space in the village and opened an art gallery, 
art studios, a lecture and film hall and a computer lab and educational spaces.

To serve vulnerable youths, Art + Practice provides educational spaces, mental 
health services and job training

Through a partnership with UCLA’s Hammer Museum, the gallery at Art + Practice 
is hosting exhibits programmed by the museum’s curators. “It is important for 
the organisation to present museum-grade artwork, exposing the community to 
work that is typically only shown in museum spaces,” says Allan DiCastro, Art + 
Practice executive director, and Bradford’s partner. The couple, along with art 
collector and philanthropist Eileen Harris Norton, cofounded the organisation 
to bring world-class art closer to the city’s largely African American and 
Latino neighbourhoods. “Museums in South LA are rare,” DiCastro says.


But it’s about more than art. “The epidemic of foster youth in this specific 
area was an issue we wanted to address,” DiCastro says. There are an estimated 
30,000 foster youths in Los Angeles County, with especially high concentrations 
in the neighbourhoods surrounding Leimert Park Village. Foster youth face high 
rates of incarceration, homelessness and unemployment upon emancipation, issues 
that have widespread effects in South Los Angeles. To serve these vulnerable 
youths, Art + Practice provides educational spaces, mental health services and 
job training in partnership with theRightway Foundation 
<http://www.therightwayfoundation.org/>, which moved its headquarters to the 
Art + Practice campus last summer.

Spread out over a half dozen buildings, Art + Practice is also making an 
impact on the community through sheer geographic footprint. With seed money for 
the project provided by Bradford and DiCastro, along with the resources of the 
Rightway Foundation, the Hammer Museum and a $600,000 grant from the James 
Irvine Foundation, the organisation brings a concentrated hub of economic 
stability to the neighbourhood, in itself an act of economic development.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445859072370%2F0ea729c6-4225-41dc-9914-f866682d55fd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Theaster%20Gates%20to%20Assemble%3A%20is%20there%20an%20art%20to%20urban%20regeneration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Theaster%20Gates%20to%20Assemble%3A%20is%20there%20an%20art%20to%20urban%20regeneration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445859072370%2F0ea729c6-4225-41dc-9914-f866682d55fd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Artist Mark Bradford opened Art + Practice in LA’s Leimert Park Village, a 
historic African American neighbourhood that has seen many businesses dry up in 
recent years. Photograph: Jesse Grant/MacArthur Foundation 
“It is important to a have a public presence for sustainability reasons,” says 
DiCastro. “In order to make an impact and be part of the conversation, you have 
to have a physical stake in the neighbourhood, and be present in the community.”

In the UK, the architecture collaborative Assemble 
<http://assemblestudio.co.uk/> have integrated this concept of community 
involvement deeply into their architectural practice. By working with 
communities more as collaborators than clients, Assemble has produced more than 
a dozen temporary and permanent projects that simultaneously add to the built 
environment and fill a need within the community.

Residents prevented demolition and have since painted 100 empty homes. They 
were nominated for the 2015 Turner Prize

The most well-known example is Assemble’s work in Liverpool’s Granby Four 
Streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/27/liverpool-locals-took-control-long-neglected-streets>
 neighbourhood, a section of the city heavily impacted by riots in 1981 that 
had been slated for a redevelopment that never came. Local residents opposed to 
the plans fought to prevent the demolition of a cluster of abandoned terraced 
homes in the years that followed. They’ve since organised to paint and maintain 
some of the more than 100 empty homes in the neighbourhood and have also 
established a community land trust to take control over a swath of the city 
that the government’s failed plans had left to decay.


Assemble was brought in by the social investor Steinbeck Studio to help usher 
the land and its empty homes into a more sustainable future by literally 
building on the aspirations of the community land trust. “It was their work 
that brought attention to the area,” says Maria Lisogorskaya, one of Assemble’s 
members. “We’ve worked with them for a few years now looking at the reuse of 
Victorian terraces in the area and how they can be brought back to life, but 
also what that means in relation to business and economic growth and how we can 
support this incredible grassroots action that’s already been happening.”


They’re collaborating with the community land trust to refurbish vacant 
housing, establish new public spaces and use the neighbourhood’s space and 
resources to jumpstart economic enterprises. For this project, Assemble was 
recently nominated for the 2015 Turner Prize.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445858103606%2F199e326b-6788-45f9-912c-04c05a9a51d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Theaster%20Gates%20to%20Assemble%3A%20is%20there%20an%20art%20to%20urban%20regeneration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Theaster%20Gates%20to%20Assemble%3A%20is%20there%20an%20art%20to%20urban%20regeneration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Ftheaster-gates-assemble-art-urban-regeneration-chicago%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445858103606%2F199e326b-6788-45f9-912c-04c05a9a51d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Architecture collective Assemble and local Toxteth residents are collaborating 
to refurbish vacant housing, establish new public spaces and use the 
neighbourhood’s resources to jumpstart economic enterprises. Photograph: Gary 
Calton 
Lisogorskaya says an important part of developing the Granby Four Street 
project was to start simply by asking the residents what they wanted. By 
understanding the community’s desires and needs, Assemble felt like they were 
better able to build a project that would make a difference in the 
neighbourhood. It’s a community-focused approach thatdiffers wildly from the 
interventions of the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/jul/28/urban-design-mistakes-unhealthy-inactive-communities>
.

“In Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool>, it feels like the 
previous developments and approaches have brought a lot of damage and feel 
really inappropriate,” she says. “So we’re definitely coming at it as a 
response and saying well, actually, this kind of grassroots, hands-on thing has 
really worked here because the community is so strong.”


Toxteth, 1981: the summer Liverpool burned – by the rioter and economist on 
opposite sides
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/14/toxteth-riots-1981-summer-liverpool-burned-patrick-minford-jimi-jagne>
And to help the community beyond just fixing up abandoned homes, Assemble 
worked with the community land trust to set up theGranby Workshop 
<http://www.granbyworkshop.co.uk/>, where community members build and sell 
handmade housewares such as benches, tables, planters and block-printed 
fabrics. As part of the Turner Prize nomination, Assemble has built a showroom 
for the products made in the workshop, and proceeds from sales go back towards 
the neighbourhood’s regeneration projects.


Most architects don’t build economic engines into their projects, and 
Lisogorskaya is quick to note that this type of intervention doesn’t make sense 
everywhere. “It can’t just be a generic; ‘Let’s put a workshop there,’ like 
some evangelical mission,” she says. But she does argue that things such as 
economic sustainability and local jobs are inherently interconnected with any 
effort to rehabilitate a neighbourhood. The architecture is only part of the 
project, and can only do so much on its own. As more architects and artists 
begin to think about ways their projects can have an impact beyond the gallery 
or the edge of the property line, the better these efforts will be at blurring 
the line between art and urban intervention. In fact, Mayor Boris Johnson has 
recently called on developers, planners and local authorities to put culture 
and creativity at the forefront of their thinking about city developments.


“As an approach it shouldn’t be unique,” says Lisogorskaya.


Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 