
I’ve always had a nagging feeling that there must be a better way to do things 
and that we could do more for patients. It started almost immediately as I 
began my career as a student paramedic. I tried to suppress it; it wasn’t 
really the done thing. Everyone talked about what was wrong with the way things 
were but no one talked about how we could make them better.


At first it was easy; my mind was awash with all the new experiences of daily 
ambulance life, busy learning how to fit in, to be a paramedic – doing the 
things paramedics did. And I loved it, flying through the streets of London 
with blue lights flashing, responding to calls and patients.

However, as I rolled through my days, that nagging feeling began to return, 
and now it seemed harder to ignore. It was hard to explain to those around me 
and at times it felt like we were speaking different languages. People talked 
about how we could “never be wrong for taking someone to hospital” and “what 
did we know?”. Even my colleagues, who agreed that at times it didn’t feel 
right, would feel powerless – crippled by a fear and belief that making a 
mistake would cost them their job. Managers felt just as powerless as the rest 
of us and were under pressure to keep response times down. The pressure they 
were under was tangible and communications between frontline staff and managers 
seemed to hit a brick wall. I grew frustrated and tired; at times it felt 
claustrophobic, surely if we keep doing what we’d always done then nothing 
would ever change?

My life as a paramedic: when every second counts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/mar/03/my-life-as-a-paramedic-when-every-second-counts>
The real breakthrough came when I was invited to take part in a collaborative 
project on frailty. We explored ways in which we could work differently to 
improve the patient care for the people we had so often responded to by 
ambulance, setting up a falls response service with community nurses. We shared 
our skills and experiences to meet the needs of the patients that we would have 
previously taken to hospital and helped them in their own homes instead.

The lead for the project was a Darzi fellow, a GP who had taken a year out of 
her training to develop herself and her leadership skills. The fellowship is an 
initiative that benefits both participants and their employing organisations. 
Over the past seven years, Darzi fellows have led major service improvements, 
implemented numerous safety and quality initiatives, and made substantial 
financial savings for trusts. I applied for clinically relevant posts 
advertised on theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> jobs website and 
was invited to interview with a number of trusts across London. I am spending 
the year working on a project helping people manage their chronic joint pain.

Unlike my job as a paramedic the pressure here is different, less immediate, 
and less obvious but still very much there. It lurks in the background – no one 
here will die or lose a limb as a result of a mistake I make, but what I do 
here could play a part in what is the practice of the future. It’s hard to see 
if what I do will make a difference and often I won’t know for months or even 
years to come.

I find myself stuck between two worlds and constantly explaining what it is I 
do. I feel I am no longer considered a clinician by my former colleagues and 
yet I don’t consider myself to be a manager. My former colleagues joke about my 
office hours and weekends off but equally I am overwhelmed by the words of 
support and encouragement I have received from them – they enthusiastically ask 
about my work and are proud of what I, “the paramedic”, have achieved.

Paramedic: most patients we take into A&E don’t need to be there
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2015/jan/12/a-and-e-patients-dont-need-ambulance>
Despite bridging these two worlds, I feel that I have the best of each – my 
insight into the clinical frontline as a paramedic and the constant challenge 
of being a Darzi fellow involved in quality improvement work. The meeting of 
these two worlds puts me in the privileged position of being able to implement 
real change for colleagues and the patients we look after.

This is an edited version of a piece 
<https://faysibley.wordpress.com/2016/08/17/a-clinician-living-in-a-fellows-world/>
 that orginally appeared on the writer’s personal blog.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 