
At his 1970s peak, with seven US No 1 albums in four years, Elton John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john> was a regular at Colorado’s 
Caribou Ranch studios. In 1974, he recordedCaribou in the winter snows, 
returning in August to makeCaptain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy. John 
had begun work on the music in July on a voyage to New York on the SS France 
(after which he popped down to Philadelphia to play tennis with Billie Jean 
King). In a cable to his PR at Rocket Records, Caroline Boucher, he told how he 
was summoned to see the captain after throwing a tantrum when his Yves Saint 
Laurent bow-tie fell apart: “Looking quite the perfect English gentleman 
(except for my green hair) I swish up to the Riviera Bar for drinks. I decide 
to break my no-alcohol rule and have a glass of Mumms – excellent. Someone says 
in a rather grand voice: ‘That man over there is Elton John – he is famous but 
I have never heard of him.’”

When told on a ship-to-shore call that Caribou had gone platinum, another 
dietary restriction went overboard: “I break my no-carbohydrate rule and I have 
one pretzel.”

Ten months later he returned to Caribou to record Rock of the Westies. He had 
ditched almost his entire band, and the carbs also seem to be back on the table 
here, with John looking rather uneasy in his hat – a recent addition to cover 
his hair loss. “He hated being photographed,” Terry O’Neill later said. “The 
costumes were what he hid behind.”

Elton John: 'When I was on drugs there was a monstrous side to me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/15/elton-john-drugs-monstrous-side> 
The frugal breakfast wasn’t entirely in keeping with the diet at the studios. 
John’s lyricist Bernie Taupin once said it was “all Jack Daniel’s and lines on 
the console” during this recording. Jim Guercio, Caribou’s owner, later 
recalled John taking a trip in a limo 
<http://www.cpr.org/news/story/auction-nears-jim-guercio-and-kenny-passarelli-share-caribou-rock-star-tales>
 to a burger joint in Boulder – in pink glasses and a pink fur coat. “I said, 
‘Elton, if you want to be discreet, this is not the right wardrobe.’”

This was one of the most downbeat shots of the many of Elton that O’Neill took 
in the 70s. The two shared a love of football and a similar sense of humour. 
But, as Boucher recalls, he nearly didn’t get the gig. “I’d originally wanted 
Patrick Lichfield but he never rang back. So I got hold of Terry and he worked 
solidly for us during Elton’s big hit period 
<http://www.eltonjohn.com/october-25-26-1975-elton-knocks-it-out-of-the-park-at-dodger-stadium/>
.”

The shot’s co-star is Frank, the studio cat. “I don’t know what he’s doing 
there,” says Boucher. “Elton always preferred dogs.”
 