
I didn’t write about the Nobel Prize in physics on the day it was awarded, 
because it was awarded in an area of physics I’m not very familiar with, and I 
needed to educate myself.

The area concerned is ‘topological phases and phase transitions’ in matter. 
It’s notcompletely unfamiliar to me. Steve Bramwell, a leading expert in the 
area, is a member of my department at UCL, and I have been lucky enough to hear 
him talk about his work. He’s been pretty busy with interviews since Tuesday, 
and is quoted in the Guardian news article on the prize,here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/04/david-thouless-duncan-haldane-and-michael-kosterlitz-win-nobel-prize-in-physics>
.

Brexit 'not good news for British science' warn new Nobel laureates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/06/brexit-not-good-news-for-british-science-warn-new-nobel-laureates>
While trying to educate myself, I came across a great explanation of the 
general ideas behind the prize, by Brian Skinner at MIT, and I don’t think I 
can improve on it. If you want to understand the ideas and why they are 
important, I heartily recommendhis article 
<http://www.ribbonfarm.com/2015/09/24/samuel-becketts-guide-to-particles-and-antiparticles/>
 (written before the prize was awarded)¹.

Without rehashing that then, I just want to add something that really 
fascinates me about this kind of physics.

A key concept is the idea of topological defects, illustrated in Skinner’s 
article by a glitch in a zipper, or a vortex in a field of arrows. These 
defects exhibit many of the features we see in the so-called ‘fundamental’ 
particles of the Standard Model of physics. Some of the mysterious properties 
of these particles become a bit more intuitively obvious when the particles are 
pictured as vortices.

For example, the ‘Pauli exclusion principle’ is what stops electrons from 
overlapping each other, and constrains them to occupy different energy-levels 
around the atomic nucleus. These energy levels are responsible for all the 
chemical properties of the elements in the periodic table, so it’s an important 
principle to understand. I find it difficult to picture how this might work in 
the case of fundamental electrons. But if you look at the vortices in Skinner’s 
illustrations, it is easy to see why they can’t approach each other too closely 
- the arrows just point in the wrong way.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-is-topology-nobel-member-uses-cinnamon-bun-bagel-and-pretzel-to-explain-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20topology%3F%20Nobel%20member%20uses%20cinnamon%20bun%2C%20bagel%20and%20pretzel%20to%20explain%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-is-topology-nobel-member-uses-cinnamon-bun-bagel-and-pretzel-to-explain-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20topology%3F%20Nobel%20member%20uses%20cinnamon%20bun%2C%20bagel%20and%20pretzel%20to%20explain%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-is-topology-nobel-member-uses-cinnamon-bun-bagel-and-pretzel-to-explain-video&media=>
What is topology? Nobel member uses cinnamon bun, bagel and pretzel to explain 
– video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/oct/04/what-is-topology-nobel-member-uses-cinnamon-bun-bagel-and-pretzel-to-explain-video>
These topological ideas even give rise naturally to the idea of quantisation 
itself. You cannot move gradually between two topologically distinct forms – 
say a bagel and a Swedish pretzel (see video). You have to make a quantum leap. 
In topological terms, you have to make, or break, a connection.

So from one point of view this physics looks more fundamental than the search 
for the smallest constituents of matter. It is the physics of deep principles, 
which these constituents seem to obey.

On the other hand, all the discussion of these principles in terms of zips and 
arrows (or bagels) assumes that the zips and arrows and the forces between them 
exist. The experimental observations and applications are seen in solids, and 
the little arrows are magnetic atoms or molecules. All of them have to be made 
of something, and in the end what they are made of is the quarks and electrons 
of the Standard Model. Once you have got to that stage, you are reduced to 
saying that electrons behave like defects in a quantum field, you have no 
mechanistic model for that field, so you call it fundamental. And indeed it 
might be.

Majorana particles - Fundamentally confusing | Jon Butterworth | Life & Physics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2014/oct/05/majorana-princeton-particles-fundamentally-confusing>
All I’m really saying is that there are two senses in which physics can be 
‘fundamental’. There is the question of what everything is made of at its core 
– what are the smallest constituents of the universe? But there are also 
fundamental principles, which operate in many different systems, on many 
different scales.

These topological phases are a manifestation of some new principles, with far 
reaching consequences. That is why their discovery is so important.

¹ His swirling arrow diagrams are also lovely to look at. One of the key 
achievements behind the prize is the ‘Kosterlitz–Thouless phase transition’, 
corresponding to a temperature at which vortices and anti-vortices separate 
from each other, illustrated by the lovely animation half way down the article. 
Thanks toStephen Curry <https://twitter.com/Stephen_Curry> and Aatish Bhatia 
<https://twitter.com/aatishb> for pointing me at this article.

Jon Butterworth <https://twitter.com/jonmbutterworth>’s book Smashing Physics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/02/smashing-physics-jon-butterworth-review-cern-higgs-boson-particle>
is available as “Most Wanted Particle” in Canada & the US.
 