
Over 20,000 Game of Thrones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> fans – many still 
reeling from the latest episode's shock twist 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xmWCqrMdqE0&feature=player_embedded> – are 
expected to descend on Belfast as an exhibition themed on the hit fantasy TV 
series starts its 10-day run in the city on Saturday.

It took just 24 hours for over 12,000 advanced tickets to be snapped up when 
they were released in May, scoring a huge coup for the one-year-oldTitanic 
Belfast museum 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2012/apr/10/titanic-events-100th-anniversary-belfast>
. An undisclosed number – said to be "a few thousand" – have been withheld for 
those who turn up on the day, with large queues predicted.

Five cities – the others are New York, São Paulo, Amsterdam and Toronto – have 
been chosen as destinations for the free exhibition. Curated by US television 
company HBO, it features over 70 artefacts from the series, including a 
selection of handmade costumes, Jon Snow's "Longclaw" sword, Cersei Lannister's 
red lion dress, and the model dragons that were used before CGI effects were 
added. Visitors will also have chance to sit in a precise replica of the famed 
iron throne and participate in an interactive Blackwater Bay battle scene.
 Crown from the Game of Thrones, part of the collection of artefacts on a 
world tour. Photograph: Robin Utrecht/EPA 
Belfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> was an obvious choice for the 
exhibition as parts of all three series have been filmed in Northern Ireland, 
with various locations across all six counties standing in for places on the 
fictional continent of Westeros.

"As soon as the exhibition was announced in February, we started receiving 
thousands of emails from across the world – from Canada, from Australia," says 
Helen Carey of the Northern Ireland tourist board. "Lots of people wanted to 
arrange a trip around it and wanted to know which locations they could visit at 
the same time. We've noticed people booking tickets from places as far away as 
Honduras, the Philippines and Uruguay."

At the New York exhibition, which was unticketed, 5,000 people turned up every 
day. Staff at the Belfast Titanic are advising fans to arrive at off-peak times 
if they want to secure one of the sought-after tickets sold on the door.
 A visitor sits in the iron throne at the Game of Thrones exhibition in 
Amsterdam. Photograph: Robin Utrecht/EPA 
Many are hoping Game of Thrones could do for tourism in Northern Ireland what 
Lord of the Rings did for New Zealand. Last month San Francisco-based tour 
company Viator launchedGame of Thrones tours in Northern Ireland 
<http://www.viator.com/tours/Belfast/Private-Tour-%E2%80%98Game-of-Thrones-and-Giants-Causeway-Tour-from-Belfast/d738-5844GOT>
 as well as inDubrovnik, Croatia 
<http://www.viator.com/tours/Dubrovnik/Viator-Exclusive-Game-of-Thrones-Walking-Tour-of-Dubrovnik/d904-5360GAMETHRONES>
, another series location. The nine-hour Belfast tour, costing from £72pp, 
takes in the caves where red priestess Melisandre of Asshai gave birth to her 
"shadow baby"; Ballycastle, setting for the Free Cities where Lord Varys was 
born as a slave; and Dark Hedges road, where Arya Stark dressed as a boy to 
escape from King's Landing.

Moyra Lock, from national film commission Northern Ireland Screen, was part of 
the team that enticed the production team to film in the country and says the 
reaction has been remarkable. "It feels like Northern Ireland's profile has 
never been bigger, and in such a positive way. We took a punt on the pilot 
[filmed in 2009] and the spin-offs have been amazing. It's created an 
incredible buzz."

And, for Northern Ireland, this could just be the beginning. Filming of the 
fourth series, which starts in the country in July, covers the action only as 
far as book three, part two. Author George RR Martin has written five books in 
the series, with two more said to be in the pipeline.
 