
Long evening shadows almost blot out the colours of the flower garden, planted 
by John Constable’s mother. Painted in 1815, it is one of two paintings that 
remain the artist’s most personal works, and which he kept with him all his 
life.

“I’m sure the artist intended us to read into those shadows and that great 
bank of heavy cloud hanging over the scene,” said Emma Roodhouse, curator of 
the exhibition atChristchurch Mansion in Ipswich 
<http://www.cimuseums.org.uk/Christchurch-Mansion>. “There is a lot of emotion 
in these paintings.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fconstables-gardens-review-john-constable-paintings-christchurch-mansion-ipswich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434470756109%2Fdf38d23d-23dd-428f-8ac3-d19181c4351c-2060x1334.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Garden%20state%3A%20Constable's%20paintings%20of%20home%20reveal%20his%20emotional%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fconstables-gardens-review-john-constable-paintings-christchurch-mansion-ipswich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Garden%20state%3A%20Constable%27s%20paintings%20of%20home%20reveal%20his%20emotional%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fconstables-gardens-review-john-constable-paintings-christchurch-mansion-ipswich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434470756109%2Fdf38d23d-23dd-428f-8ac3-d19181c4351c-2060x1334.jpeg>
 Overshadowed … Golding Constable’s Kitchen Garden, July 1815. Photograph: 
Colchester and Ipswich Museum Service collection 
The twin paintings show the flower and kitchen garden belonging to Constable’s 
father Golding and mother Ann, at the grand house in East Bergholt, Suffolk, 
which his father built in 1784. Constable was born there in 1776, and his 
earliest sketches include scenes of the house, garden and surrounding farmland 
– including the oldest drawing Roodhouse has traced, which shows an overgrown 
patch of weeds and brambles. “This place was the origin of my fame” Constable 
once wrote.

In February 1815, Ann fell while weeding. Constable’s brother Abram wrote to 
him: “My mother was attack’d yesterday morning whilst in the garden with 
giddiness, brought on by the cold which was very severe and stooping to weed.” 
By the end of March she was dead, aged just 67.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fconstables-gardens-review-john-constable-paintings-christchurch-mansion-ipswich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434470939117%2Fc41e82c5-f26f-4c13-b8b2-668631186062-905x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Garden%20state%3A%20Constable's%20paintings%20of%20home%20reveal%20his%20emotional%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fconstables-gardens-review-john-constable-paintings-christchurch-mansion-ipswich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Garden%20state%3A%20Constable%27s%20paintings%20of%20home%20reveal%20his%20emotional%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fconstables-gardens-review-john-constable-paintings-christchurch-mansion-ipswich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434470939117%2Fc41e82c5-f26f-4c13-b8b2-668631186062-905x1020.jpeg>
 By 1816 he was dead ... Golding Constable, 1815, painted by his son John. 
Photograph: Tate 
Constable missed her funeral, although Roodhouse, who has been poring over 
archives in the UK and America, has not found an explanation for his absence. 
Instead he came for a long summer stay, but when he painted the gardens in July 
his father was ill. Golding died the following year. Soon afterwards, the 
family home was sold, and then demolished along with its gardens in 1839. The 
link was broken between Constable andthe landscape which had inspired many of 
his most famous paintings <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/flatford/>, including
The Hay Wain 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/upload/img/constable-hay-wain-NG1207-fm.jpg>.

Christchurch Mansion has owned the two garden paintings since 1955, and has 
the best Constable collection outside London. In 2013, along with the Tate and 
others, it launched a successful appeal to acquire one of his most spectacular 
paintings, Salisbury Cathedral from the Meadows, which is also on display. 
Roodhouse has borrowed work from the Tate, the V&A and the Fitzwilliam in 
Cambridge – including another shadowed garden belonging to Constable’s friend 
John Fisher in Salisbury.


Alongside these works, which offer us a glimpse into Constable’s childhood, is 
a rare example of the work of the artist as a juvenile delinquent – a carving 
of a windmill, which Constable gouged with a penknife into a piece of timber 
from his father’s mill.

• Constable’s Gardens, Christchurch Mansion, Ipswich, until 6 September 2015 
<http://www.cimuseums.org.uk/Christchurch-Mansion>
 