
I was 21 and in uneasy transit between the visions of the poet and the 
compromises (I thought) of prose, when an older poet brought me a novel – a 
sturdy Granta Books hardcover, published a few years earlier. Its author’s 
name, Patrick Chamoiseau, didn’t ring any bells. Nor had I learned yet to 
appreciate those virtues its greyscale jacket evoked. Dignity. Maturity. 
Sobriety. Of Martinique, the book’s setting, I knew essentially nothing. Yet a 
peculiar contrast sparked my imagination. Beneath a muted photograph of a 
labourer’s folded hands was a trademark from the junk-culture landscape I had 
grown up in: Texaco.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgarth-risk-hallberg-texaco-patrick-chamoiseau-how-fiction-new%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444918122831%2F215da7fc-5844-42c0-87fa-e199bb4e8430-1354x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Garth%20Risk%20Hallberg%20on%20how%20fiction%20can%20%E2%80%98make%20it%20new%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgarth-risk-hallberg-texaco-patrick-chamoiseau-how-fiction-new%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Garth%20Risk%20Hallberg%20on%20how%20fiction%20can%20%E2%80%98make%20it%20new%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgarth-risk-hallberg-texaco-patrick-chamoiseau-how-fiction-new%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444918122831%2F215da7fc-5844-42c0-87fa-e199bb4e8430-1354x2040.jpeg>
The effect, for me, was of a smiley-face slapped on to that Van Gogh painting 
ofthe boots <https://www.pinterest.com/pin/496029346436092409/>. Or of a Donald 
Barthelme <https://www.theguardian.com/books/donald-barthelme> story 
crash-landing in the middle ofLet Us Now Praise Famous Men 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/let-us-now-praise-famous-men.html>. Or 
perhaps it’s simpler to say that the effect was to scramble my assumptions 
about the range of textures a single piece of prose might encompass. And that 
was just the cover. I carried the book back to my matchbox apartment and 
started reading it. As I recall, I didn’t stop except for food and sleep until, 
two days and 400 pages later, I reached the end.

Chamoiseau, it turned out, had been a poet, too, at the start – and in this 
way, like me, an exile at the gates of the novel. A Martinican of African 
descent, citizen of a former French colony, he also had a necessarily 
complicated relationship with the literary traditions of the metropole. His 
early critical writing (according to an afterword) explored the tensions 
between a French “more French than that of the French” and an ideal he called “
Creolité”. But in Texaco, he not only braved these tensions; he turned them 
into drama. Among the supporting cast, for example, is one Monsieur 
Gros-Joseph, a bourgeois merchant who has amassed a library of classics as a 
kind of bulwark against the dissonance of colonial life. With the outbreak of 
the second world war – a revelation of dissonance even at the heart of the 
empire – Monsieur Gros-Joseph loses his mind and begins quite literally to 
devour his books.

The poems, the wretch would say, tasted better than the novels – more 
delicate. Rimbaud gave off a taste of silty cockle, something that choked and 
tortured the mouth before spreading out layers of smells, then turning into a 
sheaf of powder and desert sand. Lautréamont reigned in a bouquet of 
star-apple-green-lemon, but in large quantities would cause stomach ache. And 
Montaigne, alas, oh flamboyant spirit ... his books dissipated their virtues in 
the mouth only to leave the taste buds the impression of stale paper. Ah Zola 
taste of shit, Ah Daudet taste of shit, and he would fling them across the 
room, pages torn by his teeth.

I was reading all this in English, of course, my own French having stalled 
around “Voulez-vous coucher avec moi”, but I could glean from Rose-Myriam 
Rejouis and Val Vinokurov’s translation that Chamoiseau’s language was not that 
of the Académie – or not only that. Studding the long sentences like petals on 
a bough were “booboos” and “bekés” and “the Noutéka of the hills”; “Mentohs”, 
asbestos, and the “pissied” city streets. And vining around the main narrative 
in similar profusion were folktales and folk wisdom and an endless, vivid 
catalogue of the windfalls harvested by the urban poor of Martinique: “a box of 
wrapping paper to line a hutch, a pan to reinforce a shaken facade, a fork, a 
cracked plate, a piece of tulle, a bottle, a string ... ”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgarth-risk-hallberg-texaco-patrick-chamoiseau-how-fiction-new%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444917974139%2Fcc55989e-86c5-41b6-9f70-3bef272446be-2060x1379.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Garth%20Risk%20Hallberg%20on%20how%20fiction%20can%20%E2%80%98make%20it%20new%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgarth-risk-hallberg-texaco-patrick-chamoiseau-how-fiction-new%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Garth%20Risk%20Hallberg%20on%20how%20fiction%20can%20%E2%80%98make%20it%20new%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgarth-risk-hallberg-texaco-patrick-chamoiseau-how-fiction-new%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444917974139%2Fcc55989e-86c5-41b6-9f70-3bef272446be-2060x1379.jpeg>
 Patrick Chamoiseau. Photograph: Ulf Andersen/Getty Images 
These bricoleurs, the dispossessed rather than the merchant class, are the 
novel’s real subject.Texaco takes its name from the shantytown they construct 
after the war, a sprawl of crate-wood hutches hard by the oil tanks that fuel 
the capital city of Fort-de-France. For years, as the novel opens, police from 
the city centre have been conducting raids on the Texaco quarter, levelling 
homes, asserting property rights under the banner of public safety. Lean-tos 
can always be rebuilt – hence those long lists of scavenged materials. But now, 
in the 1980s, a new threat has appeared: an urban planner with visions of a 
more permanent incursion.

A prologue follows him as he wanders around Texaco, studying its hutches, 
assessing “the usefulness of [its] insalubrious existence”. Layers of 
neighbourhood gossip muddle what happens next, but we know some things for 
certain. Offence is taken. A stone is thrown. Blood is drawn. Finally, the 
injured urban planner is brought to the community’s elder and co-founder, a 
septuagenarian “femme-matador” named Marie-Sophie Laborieux. “What’s the use of 
visiting something you’re going to raze?” she asks the planner, having poured 
him a glass of rum. And finding him at a loss for words, she says, “Little 
fellow, permit me to tell you Texaco’s story”.

The remainder of Texaco is that telling. Marie-Sophie begins 90 years before 
her own birth, when her grandparents are slaves on a sugar plantation. In a 
series of indelible set pieces, we learn of the manumission of her father, 
Esternome; of his unhappy attempts to find love and work as a freeman in “
l’En-ville”; of the broader abolition of slavery in Martinique; and of the 
volcano that destroys the city of Saint-Pierre, sending Esternome and thousands 
of other refugees toward the capital. If Chamoiseau’s marked orality andin 
medias res opening have gestured toward epic, this section of the novel makes 
good on the promise, in the manner ofOne Hundred Years of Solitude 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/one-hundred-years-of-solitude.html>, or 
Edward P Jones’sThe Known World. “My poor Esternome” is a figure of great 
sympathy, beset from all sides, and his odyssey knits the origins of Texaco 
into the larger history of a people.

The central hero of Texaco, though, is Marie-Sophie, who commands the second 
half of the novel. After the death of her father, she goes to work as a servant 
in various households (among them the Gros-Josephs’). The situation of the 
merchants may improve with decolonisation, but that of the working classes, in 
Chamoiseau’s account, seems no better – just different. Marie-Sophie is in her 
own way as unlucky as her father; she cannot hold on to a job, or to love. But 
the stories she has inherited inoculate her against despair. Even as the urban 
planner encounters her – “an oldcâpresse woman, very tall, very thin, with a 
grave, solemn visage and still eyes” – she remains open to the world in all its 
richness and contradiction, and ingenious in building what she needs out of 
whatever is to hand. Unable to bear children, she becomes the mother figure of 
the resistance, distributing the gifts of nurture and nature to the broader 
family of the Texaco quarter. And her most resourceful construction is the 
novel itself, a feat of narrative prodigality that staves off, word by word, 
the destruction of an entire community.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgarth-risk-hallberg-texaco-patrick-chamoiseau-how-fiction-new%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444922408744%2F187490f0-532b-45fa-9986-58bd36a31308-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Garth%20Risk%20Hallberg%20on%20how%20fiction%20can%20%E2%80%98make%20it%20new%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgarth-risk-hallberg-texaco-patrick-chamoiseau-how-fiction-new%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Garth%20Risk%20Hallberg%20on%20how%20fiction%20can%20%E2%80%98make%20it%20new%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fgarth-risk-hallberg-texaco-patrick-chamoiseau-how-fiction-new%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444922408744%2F187490f0-532b-45fa-9986-58bd36a31308-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Garth Risk Hallberg 
This feat, to make an obvious point, is Chamoiseau’s, too. And interestingly, 
for all its formal dazzle, it succeeds because we believe so strongly in 
Esternome and Marie-Sophie and their vivid, tangled stories. Maybe at 21, I 
harboured a hope thatTexaco would reject the dubious old magic of prose fiction 
– would, like Monsieur Grand-Joseph, fling character, plot and invention across 
the room, “torn by teeth”. Instead, by stirring them into its concretion of the 
oral and the written, the poetic and the prosaic, the local and the global,
Texaco made everything I’d ever loved about reading feel new.

It seems to me at 36 that the source of Texaco’s literary power is precisely 
its hybridity, its capaciousCreolité, its embrace of “both/and” where it would 
be easy to see an “either/or”. I’ve read enough now to recognise this as a 
venerable tradition, extending back to Scheherazade and Don Quixote and forward 
toMidnight’s Children 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Midnight%E2%80%99s+Children&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 andBeloved 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Beloved&order=relevance&dir=desc>
. It’s an aesthetic inseparable from the novel itself. But in a world of 
continued dispossession, of millions of people struggling merely for a home, 
Chamoiseau’sCreolité may point the way to an ethic, too – sceptical, 
imaginative, humane. At the very least, it wins over the urban planner of 
Texaco, who as the novel ends is ready to stand with Marie-Sophie against the 
wrecking balls and high-rises of the “domineering, geometrical grid”. Their 
resistance will likely be fragile, even doomed. But long after Texaco is gone, 
the vision she’s granted him will endure:

In the centre, an occidental urban logic, all lined up, ordered, strong like 
the French language. On the other side, Creole’s open profusion, according to 
Texaco’s logic. Mingling these two tongues, dreaming of all tongues, the Creole 
city speaks a new language in secret and no longer fears Babel. [...] The 
Creole city returns to the urban planner, who would like to ignore it, the 
roots of a new identity: multilingual, multiracial, multihistorical, open, 
sensible to the world’s diversity.
 