
A haul of genes that influence how long people spend in education has been 
uncovered by one of the largest studies conducted in the field.

The international effort by more than 250 scientists found 74 genetic variants 
that shape the number of years people spend at school and university, with most 
of the variants involved in brain development, particularly in the womb.


The work does not mean scientists can now use genes to predict how long a 
person will stay in education. But the behavioural geneticistRobert Plomin 
<https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/portal/robert.plomin.html>, who was not involved in 
the study, said the research had reached a “tipping point” where tests would be 
used to identify people’s individual strengths and weaknesses.


The genes spotted in the latest study appear to work through their impact on a 
person’s cognitive abilities and aspects of personality, such as intellectual 
curiosity and persistence, but the importance of each specific trait is not yet 
confirmed.


Daniel Benjamin <https://cesr.usc.edu/people/staff/djbenjam>, a study author 
at the University of Southern California, said the findings, reported in the 
journalNature <http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature17671>, offer fresh 
insights into the biology of human brains, and also cast light on mental health 
conditions. Genetic variants for time spent in education and Alzheimer’s, 
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia overlapped to a large extent, the study 
found.


Genes influence academic ability across all subjects, latest study shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/23/genes-influence-academic-ability-across-all-subjects-latest-study-shows>
While the work massively expands what researchers know about the role of DNA 
in reaching educational milestones, the 74 genetic factors explain only a 
minuscule amount of the difference in time people spend in education.Genetics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/genetics> accounts for at least 20% of the 
variation seen across the population, but family background, upbringing, and 
other social and environmental factors explain the rest.


“Taken together, the 74 genetic variants explain roughly half of 1% of the 
variation across individuals in educational attainment,” Benjamin told the 
Guardian. For the variant with the largest effect, the difference between 
inheriting zero and two copies - one from each parent - was on average nine 
extra weeks of schooling. That means many thousands, perhaps many millions, of 
genetic variants shape how long a person stays in education.

The international team scoured the genomes of nearly 300,000 Europeans in 15 
countries for genetic variants associated with time spent in education. Having 
found 74, the scientists verified them in 111,000 people who have DNA held by 
theUK Biobank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/mar/30/uk-biobank-medical-records-britons-online>
. When the researchers pooled the results from both groups, they had 162 
genetic variants linked to years in education.


The scientists went on to produce what they call a “polygenic score” based on 
all nine million sections of DNA they analysed, and found it explained 3% of 
the difference in time people spent at schools and universities, and 6% when 
they included the UK Biobank data.


With larger studies, Benjamin said, polygenic scores will improve in accuracy 
and could eventually be used to improve teaching. In one approach, researchers 
could use polygenic scores to take account of different genetic abilities when 
assessing how effective interventions such as free preschool education are.


“Over the next ten years, I believe that the most important consequence of 
this kind of study is that it will enable social scientists to statistically 
remove genetic factors when studying interventions to improve school 
performance,” Benjamin said.


But Plomin believes the scores could be used to personalise education too. 
Children do not all respond in the same way to teaching practices, and genetic 
scores could help find those that benefit the most, and those who would perform 
better with different approaches.


“I really believe that we are at a tipping point where ‘polygenic’ scores such 
as this one will be used to predict genetic strengths and weaknesses for 
individuals,” Plomin said.

“These polygenic scores will be useful to predict patterns of strengths and 
weaknesses that will move education closer to ‘personalised learning’ rather 
than continuing to assume that a one-size-fits-all national curriculum works 
equally well for everyone,” he added. “We need to discuss applications and 
implications now because it really is happening.”
 