
Doctors should not routinely screen for herpes when testing for sexually 
transmitted infections, genetic testing should not be used to diagnose coeliac 
disease in most cases and radiation to treat some low-risk cancers should be 
reconsidered.

These are among the latest recommendations 
<http://www.choosingwisely.org.au/recommendations/ranzcr> released on Thursday 
by NPS MedicineWise, an Australian-based organisation led by medical experts to 
provide doctors and patients with independent, evidence-based information.

They were developed in conjunction with medical societies, colleges and peak 
bodies to reflect the latest science, and to prevent unnecessary tests being 
ordered that may prove useless or even harmful to patients.

Could a diet tailored to your DNA save your life?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/29/die-now-diet-later-could-nutrigenetics-save-your-life>
The Human Genetics <https://www.theguardian.com/science/genetics> Society of 
Australasia said genetic information and testing was more widely available but 
it was important to be aware the tests could lead to further unnecessary 
investigations, worry, ethical, social and legal issues. In particular, the 
society is warning people to not initiate testing on their own – for example 
through ordering tests available online.

A clinical professor with the organisation, Jack Goldblatt, said 
direct-to-consumer genetic testing for MTHFR and APOE genes were a particular 
worry.

“MTHFR is an enzyme that converts folate,” he said. “MTHFR variants are very 
common in the general population and folic acid supplementation has been shown 
to increase folate levels, regardless of MTHR status. Having a variant in the 
gene does not generally cause health problems.”

He said while APOE was considered a risk or susceptibility factor for 
Alzheimer’s disease, the test only revealed a probability. People undertaking a 
test for APOE also risked being falsely reassured, he added.

“If the likelihood of improved outcomes from the use of a test for the gene is 
extremely low, then it should not be undertaken,” he said.

“Genetic tests are best performed in a clinical setting with the provision of 
personalised genetic counselling and professional interpretation of tests 
results, for patients to understand the further implications of the results.”

Among the recommendations from the Gastroenterological Society of Australia is 
to not undertake genetic testing for coeliac disease. The coeliac gene can be 
found in one third of the population, but coeliac disease only affects about 
1.4% of the population. Not everyone with the gene will develop coeliac disease.

Gastroenterologist Anne Duggan told Guardian Australia the test could be 
misleading and create unnecessary anxiety.

“The appropriate first-line screening test should be a serology test for the 
relevant antibodies, followed by an endoscopy and small bowel biopsy,” she 
said. “The genetic test is only useful when those tests are inconclusive.”

The NPS guidelines also recommend surveillance rather than radiation should be 
first discussed to manage low-risk prostate cancer. In some cases, low-risk 
prostate cancers left alone will never go on to cause harm to a patient during 
their lifetime.

Genetics tests flawed and inaccurate, say Dutch scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/may/30/genetics-tests-flawed-dutch-scientists>
Meanwhile, the Australian Chapter of Sexual Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> Medicine has highlighted 
that herpes serology (blood testing) was not an appropriate screening test in 
people without herpes symptoms because it could not “accurately confirm whether 
the person is infected or is a transmission risk to others from asymptomatic 
shedding” of the virus.

“Clinicians also need to consider whether test results will influence 
treatment or outcomes because, if they do not, then testing is a waste of 
finite health resources and is not indicated,” the guideline states.

“Herpes serology tests only have good sensitivity and specificity in high 
prevalence populations.”

There were some situations when the test was useful, the guidelines say, such 
as for patients with sexual partners with genital herpes, and in cases where a 
woman appears to have a first episode of herpes during pregnancy.
 