
George Zimmerman <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/george-zimmerman> walked 
free from a Florida courtroom late on Saturday after a jury acquitted the 
neighbourhood watch leader of murdering an unarmed black teenager, Trayvon 
Martin, in a case that played into the national debates about race, civil 
rights and the proliferation of guns in US society.

Zimmerman, 29, smiled briefly and shook the hands of his lawyers Mark O'Mara 
and Don West after the verdict from the jury of six women was read.

Tracy Martin and Sybrina Fulton, the parents of the 17-year-old shot dead by 
Zimmerman on the night of 26 February last year, were not in court to hear the 
decision. Martin said he was "brokenhearted", and Fulton said it was her 
"darkest hour".

The unanimous verdict came after more than 16 hours of deliberations by the 
panel at the Seminole County criminal justice centre in Sanford. They had 
sifted through the testimony of 56 witnesses and hours of lawyers' arguments 
during the three-week trial. The jury accepted Zimmerman's contention that he 
shot Martin in self-defence, believing his life to be in immediate danger.

"You have no further business with this court," Judge Debra Nelson told 
Zimmerman, informing him that he was free to go and that his GPS tracking 
bracelet would be removed. Zimmerman's wife Shellie broke down in tears and 
sobbed into a pink scarf, then beamed widely as she hugged her husband's 
parents, Robert and Gladys.

The acquittal was greeted with cheers and angry shouts outside the courthouse, 
where dozens of banner-carrying supporters of the Martin family had gathered 
through the day.

Police stepped in to remove a vocal protester from the gathering but the 
protests remained largely peaceful. Teams of officers from the Sanford police 
department and the Seminole County sheriff's office kept a close eye on the 
demonstrators, who included a smaller number calling for Zimmerman to be found 
not guilty.

O'Mara, Zimmerman's lead attorney, said his client was "very, very happy" with 
the jury's decision. Asked if Zimmerman was scared for his future, O'Mara said: 
"I think he's going to be great, I think he's still worried and hopefully 
everyone will respect the jury's verdict as they should and most have said they 
will, and we'll take it day by day.

"I think he wishes he could wave a magic wand and get his life back. He has to 
be very cautious and protective for his safety because there's still a fringe 
element out there who have said they want revenge."

Martin's parents said they were devastated. "Even though I am brokenhearted, 
my faith is unshattered. I will always love my baby Tray," Tracy Martin said in 
one of three Tweets posted shortly after the decision was announced.

His ex-wife, Sybrina Fulton, said she was relying on her faith. "Lord during 
my darkest hour I lean on you," she wrote on Twitter. "You are all that I have."

Analysts said the verdict reflected a weak, circumstantial case put by the 
prosecutors. "We were able to have a fair hearing and an open trial but this is 
not a time for jubilance, it's a time for reflection," said Mark NeJame, a 
prominent Orlando attorney who turned down the chance to represent Zimmerman 
last year. "A young man is dead. This is just a tragedy and we need to figure 
out a way to do better."

Martin, who lived in Miami, was walking back to the house of his father's 
fianc√©e at the Retreat at Twin Lakes gated community carrying a soft drink and 
sweets he had bought at a local convenience store. Zimmerman, who worked as a 
mortgage underwriter, said he spotted the hoodie-wearing youth as he was on his 
way to buy groceries, then called police to report a "suspicious male". 
Somehow, the two ended up in a fight.

Zimmerman was released without charge on the night of the shooting. After a 
campaign by Trayvon Martin's parents prompted nationwide protests, Florida's 
governor, Rick Scott, appointed a special prosecutor to re-examine the 
circumstances of the case. Zimmerman was arrested in April last year, 44 days 
after the shooting.

The case hinged on the conflicting testimony of witnesses and the key issue of 
whose screams were heard on a recording of a 911 call made by one of 
Zimmerman's neighbours, which also captured the fatal shot.

Martin's mother, father and brother all testified that they were certain it 
was the teenager who was pleading for his life. Zimmerman's parents and a 
numbers of friends and neighbours took the stand to insist that it was 
Zimmerman.

The earlier call, made to a non-emergency police line by Zimmerman, caught the 
defendant using profanities that were repeated by the prosecution to try to 
show he acted with spite, ill-will and hatred, the benchmarks for a 
second-degree murder conviction.

"Fucking punks. These assholes, they always get away," assistant state 
attorney John Guy said as he began his opening argument on the first day of the 
trial. "Those were the words in that grown man's mouth as he followed in the 
dark a 17-year-old boy that he didn't know."

He concluded by telling the jury: "George Zimmerman did not shoot Trayvon 
Martin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trayvon-martin> because he had to. 
He shot him for the worst of all reasons, because he wanted to."

O'Mara, Zimmerman's lead attorney, worked hard to counter the state's 
portrayal of his client as an overzealous, angry vigilante who was "fed up" 
after a series of burglaries and who became a self-appointed guardian of the 
community.

"There is not one witness to suggest that the guy is who they want you to 
believe he is, that neighbourhood watch cop wannabe crazy rider walking the 
neighbourhood looking for someone to harass," O'Mara said.

Instead, he argued, Martin was the aggressor, emerging from the darkness to 
break Zimmerman's nose with a sucker punch and smashing his head on a concrete 
pavement, forcing him to fire the single shot from his 9mm semi-automatic 
pistol to save his life.

He used a number of props to make his points, including a life-size mannequin 
that he wrestled with theatrically on the courtroom floor and a slab of cement 
he dumped in front of the jury box to represent the "weapon" he said Martin 
used, proving he was not unarmed.

O'Mara insisted Zimmerman had not disobeyed the police dispatcher's 
instruction not to follow Martin.

Fellow defence attorney West proved the most colourful and controversial 
character during the trial, opening his case with a questionable knock-knock 
joke about Zimmerman's notoriety and clashing frequently with the judge.

He also appeared in a photograph posted to Instagram by his daughter Molly 
showing the family enjoying a "celebration" ice cream after opening statements. 
The accompanying caption "we beat stupidity" and hashtag #dadkilledit prompted 
the state attorney's office to demand an inquiry.

Benjamin Crump, lawyer for the Martin family, expressed thanks to supporters 
and prosecutors. Visibly shaken by the verdict, he said: "To everybody who put 
their hoodies up, to everybody who said 'I am Trayvon', his family express 
their heartfelt gratitude for helping them these past 17 months."

Crump said that the daughter of the late civil rights leader Martin Luther 
King Jr, Dr Bernice King, had sent him a message that read: "Today is a 
defining moment for the status of my father's dream. Whatever the Zimmerman 
verdict is, in the words of my father we must conduct ourselves on higher plane 
of dignity and discipline."

He added: "Trayvon Martin will forever remain in the annals of history next to 
Medgar Evers an Emmett Till as symbols for the fight for equal justice for 
all." He finished his remarks with an appeal for calm. "For Trayvon to remain 
in peace, we must all be peaceful," he said.

Ben Jealous, president of the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People, issued a statement condemning the acquittal. "We are outraged 
and heartbroken over today's verdict. We stand with Trayvon's family, and we 
are called to act," he said, in reference to plans to pursue a civil case 
against Zimmerman over Martin's death.

The group's chairman, Roslyn Brock, said: "Today, justice failed Trayvon 
Martin and his family. We call for the Justice Department to conduct an inquiry 
into the civil rights violations committed against Trayvon Martin."

Legal proceedings are still active against Zimmerman's wife. Shellie Zimmerman 
faces a perjury charge for alleging lying at her husband's bail hearing last 
summer over the state of the couple's finances, pleading poverty soon after 
they raised $130,000 through donations to his online defence fund.

O'Mara has said that fighting the murder charge effectively bankrupted the 
couple, who have relied on friends for food and clothes for Zimmerman to wear 
at his trial.
 