
Germany has been sued for damages in the United States by descendants of the 
Herero and Nama people of Namibia, for what they calleda campaign of genocide  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/25/germany-moves-to-atone-for-forgotten-genocide-in-namibia>
by German colonial troops in the early 1900s that led to more than 100,000 
deaths.

According to a complaint filed on Thursday with the US district court in 
Manhattan, Germany has excluded the plaintiffs from talks with Namibia 
regarding what occurred, and has publicly said any settlement will not include 
reparations to victims, even if compensation is awarded toNamibia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/namibia> itself.

“There is no assurance that any of the proposed foreign aid by Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> will actually reach or assist the 
minority indigenous communities that were directly harmed,” the plaintiffs’ 
lawyer Ken McCallion said in an email. “There can be no negotiations or 
settlement about them that is made without them.“

 The proposed class-action lawsuit seeks unspecified sums for thousands of 
descendants of the victims, for the “incalculable damages” that were caused.

 US representatives of the German government did not immediately respond to 
requests for comment.

Germany moves to atone for 'forgotten genocide' in Namibia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/25/germany-moves-to-atone-for-forgotten-genocide-in-namibia>
The slaughter took place from roughly 1904 to 1908, when Namibia was a German 
colony known as South-WestAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, 
after the Herero and Nama groups rebelled against German rule.

 According to many published reports, victims were also subjected to harsh 
conditions in concentration camps, and some had their skulls sent to Germany 
for scientific experiments.

 Some historians view what occurred as the 20th century’s first genocide, and 
a 1985 United Nations report said the “massacre” of Hereros qualified as a 
genocide.

 Germany has paid victims of the Holocaust, which occurred during the second 
world war.

 The plaintiffs on Thursday sued under the Alien Tort Statute, a 1789 US law 
often invoked in human rights cases.

 The US supreme court narrowed the law’s reach in a 2013 decision, Kiobel v 
Royal Dutch Petroleum Co, saying it was presumed not to cover foreign conduct 
unless the claims sufficiently “touch and concern” the US.

 McCallion said Kiobel and later rulings “leave the door open” for US courts 
to assert jurisdiction in genocide cases.

 The plaintiffs, including some from New York, also brought federal common law 
and New York state law claims.
 