
The Sinn Féin president, Gerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, has denied he sanctioned the 
murder of a British spy inside the IRA.

Adams rejected allegations aired on BBC television on Tuesday night that he 
directly ordered the killing of Denis Donaldson at his remote cottage in the 
Irish Republic a decade ago.

Donaldson worked as a British agent while operating as a senior IRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> member and Sinn Féin official in the 
Stormont parliament.

An informer named only as “Martin” told the BBC Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> Spotlight programme that Adams 
had ordered the Donaldson murder.


“I know from my experience in the IRA that murders have to be approved by the 
leadership, the political [and] military leadership of the IRA,” said “Martin”.

When pressed on who he was referring to, the self-confessed IRA informant 
said: “Gerry Adams, he gives the final say.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgerry-adams-denies-sanctioning-of-british-spy-denis-donaldson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58fdbd8c441cfafa398f7cb7b8146dc9cf384933%2F0_12_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gerry%20Adams%20denies%20sanctioning%20murder%20of%20British%20spy%20Denis%20Donaldson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgerry-adams-denies-sanctioning-of-british-spy-denis-donaldson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gerry%20Adams%20denies%20sanctioning%20murder%20of%20British%20spy%20Denis%20Donaldson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgerry-adams-denies-sanctioning-of-british-spy-denis-donaldson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58fdbd8c441cfafa398f7cb7b8146dc9cf384933%2F0_12_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Gerry Adams denies he was consulted on what he calls an alleged IRA army 
council decision or that he had any final say in the matter being sanctioned. 
Photograph: Clodagh Kilcoyne/Reuters 
In a statement released through his solicitor on Tuesday night, Adams lawyer 
said his client “had no involvement and had no knowledge whatsoever in Denis 
Donaldson’s killing”.

He categorically denies he was consulted on what he calls an alleged IRA army 
council decision or that he had any final say in the matter being sanctioned.


Following the Donaldson murder the Real IRA admitted killing the British agent 
at his cottage in County Donegal. But “Martin” in the programme claimed this 
was an opportunistic move by the republican dissidents to promote the idea they 
had murdered a top British agent.


“Martin” insisted the mainstream IRA killed Donaldson over his years of 
betrayal at the heart of the Irish republican movement.


Spotlight claimed the Provisional IRA’s South Armagh brigade rather than the 
Real IRA demanded Donaldson be killed in an act of revenge for his treachery.


It said the convicted tax fraudster Thomas “Slab” Murphy, the jailed reputed 
leader of the IRA in South Armagh, personally asked the republican leadership 
that Donaldson be killed.


Donaldson’s betrayal was a devastating blow for the mainstream republican 
movement as the former IRA prisoner was once part of Gerry Adams’ inner circle 
in Sinn Féin.


Among those the east Belfast republican served time with in the Maze prison 
was the IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands. He was exposed as an informer in 2005 
and confessed publicly to working for Royal Ulster Constabulary special branch 
as well as other branches of the security forces for years.


Among his various roles for the IRA and Sinn Féin, Donaldson worked abroad 
forging relations with international militant groups including Palestinian 
factions and the Lebanese Hezbollah. At the time Donaldson was in the Middle 
East he was already working as a British spy.

Adams has consistently denied ever being in the IRA.
 