
The family of Jean McConville have vowed to pursue Gerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams> through the civil courts 
after Northern Irish prosecutors confirmed the Sinn Féin leader will not face 
any criminal charges over the murder of their mother by the IRA more than 40 
years ago.

McConville, 37, was abducted, killed and buried in secret by the IRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> in 1972 in one of the most notorious 
murders of the Troubles. She was one of 16 people accused of working as 
informants for the security forces who became known as “the disappeared” 
because their bodies were never found.

The PPS in Belfast confirmed on Tuesday that it would not be prosecuting seven 
people in relation to the killing of McConville, who had 10 children.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fgerry-adams-will-not-face-trial-over-jean-mcconville%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fe416b907d4595df35bfe447da77a674e4c74c9%2F0_78_1939_1162%2F1939.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gerry%20Adams%20will%20not%20face%20charges%20over%20Jean%20McConville%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fgerry-adams-will-not-face-trial-over-jean-mcconville%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gerry%20Adams%20will%20not%20face%20charges%20over%20Jean%20McConville%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fgerry-adams-will-not-face-trial-over-jean-mcconville%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fe416b907d4595df35bfe447da77a674e4c74c9%2F0_78_1939_1162%2F1939.jpg>
 Jean McConville was dragged away by an IRA gang, driven across the border to 
the Irish Republic, shot in the head and then buried in secret. Photograph: PA 


The seven – three men aged 57, 59 and 66, along with four women aged 58, 59, 
59 and 61 – include Adams, who has always denied he gave the order to 
“disappear” the widowin 1972 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/03/jean-mcconville-timeline-murder-gerry-adams>
. Another of those believed to be among the seven is Bobby Storey, a senior 
Belfast republican and close aide to Adams.

Northern Ireland’s deputy director of public prosecutions, Pamela Atchison, 
said: “We have given careful consideration to the evidence currently available 
in respect of each of the three men and four women reported and have concluded 
that it is insufficient to provide a reasonable prospect of obtaining a 
conviction against any of them for a criminal offence.”


However, Helen McKendry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/06/jean-mcconvilles-daughter-give-up-fighting-helen-mckendry-ira>
, Jean McConville’s daughter, and her husband Seamus, one of the original 
campaigners for the “disappeared”, told the Guardian they were “disappointed 
but not surprised” over the PPS decision.

“We accept the course of justice and the decision even though the IRA never 
gave thought for justice for Jean. We would rather have the criminal case not 
going ahead like that than for it to collapse in court. However today is the 
beginning of a new fight for justice through a civil action against Mr Adams. 
The PPS decision gives us the green light to start that campaign through the 
civil courts.

“When we first raised the possibility of a civil case we were contacted by 
lots of people who offered financial support as we don’t expect legal aid. We 
would now ask all those people to back us now in building a case with our legal 
team towards a civil action,” the couple said.

Northern Ireland police win latest round in battle to hear Boston College tapes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/27/northern-ireland-boston-college-tapes-winston-winkie-rea-psni-loyalist-troubles>
Adams said the PPS decision was long overdue . “There was never any real basis 
for questioning me in respect of this case,” he said after Wednesday’s 
announcement. “I played no act or part in Jean McConville’s death. I support 
the PSNI. But the timing of my arrest showed there remain elements within the 
PSNI who are against Sinn Féin. But they will not succeed.”

The evidence that led to Adams’s arrest last year, as well as the other six, 
was partly based on theBoston College tapes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/27/northern-ireland-boston-college-tapes-winston-winkie-rea-psni-loyalist-troubles>
. These were a series of recorded testimonies from IRA and loyalist 
paramilitary veterans that were to form a historic archive about the armed 
campaigns of the Troubles. They were only to be released when each of the 
participants had died.

The Police Service of Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> pursued some of the taped 
interviews they claimed contained knowledge of the McConville murder and 
disappearance through the US courts system. But after examining files sent by 
the PSNI to the PPS in the case of the seven, including Adams, Atchison said 
there was insufficient evidence to continue the investigation.

She pointed out that there had already been a decision to prosecute an eighth 
individual, Ivor Bell, who was arrested and charged in March 2014, and is 
currently before the court. The decision was to prosecute Bell on charges of 
soliciting the murder of McConville, which the veteran Belfast republican 
strongly denies.


Atchison said: “We have had a series of meetings with members of the family, 
most recently this morning, about all of our prosecutorial decisions and we 
will continue to engage with them as we progress the prosecution of Ivor Bell. 
We thank them for the positive way that they have engaged with us at each stage 
of the process.”

The McKendrys want the civil action based on the case brought by families of 
theOmagh bomb massacre of 1998 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/10/man-charged-murder-29-people-omagh-bombing>
. Michael Gallagher and other families of the victims of the Omagh bomb 
massacre made legal history by suing four allegedReal IRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/real-ira> leaders in a civil action.

The killing of McConville, a Protestant who became a Catholic convert, has 
continued to haunt both Adams and the peace process.

In front of her children, at their home in the Divis flats complex, the west 
Belfast woman was dragged away by an IRA gang, driven across the border to the 
Irish Republic, shot in the head at a remote coastal spot in County Louth, and 
then buried in secret.

Former IRA members including Adams’s former friend, the hunger striker Brendan 
Hughes, alleged the Sinn Féin president gave the order for McConville to be 
disappeared after she was shot as an informer.

Adams has consistently denied claims of involvement in the McConville murder 
or of ever being in the IRA.
 