
Sinn Féin’s president, Gerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, has apologised for using the 
N-word in a tweet while watching Django Unchained, Quentin Tarantino’s film 
about racism and slavery in America.


Adams later deleted the tweet but one of the few black Irish republicans from 
theSinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> leader’s west 
Belfast base also criticised his comparison with nationalists in Northern 
Ireland to the plight of black American slaves.


A frequent user of Twitter, Adams tweeted on Sunday night: “Watching Django 
Unchained-A Ballymurphy Nigger!”


The use of the word has provoked a storm of controversy in Ireland and beyond 
but Adams initially insisted he was using the word ironically.

Speaking at a press conference on Monday at Sinn Féin’s Connolly House 
headquarters in his native west Belfast, Adams said: “I have acknowledged that 
the use of the N-word was inappropriate. That is why I deleted the tweet. I 
apologise for any offence caused.”

He said any attempt to accuse him of racism “lacked credibility”. In his long 
career at the top of Sinn Féin, Adams has been welcomed by black political 
leaders from Jesse Jackson in the United States to Nelson Mandela in South 
Africa.

Adams defended his attempt to compare the situation of Irish nationalists in 
Northern Ireland with African American history.

He said: “I stand over the context and main point of my tweet, which were the 
parallels between people in struggle. Like African Americans, Irish 
nationalists were denied basic rights. I have long been inspired by Harriet 
Tubman, Frederick Douglass, Rosa Parks, Martin Luther King and Malcolm X, who 
stood up for themselves and for justice.”

Writer Tim Brannigan, one of the few black Irish republican prisoners to be 
held in the Maze prison, said he was shocked Adams had used the word.


“Gerry and Sinn Féin won’t need me to tell them just how toxic it is and the 
sort of reactions it gets. I don’t think that you can equate what was happening 
in Belfast in 1965 with slavery,” Brannigan said.

Alex Attwood, SDLP candidate for Belfast West and former Stormont minister, 
said the tweet demonstrated a “staggering deficiency in judgment” by the Sinn 
Féin president.

“For years now Sinn Féin have embarrassingly tried to portray Gerry Adams as 
some kind of international icon. It was only in March that Gerry Adams was 
comparing himself to Rosa Parks. If a similar remark had been made by any other 
political leader on this island, Sinn Féin would have unleashed an orchestrated 
wave of angry condemnation. They would not accept any talk of context or of 
irony. They should hold themselves to the same standard,” Attwood said.

During the Troubles Irish republicans including Adams associated themselves 
with the struggle for black liberation not only in the United States but in 
post-colonial states particularly in Africa. The IRA and Sinn Féin maintained 
strong links with the African National Congress and one of the ANC’s leaders 
became part of the team that oversaw the decommissioning of most of the 
Provisionals’ arsenal in the early 2000s.


Sinn Féin activists have also been involved in grassroots anti-racist 
campaigns in both Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. Martin McGuinness as 
deputy first minister in the north of Ireland paid a personal visit to a group 
of Roma families who were subjected to a campaign of racist violence in south 
Belfast just under a decade ago.


The party, alongside other more militant republicans, however, continues to 
revere one of the most controversial figures in 19th century Irish 
republicanism, John Mitchel.

The Newry-born Fenian fled Ireland to the US where he became a slave owner and 
active backer of the Confederate cause. Even after the Confederacy was defeated 
in the American civil war Mitchel continued to argue for the reintroduction of 
the African slave trade.
 