
Enormous congratulations to Gerry Adams, who is formally elevated to irony’s 
army council. The Sinn Féin president is the subject of exciting publishing 
news, with the forthcoming release ofa collected volume of tweets and selfies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/22/gerry-adams-to-release-book-featuring-his-best-tweets-including-rubber-ducks>
. According to the party bookshop’s blurb, “this little book shows the lighter 
side of his personality”.

I think that’s probably best, considering the alternative. Still: it’s 
potentially an explosive Volume II.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fgerry-adams-book-tweets-best-peace-dividend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd682e12046486197749c5221504f9121928ffb46%2F0_0_716_1077%2F716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gerry%20Adams%E2%80%99s%20book%20of%20tweets%20is%20the%20best%20peace%20dividend%20yet%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fgerry-adams-book-tweets-best-peace-dividend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gerry%20Adams%E2%80%99s%20book%20of%20tweets%20is%20the%20best%20peace%20dividend%20yet%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fgerry-adams-book-tweets-best-peace-dividend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd682e12046486197749c5221504f9121928ffb46%2F0_0_716_1077%2F716.jpg>
 My Little Book of Tweets by Gerry Adams. Photograph: Sinn Fein Shop 
By way of a nod to what we might airily generalise as “Before”, Gerry’s 
digital musings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jan/06/gerry-adams-twitter-account-decoded>
 will be consubstantiated into paper form – not the precise equivalent of being 
voiced by an actor, but perhaps close to it. Maybe Stephen Fry could do the 
audio book. Or indeedStephen Rea <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Rea>, 
who has some familiarity with the part, having voiced Gerry occasionally during 
the late 80s and early 90s.

Anyway, My Little Book of Tweets is available for pre-order via the Sinn Féin 
bookshop 
<http://www.sinnfeinbookshop.com/my-little-book-of-tweets-by-gerry-adams/> at 
the competitive price of £6.88. I say “competitive”, but in truth this is still 
a sparsely populated genre. Publishers may correct me, but to my knowledge this 
is only the second formally released such compilation, coming after last year’s
Selfish <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/kim-kardashian-selfish.html>, which 
was – naturally – a self-curated collection of Kim Kardashian’s selfies.

Though Gerry has (yet?) to journey into the arena of the belfies and whatnot 
that sustain the Kim K brand, the publisher’s synopsis promises a real 
playfulness, explaining that the tweets often feature “rubber ducks and teddy 
bears”. We must take their word for it. Despite having followed the certainly 
idiosyncratic Gerry onTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> 
for some years now, I confess to having missed the cuddly toy stuff – though in 
one sense teddy bears have long attended his work.

At present, the volume will only be available via the Sinn Féin bookshop, 
though should it become a runaway success after its publication next week, the 
publisher may set its eye on expanding to other markets. Why not gift 
catalogues? I confess to being an avid scourer of the more recherché gift 
catalogues. A personal favourite for those “hard to buy for” recipients is 
something calledMuseum Selection <http://www.museumselection.co.uk/>, from 
which I have recently purchased a 1930s motoring-based board game called 
Touring England, as well as two volumes entitledBritain’s Lost Regiments 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/britain-s-lost-regiments.html>, and Dr 
Beeching’s Axe 50 Years On: Memories of Britain’s Lost Railways 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dr-beeching-s-axe-50-years-on.html>. Might 
Adams’s My Little Book of Tweets not make an eye-catching addition to Museum 
Selection range next Christmas? I merely volunteer the suggestion.
Gerry Adams (@GerryAdamsSF) 
New ducks. They light up! Made my Christmas. pic.twitter.com/VZ9x7Evyml 
<http://t.co/VZ9x7Evyml>
 <https://twitter.com/GerryAdamsSF/status/416629938482335744> December 27, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/GerryAdamsSF/status/416629938482335744> 
As for how the book competes with the more esoteric end of the official 
merchandise flogged by other political parties, it must be said this is an 
increasingly surreal retail category. During the election I spent some time in 
the various parties’ online shops, and consequently was wildly tempted by 
everything from Tory babygrows reading LITTLE IRON LADY to a selection of SNP 
onesies for adults from their diffusion line “the Nicola Signature Range”, and 
the branded “UKIP AT WORK” hi-vis jacket. I seeLabour’s legendary “controls on 
immigration” mug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/29/diane-abbott-labour-immigration-controls-mugs-shameful>
 has now been withdrawn from sale. Or sold out, you know? It could totally have 
sold out. Either way, it doesn’t matter, as I already own one. As well as a 
scale replica ofthe Ed Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/21/ed-stone-destroyed-after-general-election>
.

For those coming newly to this side of him, it should be pointed out that the 
whole eccentric, cuddly uncle feel to My Little Book of Tweets is not new – 
Adams’s social media followers have been familiar with it for years, and the 
official trail chooses to meet the theories head on by pointing out that: 
“Gerry Adams’s tweets have been described as bizarre, weird and as part of a 
clever strategy.”

Even so, it is tinged with WTF-ery, particularly as Gerry’s most significant 
recent mention in dispatches came throughout thosetranscripts of calls between 
Bill Clinton and Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/07/blair-and-clinton-global-concerns-of-two-buddies>
. “We’ve all taken our licks for Gerry,” Clinton remarks testily at one point. 
“I don’t know what the real deal is between him and the IRA,” the president 
says in exasperation at another dicey point during the peace process.

“It’s hard to put pressure on him when you don’t know what’s going on. It’s 
just bizarre.”

Blair and Clinton transcripts reveal global concerns of two buddies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/07/blair-and-clinton-global-concerns-of-two-buddies>
It feels quite a jump from that to My Little Book of Tweets – but then, it is 
a marked feature of this age that so many end up self-ironising in the end. 
Perhaps it’s best to simply regard Gerry’s book as the political equivalent of 
an ageing hardman action star taking a role inThe Expendables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-expendables>, the movie franchise where 
Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger and so on have graduated into 
gently sending up the 80s versions of themselves.

As the publisher’s notes remark cheerily of the Sinn Féin president: “Many 
years’ experience of politics have taught him not to take himself too 
seriously.” Although, of course, Sly and Arnie and Gerry all took themselves 
very seriously indeed back in the day. AsArnie said only this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/18/sylvester-stallone-arnold-schwarzenegger>
: “[Sly] and I were at war in the 80s. We hated each other and the reason was 
we both have a big ego. It was a battle of who makes more money at the box 
office, who has more muscles, who killed more people … we are now great friends 
and realise we really used each other as motivation.”

Well, quite. The sadness is that Gerry’s arch rival died without having been 
bitten by the Twitter bug. Though we might that speculateIan Paisley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ianpaisley>’s tweets would have tended 
toward the one-note – one-word, mostly – it would have been nice to have had 
the companion volume to this doubtless charming forthcoming release.
 