
Alcohol. It’s a popular social lubricant 
<http://www.southerncenter.uga.edu/Alcohol%20as%20social%20lubricant..%20Alcohol%20myopia%20theory,%20social%20self-esteem,%20and%20social%20interaction.pdf>
,provides pleasure <http://www.hamsnetwork.org/dopamine.pdf>, and often tastes 
nice. It also haslong term health consequences 
<http://www.nhs.uk/change4life/Pages/alcohol-health-harms.aspx>, and imposes a 
heavy burden on our society 
<http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/publications/globalstatusreportalcohol2004_socproblems.pdf>
. Overall, it’sa mixed blessing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2013/jan/08/alcohol-friend-foe-consequences-health>
.

At present it’s becoming ever-more fashionable, even charitable 
<http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/support-us/find-an-event/charity-challenges/dryathlon?ds_kids=p1511964158&adc=cpc&gclid=CJbnwPyi78kCFQTlwgodsToLhw&dclid=CJuix_yi78kCFU4SGwodCDQDSg>
, to abstain from alcoholfor the month of January 
<http://www.alcoholconcern.org.uk/what-we-do/campaigns/dry-january/?gclid=CMTUheqi78kCFRQTGwodxQcJRA>
. Afterthe indulgence of the Christmas period 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/12/14/christmas-weight-gain_n_4370815.html>
, it’s hardly surprising people will want to do something healthy, and what 
could be healthier than giving up alcohol?

But is that actually a rhetorical question? There are debates as to whether or 
not alcohol is good for you, or whether giving it up has any benefits 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/dry-january-is-it-worth-giving-up-alcohol-for-a-month-a6794506.html>
. Nobody seems to have a straight answer, so I thought I’d offer my own 
experiences. I abstained from alcohol last January, but as a trained 
neuroscientist I opted to keep detailed notes as to my physical and mental 
state as the month progressed, to see what the absence of alcohol did to me. I 
wasn’t a problem drinker (and still am not as far as I know), but I did like a 
glass of wine of an evening, and met with friends in the pub once a week or 
thereabouts. So how would a sudden absence of thischemical depressant 
<http://kidshealth.org/teen/drug_alcohol/alcohol/alcohol.html> effect me? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42908e3bd72685f128da63269d1d0b1fbeb3d5c8%2F0_104_2984_1792%2F2984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20booze-free%3F%20The%20effects%20of%20a%20month%20without%20alcohol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20booze-free%3F%20The%20effects%20of%20a%20month%20without%20alcohol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42908e3bd72685f128da63269d1d0b1fbeb3d5c8%2F0_104_2984_1792%2F2984.jpg>
 It’s easier to give up drinking if you can associate alcohol with unsavoury 
characters. Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/AFP/Getty Images 
Day 1

No change that I can detect at present. But then I did go out last night, must 
have had about10 units 
<https://www.drinkaware.co.uk/understand-your-drinking/unit-calorie-calculator>
, so odds are it’s still in my bloodstream, givenhow long it takes the liver to 
clear it out <http://www.nhs.uk/chq/Pages/853.aspx?CategoryID=87>. Also my head 
feels like I’ve had my brain replaced with concrete and broken glass and my 
stomach seems to be trying to declare independence from my body, but thenthat’s 
to be expected. 
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/hangovers/basics/symptoms/con-20025464>

Day 3

Pretty sure it’s all out of my system now. Starting to feel somewhat sharper 
and focused admittedly, but that’s probably just my brainreturning to normal 
levels of functioning 
<http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2003-05/ace-aie050703.php>.

Day 5

Find myself feeling more energetic, possibly because my liver doesn’t have to 
spend so much timeclearing the alcohol out of my system 
<http://www.britishlivertrust.org.uk/liver-information/liver-conditions/alcohol/>
. As a result, it can providemore energy and important metabolites 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/PMH0072577/>. I decided I should put 
this enhanced function to good use, maybe use this opportunity to build up my 
liver’s important mineral stores,like iron 
<http://library.med.utah.edu/NetBiochem/hi11b.htm>. This scheme was aborted 
when my wife caught me trying to eat a box of nails. I had assumed it was 
alcohol causing me to have impaired judgement, but it’s possible this is my 
default state of being.

Day 7

My memory is improving <http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1974-00590-001>. 
Several times today my wife has made statements that she has made at other 
times over the past two years and I was able and willing to point out exactly 
when she said them and how she ended up being wrong each time. I am also able to
sleep better now <http://time.com/3671777/drinking-sleep/>, which is handy as 
I’m doing a lot of it on the sofa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58e60130589af09770a3a62bd55bb11e1dbcd106%2F0_1533_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20booze-free%3F%20The%20effects%20of%20a%20month%20without%20alcohol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20booze-free%3F%20The%20effects%20of%20a%20month%20without%20alcohol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58e60130589af09770a3a62bd55bb11e1dbcd106%2F0_1533_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Science fact: for some people, their wine intake is inversely proportional to 
their whine output. Photograph: 68/George Doyle/Ocean/Corbis 
Day 10

Met up with some friends in the pub last night. As I’m not drinking I just had 
apple juice and put the time to good use by explaining to each of them the 
damage they were doing to themselves with their alcohol consumption and 
pointing out how much better I am now due to me not drinking. I had to leave 
early in the end as they started getting hostile, which isanother effect of 
alcohol <http://www.psychguides.com/guides/anger-symptoms-causes-and-effects/> 
I hadn’t considered. I pity them and their stunted experience of the world.

Day 12

Energy levels and focus continue to increase, making me feel stronger and more 
agile all the time. It occurs to me that I may have beenbitten by a radioactive 
spider <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spider-Man> while I slept. Ergo, I may be 
Spider-Man? I have not noticed any extra glands for secreting web fluid, but 
with my enhanced cognition it shouldn’t be a problem to assemble an efficient 
wrist-mounted apparatus for simulating this.

Day 13

Just got home from hospital after being treated for injuries caused by my 
falling off the building I was attempting to scale. I got a stern telling off 
from the doctor, both for my ridiculous behaviour and for interrupting him 
constantly to tell him I’m not drinking.

Day 16

My improved focus and cognition mean I am far more productive. Today I 
calculated my taxes for the next 5 years usingan exquisitely complex algorithm 
<https://www.researchgate.net/profile/David_Stoffer/publication/243712636_An_approach_to_time_series_smoothing_and_forecasting_using_the_EM_algorithm/links/00b7d53839ec45c465000000.pdf>
 that I came up with that deduces my incomes and outgoings with less than a 
0.05% margin of error, reorganised the house so that the air flow ensures 
maximum efficiency of the heating system, and solvedFermat’s last theorem 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermat%27s_Last_Theorem> while making some 
toast. I was going to write it down, but with my vastly improved memory there 
is no need.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc411f0c3e5d2fa50ac041057e28f96a58f8e3f9%2F0_266_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20booze-free%3F%20The%20effects%20of%20a%20month%20without%20alcohol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20booze-free%3F%20The%20effects%20of%20a%20month%20without%20alcohol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc411f0c3e5d2fa50ac041057e28f96a58f8e3f9%2F0_266_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Abstaining from cocktails means you can give up several types of alcohol at 
once. Photograph: PR company handout 
Day 19

I’m starting to remember things from my early childhood 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/media-spotlight/201404/exploring-childhood-amnesia>
. Like, really early, from birth to 6 months old, in exquisite detail. So 
embarrassing, how could I have soiled myself so often? What was I thinking!

Day 21

Decided to count all the atoms in the house. My wife told me that this was a 
ridiculous endeavour as you can’t know both the position and velocity of an 
elementary particle due tothe uncertainty principle 
<http://abyss.uoregon.edu/~js/21st_century_science/lectures/lec14.html>. I told 
her this was just a misconception by people who weren’t focused enough.

Day 24

About half way through counting all the atoms in my house, have done the 
ground floor and upstairs bathroom, but I keep getting distracted by a low 
hissing sound. After ruling out all possible sources in my home, I realised I 
was nowhearing the echoes of the Big Bang 
<http://www.space.com/25945-cosmic-microwave-background-discovery-50th-anniversary.html>
. Exactly how my brain’s hearing system, which responds tochanges in air 
pressure <http://www.hearinglink.org/how-the-ear-works>, was detecting 
low-level radiation is uncertain, but I guess that’s what giving up drinking 
does to you.

Day 27

I don’t need to keep these notes anymore. I see all. I know all. I remember 
all. With my enhanced mind and brain, it is my duty to bring enlightenment to 
all those lesser beings. And I will do so. By force if necessary. How could 
anyone stand against me? They are but insects to the God-like status I have 
achieved.

Day 31

Told some rugby fans in town that they should submit to my teachings or face 
the wrath of my almighty brain. They wedged me upside down in a bin. I really 
need a drink right now.

Day 32

Had a drink. Feel much better now. I remember something about Spider-Man and 
being a God, but that was probably just a dream.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c5272e5689e03966e175c9dbdcf34824f984da1%2F0_295_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20booze-free%3F%20The%20effects%20of%20a%20month%20without%20alcohol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20booze-free%3F%20The%20effects%20of%20a%20month%20without%20alcohol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Falcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c5272e5689e03966e175c9dbdcf34824f984da1%2F0_295_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Sometimes you can end up so sick of not drinking. Photograph: Radius 
Images/Alamy 
So there you go. In truth, the impact of giving up drinking is something that 
can’t really be generalised in any useful way as itdepends on so many factors 
<http://www.webmd.com/cancer/features/faq-alcohol-and-your-health>. Your 
regular intake, you age, body type, diet, genetics, family history, all of it.

Each person responds differently, and while abstaining from alcohol is 
probably a good move overall in a health-sense, don’t expect it to be some 
‘magic bullet’ that solves all your problems in one easy step. It might even 
have a negative impact, like making you think up ridiculous events for the 
amusement of strangers online.

Dean Burnett isn’t drinking this month, but doesn’t expect you to sponsor him 
so don’t worry.@garwboy <https://twitter.com/garwboy>

 * The Idiot Brain by Dean Burnett (Guardian Faber, £12.99). To order a copy 
for £7.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370462/s/idiot-brain/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.  