
It’s probably no shock to learn that most US golfers tend to vote Republican – 
but the strength of ill feeling towardsHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is perhaps more 
surprising, particularly among the women of the LPGA. Oh, and the game’s greats 
also like Donald Trump – and think Tiger Woods will win again.

With friends like Michael Jordan, why would Tiger Woods need enemies? | Marina 
Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/27/michael-jordan-tiger-woods-world-no1-undermining-friend-nba>
The revelations come from Sports Illustrated’s annual anonymous pro tour survey
 
<http://www.golf.com/tour-and-news/si-anonymous-poll-revealed-pga-champions-and-lpga-pros-answer-all>
, published on Tuesday, where golfers can sound off on multiple topics without 
being unmasked. SI polled more than 150 players across three American tours, 
and, unsurprisingly, a strongly Republican bent emerged from the survey.

Forty-four percent of LPGA Tour players said they will not be voting for 
Hillary Clinton in the presidential election, against 33% who will be, and 23% 
who gave no response. “Absolutely fucking not,” opined one anonymous responder.

Players on the men’s tours were asked: “If Clinton could guarantee to cut your 
taxes in half and the Republican candidate would keep them the same, would you 
vote for her?” Fifty-six percent of PGA players said no, while a massive 74% of 
players on the Champions Tour – the tour for players aged 50 and over – said 
the same. “I wouldn’t vote for [Clinton] if she were the last person on Earth,” 
said one older gentleman.

But there was no such problem for Donald Trump, whose various misdeeds didn’t 
seem to bother the golfers profiled in the survey. Sixty-seven percent of 
players on the women’s tour said that the LPGAshould hold tournaments on 
courses owned byDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, 
while 45% of players on the PGA Tour, and 88% of players on the Champions Tour, 
didn’t think the WGC-Cadillac should be moved from the Trump National Doral 
resort in Miami because of the Republican frontrunner’s controversial – nay, 
offensive – positions on women, immigration and race. “No,” said one player. “I 
love that golf course.”

Thirty-four percent of Champions Tour players are supporting Trump in the 
Republican primaries, 22% are undecided, 12% are going for Kasich, and 10% will 
be disappointed now Ted Cruz has suspended his campaign. Only 22% of Champions 
Tour players answered “none”, while one player said he’d be voting for “anyone 
who can beat a Democrat.”

Among the other themes that emerged:

 * Adam Scott has the PGA Tour’s prettiest swing. 
 * Players’ caddies on balance deserve 10% of the winner’s check. 
 * Phil Mickelson would make a better Ryder Cup captain than Woods. 
 * Jordan Spieth is held in slightly higher regard than Rory McIlroy. 
Also, the players remained positive about the fortunes of the game’s biggest 
names. Sixty-four percent of LPGA players believe Michelle Wie will win another 
major, while 42% of PGA players feel Woods will win another PGA event, compared 
to 27% who don’t. Having said that, one player did say: “I’m optimistic, but 
running out of reasons.”
 