
On 25 October, the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, wandered into unfamiliar 
territory – at least for a major politician.Addressing a media conference in 
Munich, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/angela-merkel-internet-search-engines-are-distorting-our-perception>
 she called on major internet companies to divulge the secrets of their 
algorithms on the grounds that their lack of transparency endangered public 
discourse. Her prime target appeared to be search engines such as Google and 
Bing, whose algorithms determine what you see when you type a search query into 
them. Given that, an internet user should have a right to know the logic behind 
the results presented to him or her.

“I’m of the opinion,” declared the chancellor, “that algorithms must be made 
more transparent, so that one can inform oneself as an interested citizen about 
questions like, ‘What influences my behaviour on the internet and that of 
others?’ Algorithms, when they are not transparent, can lead to a distortion of 
our perception; they can shrink our expanse of information.”

As a slogan, 'transparency' sounds good. It gives one a warm feeling, even if 
it’s baloney

All of which is unarguably true. We know that search results – and social 
media news feeds – are assembled by algorithms that determine the websites or 
news items likely to be most “relevant” for each user. The criteria used for 
determining relevance are many and varied, but some are calibrated by what your 
digital trail reveals about your interests and social network and, in that 
sense, the search results or news items that appear in your feed are 
personalised for you. But these powerful algorithms, which can indeed shape how 
you see the world, are proprietary and secret, which is wrong. So, Merkel 
argues, they should be less opaque.

QED? Sadly, no. I hold no brief for Google or Facebook, but simply making 
their algorithms transparent would do more harm than good. The reason is that 
search results or news feeds could then be “gamed” by external operators whose 
objectives might be even more questionable – and would certainly be more opaque 
– than those ofGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> and 
Facebook.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fgood-luck-in-making-google-reveal-its-algorithm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fb08ce986ddc5d51de7692ecdfcdc05d8d3f498%2F349_1500_2077_2596%2F2077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20luck%20in%20making%20Google%20reveal%20its%20algorithm%20%7C%20John%20Naughton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fgood-luck-in-making-google-reveal-its-algorithm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20luck%20in%20making%20Google%20reveal%20its%20algorithm%20%7C%20John%20Naughton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fgood-luck-in-making-google-reveal-its-algorithm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fb08ce986ddc5d51de7692ecdfcdc05d8d3f498%2F349_1500_2077_2596%2F2077.jpg>
 German chancellor Angela Merkel wants the major internet companies to divulge 
their secrets. Photograph: EPA 
That doesn’t mean that the companies are squeaky clean, by the way. In fact, 
at the moment, the European commission is trying to decide if Google is abusing 
its monopoly of search to favour its own commercial interests. But at least we 
know what its motives are. On the other hand, if hackers of the Russian 
security service, say, were able secretly to manipulate your search results 
then you might conclude that transparency was overrated.

As a slogan, “transparency” sounds good. Like the saying “sunlight is the best 
disinfectant”, it gives one a warm feeling, even if it’s baloney. But in the 
digital arena, at least, transparency is not necessarily the best way to 
achieve the accountability that Merkel rightly craves.

Just imagine for a moment that she were able to compel Google to publish its 
PageRank algorithm, the one that decides which pages are most relevant to your 
search query. Once upon a time, when Google was conceived by Sergey Brin and 
Larry Page, PageRank was probably a fairly compact program. Now, it’s an 
amalgam of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of individual modules expressed as many 
thousands, perhaps millions, of lines of computer code. Publishing it might 
indeed enable hackers armed with the right tools to find exploitable weaknesses 
in the code, but it wouldn’t do much to help the average citizen to figure out 
if search results were being skewed in some sinister or unscrupulous way.

Google News introduces fact check feature – just in time for US election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/13/google-news-fact-check-trump-clinton-us-election>
So just publishing secret stuff doesn’t do the trick. In a way, this is the 
hard lesson that WikiLeaks learned. At the beginning, its animating philosophy 
was that if you published information that powerful and secretive organisations 
would prefer to keep private, then good things would happen. So WikiLeaks did 
indeed publish such material. But except in a few cases, nothing much happened, 
which is why, in the end, Julian Assange decided that the way forward was first 
of all to createeditorial material such as the “collateral murder” 
<https://collateralmurder.wikileaks.org/> video and, later, to team up with 
established journalistic outfits such as theGuardian, New York Times, Le Monde, 
El Paisand Der Spiegel to release a huge trove of US diplomatic cables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/28/how-us-embassy-cables-leaked>.

But the German chancellor has put her finger on an important problem. 
Decision-making algorithms are already shaping our culture, our commerce and 
maybe even our politics. For the most part, they are opaque and those who 
deploy them are therefore unaccountable. In the long run, this is intolerable – 
for liberty, privacy, equity and maybe even for democracy. The good news is 
that the problem is not insoluble. But there’s no single solution, no magic 
bullet. Calling for transparency won’t do it. Sometimes, publication will be 
the answer; at other times, it will be a muscular inspection regime, or need 
legislative changes to enforce legal liability. But before we can get started 
on solutions, we need first to acknowledge that we have a problem. So two 
cheers for Angela Merkel!
 