
What do you do when you have $43bn (£30bn) in your back pocket? Why, you buy 
companies like there’s no tomorrow. A couple of years ago,Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> decided that it needed to get 
into robotics, so it went shopping for robotics companies. It picked up eight, 
all for the search giant’s equivalent of small change.

What the hell was a search company doing getting involved in this business? 
Now we know: it didn’t have a clue

From the mainstream media’s point of view, the most interesting of these 
acquisitions wasBoston Dynamics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/17/google-boston-dynamics-robots-atlas-bigdog-cheetah>
, an east coast firm that specialised in making robots with legs. At the time, 
its best-known product wasBigDog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/30/us-marines-reject-bigdog-robot-boston-dynamics-ls3-too-noisy>
, a quadruped that was designed with funding from the Pentagon in the hope that 
it would serve as an automated pack animal for US soldiers operating in rough 
terrain where wheeled vehicles couldn’t go. BigDog worked as advertised, but 
made such a racket that any soldier hoping to surprise the enemy would have 
been better advised to travel with a brass band and so it was eventually 
retired from active service.

The Boston Dynamics robots are both impressive and creepy, as even a cursory 
inspection ofYouTube videos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rVlhMGQgDkY> will 
confirm. One of them – the Atlas – is a muscular-looking biped that can pick 
itself up off the floor after being felled by a sneaky chap with a hockey 
stick. What’s particularly creepy is the fact that the robot never gets 
annoyed, even while it is being taunted by the guy with the stick. Personally, 
I would have zapped him.

But I digress. The question on everyone’s mind as Google hoovered up robotics 
companies was: what the hell was a search company doing getting involved in 
this business? Now we know: it didn’t have a clue.

Last week, Bloomberg revealed that Google was putting Boston Dynamics up for 
sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/18/boston-dynamics-put-up-for-sale-google>
. The official reason for unloading it is that senior executives in Alphabet, 
Google’s holding company, had concluded (correctly) that Boston Dynamics was 
years away from producing a marketable product and so was deemed disposable. 
Two possible buyers have been named so far – Toyota and Amazon. Both make sense 
for the obvious reason that they are already heavy users of robots and it’s 
clear that Amazon in particular would dearly love to get rid of humans in its 
warehouses at the earliest possible opportunity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgoogle-robots-boston-dynamics-sale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe900871b1918c56b97f4f86135547e9b938839b9%2F266_100_2440_1464%2F2440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20was%20barking%20up%20the%20wrong%20tree%20with%20its%20robot%20dogs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgoogle-robots-boston-dynamics-sale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20was%20barking%20up%20the%20wrong%20tree%20with%20its%20robot%20dogs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgoogle-robots-boston-dynamics-sale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe900871b1918c56b97f4f86135547e9b938839b9%2F266_100_2440_1464%2F2440.jpg>
 Atlas, the Boston Dynamics robot: a glutton for punishment. Photograph: 
Google/YouTube 
This saga is interesting because Google is, par excellence, a technocratic 
outfit that worships evidence-based decision-making. In his bookHow Google Works
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-google-works-262209.html>, the company’s 
executive chairman, Eric Schmidt, describes an organisation that is fanatically 
data-driven. Every procedure, every process, is relentlessly scrutinised, which 
is why, for example, every job interview lasts 30 minutes and offers of 
employment are decided by a peer-review process rather than by the most senior 
manager present.

That is also why the robotics buying spree seemed so weird. It was more like 
the acquisitive binge of a Premier League football club than the outcome of a 
deliberative corporate process. But most of us were so intimidated by Google’s 
technocratic ethos that we assumed that the company must know what it was 
doing. In assuming that we were clearly wrong.

So what went on? Already two interesting hypotheses have emerged, both of 
which are about corporate cultures. Boston Dynamics is a typical east coast 
outfit, a spin-off from MIT, whereas Google is a Silicon Valley creation that 
was originally spun off from Stanford. These two intellectual milieu are as 
different as chalk and cheese. (And of course Silicon Valley has never quite 
recovered from the fact that the arpanet, the predecessor to the internet, was 
originally built by a Boston-based company,Bolt, Beranek and Newman 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BBN_Technologies>.)

A second hypothesis is also about a clash of cultures. Robotics of the kind 
created by Boston Dynamics is largely an analogue technology or, at any rate, 
an intimate fusion of digital sensors and signal processing with physical 
actuators that move the robot’s limbs and other moving parts. But almost 
everything that Google does is purely digital, so perhaps the digital immune 
system rejected the analogue intruder.

Whatever the explanation, the fact is that Boston Dynamics is being cut loose. 
And Google is returning to its digital roots, asSundar Pichai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/08/google-sundar-pichai-shares-highest-paid-ceo>
, its new chief executive, has been explaining. Google, he says, is moving from 
a “mobile-first to an AI-first world”, which is a fancy way of saying that the 
company will be using machine-learning to make its products (mainly search) 
more helpful to users. We will know that he has succeeded when a Google search 
can answer the question: “What in God’s name possessed you to buy Boston 
Dynamics?”
 