
Google has launched a family sharing function that will allow up to six people 
to share purchases made via theGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Play store, including apps, 
movies, TV shows, books and games.


The free Family Library feature is in addition to the Google Play Music family 
plan, which allows six people to share a music subscription service for £14.99 
a month.

Once set up via an Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> 
device or the web, a family can share purchases and one payment method using 
separate Google accounts. Purchase approval can also be set up to stop children 
buying apps or in-app purchases. In the past, families would have to share one 
Google Play account to achieve similar.

Raj Iyengar, product manager for Google Play, said: “With Family Library, you 
can choose which items you want to share and which to keep to yourself – for 
example, I’ll probably keep my collection of comic books in my personal library.

“When you sign up, you’ll select a credit card to share as your family payment 
method, but your family members will always have the option of buying stuff 
with their personal credit cards or gift cards.”

Movies, TV shows and books can also be shared with iOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> devices, such as the iPhone and 
iPad with Google’s apps, and computers and Chromebooks through a web browser.

Apps <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apps> and games purchased after 7 
February this year are automatically eligible, but developers have to opt in to 
allow prior purchases to be included in the Family Library. Books are only 
eligible if the publisher has opted into Family Library, while movies and TV 
shows have to be purchased with the family payment method and rentals are not 
eligible for inclusion in the Family Library.

Google is not the first to implement a shared family feature across its store. 
Apple rolled out a similar feature for its iTunes and Apps stores in 2014with 
iOS 8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/17/ios-8-review-iphone-ipad-apple>
, which allowed up to five people to share one payment card and content 
library, including apps, music, films and TV shows.

Family Library will be rolling out to Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, 
Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, the UK and US, starting 
today.

 * Google Android 6.0 Marshmallow review: more polished, greater control and 
longer battery life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/22/google-android-6-0-marshmallow-review-longer-battery-life-now-on-tap-apps>
 * Has your child bought a Facebook app without asking? You can get a refund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/27/facebook-refund-children-app-purchases-lawsuit> 