
Google has finally launched an own-brand smartphone, the Pixel, to challenge 
Apple head on and provide a premiumAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> experience with the hardware 
tailored to the software by the people who actually make it..


The new smartphone succeeds Google’s Nexus line of devices and the company 
claims that the Pixel is now 100% Google, unlike the Nexus devices whereGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> provided the software and had 
some input into the devices but not total control. The Pixel phone joins the 
Pixel C Android tablet and Chromebook Pixel as Google’s first in-house devices.

But for Google, the Pixel isn’t just a smartphone, it’s a referendum on 
whether Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/05/google-pixel-phone-market-apple-iphone>
 as a brand sells.

Wedge shape
 The Pixel is thicker at one end, but you might not notice unless someone 
pointed it out. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
With an all-metal body, all-glass display, rock-solid build, fingerprint 
scanner and headphones socket, thePixel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pixel> ticks most of the boxes expected 
of top-end smartphone, except for a lack of waterproofing. It’s slightly 
different looking too, with a glass panel covering the top third of the back 
and a wedge-shape that’s thicker at the top and hides any camera lump. How 
attractive it is as a design divides opinion.

The Pixel feels great in the hand, with nicely curved edges and flat sides 
that make it easy to grip and hold on to. It’s also not too thick, with the 
wedge shape meaning the bit you hold is thin and has good weight distribution.

At the Pixel’s base it is 7.3mm thick and it weighs 143g. In comparison to the 
competition, namelyApple’s 7.1mm thick, 138g iPhone 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/23/iphone-7-review-poor-battery-life>
 and Samsung’s 7.9mm thick, 152g Galaxy S7, the Pixel is right in the middle. 
It’s thinner than last year’s7.9mm thick Nexus 5X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/23/google-nexus-5x-review-android-60-marshmallow-smartphone-battery>
 and but 7g heavier.

The Pixel has a 5in full HD AMOLED screen on the front, which makes it one of 
the smaller premium smartphones available, with most others having 5.1in or 
larger screens. The display is crisp and vibrant, with deep blacks and 
excellent viewing angles. It’s relatively easy to read in direct sunlight too, 
making it one of the best displays fitted to a smartphone, although not quite 
as good as Samsung’s best.

Specifications

 * Screen: 5in 1080p AMOLED (441ppi) 
 * Processor: quad-core Qualcomm Snapdragon 821 
 * RAM: 4GB of RAM 
 * Storage: 32 or 128GB 
 * Operating system: Android 7.1 Nougat 
 * Camera: 12.3MP rear camera, 8MP front-facing camera 
 * Connectivity: LTE, Wi-Fi, NFC, Bluetooth 4.2, USB-C and GPS 
 * Dimensions: 143.8 x 69.5 x 7.3-8.6 mm 
 * Weight: 143g 
DayDream ready
 Google’s Pixel still has a headphone socket, but doesn’t actually come with 
any headphones in the box. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The Pixel is one of the first handsets to use Qualcomm’s new Snapdragon 821 
processor, which is essentially a tweaked version of the 820 found in the
OnePlus 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
 and other smartphones.

Performance is not an issue. From Prisma images to graphically intensive 
games, the Pixel chewed through everything I threw at it, which you’d expect 
for a £600 smartphone. It’s one of the most powerful Android smartphones 
currently available. It’s well optimised, snappy, fast and, perhaps most 
impressively, it doesn’t get that hot when under load.

Most smartphones heat up considerably when downloading a lot of data, such as 
when setting up a phone, but the Pixel didn’t. It also ran games such as Dan 
the Man without heating up in the slightest, where last year’sNexus 5X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/23/google-nexus-5x-review-android-60-marshmallow-smartphone-battery>
 became noticeably hot.

The Pixel is also the first smartphone to be certified for use with Google’s 
newDayDream virtual reality platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/04/google-launch-pixel-xl-iphone#img-4>
. Whether that means anything in reality will depend on how successful Google’s 
latest push for VR ends up being. It’s not yet available, so how it performs is 
still unknown.

A day between charges
 The USB and single speaker at the bottom (the left-side hole). Photograph: 
Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Using the Pixel as my primary device, it lasted just over 24 hours without 
charging, managing three hours of app usage and browsing, hundreds of emails 
and push notifications, a couple of photos, five hours of music over Bluetooth 
headphones and the odd game ofDan the Man 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.halfbrick.dantheman> during 
my one hour and 20-minute train commute to and from work. It means you’ll get 
through a day and a night out, but you’ll have to charge it overnight or it’ll 
most likely be dead before you get to work the next day.

The Pixel has fast charging through USB-C’s power delivery specification, not 
Qualcomm’s QuickCharge or any other accelerated charging system. A full charge 
from completely flat took one hour 45 minutes, reaching 25% capacity in about 
15 minutes, 40% in 25 minutes and 66% in about 50 minutes. It’s not the fastest 
charging smartphone available, but it’s considerably faster than Apple’s iPhone 
7.

Android 7.1 Nougat
 Pixel comes installed with Google’s latest launcher complete with a new-look 
homescreen and app drawer. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The Pixel comes with the latest version of Android 7.1 Nougat and is the first 
smartphone to do so. Most other smartphones are still running Android 6 
Marshmallow, let alone version 7 or 7.1.

Android 7.0 Nougat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/android-7-nougat-review-battery-life-multitasking-operation-notifications-facial-recognition-android>
 introduced some solid battery and time-saving features, which are all present 
on the Pixel. Google’s version of Nougat 7.1 introduces a few more new and 
useful things including the ability to block visual alerts when do not disturb 
is activated, such as the flashing LED notification light – handy for those 
that charge their smartphone overnight next to their heads.

The Pixel also has a new version of Google’s launcher – previously known as 
the Google Now launcher – which shipped with Nexus devices and is available for 
otherAndroid smartphones and tablets on the Play Store 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.launcher>. 
The Pixel’s launcher has a new-look Google search bar and home screen weather 
widget, neither of which can be removed limiting vertical icon space to four 
rows, and now hides the app drawer behind a swipe up from the five-icon-wide 
tray at the bottom of the screen.
 Launcher shortcuts pop-up on a tap and hold, but can be dragged from the menu 
to make a dedicated icon for the shortcut on the homescreen. Photograph: Samuel 
Gibbs for the Guardian 
The biggest functional change for the home screen, however, is the new 
launcher shortcuts, which mirror Apple’s 3D touch gestures on iOS, but without 
the need for a pressure-sensitive screen. Tapping and holding an app icon pops 
up a list of quick actions, from phone calls to specific people to recent text 
messages, options to jump straight to a selfie or video in the camera app, and 
other similar functions.

The launcher shortcuts can also be dragged from the main app to quick buttons 
on the home screen, meaning a button for jumping straight to the front-facing 
camera for a selfie can be placed anywhere on the home screen for one-tap 
access.

Most of Google’s apps support the new feature, while some third-party apps, 
including Evernote will soon be updated to add quick actions of their own. How 
much utility you get out of them will depend on which apps you use, but being 
able to pin launcher actions as a separate icon to the home screen could be 
useful for some commonly used functions.

Google’s also included a collection of attractive live wallpapers that change 
in real time while the screen is on. A collection of Google Earth shots pan 
across a view of fields in Kent or the Pantheon in Rome, while live data 
wallpapers display battery charge levels, the current weather conditions, or 
the time. There’s also the option to cycle through a collection of still images 
on a daily basis for various different topics such as cityscapes, aerial shots, 
landscapes and other themes.

Android 7.1 also now has a built-in night mode, which aims to reduce blue 
tones from the display to limit the amount of blue light shone into the eyes 
during the hours of darkness. Doing so is meant to help smartphone users sleep 
by stopping the blue wavelengths of light stimulating cells in our eyes and 
waking us up. Third-party apps have been doing similar for a while andApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> added a night mode to iOS 9.3, 
so it’s not a new feature, but it is good to see built into Android.

Google Assistant
 Google Assistant hides under the home button, ready to answer questions and 
perform basic functions such as setting timers. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for 
the Guardian 
The most hyped feature of Google’s new version of Android Google Assistant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/04/google-launch-new-assistant-home>
, formerly known as Google Now. The biggest difference is now it will talk back 
to you and is much more focused on conversational voice interaction. You ask a 
question, it answers but keeps listening for a follow-up command or further 
questions about the subject.

Activated by either a long press on the home button or by saying “OK, Google”, 
Assistant can perform quick tasks such as setting timers, sending messages and 
playing music, fire up searches and other standard virtual-assistant functions, 
but it is also the most personal Google assistant to date. It will actively 
learn from your preferences, either by your searches or by your explicit 
command.

For users or any other Android smartphone, Assistant is essentially a slightly 
better Google Now with a much clearer name, but it’s also one of the most 
capable voice assistants available and makes Apple’s Siri look a bit behind the 
times. Google’s voice recognition is top notch, and it has access to so much 
more data it’s more surprising when it can’t answer a fact-based question than 
when it can.
 Pixel, phone by Google. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
It will apparently eventually be able to interact with third-party apps and 
services allowing users to simply say “OK, Google, order me an Uber” or 
similar, but they’re not available yet. You can also only directly interact 
with Assistant via voice from the launcher, but you can type text into the 
Google search bar or in Allo. It seemed an odd omission, as there were times 
when I wanted to silently ask it a question using the keyboard.

To get the most out of it you must give your digital life over to Google and 
that certainly has some privacy implications – it knows where you are, what 
you’re searching for, can read what’s on the screen and collates all that data 
– but that isn’t a new phenomenon and is simply a progression of what Google’s 
been doing for the last couple of years on Android. Whether that matters to you 
depends on whether you trust Google. You do not have to use Assistant, it can 
be turned off.

The real promise of Google Assistant, however, is that no matter where you 
interact with it, it’s the same assistant. For UK users the Pixel phone and 
Google’s Allo app are the only two places Assistant is available for active 
interaction, but US users will also be able to buy Google Home, an Amazon Echo 
competitor. Home will also come to the UK next year.

Google Assistant isn’t a massive step forward in the AI wars, but it’s a solid 
start for Google in the next phase of conversational assistants. If you’re 
expecting it to know and be able to do everything about the phone, your life 
and other things a flesh-and-blood personal assistant might, you’ll be 
disappointed.

Fingerprint scanner
 The fingerprint scanner on the back doubles as a pad to swipe down the 
notification shade. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Last year’s Google Nexus phones had brilliant fingerprint scanners on the 
back. The Pixel continues to use the same winning formula: it’s fast, accurate 
and can now be used to bring down the notification shade with a swipe on the 
pad – something other manufacturers including Huawei have been doing for a 
while. The Pixel Imprint scanner is arguably the best in the business, but if 
you use your phone on a desk, you can’t activate it without picking it up.

Camera
 The camera app has a few more bells and whistles, but doesn’t have the 
extensive manual controls third-party camera apps have from Samsung, Huawei, LG 
and others. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The Pixel’s 12.3-megapixel camera is cracking. Camera rating firm DxoMark 
ranked it slightly above all other smartphone cameras and it’s clear why, as 
it’s very difficult to take a rubbish photo with it.

In good light you get crisp, well judged photos with an excellent amount of 
fine detail. Google’s HDR+ feature is particularly good, producing some of the 
best high dynamic range photos I’ve seen and without the image blur that can 
creep in with other systems.

Low and poor light performance is also excellent, despite the camera not 
having optical image stabilisation, while the Google Camera app now has some 
much needed extra features, including the ability to switch the automatic white 
balance with the tap of a button and a golden ratio grid, which helps you frame 
your photos. The camera struggled to correctly identify office fluorescent 
lighting, however, leaving images with a yellow tint. Selecting the fluorescent 
lighting option corrected it.

Full manual control isn’t included – you’ll need a third-party app for that – 
but it has most of what many will need on a day to day basis. Shooting burst 
photos by holding down the shutter button even creates a gif out of the 
resulting stills.

The 8-megapixel selfie camera is also very good, producing images with good 
depth and colour. Most selfie cameras are either soft and lack detail or hard 
and capture every wrinkle and pore on the face, but the Pixel’s treads that 
fine line with soft, flattering focus without losing too much detail.

Observations
 The back has a glass panel covering the top third of the device. Photograph: 
Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
 * The glass panel on the back aids grip by the index finger 
 * It only has one down-firing speaker on the bottom, which is easily blocked 
by hands when gaming 
 * Google Photos on the Pixel comes with free, unlimited full resolution photo 
and video backup, not just up to 16MP and 1080p video 
 * The notification LED is not enabled by default, but is available in 
notification settings 
 * Gif search is built into Google’s Keyboard for apps that support it such as 
SMS Messenger app 
 * The calendar app now shows the correct date on the home screen 
 * The charging meter is inaccurate: at 96% it says four minutes until done 
but took 17 minutes to reach 100% 
 * Wallpapers are normally things I set and forget, but I really liked the new 
live Google Earth images 
Price

The Pixel costs £599 with 32GB of storage or £699 with 128GB of storage in 
black or silver. It is also available in blue in the US.

For comparison, Apple’s iPhone 7 costs £599 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/23/iphone-7-review-poor-battery-life>
 with 32GB of storage, Samsung’s Galaxy S7 costs around £500, theHuawei P9 
costs £449 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/18/huawei-p9-review-smartphone-leica-camera-fingerprint-scanner-emui-software>
 and theOnePlus 3 costs £329 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
.

Verdict

The Pixel is an interesting device. A phone designed by Google, the maker of 
Android. The software side is top notch: the smoothest, newest and best 
optimised version of Android available at the moment and most probably into the 
future, what with rapid updates coming straight from Google.

But the phone itself is only up to par with the best of the rest and not 
leagues ahead. The design isn’t as innovative or interesting as that produced 
by Samsung. It’s not waterproof, either, and it doesn’t have expandable 
storage. The camera is great, so is the screen and the build quality is 
excellent, all things you’d expect from a £600 smartphone in 2016.

If Google’s aim was to beat Apple, it has done so on battery life alone. If it 
was to challenge the current king of Android, Samsung’s Galaxy S7 line, then 
the result is less clear.

Pros: great camera, good screen, a day’s battery life, Android 7.1 Nougat, 
Google Assistant, great fingerprint scanner

Cons: not waterproof, no expandable memory, no front-facing speakers, no 
wireless charging, expensive

A review of the larger Google Pixel XL with a 5.5in screen, the smartphone 
competing with theiPhone 7 Plus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/03/iphone-7-plus-review-apple-newest-smartphone-phablet>
 andSamsung Galaxy S7 Edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/11/samsung-galaxy-s7-edge-review-android-smartphone-phablet-marshmallow>
, will be available next week

Other reviews

 * OnePlus 3 review: flagship phone at mid-range price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
 * Honor 8 review: Huawei’s cheaper smartphone is just short of brilliant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/15/huawei-honor-8-review-value-smartphone-dual-cameras-sim-microsd-card-slot-battery-life-software>
 * HTC 10 review: up there with Samsung’s best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/htc-10-review-up-there-with-samsungs-best>
 * Huawei P9 review: aiming for the big boys but just missing on software 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/18/huawei-p9-review-smartphone-leica-camera-fingerprint-scanner-emui-software>
 * LG G5 review: a power user’s friend that just misses the mark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/11/lg-g5-review-power-users-friend-that-just-misses-mark>
 * Google Nexus 5X review: the people’s Android phone? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/23/google-nexus-5x-review-android-60-marshmallow-smartphone-battery>
 * iPhone 7 review: how good can a phone be if the battery doesn’t last even a 
day? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/23/iphone-7-review-poor-battery-life> 