
Sex has got a lot to answer for. The UK is facing a rising demand for sexual 
health and contraceptive care. Unacceptable levels ofsexual coercion 
<https://www.nspcc.org.uk/fighting-for-childhood/news-opinion/40-percent-teenage-girls-pressured-into-sex/>
 andfemale genital mutilation (FGM) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/05/research-finds-200m-victims-female-genital-mutilation-alive-today>
 are being reported, sexually transmitted infection (STI) diagnoses are
increasing 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/437433/hpr2215_STI_NCSP_v6.pdf>
 [pdf], and the UK still has thehighest rate of teenage pregnancy 
<http://www.fpa.org.uk/news/uk-has-highest-teenage-birth-rates-western-europe> 
in western Europe.

Despite all of this, key services are facing monstrous budget cuts alongside 
so many other sectors of our increasingly wearyNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. This means clinic closures, the 
dissolution of preventative health programmes, further pressure on already 
overloaded GP practices, and horrifying long-term financial costs.

In truth, sexual health services have suffered financially for some time. With 
the implementation of theHealth and Social Care Act 2012 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/7/contents/enacted/data.htm>, 
responsibility for sexual health funding was allocated to local authorities and 
these servicesput out to tender 
<http://www.bashh.org/documents/BASHH%20RCP%20paper%20on%20threats%20from%20tendering%202013.pdf>
 [pdf].

Sexual health services play a key role in protecting the health of the nation 
... sufficient funding is crucial
Elizabeth Carlin, BASHH president 
Private companies can bid for control over them, which the government claimed 
would improve standards “through competition and choice”. In reality, the 
winning bids are often ones that offer immediate cost-saving rather than 
long-term financial benefits and the best possible standards of care.

In 2015, the government announced its £200m public health budget cut 
<http://gu.com/p/4ffdp/stw>, resulting in local councils spending millions of 
pounds less than planned on sexual health services nationwide. Add to this a 
potential40% cut in central funding to local authorities 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/documents/10180/5854661/Under+pressure.pdf> [pdf] and 
you can see how pressure is mounting.

Elizabeth Carlin, president of the British Association of Sexual Health and 
HIV (Bashh) <http://www.bashh.org/>, is one of many specialists to express 
concern. “Sexual health services play a key role in protecting the health of 
the nation,” she says. “Coordinated care with sufficient funding is crucial.”

So, what do these services actually do – and what would be the repercussions 
of service dismantlement?

Let’s start with sexual violence. Approximately 85,000 women and 12,000 men 
are raped in England and Wales alone every year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/214970/sexual-offending-overview-jan-2013.pdf>
 [pdf]. That’s roughly 11 adult rapes per hour. Over 1,200 victims of FGM were 
recordedbetween January and March this year <http://gu.com/p/4kz3a/stw>, and 
unknown numbers of girls and women remain unprotected. Gang violence and 
grooming are increasingly recognised and the lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender (LGBT) community remains at risk from stigma and discrimination. 
Sexual health services identify and support these vulnerable groups every day 
so the ramifications of reducing access to this support and expertise will be 
far-reaching and significant.

Recent coverage of NHS England’s decision 
<http://www.tht.org.uk/sexual-health/About-HIV/Pre-exposure-Prophylaxis> not to 
fund the provision to high-risk individuals of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) 
– a highly effective HIV-prevention drug – highlighted the extent of our HIV 
epidemic. About17% of infected individuals in the UK are unaware of their 
positive status 
<http://www.nat.org.uk/HIV-in-the-UK/HIV-Statistics/Latest-UK-statistics.aspx> 
and an estimated one in 20 men who have sex with men (MSM) aged 15–44 are 
living with HIV. Sexual health services are responsible for huge proportions of 
HIV testing, education and specialist care for newly-diagnosed individuals.

STIs remain problematic, particularly in MSM, with a 46% increase in syphilis 
and 32% increase in gonorrhoea reported in this group byPublic Health England 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/437433/hpr2215_STI_NCSP_v6.pdf>
 [pdf] in 2014. The threat ofgonococcal resistance 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/health/super-gonorrhoea-is-coming-and-george-osborne-needs-to-dig-deep/>
 also persists, with the frightening possibility that we could end up with no 
effective treatment for an infection that affects up to 30,000 people in the UK 
every year. Expert services are essential to ensure the public is tested, 
managed and educated to reduce STI transmission and prevent long-term health 
problems.

Teen conception rates are another important measure of the state of health and 
society for local councils, yet the UK continues to have the highest figures in 
western Europe. The Family Planning Association (FPA) 2015 reportUnprotected 
Nation 
<http://www.fpa.org.uk/influencing-sexual-health-policy/unprotected-nation-2015>
 estimates that additional unintended pregnancies due to budget cuts could cost 
up to £8.3bn over the next five years. That’s coupled with the countless women 
who will deal with the mental and physical implications of an unwanted 
pregnancy or abortion. In essence, an unforgivable removal of choice from the 
UK public.

The secret sexual health doctor's diary: 'The waiting room is bursting at the 
seams'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/21/sexual-health-doctors-diary-nhs>
“We’ve seen evidence of local authorities restricting access – for example, 
only providing services to under-25s. This goes against the principle of 
providing open-access care,” says Laura Russell, the FPA’s senior policy and 
public affairs officer.

This list of problems is by no means exhaustive. While the health budget 
remains a challenge and all the unpleasant health problems associated with sex 
are easier to ignore, the government’s failure to openly address these issues, 
support sexual choice and put their long-vision specs on will only take us back 
to the times we’ve worked so hard to leave behind.

Let’s just hope they’re ready to confront the repercussions of their actions – 
warts and all.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 