
Perhaps it's optimistic to be British and to swim outdoors – the past few 
summers, this one being (touch wood) the exception, don't really inspire most 
to find their local lido and swim under the skies. Which means many outdoor 
pools, some with incredible art deco architecture from the golden age of 
British lido-building in the 1920s and 30s, are under threat of closure, or 
have languished unloved and unpened for many years.

There are, however, some glorious exceptions. Here are 10 lidos, tidal and 
outdoor swimming pools we love. Is your favourite on our list?

Brockwell Park, London <http://www.fusion-lifestyle.com/centres/Brockwell_Lido>

A complete suntrap in the summertime, Brockwell lido – or Brixton beach, as 
it's known to locals – is one of the best examples of art deco-style lidos, and 
a model for lido campaigning groups. It's a huge success story, with a gym and 
spa as well as anaward-winning poolside cafe <http://www.thelidocafe.co.uk/> 
serving locally sourced food from breakfast through to dinner. If you don't 
want to get your hair wet, order yourself a craft beer and sit poolside soaking 
up the continental ambience.

Tooting Bec lido, London 
<http://www.dcleisurecentres.co.uk/centres/tooting-bec-lido/>

Tooting Bec lido is famously the largest freshwater open-air swimming pool in 
England and it's also the home of cold water swimming. Its size and 
eyecatchingly colourful poolside changing cubicles mean the place is heaving 
when it's open to the public in the summer. If you're a member ofSouth London 
Swimming Club <http://www.slsc.org.uk> you get the pool to yourself – in the 
chilly winter off-season.

Jesus Green outdoor pool, Cambridge 
<http://www.everyoneactive.com/tabid/663/default.aspx>

You have to be careful to stick to your lane at Jesus Green outdoor pool in 
Cambridge. Built to mimic the river Cam, it's as long as Tooting Bec lido at 
91m, but only half the width – a skinny 14m. Built in 1923, the idea was that 
the pool would recreate the experience of swimming in the river it parallels, 
but with the thoughtfully added convenience of changing rooms. The pool is open 
every day this summer for you to enjoy the retro experience.
 Bristol lido 
Bristol lido, Somerset <http://www.lidobristol.com>

The Clifton lido, as it was when it opened in 1849, was one of the first 
open-air pools, built to cater for the Victorian love of spas and baths. Today 
its multimillion-pound upgraded spa facilities, poolside bar and 75-seat 
restaurant make it a fairly exclusive spot, and the large, square 
blue-tile-lined pool and glass surroundings will add a sense of glamour to your 
swim.

Stonehaven outdoor pool, Aberdeenshire <http://www.stonehavenopenairpool.co.uk>

Another Olympic-sized pool, this time right up on the north-east Scottish 
coast in Stonehaven, this is the UK's only open-air heated seawater pool. 
Saltwater from Stonehaven Bay is cleaned and heated to a balmy 29C from every 
May to September. It retains that traditional seaside pool feel, with chutes 
and inflatables for kids. For a child-free, starlit swim visit on a Wednesday 
night during the peak summer season, when the opening hours are extended until 
midnight.

Jubilee outdoor pool, Penzance <http://www.jubileepool.co.uk>
 A swimmer at Brockwell lido. Photograph: Martin Godwin 
The clean, sweeping white lines of the Jubilee pool in Penzance are surrounded 
by bespoke festival-style flags designed by local artistLucy Birbeck 
<http://www.lucybirbeckflags.com/>, giving you the feeling of the French 
riviera. Bathers swim in a million gallons of seawater in what is the UK's 
largest seawater lido, sheltered from the winds by the high walls and with the 
spectacular backdrop of Mount's Bay and St Michael's Mount.

Havre de Pas tidal pool, Jersey 
<http://www.gov.je/Leisure/Sport/Facilities/Outdoor/Pages/Havredespas.aspx>

Havre de Pas is home to the most southerly lido in the British Isles. A tidal 
pool on the beautifulJersey <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/jersey> coastline, 
it's open to swimmers all year round and it's completely free. With large steps 
down to the water, changing rooms, freshwater showers, a cafe and a low-tide 
toddler pool, it's a great spot to camp out and spend the whole day with your 
kids.

Rock pool, Newcastle, County Down <http://www.therockpool.co.uk>

This much-loved sea pool on the Irish Sea coast is, like many of the UK's 
outdoor pools, hanging between renovation and closure. After this summer, 
hopefully it will be the former, since with the Mourne mountains as a backdrop 
and the sea in front, it's a beautiful spot for an outdoor swim.

Ilkley lido, North Yorkshire <http://www.ilkleylido.co.uk>

Ilkley's lido is uniquely mushroom-shaped. The circular part of the pool is 
46m in diameter, and it slopes from paddling shallows that get lovely and warm 
in the summer to a depth where you could play water polo, if the pool weren't 
such an odd shape. There's a working fountain in the middle, and beyond it, 
poster-perfect views of the Cow and Calf rock formations onIlkley Moor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ilkley_Moor>.

Tinside lido, Plymouth <http://www.everyoneactive.com/tabid/1691/default.aspx>

Jutting out of the headland and overlooked by Plymouth Hoe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plymouth_Hoe>, Tinside lido is a triumph of art 
deco architecture. After a £3.3m renovation several years ago, its curving 
asymmetric sweep of a roof and semicircular pool are undeniably classy. The 
lido is floodlit at night, and by day it's possibly the closest thing the UK 
has to a publicinfinity pool 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:2012-12-30_Marina_Bay_Sands_infinity_pool.JPG>
, with beautiful views out across Plymouth Sound.
 