
England Made Me is an overlooked early Graham Greene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/grahamgreene> novel, set in Stockholm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/stockholm>, a city about which, he 
admitted, he knew very little. Despite the overseas location, it was an attack 
on theEnglish class system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/03/great-british-class-survey-seven>
, rooted in public school education, underpinned by his growing disquiet with 
international capitalism.

Greene had reviewed George Soloveytchik’s The Financier: the life of Ivar 
Kreuger for the Spectator in March 1933. That August he made a brief visit to 
Scandinavia, much preferringOslo <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/oslo> to 
Stockholm. However the latter, caught as summer was fading, washed in drab 
“liquid grey” light, gave him a fitting atmosphere, spiced with a big pinch of 
puritan moral hypocrisy, as he wrote in an essay on the two cities. In November 
he beganEngland Made Me, which was published in 1935.

In person, Ivar Kreuger was an odd, reticent man, originally a civil engineer. 
Before long he came to dominate the world match trade, then transformed himself 
into an international financier, offering eye-watering dollar loans to the 
French and German governments, just as world markets failed. After the Wall 
Street crash his empire spun out of control and it was, perhaps ironically,JP 
Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jpmorgan> who first detected his 
Ponzi-like arrangements, a tottering house of cards built with post-dated 
cheques. In 1932, Kreuger killed himself in Paris (or, perhaps, was shot).

Greene’s central character is closely based on him. The tycoon Erik Krogh is a 
manipulator, a social misfit with badly chosen clothes and awkward behaviour in 
polite company. As Kreuger did, he buys his opera tickets in threes to avoid 
having to interact with people in adjoining seats. With his high domed forehead 
and unlined, unmarked features, Krogh’s is the inscrutable face of financial 
wrongdoing on a global scale.

Zadie Smith on the genius of Graham Greene
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/18/classics.grahamgreene> 
He is master to a puppet cast of deracinated Englishmen and women; there’s 
hardly another Swede in the book. Ebbing and flowing around the scintillating 
modernist headquarters of Krogh’s empire are two concentric circles. The first 
is distinctively seedy and includes his bodyguard, public school educated 
Anthony Farrant (dishonest, but “not dishonest enough” and loosely based on 
Greene’s ne’er-do-well brother Herbert); the down-at-heel old Harrovian 
newspaper man Minty, who is looking for evidence of misdoings; and Krogh’s 
angry, villainous sidekick Fred Hall. Kate Ferrant, Anthony’s twin sister, is 
at the centre of the other circle, cerebral and (almost) unflinchingly modern; 
she is Krogh’s assistant and lover. Farrant owes his job to her and she 
maintains a protective, sexually ambiguous, relationship with him.

Greene uses Krogh’s headquarters to set the tone of the novel. The fictional 
building is drawn in careful counterpoint to Kreuger’s real granite and marble 
“Match Palace”, designed in the prevailing Scandinavian neo-classical style. It 
still stands.

In contrast Greene places his shy financier within a spectacular modern 
movement set piece, which is also immeasurably distant from Krogh’s shabby 
court of Englishmen, with their old school ties and family businesses, reduced 
to living in scruffy rented rooms, with dirty windows and drooping pot plants. 
Greene’s world of international finance, where Krogh’s stock offers a 10% 
return, is one of “glassy cleanliness, the latest fashionable sculpture … 
soundproof floors and Dictaphones and pewter ash-trays”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fgreeneland-sweden-when-graham-greene-let-himself-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440672479227%2F2931afcc-ea56-4c5c-ac64-7de8c5bea607-1265x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greeneland%20in%20Sweden%3A%20when%20Graham%20Greene%20let%20himself%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fgreeneland-sweden-when-graham-greene-let-himself-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greeneland%20in%20Sweden%3A%20when%20Graham%20Greene%20let%20himself%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fgreeneland-sweden-when-graham-greene-let-himself-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440672479227%2F2931afcc-ea56-4c5c-ac64-7de8c5bea607-1265x2040.jpeg>
In summer 1930, architects had flocked to Sweden to visit the Stockholm 
Exhibition. In an Architectural Review feature Sweden was praised for its 
willingness to veer away from crowd-pleasing Scandinavian classicism (by then 
derogatorily called “Swedish Grace”) in order to explore “the uncharted 
currents of the modernist maelstrom”. The same year also saw the opening of 
Stockholm’s spectacular Lumafabriken, an electric light bulb factory with a 
glass “lighthouse” tower, where the bulbs were tested. Sweden briefly found 
itself at the heart of functional modernism and it suited Greene’s purposes 
well.

Krogh’s HQ is a cube of glass and steel, the metal front steps leading up to 
automatic doors, and beyond these, into a translucently walled circular 
courtyard, where an abstract sculpted fountain is bathed by discreet lighting. 
Waiting for the lift one typically lightless afternoon, Krogh observes his 
employees, artificially lit, at work – the accountant hunched over his 
“machine”, the waitress drawing down the black leather blinds in the 
restaurant, a director standing on a chromium balcony. The lift, slow, silent 
and glazed like the rest of the building, travels up five floors and delivers 
Krogh to his private office, unheated, barely furnished and soundproof (Kreuger 
famously had a Silent Room in his Match Palace). There he works, in isolation, 
at a vast desk following the curve of the outside wall. Everything bears his 
monogram EK, the motif “designed by Sweden’s leading artist”.

England Made Me toys with oppositions between the popular (statues with 
identifiable features, the Tivoli amusement gardens, traditional-looking 
buildings) and the elite (statues with no discernible form, opera, modernist 
architecture). Krogh feels exposed in his ignorance of, and failure to 
appreciate, the new green stone fountain at the heart of his headquarters, 
suspecting he had “pandered to a fashion he did not understand”. He cannot 
judge whether it is good or bad, but would have preferred a nymph or goddess. 
Kate is his cicerone in matters of taste: this is perhaps their only real 
intimacy. Yet her brother has the confidence to offer Krogh advice on tailoring 
and ties, and is not afraid to express his dislike of the formless carving. 
Greene was well aware of current wider discussions around exactly who abstract 
art was aimed at and whether its exclusive nature was acceptable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fgreeneland-sweden-when-graham-greene-let-himself-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440672391751%2F4611a7bd-e5ca-418b-8630-4cb4f1dbd068-2060x1506.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greeneland%20in%20Sweden%3A%20when%20Graham%20Greene%20let%20himself%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fgreeneland-sweden-when-graham-greene-let-himself-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greeneland%20in%20Sweden%3A%20when%20Graham%20Greene%20let%20himself%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fgreeneland-sweden-when-graham-greene-let-himself-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440672391751%2F4611a7bd-e5ca-418b-8630-4cb4f1dbd068-2060x1506.jpeg>
 The Bata shoe factory in Zlin. Getty Images Photograph: Getty Images 
His fictional HQ borrows features from some of the most admired modern 
movement industrial buildings in Europe. In Zlín, Czechoslovakia,Tomáš Baťa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/jun/19/architecture>, the 
founder of a worldwide shoe-making empire, used the central lift as his office, 
while the curtain-walled Van Nelle food-processing factory in Rotterdam was 
perpetually lit by electricity – a beacon of modernity, reflected in the water 
below. By contrast, Krogh’s building, for all its transparency, houses a 
business trapped in the coils of a system its owner could no longer control.

After Farrant leaks sensitive financial information to Minty (whom he trusts 
because they went to the same school), he is taken on a one-way walk to the 
foggy lakeside by Krogh’s fixer, Hall. As Farrant prepares himself for death, 
he notes how “the perfect taste, the shrewd modernity of the great building 
touched his mood with malice”. Krogh’s headquarters, “a great liner built on 
credit”, is by then heading on to the rocks of fraud; there are no ambitions to 
right the wrongs of society, no national and few personal responsibilities.

In a letter to his wife and architectural partner Jane Drew, written in early 
1946, the leading modernist Edwin Maxwell Fry admitted that he was becoming 
increasingly persuaded by her view “that modern architecture has … taken too 
material and too mechanical a view of its powers of expression”. It seems that 
functionalism was also not entirely to Greene’s taste, although from the 1930s, 
including his editorship of the short-lived literary magazine Night and Day in 
1937, he found himself standing just outside the engine room of the modern 
movement in Britain.

Interviewing Greene for the Paris Review in the early 1950s, Simon Raven and 
Martin Shuttleworth told him thatEngland Made Me was their favourite of his 
novels. In reply, Greene admitted to having a “particularly soft spot” for it. 
“I was beginning to find my own world. InEngland Made Me I let myself go in it 
for the first time.”
 