
Dayle Clark, 19, was in a supported housing mother and baby unit and wanted 
her own place, but debts and rent arrears prevented her from moving on.

Referred by her key worker to The Money House 
<https://www.hyde-housing.co.uk/tenants/advice-and-support/money-and-debt-advice/the-money-house/>
, a financial capability training project in south-east London, she realised 
she was unnecessarily paying for a TV licence and learned about how to 
prioritise bills and create budgets.

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016: winners and runners-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-winners-and-runners-up>
Negative memories of school meant she was initially nervous, but she quickly 
realised the value of personal finance education: “I’m more confident dealing 
with debt and knowing my rights because the course taught me the ins and outs 
of the system.”

With her newfound money management skills, Clark soon moved into a new 
property and set up her housing benefit and council tax benefit payments 
herself; she is no longer in arrears.

Young people <https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople> leaving care or 
supported housing often slip into debt and face eviction. The Lottery-funded 
Money House is run by housing association The Hyde Group alongside the London 
borough of Greenwich, Greenwich Citizen’s Advice and debt advice charity 
Meridian Money Advice.

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016 Public Servant of the Year winner: Helen 
Backus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-public-servant-of-the-year-winner-helen-backus>
The project, which from December will be run by the youth financial education 
charityMyBnk <http://mybnk.org/>, offers a flexible programme of financial 
training to those at risk of eviction and homelessness.

Trainees aged 16-25 attend the free training – run out of a real flat in 
Greenwich, complete with second-hand furniture, real utilities and real bills – 
for a day or week, depending on their need; they do not stay overnight. 
Interactive money management sessions are delivered in an environment 
resembling a first home, not a classroom. Training includes budgeting, bills, 
choosing utility providers, dealing with doorstep lenders, benefits, 
responsible borrowing and tenancies.

Tom Gardiner, Hyde Plus special projects manager, explains how the scheme 
began in 2013: “We have a background in financial inclusion projects. Greenwich 
council was concerned about the difficulties that care leavers and young people 
leaving supported housing were getting into. There was a gap in support and 
information before they moved onto independent living.”

The project is integrated into the council’s system for care leavers and 
preventing youth homelessness; those leaving care and support must complete the 
course before being able to bid for social housing.

Almost 500 young adults who have recently moved into their own flat – or are 
about to – have finished the training. Research carried out ahead of setting up 
the project, showedaverage rent arrears among 16-25-year-old social housing 
tenants in Greenwich was £650 
<https://www.haikudeck.com/the-money-house-update-education-presentation-8ZfmwmVxWk#slide3>
, and that young people werefour times more likely to be evicted 
<https://www.hyde-housing.co.uk/news-events/news/work-money-and-benefits/money-house-leads-the-way-in-tackling-youth-homelessness/>
 from social housing than 45-55 year-olds. Meanwhile, 98% of the Money House’s 
340 ex-trainees surveyedfeel more financially confident after the course 
<https://www.hyde-housing.co.uk/news-events/news/hyde-in-the-community/hyde-plus-publishes-latest-impact-report/>
 andnobody who completed the five-day course has been evicted 
<https://www.hyde-housing.co.uk/news-events/news/work-money-and-benefits/money-house-leads-the-way-in-tackling-youth-homelessness/>
.

Gardiner hopes that greater awareness of The Money House’s style of engaging, 
pre-tenancy training will interest other districts at a time when financial 
resilience is more important than ever. He adds: “The extent of austerity is 
why financial capability training is really important now.”

All the winners and runners-up of this year’s awards are featured on Guardian 
Society Professionals <https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals>
 