
John Wilson realised his boyhood dream of joining the army when he enlisted in 
2008. But his military career tragically ended four years later when an 
improvised explosive device went off while he was on patrol in Helmand 
Province, Afghanistan. He lost both his legs, was medically discharged from the 
army in 2014 and then struggled to find another job. “I’d get to the interview 
stage but then because of my prosthetic legs, employers would see me as a 
medical problem and I’d not hear back from them again,” he recalls.

Two years on Wilson, 29, has forged a new career path working for Transport 
for London (TfL), having completed a work placement organised via its Smart 
Sourcing initiative and successfully applied for a permanent role. Wilson now 
works as a compliance officer monitoring CCTV footage and issuing penalty 
notices to drivers who abuse the yellow box markings or red lines on London 
roads. “I feel great. I get up and get here on time. I’ve got a can-do 
attitude,” he says. “I’m glad to have a job, job security and a new career.”

Wilson is one of 27 ex-military personnel who have joined TfL through Smart 
Sourcing – its recruitment programme set up to encourage what TfL identified as 
a potential untapped workforce. Charlotte Johns, TfL’s head of recruitment 
says: “The ex-military have the sort of skills we need for roles we struggle to 
fill – bomb disposal experts, for example, have the same skills set as as 
electrical engineers. They bring teamwork and leadership skills, resilience and 
the ability to work under pressure. This isn’t tokenism – we are hiring the 
right people for the right job.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety-professionals%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fguardian-public-service-awards-2016-transformation-winner-transport-for-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9fc0b8362f587aebc2c3d339a4d7c0131126dce%2F478_712_2888_4321%2F2888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20Public%20Service%20Awards%202016%20recruitment%20winner%3A%20Transport%20for%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety-professionals%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fguardian-public-service-awards-2016-transformation-winner-transport-for-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20Public%20Service%20Awards%202016%20recruitment%20winner%3A%20Transport%20for%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety-professionals%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fguardian-public-service-awards-2016-transformation-winner-transport-for-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9fc0b8362f587aebc2c3d339a4d7c0131126dce%2F478_712_2888_4321%2F2888.jpg>
 John Wilson: “I’m glad to have a job, job security and a new career”. 
The six-month placements give former service personnel invaluable experience 
if they have never set foot in a civilian workplace. They are encouraged to 
identify their transferrable skills under the programme and are also given 
support completing CVs and developing interview skills to help them feel 
confident enough to apply for permanent roles. The initiative also gives 
managers the chance to understand the specific issues somebody may have in 
Civvy Street. The scheme, designed to help individuals become work-ready, has 
been so successful that it is now being expanded to offer the same 
opportunities to ex-offenders.

Former army captain Alex Norman left the forces this summer after seven years 
in a variety of logistic roles because he no longer wanted to be posted abroad: 
“My next job could have taken me anywhere.” He is now on a TfL placement as an 
assistant project manager on large construction schemes. He lists attention to 
detail, exemplary time-management and people skills as the benefits he brings 
to the organisation: “I’ve an interview for a permanent role coming up, which 
shows that the scheme really works. If I get the job I’ll feel I have earned it 
on merit – but Smart Sourcing gave me the opportunity.”
 