
Since 2004, the Guardian has sought to showcase the best UK projects and 
initiatives in its annual Public Service Awards.

This year the Society Professionals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals> networks, which serve 
communities of dedicated staff working inhousing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network>, health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network>, social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network>, the voluntary sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network>, criminal justice and 
central and local government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network>, have set out once again 
to recognise and reward excellence across public services.

We are looking to showcase the most innovative approaches that have been 
developed across public services, and create a forum for sharing new ideas and 
best practice.

As they read your entry, the judges  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/may/18/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-meet-the-judges>
will be asking:

 * How effectively does the project or initiative meet the specific criteria 
of the category entered? 
 * Is there evidence of measurable, sustainable change as a result of the 
project? 
 * Does the project go above and beyond standard practice?

 * What were the challenges the project had to overcome? 
This year’s categories, each with their own specific criteria, are:

Care – sponsored by CGI <http://www.cgi-group.co.uk/>

We’re looking for the best initiatives that put care of patients, residents 
and clients front and centre and for the projects that highlight best practice 
in social work. Tell us:

 * how the project has had a positive, tangible impact on the quality of care 
or social work delivered by your organisation. 
Digital and technology – sponsored by Havas People 
<http://www.havaspeople.com/>

Showcase your digital project. Whether it’s frontline or back office, tell us 
about the technology that has:

 * improved your service, enabled better team working or delivered efficiency. 
Finance - sponsored by Finders International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/may/18/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-sponsors>

Finding savings and efficiencies in a time of austerity gets tougher every 
year. Tell us how your project has:

 * minimised costs, transformed processes or innovated in a sustainable way 
for the benefit of service users. 
Health and wellbeing – sponsored by Remploy <http://www.remploy.co.uk/>

We’re looking for projects that have prioritised improvement in the health and 
wellbeing of staff or service users, whether it’s a particular focus on 
disability or mental health, or a scheme that encourages healthier lifestyles. 
Tell us:

 * how your service has prioritises health and wellbeing, and the difference 
this has made. 
Housing - sponsored by Oyster Partnership <https://www.oysterpartnership.com/>

With the housing crisis really taking hold, we want to showcase the most 
innovative projects in the social and supported housing sectors. From 
well-designed estates to new ways to support residents with dementia, we want 
to hear from teams that are supporting tenants in new ways. Tell us:

 * how your housing project is different and how it supports residents 
Learning and development - sponsored by Skills for Care 
<http://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/Home.aspx>

With public service employees working harder than ever, how do you ensure your 
staff have time and access to training and career development opportunities? 
Let us know about:

 * a new partnership, collaborative working or a mentoring scheme, and explain 
how your team ensures staff are always learning new skills.

Recruitment -  <http://www.veredus.co.uk/>sponsored by Quadrant Resourcing 
<http://www.quadrantresourcing.com/>

After years of pay restraint and public service cuts, finding and retaining 
talent isn’t easy. Tell us how your team seeks out, motivates and promotes your 
star performers, at all levels across your organisation. Explain how your 
project:

 * has made a real and sustainable impact on recruitment. 
Sustainability – sponsored by Repic <http://www.repic.co.uk/>

We want to hear about projects that are shoring up public services for the 
longer term: those that have demonstrably proved to be energy-efficient, 
environmentally friendly or carbon neutral. Tell us about the most sustainable 
initiatives in UK public services, that are:

 * innovative, cost-effective and have the potential to be developed and 
replicated across public services. 
Transformation – sponsored by Ameo <http://www.ameogroup.com/>

With the public and voluntary sectors going through an immense amount of 
change, we are looking for the most inspirational teams and leaders involved in 
change management. Tell us:

 * who, at any level of your organisation, has demonstrated vision and 
innovation and kept staff motivated in the face of change. Tell us what 
challenges the team or individual has overcome. 
Public Servant of the Year - sponsored by EY <http://www.ey.com/uk/en/home>

Do you know anyone who embodies the very spirit and ethos of public service? 
Someone who has gone the extra mile for service users and made a real 
difference to outcomes? We’re looking for the very best from across public 
services and the voluntary sector. Tell us:

 * how this public servant has made a real difference and why they should 
receive an award for outstanding work in public service.

Overall Winner

This category celebrates the best of the individual category winners deemed by 
the judges to be the strongest of this year’s entries. This team will have 
demonstrated an exceptional level of application, innovation and achievement, 
and will have delivered substantial improvement in a public service that has 
made a real difference to people’s lives.
 