
It is an astonishing story of passion, innovation and community cohesion in 
one of London’s poorest districts. Two years ago, a small team was given the 
Herculean task of leading the cultural, social and economic transformation of a 
corner of London at a time of enormous physical change.

Today, millions of pounds of capital and social investment have poured into 
the borough from innovative thinking and doing. From community choirs to green 
energy schemes, from bike clubs to an annual swing dance festival and an 
exciting new partnership with the London College of Fashion, University of the 
Arts London, Poplar has now become a byword for an inclusive neighbourhood with 
lots to look forward to. Indeed, the population is set to double over the next 
10 years, as new homes are built as part of a major regeneration programme.

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016 Public Servant of the Year winner: Helen 
Backus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-public-servant-of-the-year-winner-helen-backus>
The transformation has been led by a taskforce from Poplar’s Housing and 
Regeneration Community Association <http://www.poplarharca.co.uk/> (Harca), 
which owns and manages 9,000 homes in east London. The six-person Arts, 
Culture, Community, Enterprise and Sustainability (Accents) team is 
self-funding and has worked with organisations within and beyond Poplar to 
deliver the extraordinary achievements.

Blossom Young, project manager, paid tribute to all the people involved in 
Accents – and claimed half of Poplar Harca’s 300 staff had been part of “the 
evolution from service provider to catalyst for change.” The residents are now 
running projects including 50-year-old caretaker Nelson Piperides, whose love 
of swing has led to the setting up of theSwing East music festival 
<http://www.swingeast.co.uk/>, which has attracted more than 2,500 people. 
There is also a monthly film group, thePoplar Peddlers cycle group 
<http://www.poplarpeddlers.club/>, an environmental network, a music collective 
and some community gardens. Altogether, 36 community groups have been supported 
and 32 jobs have been created for local people.

In the past year, with pressure growing on affordable space, attention has 
focused on looking at how “dead spaces”, seen as liabilities, can be used 
differently. As part ofOpen Poplar <http://openpoplar.com/>, the Accents team 
identified more than 50 unused and underused local spaces, from spare desks in 
offices to large underground garages, community gardens and a quirky boiler 
house. Many were maintenance liabilities. Invites for pitches attracted 21,485 
square feet of business proposals from galleries to factories and community 
centres to shops.

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016 overall winner: Sevenoaks district council
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-overall-winner-sevenoaks-district-council>
One project – also achieved through a partnership with the fashion college – 
is transforming 81 mostly disused garages intoFashionHub 
<http://www.poplarharca.co.uk/sites/default/files/files/Fashioning%20Poplar%20Supporting%20document%20FINAL.pdf>
 (pdf), a £3.9m manufacturing and training space incorporating a “makery” for 
local artisan-style businesses.

Elsewhere, a once-rat-infested basement underneath a residential block will 
shortly become a workspace for more than 20 artists. And there has been support 
for market traders in Chrisp Street bringing a new cafe and space for fitness, 
yoga and performance where a shop used to be.

Bree Sims, Accents communications manager, says: “Increasingly, residents are 
running Accents projects. This builds innovative thinking in the community, 
seeding greater value, skills and ownership.”



 