
Nearly two weeks after House Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> staged a historic sit-in to 
demand action on gun control legislation, the Republican speaker of the House 
has agreed to hold a vote on a single gun-related bill: a measure to allow the 
attorney general to delay the sale of a gun to a suspected terrorist for three 
days, similar to a Senate measure backed by the National Rifle Association.

Gays Against Guns group brings gun control fight to main street America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/04/gays-against-guns-stricter-gun-control-congress-bill-new-york>
The House Democratic leader, Nancy Pelosi, slammed the legislation on Friday 
as “a toothless NRA bill that will do nothing to keep our communities safe”, 
and promised that Democrats would continue to fight for tougher gun control 
laws, including expanded background checks on gun sales.

“Americans are fed up with Republicans’ dangerous obstruction of bipartisan, 
commonsense gun violence legislation,” Pelosi said in a statement.

It is not clear what tactics House Democrats may use this week to push for 
votes on gun legislation. The 26-hour sit-in on the floor of theHouse of 
Representatives <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/house-of-representatives>, 
livestreamed via politicians’ own smartphones, sparked a passionate public 
response, with crowds gathering outside the Capitol and news outlets covering 
the protest until the early hours of the morning.


Congress has not passed any major gun control legislation in more than 20 
years. In the wake of the deadliest mass shooting in recent American history, 
at the Pulse LGBT nightclub in Orlando in June, Democrats argued that the 
nation needed to take action on both terrorism and stricter federal gun laws to 
keep guns out of the hands of dangerous people.Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> countered that the problem 
the country needs to address was “radical Islamic terrorism”, not gun control.

The speaker of the House, Paul Ryan, called the Democratic sit-in a “publicity 
stunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jun/22/us-election-2016-live-updates-donald-trump-speech-clinton-email-ethics>
” and a “low moment <http://www.wispolitics.com/index.iml?Article=373384>”, and 
told a Wisconsin news outlet 
<http://www.wispolitics.com/index.iml?Article=373384> last week that any future 
protests from House Democrats would not be handled “in the same way”.

“We will not tolerate this,” he said. 

Ryan has agreed to meet on Tuesday with the Connecticut representative John 
Larson and Georgia’s John Lewis, two of the organizers of the sit-in. A 
Republican congressional staffer said Lewis and Larson had asked Ryan to meet 
the full Democratic caucus, but that Ryan agreed to meet only the two of them.

Ryan “looks forward to meeting with Congressmen Lewis and Larson to discuss 
the important action the House will take to prevent terrorist attacks”, the 
speaker’s spokeswoman, AshLee Strong, said in a statement.

The public sentiment is for sensible gun reform. All we need is for speaker 
Ryan to have some kind of courage
Arizona representative Ruben Gallego 
During the sit-in, Democratic legislators shouted Ryan down with chants and 
called out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/22/house-democrats-stage-sit-vote-gun-control>
 “Shame! Shame!” During a Democratic day of protests over gun violence last 
Wednesday, some legislators continued to focus their criticism on Ryan.

“The public sentiment is for sensible gun reform,” Arizona representative 
Ruben Gallego saidin a press call on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/29/gun-control-day-protest-action-congress-legislatio>
. “All we need is for speaker Ryan to have some kind of courage.”

A memo from the Congressional Black Caucus encouraged Democratic legislators 
“to be as disruptive to Speaker Ryan as possible next week” and to bring images 
of constituents killed with firearms to the House floor, theWashington Examiner 
reported 
<http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/congressional-black-caucus-plans-to-disrupt-house-tuesday/article/2595523>
 on Saturday. A spokeswoman for GK Butterfield, chair of the Congressional 
Black Caucus, did not respond to requests for comment.

Gun control advocates said they hoped the sit-in marked a turning point for 
Congress, which has repeatedly rejected new gun control legislation. An attempt 
to renew a federal ban on military-style “assault weapons” and expand 
background checks failed in the Senate in 2013, months after a disturbed young 
man in Connecticut murdered 20 young children and six adults with a military 
style rifle.

After a nearly 15-hour-filibuster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/16/enough-senate-filibuster-ends-as-democrat-claims-gun-control-victory>
 by Democratic senator Chris Murphy last month, the Senate voted on four 
gun-related bills, two proposed by Democrats and two by Republicans. All four 
votes failed.

On Friday, House majority leader Kevin McCarthy introduced legislation to 
combat terrorism, including a measure that would give the attorney general 
three days to delay a gun sale to a suspected terrorist while convincing a 
judge to block the sale given probable cause that the purchaser “will commit an 
act of terrorism”.

The suspected buyer would have an opportunity to participate in the hearing 
with legal counsel, and the government would be responsible for paying the 
buyer’s attorneys’ fees if its petition were denied.

In a statement, McCarthy called the legislation “a responsible measure that 
confronts this threat while protecting the rights of law-abiding citizens”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fgun-control-congress-paul-ryan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e5d1fb5e0b5f4d1ee0967ddf5f4ec410fdffa3a%2F0_605_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gun%20control%20fight%20returns%20to%20Congress%20as%20Speaker%20Ryan%20allows%20vote%20on%20one%20bill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fgun-control-congress-paul-ryan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gun%20control%20fight%20returns%20to%20Congress%20as%20Speaker%20Ryan%20allows%20vote%20on%20one%20bill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fgun-control-congress-paul-ryan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e5d1fb5e0b5f4d1ee0967ddf5f4ec410fdffa3a%2F0_605_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Democratic members of Congress participate in their sit-in protest on the 
floor of the House. Photograph: Representative John Yarmuth/AP 
House Democrats are pushing for a vote on HR 1076, a more expansive measure 
that would simply allow the attorney general to bar any “known or suspected 
dangerous terrorist” from buying guns. The legislation would give Americans 
denied the right to buy a gun a much more uphill legal battle to challenge the 
denial after the fact.

Both liberals and conservatives have opposed the Democrats’ approach, arguing 
that it is dangerous to use opaque and much-criticized government terror watch 
lists as a standard to deny Americans a constitutional right.

Some advocates have called this approach a threat to civil rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/22/gun-control-terror-watchlists-muslims-discrimination>
 that woulddisproportionately affect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/22/gun-control-terror-watchlists-muslims-discrimination>
 Muslims.

House Democrats are also pushing for a vote on HR 1217, a bipartisan bill that 
would expand requirements for conducting background checks on firearms sales at 
gun shows and over the internet. This compromise measure, similar to the one 
debated after the 2012 Sandy Hook shooting, does nothing to change regulations 
on other private gun sales between citizens, which currently require no 
background check.

The defeated Senate measure to expand background checks went further, and 
required background checks on gun transfers and sales with only a handful of 
exceptions, including gifts to immediate family members and temporary transfers 
during sporting events.

What could actually work to fix gun violence in America – and what doesn't
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/23/gun-control-violence-what-works-what-doesnt>
Although many Democrats have endorsed a ban on military-style assault weapons, 
as has Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, 
legislation to renew the federal assault weapon ban is not part of the current 
fight in the House.


A staffer for Larson said that while he personally supported an assault weapon 
ban, the House Democrats’ focus has been on other bills that “rose to the 
surface” during the sit-in protests. The staffer called the gun control fight 
“a member-driven, organic movement”.

The new Democratic focus on gun control law comes after more than a decade of 
dodging the gun debate as an issue that could only hurt the party’s electoral 
chances. Now, Clinton has made gun control – and fierce attacks on both the 
National Rifle Association and America’s firearms industry – a central part of 
her presidential campaign.

Gun control may also be a key issue in competitive Senate races this year, as 
Democrats push to recapture control from Republicans. Over the last week, 
advocates from Everytown for Gun Safety, a leading gun control group, have
staged protests 
<http://everytown.org/press/post-guns-sit-in-everytown-moms-survivors-continue-to-hold-washington-politicians-accountable-ask-them-to-buck-the-nra/>
 against vulnerable Republican senators who have opposed gun control.

The group has also run newspaper ads 
<http://everytown.org/press/everytown-wisconsin-moms-to-run-full-page-ad-in-wisconsin-state-journal-blasting-senator-johnsons-dangerous-votes-against-expanding-background-checks/>
 targeting Republican senators Ron Johnson and Kelly Ayotte, both of whom are 
facing tough re-election fights this fall.
 