
In 1980, the Korean army massacred left-leaning students and civilians in the 
northern city of Gwangju. Around 600 people died in the pro-democracy 
demonstrations, and it is in their memory that theGwangju Biennale 
<http://www.gwangjubiennale.org/www/vieweng/> was founded. It’s Asia’s 
pre-eminent biennale, and its political roots throw a distinctive cast on the 
curation.

With more than 250 artworks by 120 artists and teams from 37 countries, the 
work this year is cerebral and thought-provoking, liable to send one down a 
rabbit hole of intellectual associations and illusions, ideas and politics. The 
biennale’s theme – the Eighth Climate: What DoesArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Do? – derives from a theory of 
12th-century Persian mystic and philosopher Sohrevardi that beyond the physical 
realm lies an “eighth climate” that one can reach through the power of 
imagination.

The centrepiece – the Nokdu Bookstore for the Living and the Dead – is a 
recreation of the local bookstore where activists and intellectuals used to 
meet, and which was a gathering place during the Gwangju uprising of 1980. 
Created by artist Dora Garcia in collaboration with The Book Society, there are 
lectures, workshops and lectures held there in the opening week, and you can 
even buy real books there, which have – naturally – a political or 
philosophical bent.

South Korea's breathtaking deep sea diver women – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/apr/08/south-koreas-breathtaking-deep-sea-diver-women-in-pictures>
Eyal Weizman’s Roundabout Revolution is another inherently political use of 
space. The offsite work, which was installed in 2013, is a series of concentric 
black circles painted around one of Gwangju’s roundabouts, marking the exact 
dimensions of roundabouts around the world where other revolutions have taken 
place: Ramallah, Cairo, Damascus, Tehran.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgwangju-biennale-206-south-korea-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cd5a164d6e7b992e043072a017edee96dac86a7%2F0_1277_7410_4898%2F7410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gwangju%20Biennale%3A%20personal%20and%20political%20mingle%20among%20the%20living%20and%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgwangju-biennale-206-south-korea-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gwangju%20Biennale%3A%20personal%20and%20political%20mingle%20among%20the%20living%20and%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgwangju-biennale-206-south-korea-art-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cd5a164d6e7b992e043072a017edee96dac86a7%2F0_1277_7410_4898%2F7410.jpg>
 Eyal Weizman’s Roundabout Revolution (2013). Photograph: Kyungsub Shin 
At a press conference for the biennale when a journalist asks why there aren’t 
more “spectacular” works on display, artistic director Maria Lind answers: “I 
am not particularly interested in spectacle for the sake of spectacle. If I 
engage with it, it has to be smarter than normal spectacle.”

Instead she says they want to show the “quiet contemplation” of the city. 
“Visitors will enjoy a meditative experience,” she says. “It’s not about what 
art is, but about what art does. It creates rings on the water … All the 
artists have something to say about the future.”

Arriving the day before the official opening, I wander into a lower level of 
the Gwangju exhibition hall, the main site of the biennale. There are beanbags 
scattered around screens, an empty stage and a video of a woman listing all the 
drugs she has ingested (caffeine, cocaine, Wellbutrin). Around me people in 
face masks move in what seems to be a formation, mopping the floor. The 
question is on my lips but I don’t ask it: is this art, or is this just someone 
cleaning the floor?

There is no explanatory wall text in any of the exhibition spaces, making 
information about the art tricky to access. I am left to eavesdropping, picking 
the brains of the other critics, or just going with my gut: do I like this 
work? Does it speak to me?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgwangju-biennale-206-south-korea-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd72a8c89548f266145f392252c569cccd26fcb4%2F0_0_2339_3508%2F2339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gwangju%20Biennale%3A%20personal%20and%20political%20mingle%20among%20the%20living%20and%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgwangju-biennale-206-south-korea-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gwangju%20Biennale%3A%20personal%20and%20political%20mingle%20among%20the%20living%20and%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgwangju-biennale-206-south-korea-art-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd72a8c89548f266145f392252c569cccd26fcb4%2F0_0_2339_3508%2F2339.jpg>
 Lawrence Abu Hamdan’s video and still photo work Earshot (2016). Photograph: 
Gwangju Biennale 
Approaching the work purely subjectively, the exhibition is enhanced by 
multiple viewings – I keep going back to look at my favourite works, seeing if 
I can find something else in there that I may have missed the first or second 
time. And so with each visit, the number of works I return to decreases until 
it is only a few I keep looking at – as if, if I stare hard enough and think 
long enough, I can give them my own peculiar context and pin them, 
butterfly-like, into place with a meaning.

I am drawn, in particular, to Lawrence Abu Hamdan’s video and still photo work 
Earshot (2016). Running along the bottom of the screen is an audio transcript 
of a murder trial in Israel over a visualisation of the audio-ballistic 
analysis of the gunfire used in the killings in the occupied West Bank.

 Hamdan is a forensic audio analyst as well as an artist, and his analysis of 
this gunfire was eventually used in a trial that found Israeli soldiers had 
used live ammunition – not rubber bullets as they had claimed – to shoot and 
kill two unarmed teenagers in 2014. In the catalogue, his work is described as 
an “attempt to measure the contemporary relationship between listening and 
politics, borders, human rights, testimony and truth”.

There is also art that informs the viewer about social history. Walid Raad’s 
collaboration with Suha Traboulsi features a row of wooden packing crates with 
paintings on the side.

The paintings are reproductions of works by Arab artists, which were acquired 
by the Lebanese government for a planned museum of modern art. The museum never 
opened, and the work – held in storage – was “borrowed” and given away by a 
succession of government officials.

Traboulsi was the chief registrar of public collections at the ministry of 
culture for three decades, and he painted a replica of each stolen painting on 
the wooden crates: an important record of the missing art.

On the same floor is Agnieszka Polska’s The Glass of Petrol, a digital print 
on a banner that has all the gloss of an advertisement. The image is beautiful: 
the perfect and clean shape of the champagne flute; the gorgeous colours, like 
a rainbow, in the glass. Yet this is petrol, “the dark fuel to which humanity 
is addicted”. It fits well with Lind’s loose theme: meditative work that on 
first glimpse seems beautiful, but is actually made of darker stuff.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgwangju-biennale-206-south-korea-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F420341cb87af1410a96044ea507a4419ac8ee7a4%2F0_0_5137_6724%2F5137.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gwangju%20Biennale%3A%20personal%20and%20political%20mingle%20among%20the%20living%20and%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgwangju-biennale-206-south-korea-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gwangju%20Biennale%3A%20personal%20and%20political%20mingle%20among%20the%20living%20and%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgwangju-biennale-206-south-korea-art-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F420341cb87af1410a96044ea507a4419ac8ee7a4%2F0_0_5137_6724%2F5137.jpg>
 Glass of Petrol, 2015, by Agnieszka Polska. Photograph: Gwangju Biennale 
On my final visit to the biennale, it’s twilight and hot. There is a reception 
happening upstairs on a terrace, and someone comes around with a flyer for the 
bars where there will be afterparties. The critics feel the thickness of the 
paper between their thumb and forefingers and talk admiringly of the paper 
stock.

The door of the gallery is ajar. I go back in and stand apart from some 
workmen who have a bottle of opened champagne at their feet – are they artists? 
Is this part of the show? I get to do that thing that usually only happens in 
dreams or movies: I walk around the gallery by myself.

I linger in the Nokdu Bookstore for the Living and the Dead and flick through 
the books and read the posters until security come and kick me out. Maybe this 
is what Lind means by meditative art.

• The 11th Gwangju Biennale, The Eighth Climate (What Does Art Do?) is on at 
the Gwangju Biennale Exhibition Hall and various sites throughout the city 
until 6 November

• Guardian Australia travelled to South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> courtesy of the Gwangju Biennale
 