
It’s an old cliché of security researchers: fingerprints might appear more 
secure than passwords. But if your password gets stolen, you can change it to a 
new one; what happens when your fingerprint gets copied?

That’s no longer an abstract fear: a speaker at the Chaos Communication 
Congress, an annual meeting of hackers inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, demonstrated his method for faking 
fingerprints using only a few high-definition photographs of his target, German 
defence minister Ursula von der Leyen.
 German Defence Minister Ursula von der Leyen Photograph: Hannibal 
Hanschke/Reuters 
Jan Krissler, known in hacker circles as Starbug, used commercial software 
calledVeriFinger <http://www.neurotechnology.com/verifinger.html> and several 
close-range photos of von der Leyen, including one gleaned from a press release 
issued by her own office and another he took himself from three meters away, to 
reverse-engineer the fingerprint.

“After this talk, politicians will presumably wear gloves when talking in 
public,” he joked.

Also reported at the conference was another security hole seemingly straight 
out of science-fiction: a so-called “corneal keylogger”. The idea behind the 
attack is simple. A hacker may have access to a user’s phone camera, but not 
anything else. How to go from there to stealing all their passwords?

One way, demonstrated on stage, is to read what they’re typing by analysing 
photographs of the reflections in their eyes. Smartphone cameras, even 
front-facing ones, are now high-resolution enough that such an attack is 
possible.

Starbug is no stranger to taking on biometric security. In a high profile 
stunt in 2013,he spoofed Apple’s TouchID sensors <http://vimeo.com/75324765> 
within 24 hours of the release of the iPhone 5S. Using a smudge on the screen 
of an iPhone, he printed a dummy finger using wood glue and sprayable graphene, 
which successfully unlocked a phone registered to someone else’s thumb.

For that hack, he had to have physical access to the phone he stole the 
fingerprint from, in order to get a high resolution scan of the print. His 
latest demonstration suggests that it may be possible to unlock a phone using a 
fingerprint stolen without ever touching a person or their property – although 
actually getting hold of the phone is still needed for the last stage, of 
actually unlocking it.

The increasing number of successful attacks against biometric identification 
has led to some security researchers advising that people change the way they 
think about security measures such as fingerprints and photo ID. Rather than 
treating them as a replacement for passwords, they should instead be used as a 
second factor of authentication, or even as something similar to a username: a 
publicly known piece of information which must be linked to a password before a 
user can log in.

As the ACLU’s Jay Stanley told the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-switch/wp/2014/10/17/the-biometrics-revolution-is-already-here-and-you-may-not-be-ready-for-it/>
, “Biometrics are not secrets… Ideally, they’re unique to each individual, but 
that’s not the same thing as being a secret.”

And Starbug agrees, telling Zeit in 2013 that 
<http://www.zeit.de/digital/datenschutz/2013-09/iphone-fingerabdruck-hack-starbug>
 “I consider my password safer than my fingerprint… My password is in my head, 
and if I’m careful when typing, I remain the only one who knows it.”

 * iPhone 5S fingerprint sensor hacked by Germany’s Chaos Computer Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/22/apple-iphone-fingerprint-scanner-hacked>
 