
It’s been eight years since the US elected its first black president. In that 
time, Barack Obama has beenapplauded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/02/barack-obama-is-the-first-climate-president>
 andcriticized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/30/us-fossil-fuel-investment-obama-climate-change-legacy>
 for his administration’s work,welcomed one dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2009/apr/14/barack-obama-usa-dog-bo> 
– andthen another 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/aug/20/barack-obama-family-dog-sunny-video>
 – to the first family, and even began toenjoy a bit of senioritis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2016/oct/25/barack-obama-year-of-dgaf-best-moments-final-months-office>
 before beingpulled abruptly back to earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/barack-obama-donald-trump-phonecalls-transition>
.

However you feel about the outgoing 44th president of the United States, it’s 
been eight years of change, to be sure. As his time in office draws to a close, 
we want to hear from those of you who have met the president or his family.

Did Obama greet you at a campaign stop? Reply to a letter you wrote? Were you 
lucky enough to visit the White House and run into Sunny or Bo? Tell us what 
the moment was like, either using the form below or via GuardianWitness. A 
selection of your responses will be included in upcoming coverage around the 
end of Obama’s presidency.

You can upload your images through GuardianWitness by clicking the “Contribute 
with GuardianWitness” button above. You can also use theGuardianWitness 
smartphone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps> or the Guardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 and search for “GuardianWitness assignments”.


GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed 
prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on 
the Guardian site.


Thank you for your submissions! The form is now closed, but you can see some 
readers’ responses, here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/meeting-obamas-barack-michelle-guardian-readers-stories>
 