
“Exhausted all the time, irritable, snappy”: that was the impact of work 
stress on the life of one local government social worker.

It is not an uncommon tale. A Guardian survey of 3,700 people 
<http://gu.com/p/49tty/stw> in public services and the voluntary sector has 
found that stress levels are high, with 93% experiencing some level of stress.

In local government, 999 people took the survey, including many social workers 
and other social care professionals. It is their comments that tell the story 
of increasing stress due to fewer resources, increased workloads and reduced 
staff. One social worker said that “the pressures we are facing at the moment” 
meant stress was “inevitable”.

Stress in public services: how do you unwind? Share your photos and stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2015/jun/09/stress-in-public-services-how-do-you-unwind-share-your-photos-and-stories>
People reported various negative effects of feeling stressed, such as loss of 
sleep, depression, anxiety and an impact on their relationship with their 
partner or family. One assistant team manager in a social work team said that 
in addition to having two periods off work with stress, they rarely were able 
to eat at work and had “little time or energy for personal interests or regular 
exercise”. Another local government social worker said they were “just 
exhausted all of the time, irritable, snappy”.


Many of those who responded acknowledged that their jobs were inherently 
stressful due to the nature of supporting people in difficult circumstances. 
But they reported that heavy workloads were exacerbating this. A local 
government social worker argued that “there are not enough workers to be able 
to help and support the service users that need it; we are often now dealing 
with crisis situations only in very stressful circumstances.” One person 
working in community outreach said: “Supervision, when offered and used to its 
best purposes, is effective in resolving some, if not all of this stress. It 
rarely is offered or presented to workers in this way.”

Harold Bodmer, vice president of the Association of Directors of Adult Social 
Services <http://www.adass.org.uk/home/>, said: “Social work can, at times, be
severely stressful, as individual workers engage with some of the most
vulnerable people in our society at some of the most raw and sensitive
moments in their lives. Stress will never be entirely eradicated from such a
high profile, demanding task. But it can be ameliorated and assuaged by
thoughtful management, sensitive oversight of cases and a sensitive
understanding of the pressures colleagues sometimes work under.”

And 95% of the local government workers surveyed work beyond their contracted 
hours, putting in an average of seven hours of unpaid overtime each week. Those 
working in local government were most likely to have spoken to a manager about 
stress, compared with people in central government, theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and charities. However, for nearly a 
third (31%), nothing was done to address this.

Social care <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> professionals 
from other sectors, such as the NHS and charities, also reported high levels of 
stress. In a representative comment, a safeguarding children practitioner 
working in an NHS trust said they felt “constant stress from heavy workload. 
Pressure from managers and clients to cut costs and provide the best service.” 
And one social worker employed by a quango said they had experienced insomnia, 
anxiety and depression as a result of work stress: “The phrase ‘doing more with 
less resources’ is not only an offence against physics, it is the frontline 
workers who bear this ever-increasing load.”

Increased pressure was not just experienced by social workers: one local 
government occupational therapist said that “there is less money … and yet we 
are supposed to be assessing and providing a service to an increasing number of 
people”. And a social care manager said their job was insecure, which was 
stressful in itself: “Workloads are way too high to be manageable. Add to that 
perpetual fear of job loss and you have a recipe for stress, depression and 
anxiety.”

Maris Stratulis, England manager at the British Association of Social Workers 
<https://www.basw.co.uk/>, said: “We do have reports from members about high 
stress levels in the workplace, and regardless of the national narrative we are 
still hearing about high caseloads, the challenges of hot desking, the 
challenges of court timescales and procedures, covering for colleagues who are 
sick or absent. And the other thing we are hearing is that first line managers 
are feeling squeezed from pressures from their own managers as well as from 
trying to support the staff they manage.

“We also need to acknowledge that social workers have demands outside of work, 
including childcare, adult caring responsibilities, and that can also take its 
toll when they have busy work/life demands.”

Government staff suffer longer hours, fewer breaks and increased stress
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2015/jun/10/public-services-longer-hours-breaks-stress>
Julia Skelton, director of professional operations at the British Association 
and College of Occupational Therapists <https://www.cot.co.uk/>, said: 
“Work-related stress has a profound impact on our members’ health and 
wellbeing. Occupational therapists deal with 40% of referrals in social care, 
and the impact of sourcing equipment from a small budget and finding additional 
monies to support disabled facilities grant progressing can be demoralising.


“Equipment and changes to a person’s environment can make such a difference to 
people’s lives when provided. In addition, occupational therapists are being 
expected to cope with increasing workloads, whilst at the same time having 
their pay frozen and pension benefits reduced. It is no surprise that high 
levels of stress are being reported. Stress is a silent timebomb that the 
government and employers cannot afford to ignore.”

Society Professionals also want to hear from you. Tell us how you manage your 
work-life balance on social media with the hashtag #ClockOff and share your 
stories and photos viaGuardian Witness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55758699e4b019d982cba85e>.
 