
Route information

Length 24 miles (Winchester–Butser Hill), 100 miles full South Downs Way

Duration 6 hours; South Downs Way 2-5 days

 Start Winchester

Finish Eastbourne

Classification Moderate-to-difficult

Terrain Offroad, hilly

Who's it good for? If you're after a challenge

 Map OS Explorer 132 
<http://https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/shop/explorer-map-winchester.html> 
(Winchester, New Alresford & East Meon); South Downs Way (Harvey Maps) – 
waterproof map covering the entire trail

The South Downs Way (Winchester to Butsfield Hill)

As I puffed my way around Old Winchester Hill, I startled a brown hare. Or, 
rather, I was the startled one; the slender-eared creature barely raised an 
eyebrow. It merely gave what looked suspiciously like a smirk, and loped off 
across the wrinkles of a ploughed field.

I turned to follow its gaze, and my own grin faded. The finger of the South 
Downs Way sign pointed sternly up a chalky track etched into the slope at an 
angle so acute as to give a geometry teacher palpitations. With a sigh, I 
climbed off my bike and started pushing.

I should have anticipated the hills. To paraphrase, he who goes Downs must go 
up. That's the joy for mountain-bikers on the South Downs Way, the national 
trail that banks, dips and snakes 100 miles between Winchester and Eastbourne. 
Unlike other hiker-centric long-distance paths it was devised with cyclists in 
mind, and is largely accessible to all comers. At least, those with the low 
gears and high energy for uphill slogs.

Such efforts are richly rewarded: in this case, with a fine iron-age hill fort 
and vistas across dazzling rapeseed slopes. The gothic font on OS maps often 
yields disappointment – barely visible tumuli or long-overgrown medieval 
fields. But the relics of the settlement that topped Old Winchester Hill 2,500 
years ago are still manifest; it doesn't take much imagination to picture smoke 
rising from thatched roundhouses within the bank and ditch enclosure.

But back to the bike. The South Downs National Park Authority 
<http://www.southdowns.gov.uk/> has a fine track record in, well, tracks – a 
hatful of cycling trails weave through the park. I'd chosen to tackle the 
westernmost 24 miles of the Way, detouring briefly to ogle Winchester's squat, 
bulging cathedral en route to the start at the city's statue of King Alfred.

A quick scoot through suburbs and over the M3 brought us to the South Downs 
proper and Chilcomb, a hamlet without pub or shop – but with a Norman church, 
manor and thatched cottage bearing the inspired name … Thatched Cottage.

With countryside came hills. The climb out of Chilcomb was mercifully gentle, 
leaving me with puff enough to admire the sweeping view across the natural 
amphitheatre of Cheesefoot Head. A series of undulating lanes and increasingly 
muddy tracks followed, between neat farmyards and bluebell-blanketed woods that 
provide ample excuse to hop off for a photo call. The 17th-century inn,The 
Milbury's <http://themilburyspub.synthasite.com/>, proved a welcome stop, its 
skittle alley and ancient well less of a draw than its shaded garden tables and 
cold shandy.

Across the babbling river Meon I rode, to a mud-clagged track up Old 
Winchester Hill and my encounter with that smug hare. A quartet of ramblers, 
noting my weary expression, lied cheerily: "You're nearly there" (I wasn't); 
and "You'll see the Isle of Wight around the corner" (I didn't, really, just a 
hazy shadow on the horizon).

The day continued in similar vein – low-gear uphill, freewheel down, traverse 
hamlet, drink in view – till Butser Hill loomed. At 271 metres, it's the 
highest point on the trail, but unless you have a burning fascination with 
radio masts, reaching the top isn't a must. The descent is, however. I whooped 
for the whole, epic, three-minute hayride. After the mud, the burning thighs 
and saddle-soreness, I had discovered the upsides to the Downs.

For more information, go to southdowns.gov.uk 
<http://www.southdowns.gov.uk/enjoying/south-downs-way>

Useful information

How to get there
Winchester station is less than a mile from the start of the trail. Buses 37, 
737 and 747 serve Buriton from Petersfield station.

Where to eat/drink
The Five Bells <http://www.fivebells-buriton.co.uk/> is a lovely local in 
Buriton, just off the South Downs Way near Butser Hill.

Where to stay
Wykeham Arms <http://www.wykehamarmswinchester.co.uk/> (doubles from £149), an 
18th-century coaching inn in central Winchester, with stylish rooms and quality 
gastropub grub.Meon Springs <http://www.meonsprings.com/> from £50 a night), 
fly fishery east of Old Winchester Hill, with yurts and huts, a snack cabin and 
bike hire. TheSustainability Centre <http://www.sustainability-centre.org/> (
01730 823549, camping £11pppn, twins/triple rooms £25pppn) offers camping in 
tipis, yurts and simple rooms. There is secure bike storage.

Places of interest
Steam trains run from New Alresford to Alton along the Watercress Line 
<http://www.watercressline.co.uk/>. Jane Austen's last home is in Chawton, two 
miles south of Alton.

Bike hire
Walk & Cycle <http://www.walkandcycle.co.uk/> offers bike hire and transport 
packages along the South Downs Way. Meon Springs provides mountain bikes plus 
tag-alongs and child seats.

For more options along the Way see southdownscycling.com/bikeservices 
<http://www.southdownscycling.com/bikeservices.html>

For more information on holidays in England, go to VisitEngland.com 
<http://www.visitengland.com/>
 