
Helen Marten wins Hepworth prize for sculpture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/17/helen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture>
Helen Marten is having quite a year and, indeed, quite a career. Her first 
solo show in Britain was in 2012,at the Chisenhale 
<http://www.chisenhale.org.uk/archive/exhibitions/index.php?id=124> in London, 
the seeding ground of bright young artists. Her work has twice been shown at the
Venice Biennale <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/venice-biennale>, an 
exhibition of hers has just closed at the Serpentine in London, and last week
she won the inaugural Hepworth prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/18/hepworth-sculpture-prize-winner-helen-marten-share-30000-award>
 for sculpture. She is in the running forthe Turner prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/02/turner-prize-2016-tate-review-helen-marten-camille-chaimowicz-serpentine>
, too – all at the age of 31.

We meet just before the prize ceremony at the Hepworth Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hepworth-wakefield>. She isn’t 
especially looking forward to it. “I feel frankly a little embarrassed about it 
all,” she says. “I hate things like this.” When she won, she insisted in her 
acceptance speech that prizes were flawed and she would like to share the 
honour and the £30,000 prize with the other shortlisted artists.

“The notion that the artist wants to be a public figurehead and immersed in 
spectacle is just nonsense for me,” she says. “The artist has a responsibility 
to communicate in a way that is egalitarian in a world that is increasingly 
hermetic – but that’s also the job of the institution and the curator. I love 
talking about my work – but I don’t want to do it in a forum that is a 
corrupted, dumbed-down version of my words. No one wants to be paraphrased to 
sound like an idiot because that’s accessible. That’s depressing.” She grins 
disarmingly. “Take note!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhelen-marten-from-a-macclesfield-garage-to-artist-of-the-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff0c84ac0e3a3907b9c5543ce888ac12fa52d9ca%2F2106_463_2742_3665%2F2742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%3A%20from%20a%20Macclesfield%20garage%20to%20artist%20of%20the%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhelen-marten-from-a-macclesfield-garage-to-artist-of-the-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%3A%20from%20a%20Macclesfield%20garage%20to%20artist%20of%20the%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhelen-marten-from-a-macclesfield-garage-to-artist-of-the-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff0c84ac0e3a3907b9c5543ce888ac12fa52d9ca%2F2106_463_2742_3665%2F2742.jpg>
 A 2014 work by Helen Marten titled Part offering (new and amazingly sexual 
daughters). Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
As it happens, her work is not especially easy to read, and is devilishly hard 
to describe. Encountering a sculpture of hers, one first takes in a structure 
that might dimly recall an upturned desk, or a trough or a cradle. But then 
there’s the endless detail, and your eye is drawn into a world of small things 
whose nature seems recognisable, but at the same time strange or strained: a 
match from a matchbook faces off with a small bell; ceramic pipes are draped 
with not-quite socks; a coil of rope is topped with what looks like a 
fist-clenched ball of foil and a leaf. There are things that resemble jugs 
hanging from hooks; there are spoons flattened out into unspoonness; there are 
glass gherkins suspended from a metal framework as if about to be the subject 
of some kind of chemical experiment.

Walking round her recent exhibition at the Serpentine show, I was struck by 
what the objects have been put through – they are nailed, piled, folded, 
hooked, strung, pegged, pierced, slung, plaited, laced, zipped and dangled. At 
first it seemed to make no sense, but then, gradually, rhythm bounces off the 
objects, and one finds sense in the repeated, or near-repeated motifs – the 
matchsticks, which you might see stuck into piping; or the threads that you 
want to follow on their tangled, wound-up journeys.

If you submit yourself to this art – approaching the sculptures like free 
verse whose meaning you might rather absorb than decode – you realise you are 
in a place unlike any you’ve entered before, where a distinctive mind has 
messed with the world of objects and meaning, creating her own strange, 
compressed archaeology, which you are invited to expand into imaginary life.

I don't shop for things. I know what it is I am searching for

Her starting point, she tells me, is reading. “Before I touch anything in the 
studio, before I do anything tangible or physical, I spend three or four months 
reading and researching, but not with a specific end goal in mind. It could be 
fiction, theory, news, philosophy. I read a lot of poetry. The primary impulse 
more often than not is linguistic.”

Recently she has been excited by Iconography and Electronics Upon a Generic 
Architecture 
<https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/iconography-and-electronics-upon-generic-architecture>
, by postmodern architect Robert Venturi (“a vitriolic architectural postmodern 
thesis versus an amazing impulse for collecting and gathering weird 
archaeological facts”); and an essay by artist David Robbins on “the gaze in 
television, and the Lacanian idea of empathy”. Then, she says, “I store up 
phrases, a bank of words that are the starting point for thinking about an 
accumulation of physical stuff.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmoc4l0jP4ow&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmoc4l0jP4ow>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmoc4l0jP4ow&media=>
The “physical stuff” comes next: first by a precise drawing and mapping of 
each of her works, for which a great deal of fabrication will be required. She 
works with ceramicists, metalworkers, carpenters, embroiderers and others to 
create the components of the sculptures, which she will assemble in the studio. 
Nothing is left to chance. “I don’t shop for things. I know what it is I am 
searching for,” she says. “Almost nothing is a readymade. If it looks like it 
is, it’s almost certainly a deliberate approximation.”

Every move in her sculptures, every juxtaposition and careful placing can be 
precisely justified, she says, according to her own imaginative parameters – 
even if this exactitude may be lost on some of her viewers. “I feel I know with 
such clarity what it is and how it comes together and sometimes I’m patting 
myself on the back and feeling, ‘This makes so much sense,’ and you put it in 
the world and everyone says, ‘It’s like bric-a-brac.’ And you just want to say,
fuck off. For me this is the most logical thing. It’s really a kind of humbling 
lesson doing public exhibitions, because sometimes people have no idea – and 
curators often don’t get it.”

Marten was born in Macclesfield in 1985. She has a twin sister, who is an 
accountant. (“I have a linguistic brain, and she has a mathematical brain.”) 
Her father is a chemist in the pharmaceuticals industry, her mother a 
biologist, who, after the girls had grown, did a degree in psychology and a PhD 
in the semiotics of racism. “My dad is the most ungodly pedant you have ever 
met, and everything is labelled and timetabled. My mum is peddling along in 
that wind too, but also useless with numbers, and is completely lost to 
literature, wandering around the house with audiobooks. I have some of those 
impulses.”

The family is “deeply encouraging”, she says. She attended Central St Martins 
and the Ruskin, then run by sculptorRichard Wentworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jun/11/richard-wentworth-sculptor-portrait-artist>
, who picked her out as aname to watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/17/marten-moth-paterson-veno-artists>
 in the Observer in 2010. (He wrote: “She is a brilliant fossicker. She knows 
how to look.”) Afterwards, she spent a horrible six months working for an essay 
farm – “a criminal enterprise: people can call in saying, ‘I need a 6,000-word 
essay in architectural tensegrity’, or something. And you Wikipedia the hell 
out of it and make it sound verbose and charge them”. But then she returned to 
Macclesfield and started making work in her parents’ garage – “there is amazing 
metalwork there, and I discovered laser cutting and powder coating so cheaply I 
could afford to make my first proper solo show for Berlin there”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhelen-marten-from-a-macclesfield-garage-to-artist-of-the-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8c21cefceddddfc0dc6b7eeb67fdf36fed3f8dc%2F0_259_6582_3949%2F6582.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%3A%20from%20a%20Macclesfield%20garage%20to%20artist%20of%20the%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhelen-marten-from-a-macclesfield-garage-to-artist-of-the-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%3A%20from%20a%20Macclesfield%20garage%20to%20artist%20of%20the%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhelen-marten-from-a-macclesfield-garage-to-artist-of-the-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8c21cefceddddfc0dc6b7eeb67fdf36fed3f8dc%2F0_259_6582_3949%2F6582.jpg>
 A detail from Marten’s work titled Part offering (brother cappuccino). 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Now things are different: the London studio, the representation by Sadie Coles 
gallery, the “hot” reputation, which must be something of a mixed blessing. But 
she seems to have the necessary ruthless focus on the work itself. “I make 
things involving processes or images that I find arousing or interesting – and 
I hope there is a little of that for an uninitiated audience, so you can see 
why something has been made in a particular way, or be offered a reminiscence 
of a particular colour that harks back to something you might recognise.”

Turner prize 2016; Helen Marten/Marc Camille Chaimowicz – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/02/turner-prize-2016-tate-review-helen-marten-camille-chaimowicz-serpentine>
I start to feel that her brain exists in a state of endless wonderment about 
the possibilities and capabilities and magical dumbness of objects, and the 
friction between them and the language we use. She tells me about something 
that the German artistIsa Gensken 
<http://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/isa_genzken.htm> once said about 
skyscrapers – that if you stripped away all their other meanings and uses, 
skyscrapers could be metaphorically used as rulers, “a benchmark for how we 
live our lives. That’s so genius to me – that that totemic thing can be 
stripped of previous definition and rendered as a basic measuring stick, a 
humble domestic tool.” She tells me, too, about her joy when she read a 
conversation between two artists about the biblical story of Moses and the 
burning bush.

“Moses is saying, I understand the hotness of the fire and the bushness of the 
bush. But I cannot wrap my head around the idea that the bush is burning, but 
not being consumed. I am looking at something that I understand to have logic, 
and the logic is flawed, so I must be looking at God. That amazing conundrum of 
one part on top of another part on top of another part; and all in this knot of 
impossibility – and through that, the possibility of transcendence from 
something so dull and impossible, something so basic and daily, something so 
absurd.” Which, it turns out, might also work as a description of Marten’s 
singular art.

• The Hepworth Prize for Sculpture exhibition 
<http://www.hepworthwakefield.org/news/the-hepworth-wakefield-announces-the-four-shortlisted-artists-and-judging-panel-for-the-uk-s-first-prize-for-sculpture/>
 is at the Hepworth Wakefield until 19 February. TheTurner Prize 2016 exhibition
 <http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/turner-prize-2016> is 
at Tate Britain, London, until 2 January.
 