
Helen Marten has sealed her position as one of the UK’s most exciting young 
artists after being named the winner of the 2016Turner prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/turnerprize>, her second big award in 
the space of a month.

The 31-year-old artist, who was born in Macclesfield, was presented with her 
£25,000 prize by the writer Ben Okri at a ceremony at London’s Tate Britain 
gallery.

It comes only weeks after she won the £30,000 Hepworth Prize for Sculpture. On 
that occasion Marten announced from the stage that she would be sharing the 
winnings with her fellow artists and she later confirmed she would be doing the 
same thing with the Turner Prize. “I don’t feel I need to politicise that 
gesture,” she said. “I can do it quietly.”

Turner prize 2016; Helen Marten/Marc Camille Chaimowicz – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/02/turner-prize-2016-tate-review-helen-marten-camille-chaimowicz-serpentine>
She won for work which baffles gallery goers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/02/turner-prize-2016-tate-review-helen-marten-camille-chaimowicz-serpentine>
 as much as it grips and delights them. Marten creates complex sculptures from 
a bewildering array of materials and invites people to investigate them as they 
might an archaeological dig.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F657712dcbced826249a0a869f242356b5fe5249b%2F0_28_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Turner%20prize%2C%20securing%20second%20big%20award%20in%20a%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Turner%20prize%2C%20securing%20second%20big%20award%20in%20a%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F657712dcbced826249a0a869f242356b5fe5249b%2F0_28_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 A gallery assistant looking at then Turner Prize nominee Helen Marten’s 
collection of works ‘Lunar Nibs’ and ‘Eucalyptus Let Us In’ at the Tate Britain 
in London, Britain. Photograph: Hannah Mckay/EPA 
Marten said she was feeling “numb” after being named winner, but “deeply 
honoured”.

Part of her did not want to win, she admitted, and she did not enjoy the media 
spectacle and publicity - “it can only be unhealthy and difficult for the 
people involved”. But the amount of people seeing her work had proved 
interesting and educational.

It may even change the vocabulary she uses in her work, Marten said. “It makes 
you realise that the art world as a whole is operating in a very hermetic 
bubble of sign language that is not necessarily generous to a wider public 
audience which is not initiated in that kind of language or visual information.

“Putting something here and seeing what the public perception of it is is very 
humbling and educational, it makes you think maybe my work is not universal, 
maybe the themes I’m employing are not immediately understandable.”

The chair of judges, Tate Britain director Alex Farquharson, said Marten, who 
is based in London, was making work which had real longevity and was using 
objects, forms and images in a similar way to a poet using language.

“The judges were impressed by the complexity of the work, its amazing formal 
qualities, its disparate materials and techniques and also how it relates to 
the world ... how it often suggests meaning, but those meanings are all in flux 
somehow. One image, one form becomes another.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b02c0009e1c57d5daef6bb1783158887f8bae56%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Turner%20prize%2C%20securing%20second%20big%20award%20in%20a%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Turner%20prize%2C%20securing%20second%20big%20award%20in%20a%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b02c0009e1c57d5daef6bb1783158887f8bae56%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Anthea Hamilton’s eye-catching Turner entry, Project for Door (After Gaetano 
Pesce). Photograph: Joe Humphrys, ©Tate 
Marten’s work resists being pinned down and that is a good thing, said 
Farquharson. “It is like experience of the world in real time, it reflects a 
complex world, not one that can be boiled down to singular statements or 
buzzwords.

“Her work reflects the condition of the world and particularly the condition 
of the visual world, one that is always accelerating, especially under the 
influence of the internet.”

Past Turner prize winners have often been simple to explain: Martin Creed’s 
light going on and off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2013/sep/03/martin-creed-lights-on-off>
,Mark Wallinger’s recreation of a Parliament Square protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/dec/04/art.artnews>, Chris Ofili’s 
paintings made from elephant dung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jan/16/chris-ofili-gary-younge-interview>
.

This year it is trickier, Farquharson condeded. “It is a long long way away 
from a one-liner artwork, if it was a line it would be a sentence... a 
Proustian sentence.”

For her Turner prize exhibition Marten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/12/turner-prize-shortlist-anthea-hamilton-michael-dean-helen-marten-josephine-pryde>
 used materials and objects that include cotton buds, bicycle chains, shells, 
marbles, snooker chalk, fish skins and eggs, among much else.

Marten had been many people’s favourite to win the prize and it caps an 
extraordinary year following a major show at London’s Serpentine Gallery and
winning the inaugural Hepworth prize for sculpture last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/17/helen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc1ea6e784242ad1c1cda70df2e25dc10bc63485%2F30_456_3470_1217%2F3470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Turner%20prize%2C%20securing%20second%20big%20award%20in%20a%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Turner%20prize%2C%20securing%20second%20big%20award%20in%20a%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc1ea6e784242ad1c1cda70df2e25dc10bc63485%2F30_456_3470_1217%2F3470.jpg>
 Work by Josephine Pryde from her nominated exhibition ‘lapses in thinking By 
the person i Am’. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
On winning the Hepworth prize she told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/22/helen-marten-from-a-macclesfield-garage-to-artist-of-the-year>
: “I feel frankly a little embarrassed about it all... I hate things like 
this.” Marten followed the example of the last winner of theArtes Mundi prize, 
the Chicago artist Theaster Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/28/theaster-gates-freedom-of-assembly-white-cube-london-review>
, by announcing she would share the money with her fellow shortlisted artists.

Given the year it has been politically and culturally, some observers had been 
willing judges to choose Anthea Hamilton as winner. Her most eye-catching work 
had been agiant naked bottom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/30/gaetano-pesce-turner-prize-andrea-hamilton>
 – surely a fitting artistic goodbye to 2016.

Helen Marten: an artist who thinks differently from the rest of us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/05/helen-marten-an-artist-who-thinks-differently-from-the-rest-of-us>
But it was not to be. Also losing out was Josephine Pryde, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/26/turner-prize-2016-review-tate-britain-micheal-dean-anthea-hamilton-helen-marten-josephine-pryde>
 who displayed photographic portraits of hands and Ikea kitchen counter tops 
which had been left out in the sun. In the middle of the gallery was a model 
train which people at other shows were able to ride. For London it was 
decommissioned.

The fourth shortlisted artist was Michael Dean, whose most striking 
installation was a giant heap or island of penny pieces which explored how 
difficult it is for families to get by in Britain today. They amounted to 
£20,436, which is what the government believes is the minimum that two adults 
and two children need to survive for a year in the UK. Dean then removed one 
penny meaning his characters were below the poverty line.

The Turner prize, given to an artist under 50, is judged on exhibitions which 
have been presented in the preceding year rather than the work they make for 
the Turner Prize show. In Marten’s case it was for her Lunar Nibs project at 
this year’s Venice Biennale andher solo show Eucalyptus Let Us In at Greene 
Naftali in New York 
<http://www.greenenaftaligallery.com/exhibitions/helen-marten-eucalyptus-let-us-in>
.

The prize always sparks debate and division. This year’s list has been 
criticised asnot political enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/03/why-is-the-turner-prize-failing-to-engage-with-politics>
 or too political.Wonderfully baffling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/26/turner-prize-2016-review-tate-britain-micheal-dean-anthea-hamilton-helen-marten-josephine-pryde>
 or maddeningly meaningless.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5209e9be9195525527708e09dd045f3a1de7c0ca%2F59_203_4257_2554%2F4257.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Turner%20prize%2C%20securing%20second%20big%20award%20in%20a%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Turner%20prize%2C%20securing%20second%20big%20award%20in%20a%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5209e9be9195525527708e09dd045f3a1de7c0ca%2F59_203_4257_2554%2F4257.jpg>
 The coins that formed part of Michael Dean’s striking installation. 
Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
For the Stuckists, an anti conceptual art group of artists 
<http://www.stuckism.com/> who have been protesting against the prize since 
2000, it was this year unforgivably dull.

Charles Thomson, co-founder of the group, said: “It is appalling that innocent 
victims expecting to see challenging art should end up bored to death. I have 
lost several friends in the last few weeks.

“There needs to be immediate action. The Turner prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/turnerprize> should be shut down 
before more people end up meeting their demise from sheer boredom.”

Tate, which has been organising the prize since 1984, will not mind negative 
comments – far from it, generating debate about contemporary art is the key to 
its importance.


This year prize organisers have gone even further in an attempt to spark 
conversations. There are sofas outside the show for people to chat and taking 
photographs and video of the works has been allowed where it was previously 
banned.

The prize was back in London after last year’s visit to Glasgow where a 
collective of young architects, Assemble, won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/08/assemble-turner-prize-architects-are-we-artists>
. Next year it will be at Hull’s Ferens art gallery as part of the UK city of 
culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2013/nov/20/hull-uk-city-of-culture-in-pictures>
 celebrations.

This year’s judging panel, chaired by Farquharson, took two and half hours to 
agree a winner. They were Michelle Cotton, director of Bonner Kunstverein, 
Bonn; curator Tamsin Dillon; Beatrix Ruf, director of the Stedelijk museum, 
Amsterdam; and Simon Wallis, director of the Hepworth Wakefield.
 