
“The existing provincial art gallery is the most unsatisfactory of earthly 
institutions,” scoffed the Manchester Guardian in July 1890, when the body of 
work that would form the core of theWhitworth Art Gallery 
<http://www.whitworth.manchester.ac.uk/>’s permanent collection first went on 
display. “Such galleries are governed by committees of businessmen whose 
knowledge of art is, from any serious point of view, either nil or that of a 
respectable amateur.”

The article concluded that the Manchester gallery would likely fall foul of 
being “choked with rubbish”, describing the collection of casts as “almost 
ludicrously bad”, and the overall effect as affording “little or no ground for 
hope” for the future of the institution. In keeping with critical tradition, 
the author seems little concerned that among the local worthies guiding the 
gallery were none other than the Guardian’s then editor, CP Scott, and its 
owner, John Edward Taylor.

Visiting the same site this weekend, when it reopens after a £15m remodelling, 
the Victorian critic would be in for a shock. The Whitworth has since built a 
weighty reputation, acquiring the first Picasso of any public collection in 
1922 and being described as the “Tate of the north” in the 1960s. Since 2006, 
it has been propelled by the energetic leadership ofMaria Balshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/09/maria-balshaw-whitworth-manchester-art-gallery>
 to become a dynamic international centre of contemporary art, seeing visitor 
numbers double to 190,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwhitworth-art-gallery-refurbishment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423675513894%2F90c8a726-8fb2-44e0-b1cb-ac260fc3bf6d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hello%20world%3A%20the%20new%20Whitworth%20Art%20Gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwhitworth-art-gallery-refurbishment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hello%20world%3A%20the%20new%20Whitworth%20Art%20Gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwhitworth-art-gallery-refurbishment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423675513894%2F90c8a726-8fb2-44e0-b1cb-ac260fc3bf6d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sarah Lucas at the Whitworth Art Gallery. Photograph: David Levene 
But despite its repute, the Whitworth’s building has always retained a rather 
provincial air, along with the institutional feeling of being the University 
art gallery. Described bycontemporary reviews 
<http://rusholmearchive.org/whitworth-park-and-gallery> as “hard, mechanical 
and uncompromising” when it opened in 1908, it stands as an imposing pile on 
Oxford Road, looking like part of the Edwardian hospital complex across the 
street. A number of refurbishments over the decades have had mixed success, 
leaving a dingy muddle of interiors.

“It was quite austere,” says Balshaw. “A lot of people weren’t even sure if 
they were allowed in, which is a big barrier – especially when you’re on the 
edge of Moss Side, one of the most deprived wards in the country.”

The latest remodelling and extension, by Glasgow-trained London-based 
architectsMUMA <http://muma.co.uk/>, makes its £15m budget go a long way, 
finally opening the building up to its parkland setting. At the front, they 
have softened the forbidding entrance with a sculpture forecourt and an 
inviting sequence of steps, ramps and benches; but the real meat of the project 
is saved for the back, where MUMA have extended the symmetrical composition 
with a pair of wings that project out into Whitworth Park, framing a new 
sculpture garden. “It’s about having open arms and saying: ‘This place belongs 
to you.’” says Balshaw. “Before, we turned our back with a blank brick wall – 
now you can see what’s going on inside.”

Thrusting out into the trees as a hovering glass bar, one of the new wings 
contains a cafe where you can eat Manchester’s finest brownies while suspended 
among the leaves. A children’s learning studio lies beneath, where activity can 
spill out into a courtyard garden, to be landscaped by Olympic Park flower 
expert Sarah Price, in the style of “Zen garden meets English meadow”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwhitworth-art-gallery-refurbishment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423736175892%2Fb903b1cf-af14-4c3e-ad8a-ffdb94ab1582-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hello%20world%3A%20the%20new%20Whitworth%20Art%20Gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwhitworth-art-gallery-refurbishment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hello%20world%3A%20the%20new%20Whitworth%20Art%20Gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwhitworth-art-gallery-refurbishment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423736175892%2Fb903b1cf-af14-4c3e-ad8a-ffdb94ab1582-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The Whitworth’s ‘slash and stitch’ brickwork pattern ... Photograph by Alan 
Williams 
At the other side of this garden stands a taller redbrick wing, housing a more 
grownup study centre and conservation rooms, whose wall will provide a surface 
for outdoor projections. The two learning spaces face each other, says Balshaw, 
“so you can look across to where you once came, or will come back, aged 6, 16 
or 60.”

The open competition (which attracted 130 entries) could easily have fallen 
foul of the icon syndrome, procuring a jazzy bauble in the park to lure people 
inside with a twinkle. But thankfully much of MUMA’s work will go unnoticed to 
the first-time visitor, their skills deployed on fixing functional issues and 
making the place work as a whole, as they did so successfully for theV&A’s 
medieval and renaissance galleries 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/d/medieval-and-renaissance-galleries/>, 
completed in 2009.

A good deal of intelligence has been deployed in the three temporary 
exhibition galleries, removing suspended ceilings to reveal beautiful, top-lit, 
barrel-vaulted halls. Much of the 1960s interior is protected, as a notable 
example of Scandinavian chic by architect John Bickerdike, but in translation 
across the Pennines he seemed to forget that the power of Scandi-modern was in 
its careful modelling of daylight. Before MUMA arrived, just 16% of galleries 
had natural light; now over half do.

There is great care evident in the details, from the triangular, polished 
stainless-steel window mullions, designed to dissolve into the view of the 
park, to a huge openable facade for oversized deliveries and a freight lift 
that can hold an entire class of children. It is all wrought with precision 
worthy of the Victorian philanthropist and gallery founderJoseph Whitworth 
<http://www.whitworthsociety.org/history.php?page=2> himself, whose 
achievements included developing a standardised system for screw threads and 
designing a rifle so accurate it became known as the “sharpshooter”. He would 
no doubt have cooed over MUMA’s delicate steel sun-shading screen, which dances 
in 5mm-thin fronds across the glazing like a fine lace fringe.

The lure of textile metaphors is, regrettably, one place where the project 
gets a bit clumsy. The daunting task of composing an expansive blank facade 
along the side street, necessitated by gallery walls within, has pushed the 
architects to search for allusions in the sewing drawer – a ready source of 
reference, given the Whitworth’s important textile collection. The result is a 
“slash and stitch” brickwork pattern, where deep folded clefts in the brick 
wall have been “stitched” back together with bands of white ceramic faience, 
placed at irregular intervals to give the impression of “slubs”, the lumps 
found in woven silk. But they look more like plastic burglar alarms, hung with 
random abandon.

Still, given the Whitworth’s lively rota of meteor showers and naked people 
rolling down the stairs 
<https://capitaldevelopmentwhitworth.wordpress.com/2014/08/30/the-whitworths-grand-stairs-inspire-musical-intervention/>
, the fussy facade will no doubt soon be taken over by another bold act of 
artistic intervention.
 