
There are very few stories that, on re-reading after re-reading, seem to 
become impossibly more perfect, but Herman Melville’s eerie, aching story 
Bartleby, the Scrivener is one such. Like a parable without an obvious moral, 
it is defiance raised to the metaphysical.


The plot is easily comprehensible; the meaning utterly elusive. The narrator, 
an unnamed New York lawyer, takes on a new scrivener, or copyist. Our lawyer 
describes his own philosophy as “the easiest way of life is the best” and 
relishes that he has a “snug retreat” where he can “do a snug business among 
rich men’s bonds and mortgages and title deeds”. He has two clerks already, 
nicknamed Turkey and Nippers, and a junior jack-of-all-trades, a boy called 
Ginger Nut.

Business is doing so well that the narrator takes on Bartleby, described as 
“pallidly neat, pitiably respectable, incurably forlorn”. He works “silently, 
palely, mechanically”, and on the third day of his employment is asked to 
proofread a document. He says – and it is almost the only thing he ever says in 
the story: “I would prefer not to.” He instead prefers, if anything, to look at 
the blank brick wall that is the entire view from his window.

Frustrated, Turkey and Nippers threaten to blacken his eye. The narrator, who 
prides himself on knowing about Astor on prudence, Edwards on will and 
Priestley on necessity, cajoles, offers alternative employment, even a room in 
his own house. He tries to garner the slightest biographical scraps: “Will you 
tell me, Bartleby, where you were born?” To which the answer is, of course: “I 
would prefer not to.”

It is never “no”, never “will not”, never even an outright refusal. It is 
never said aggressively or impertinently. Bartleby is always there when work 
starts and stays after they leave; on an unplanned visit on a Sunday, the 
narrator finds Bartleby there, and wonders if he is actually living in the 
offices. The overlooked subtitle is “A Story of Wall Street”; Bartleby is a 
strange premonition of the Occupy Movement.

Eventually, in frustration, the lawyer relocates his offices, but the new 
leaseholders become concerned about the man who sits all day on the banister. 
They eventually have Bartleby put in prison, where the narrator pays for him to 
have better meals, but he again prefers not to, and eventually dies of, what? 
Starvation? Melancholy? Because he did not prefer living?

Most of literature’s glorious proponents of defiance – I am thinking of 
Melville’s own Captain Ahab, but also Milton’s Satan in Paradise Lost, 
Nietzsche’s Zarathustra, or Steerpike in Peake’s Gormenghast trilogy – are 
defying the person in power, not the structure of power. Satan still wants 
there to be a universal monarchy, it’s just he wants to be its monarch.

Bartleby is different. His is a more powerful defiance; he is a figure who 
negates all the conventional, social, political and theological norms. He is 
absolutely outside the influence of what Jacques Lacan called the “Big Other”, 
that inner/outer voice that makes us gravitate towards a force that sanctions 
us. Bartleby is the politest form of rejecting all the reasons for which we 
have politeness.

Related: With Mysteries, Knut Hamsun rewrote the novel's rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2017/jan/06/with-mysteries-knut-hamsun-rewrote-the-novels-rules>

Bartleby was one of the inspirations for Bartlebooth in Georges Perec’s Life: 
A User’s Manual. In that equally defiant book, Bartlebooth tours the world 
painting watercolours of ports, which are sent back to the apartment in Paris 
where he lives. There, they are made into jigsaws, which he then reassembles, 
has mounted, then bleached, then peeled away so that all that remains is a 
blank sheet with the incised lines of former artwork. Bartlebooth’s plan is to 
leave as little a trace as is possible that he has ever existed; he fails. 
Bartlebooth and Bartleby share a kind of revolutionary not-ness.

JG Ballard <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jgballard> once wrote of a 
future Adolf Hitler emerging from the “timeless wastes” of “modern shopping 
malls”. Melville, I think, offers a more dangerously hopeful idea: that 
revolutionary resistance comes from a man in a conventional suit mildly stating 
there are things he would rather not do. It is, for Bartleby, the route to a 
kind of martyrdom.
 