
Apple users are all familiar with Siri 
<https://support.apple.com/en-gb/HT204389>, the company’s voice-activated 
personal assistant that helps out with everything from speed dialling, 
scheduling meetings and searching for directions. Users ofiOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> have had the privilege of Siri’s 
help since its introduction as part of iOS 5 for the iPhone 4S in 2011, and the 
function was also added to the third-generation iPads a year later.

Since then Siri has become a firm favourite and often hits the news – for good 
and bad. Siri hasbefriended an autistic child 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/19/fashion/how-apples-siri-became-one-autistic-boys-bff.html?_r=0>
, beenaccused of homophobia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/16/apple-russian-siri-homophobic-refuses-answer>
,fought for trans rights 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2015/jul/16/siri-autocorrecting-users-who-call-caitlyn-jenner-/>
,mocked maths dunces 
<http://www.2dayfm.com.au/scoopla/tech/blog/2015/7/siri-gets-super-sassy-when-you-ask-her-this-simple-maths-question/>
, come out as atalented rapper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/26/apples-siri-is-a-better-rapper-than-you>
 and possibly inspired aSpike Jonze film <https://www.theguardian.com/film/her> 
(which Siridid not appreciate 
<http://gizmodo.com/wow-siri-does-not-like-being-asked-about-spike-jonzes-1495056868>
).

There are both male and female variations of Siri, and different versions the 
world over – but who are the real people behind the voices?

We tracked three Siris down. Jon Briggs <http://www.jonbriggs.com/>, who is 
also the voice ofThe Weakest Link <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006mgvw>, 
was the first British male voice for Siri.Susan Bennett 
<http://susancbennett.com/> is familiar as the American female Siri – as well 
as the the voice of Delta Airlines. AndKaren Jacobsen <http://thegpsgirl.com/> 
is famous in Australia as the “GPS girl” – but her son still finds it strange 
to talk to a version of her that is trapped in a phone. We find out what it’s 
like to be in the pockets of millions – and what it’s like to answer the 
world’s questions.

How does one become the voice of Siri?

Apple are a simply brilliant technology company – but they’re not so brilliant 
with people
Jon Briggs 
Susan: All of the original Siri voices worldwide came from a bank of digital 
voices that were recorded in 2005. I recorded four hours a day, five days a 
week for a month. The process is called concatenation, and the reason the 
original Siri was so iconic is because she was the first concatenated voice to 
actually sound human.

Karen: I had an audition. I read the brief and thought: “This is me. This job 
is mine!” I went to the audition and got the job on the spot!

Jon: The original system was recorded for a US company called Scansoft, who 
were then bought by Nuance.Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> 
simply licensed it.

Has there been any contact with Apple?

K: In my best Siri voice: “I’m sorry, I am not authorised to answer that 
question.”

S: The only contact I’ve had with Apple was sort of second hand. I met Steve 
Wozniak at a tech conference last year, and his acknowledgement of me as the 
voice of Siri was very special. He’s a wonderful man, a true genius.

Jon, you have written <http://www.jonbriggs.com/personal-blog.php?itemNum=3> 
before that Apple does its “PR with a sledgehammer”…

J: I contacted them to see if there was anything that I could do to help 
promote Siri. I never went public about being the voice of Siri myself, but 
having been the voice of BBC Radio 2 for 13 years and the voice ofthe Weakest 
Link <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Weakest_Link_(UK_game_show)>, I am a 
fairly well known voice over artist. I was already being recognised.

They were rather dismissive and said that Apple wasn’t all about one person, 
you know. Given that this was about three months after the very sad death of
Steve Jobs <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/stevejobs>, who was 
definitely the one person that Apple was all about, it was all a little strange.

Apple are a simply brilliant technology company – but they’re not so brilliant 
with people. If you put someone’s voice in millions of people’s pockets without 
warning, I’m not sure what you expect that person to say when people ask: “is 
it you?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F12%2Fsiri-real-voices-apple-ios-assistant-jon-briggs-susan-bennett-karen-jacobsen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F11%2F1439303136251%2F7a131f6a-9a11-45cb-b1a0-19d271aca802-2060x1485.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hey%2C%20Siri!%20Meet%20the%20real%20people%20behind%20Apple's%20voice%20activated%20assistant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F12%2Fsiri-real-voices-apple-ios-assistant-jon-briggs-susan-bennett-karen-jacobsen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hey%2C%20Siri%21%20Meet%20the%20real%20people%20behind%20Apple%27s%20voice%20activated%20assistant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F12%2Fsiri-real-voices-apple-ios-assistant-jon-briggs-susan-bennett-karen-jacobsen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F11%2F1439303136251%2F7a131f6a-9a11-45cb-b1a0-19d271aca802-2060x1485.jpeg>
 Susan Bennett, the original American female voice for Siri. Photograph: Susan 
Bennett 
How did you first learn that you were the voice of Siri?

S: Siri was introduced on 4 October 2011, and on that day a fellow voice 
talent emailed me and said: “Hey, we’re playing around with this newiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>. Isn’t this you?” So, I went on 
the Apple site to hear the voice and recognised myself right away. I had a lot 
of different feelings about it. I was flattered that my voice had been chosen, 
but it was strange not to have known about it in advance.

J: Rory Cellan-Jones, the BBC’s technology correspondent, was reviewing the 
phone on BBC Breakfast. I watched it regularly as I was dating one of the 
presenters back then and I heard him use the Siri function and thought: “I 
recognise that voice!” How did I feel? Chuffed to bits of course.
 Siri, correcting Caitlyn Jenner’s name from Bruce after her transition. 
Photograph: Apple screenshot 
What are others people’s reactions when they find out you are the voice of 
Siri?

K: They are pretty excited and it really it is a lot of fun. Mostly they want 
me to record a message for their kids to tell them to brush their teeth, go to 
bed when they are told to, and to listen to their parents!

But I receive the most beautiful messages thanking me for helping someone with 
driving anxiety, or getting them to a destination they are headed to. It is 
surreal.

S: People don’t usually recognise my voice, because my everyday speaking voice 
isn’t as deep as Siri’s and the meter of the speech is different. Once people 
know who I am, they freak out a bit. I’m always amazed at how much people 
relate to her, and basically think of her as a person.


J: Everyone reacts very positively when they discover where they’ve heard my 
voice before – and it’s across all age ranges. It’s fair to say that the most 
street cred is gained from those under 20. And, interestingly enough, when it 
was changed last year, there was a Twitter campaign to get me reinstated – so 
they must have liked me!

When my son was younger he seemed frustrated that 'mommy in the phone' would 
not answer him as if she knew him
Karen Jacobsen 
Do you all own iPhones – and do you speak to Siri?

K: I feel as if I was the last person to get an iPhone. Our phone company did 
not offer iPhones for years. The most fun part is seeing my son ask Siri 
questions, especially when it is my voice answering. When he was younger he 
seemed frustrated that “mommy in the phone” would not answer him as if she knew 
him.

S: I do have an iPhone, as does my husband. In fact, our whole house is Mac 
and Apple. I’ve spoken to Siri a few times. Actually, the first time she kind 
of dissed me. I asked her what she was doing and she very disgustedly replied: 
“I’m talking to you!” Hahaha! Talk about attitude, right? But when people ask 
if I talk to Siri much, I say: “No, I talk to myself enough as it is!”

Apple's Siri is a better rapper than you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/26/apples-siri-is-a-better-rapper-than-you>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcUsW6LNuPaQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcUsW6LNuPaQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcUsW6LNuPaQ&media=>
 Jon Briggs was both the voice of Siri and the Weakest Link. 
J: I use Siri to book appointments and send texts as well as asking silly 
questions. Although I use the female voice rather than my male replacement, as 
I find the new one a little insipid if I’m honest.

It’s an enormously capable piece of technology and will simply grow in stature 
and ability as the interface between mankind and technology begins to fade. I 
have two iPhones, several iPads and an Apple Watch. We ran on Macs in the days 
when people would look at you sympathetically, as if you had just told them you 
use an abacus instead of a calculator.

What are the oddest Siri stories people have told you?

K: Oh my goodness. Plenty of Siri stories. Most of the questions they asked 
are probably best not mentioned in polite company.

J: I’ve met lots of people who have told me that they’ve asked me to marry 
them via Siri, so I’ve probably received more marriage proposals than any other 
Englishman. I’m still single incidentally!

Karen – you are a singer and musician. Did you hear about the guy who created 
a song with thefemale British Siri rapping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/26/apples-siri-is-a-better-rapper-than-you>
?

K: It’s brilliant. My music is more melodic piano-pop but now I am having rap 
envy. I might just have to do a version myself!

Where else might people recognise your voices from?

K: I’m known as the GPS girl. I’ve ended up in over 400 million GPS and 
smartphone devices worldwide. I hear from people all the time who want to tell 
me about the fabulous trips “we” have taken together!
 Jon Briggs, the original British male voice of Siri. Photograph: Jon Briggs 
S: I’ve been a voiceover artist for many years, but I started off as a singer. 
I was actually the person who sang the jingle about “Tillie the All Time Teller 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YLuYXZCKBjo>” for First National Bank. It was 
the first successful ATM in the US. This was before personal computers, and at 
that time no one trusted getting their money from a machine. I became the 
persona of the ATM, and suddenly people could relate to the machine, which made 
it a success. I’m also the voice of Delta Airlines.

J: Back in the early 80s I was on a radio programme called the Chip Shop 
<http://andywalmsley.blogspot.co.uk/2012/04/chip-shop.html> with Barry Norman. 
I was the voice ofThe Weakest Link 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Weakest_Link_(UK_game_show)> and I have had 
my ownvoice agency <http://www.excellenttalent.com/voiceover/jon-briggs/> for 
the last 20 years. I’m very proud of both The Weakest Link and Siri – I think 
it’s an enormous privilege to be the known voice of anything like that, and 
it’s a great way of breaking the ice with new audiences.

Apple have since changed many of the Siri voices. :-( How does it feel to be 
replaced as Siri?

S: I was a bit surprised, but everything changes, right? I guess as we head 
more and more toward artificial intelligence, and Siri becomes “big brother”, I 
think I’ll be happy that it’s not my voice!

J: Mine was replaced last year. Of course it’s disappointing, but technology 
constantly moves on. There have been several James Bonds – but there’s only 
ever one original and there can only ever be one original English voice of Siri.

• Follow Karen, Susan and Jon on Twitter: @thegpsgirl 
<https://twitter.com/thegpsgirl>, @siriouslysusan 
<https://twitter.com/SiriouslySusan> and @voiceofsiri 
<https://twitter.com/voiceofsiri> 
 