
If current projections hold, Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> will soon become the 
second presidential nominee to win the popular vote yet lose the electoral 
college – and thus the White House – in the past five US presidential elections.

Clinton, who gave a speech on Wednesday conceding to her victorious Republican 
opponent Donald Trump, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concedes-election-donald-trump-speech>
 is poised to lose the electoral college tally by a decisive 74 votes (nearly 
14% of the total available) while carrying a slim majority of the overall votes 
cast. As of Wednesday afternoonClinton led by more than 200,000 votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-results-live-clinton-trump>
, with 47.7% to Trump’s 47.5%. It would be the fifth time in the nation’s 
history that such a split has occurred and may be a boon to advocates of reform 
of the two-century-old system.

US elections 2016 live results: track who is winning, county by county
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-results-live-clinton-trump>
“We’re hoping that this will bring further attention when we start lobbying 
state legislatures next term,” said John Koza, a professor and author who 
originated legislation to replace the system that is now on the books in 11 
states and could eventually bring down the electoral college.

The electoral college is a constitutional relic of a fundamentally different 
nation, one with 13 states and a potential electorate of 2.5 million citizens, 
slashed dramatically by restrictions that limited the franchise to white, 
land-owning Protestant men. A variety of arguments have been raised for its 
value, but typically it is understood by political science and history scholars 
as a constitutional firewall from certain kinds of potentially “undemocratic” 
election outcomes.

One commonly cited scenario is to prevent a third-party candidate who is 
highly popular in one relatively small region from racking up impressive 
margins in a handful of states while more mainstream candidates split votes in 
a wider array of states. A practical example of this would be a segregationist 
candidate steamrolling the south during the civil rights era, while a Democrat 
and a Republican split the rest of the country.


But the institution has long been seen by most as a vestigial remnant of a 
bygone era. In public opinion polls,Americans of all political affiliations 
resoundingly support a direct presidential election. 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/159881/americans-call-term-limits-end-electoral-college.aspx>
 Trump himself leveled a critique in 2012 when Barack Obama won re-election in 
the popular and electoral vote handily.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
The electoral college is a disaster for a democracy.
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/266038556504494082> November 7, 
2012 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/266038556504494082> 
In 2000, George W Bush defeated Al Gore on a razor-thin margin of five 
electoral votes while losing the popular vote by more than a half million 
votes. While the outcome did prompt conversations about the fairness and 
usefulness of the electoral college, the historic recount, and peculiar issues 
surrounding “hanging chads” and “butterfly ballots”, tempered that somewhat.


But in 2016, the scenario looks different. Trump’s commanding electoral 
college lead and his unprecedentedly high unfavorable ratings in opinion polls 
both add dramatically to the dissonance of the outcome.

However, congressional efforts to retire the electoral college have not gained 
serious traction since a 1934 Senate vote to switch to a direct election failed 
by just two votes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-popular-vote-electoral-college-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34d0c77a82b11aa1d2f3ca2a3bb8716357f59639%2F0_123_4694_2818%2F4694.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%20poised%20to%20win%20popular%20vote%20despite%20losing%20presidential%20race&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-popular-vote-electoral-college-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%20poised%20to%20win%20popular%20vote%20despite%20losing%20presidential%20race&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-popular-vote-electoral-college-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34d0c77a82b11aa1d2f3ca2a3bb8716357f59639%2F0_123_4694_2818%2F4694.jpg>
 Donald Trump’s commanding electoral college lead and his unprecedentedly high 
unfavorable ratings in opinion polls both add dramatically to the dissonance of 
the outcome. Photograph: Kena Betancur/AFP/Getty Images 
The arguments then were not dissimilar to the ones advocates offer now. 
Senator Diane Feinstein of California has tried to build support for a direct 
election several times over her past three terms, arguing in 2007 that “every 
vote should be treated equally regardless of the state in which it is cast”. 
Regardless, there has been no open floor debate on this issue since 1979.

One potential workaround that has been proposed is Koza’s so-called national 
popular vote legislation. Instead of pushing for a constitutional amendment, 
which would require two-thirds of Congress to sign on, campaign organizers seek 
to convince state legislatures to pledge their state’s delegates to the winner 
of the national popular vote. The new method would only become effective once 
enough states (270 electoral votes’ worth) sign on.

Koza’s campaign would not technically abolish the electoral college, but it 
would ensure that the candidate with the most votes was named the winner of 
presidential elections. The national popular vote would also end the intense 
focus on swing states such as Florida and Ohio that frequently change hands and 
that have characterized the modern US presidential election for decades.

Some critics argue that without such battlegrounds, candidates would ignore 
rural Americans to focus attention on urban centers with high densities of 
voters. National popular vote advocates counter that, under the current system, 
only about 12 battleground states ever get any attention anyway.

Right now, the states that have enacted national popular vote bills represent 
165 electoral college votes, largely thanks to California with its mammoth 55 
votes. All 11 – including Illinois, New Jersey and Washington – are considered 
safe Democratic states.


Koza said that was less a function of how partisan the idea is and more a 
reflection of where the country was when the campaign was launched. “When we 
started in 2007, GWB was president so it was viewed Democratically,” Koza said.

He said that in recent years, the initiative had received more bipartisan 
support, passing in the Republican-controlled Oklahoma and Arizona state houses 
of representatives but failing in both state senates. In addition to the 165 
votes worth of states that have enacted the national popular vote, states 
representing another 97 votes have passed the legislation in one of their two 
state legislative bodies. If all those states were to adopt the national 
popular vote in coming years as well, that would bring the project to 262 
votes, just eight shy of the threshold to functionally end the electoral 
college.

But that might be a shakier proposition following Trump’s victory than it was 
before. The fact the electoral college delivered two of the last five elections 
to GOP candidates who lost the popular vote gives Republican lawmakers little 
incentive to act.
 