
A Melbourne street artist who was threatened with a council fine over a 
provocative mural he painted of US presidential candidateHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> has responded by covering 
her image with a niqab.

Maribyrnong council took issue with the original mural, which depicted Clinton 
wearing a revealing swimsuit with $100 notes tucked into it. The council said 
residents complained about the piece, which was painted on to the side wall of 
a scooter shop in Footscray, 5km west ofMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>.

In a statement, the council said the mural contravened its gender equity 
policy.

Naked selfie murals won't be censored, says Geelong council
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/05/geelong-nude-selfie-murals-lushsux-wont-be-censored>
“We believe that this mural is offensive because of the depiction of a 
near-naked woman, not on the basis of disrespect to Hillary Clinton, and it is 
not in keeping with our stance on gender equity,” the council chief executive, 
Stephen Wall, said.

“We contacted Victoria police to provide their opinion on the matter, and they 
deemed the mural to be offensive and in contravention of the Graffiti 
Prevention Act 2007, which council is responsible for enforcing.”

LUSHSUX (@lushsux) 
This is no longer a wall of a supposed "offensive and near naked" Hillary 
Clinton, a beautiful Muslim woman.pic.twitter.com/M7Uzr4gqBC 
<https://t.co/M7Uzr4gqBC>
 <https://twitter.com/lushsux/status/760235998353559552> August 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/lushsux/status/760235998353559552> 
As well as the council threatening the owner of the building with prosecution 
and a fine if the mural was not removed, the artist, known as Lushsux, had his 
Instagram account deleted after posting the image to the social media platform.

However instead of removing the mural, Lushsux covered up the swimsuit by 
painting a niqab over the top of it, leaving only Clinton’s eyes showing. Next 
to his work, he painted the message: “If this Muslim woman offends u, u r a 
bigot, racist, sexist Islamophobe.”
streetartglobe (@streetartglobe) 
The council threatened @lushsux <https://twitter.com/lushsux> with a fine if 
he didn't remove his mural of Hilary. This was his response.Thoughts?
pic.twitter.com/Wb7VVT6szk <https://t.co/Wb7VVT6szk>
 <https://twitter.com/streetartglobe/status/760115551653855232> August 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/streetartglobe/status/760115551653855232> 
Clinton is not the only politician to come to Lushsux’s attention. A mural of 
a naked US Republican candidate Donald Trump 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-08-01/donald-trump-uncensored-mural/7680470>
has also appeared in Melbourne’s CBD, as well as a mural of his wife, Melania 
Trump, also depicted naked. Lushsux later added Trump’s face over the explicit 
parts of the latter mural “so as not to cause any offence”.

Guardian Australia has contacted Lushsux for comment.
LUSHSUX (@lushsux) 
Decided to censor my work now as not to cause any offence. 
pic.twitter.com/Q8awqqjsUj <https://t.co/Q8awqqjsUj>
 <https://twitter.com/lushsux/status/759052147786866689> July 29, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/lushsux/status/759052147786866689>  