
An upstate New York woman, hoping to take her mind off of the US election 
results with a hike through the woods of Westchester County, bumped into 
another woman with a presumably similar notion:Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>.

Margot Gerster of White Plains wrote on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10100230623216143&set=a.557692577563.2084495.12200638&type=3&theater>
 that after “feeling so heartbroken since yesterday’s election”, she hoped to 
relax by taking her young daughter and her dog hiking on Thursday.

“I decided to take them to one of favorite places in Chappaqua,” Gerster 
wrote, the Westchester hamlet that the Clintons call home. “We were the only 
ones there and it was so beautiful and relaxing.”

As Gerster was ending her hike, however, she ran into a couple on the trail: 
the former secretary of state and her husband, former president Bill Clinton.

“I heard a bit of rustling coming towards me and as I stepped into the 
clearing there she was, Hillary Clinton and Bill with their dogs doing exactly 
the same thing as I was,” Gerster wrote. “I got to hug her and talk to her and 
tell her that one of my most proudest moments as a mother was taking [my 
daughter] with me to vote for her.”

Clinton was grateful for Gerster’s words, offering pleasantries, a hug and 
even a photo taken by the former president.

“She hugged me and thanked me and we exchanged some sweet pleasantries and 
then I let them continue their walk,” Gerster wrote. “Now, I’m not one for 
signs but I think I’ll definitely take this one. So proud.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-concession-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%20concession%20speech%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20know%20it%E2%80%99s%20painful%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-concession-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%20concession%20speech%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20know%20it%E2%80%99s%20painful%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-concession-speech-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton concession speech: ‘I know it’s painful’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concession-speech-video>
The photo represents Clinton’s first appearance since her concession speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-full-concession-speech-video>
 on Wednesday, during which she declared: “To all the little girls who are 
watching this: never doubt that you are valuable and powerful and deserving of 
every chance and opportunity in the world to pursue and achieve your own 
dreams.”

Gerster ended her post, which has been shared nearly 3,000 times, with a 
series of hashtags expressing support for the former presidential candidate: 
“#iamstillwithher #lovetrumpshate #keepfighting #lightfollowsdarkness.”

The photo has received thousands of comments, most expressing good wishes for 
the former candidate.

“I wish I could give her a hug and thank her personally,” wrote one supporter. 
“And apologize for the rest of our country.”
 