
Hispanic leaders are warning of harm to Republican White House hopes unless 
the party’s presidential contenders do more to condemn Donald Trump, the 
businessman turned presidential candidate who isrefusing to apologise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
 for calling Mexican immigrants rapists and drug dealers.

Donald Trump doubles down on Mexico 'rapists' comments despite outrage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
Trump’s comments, delivered in his announcement speech last month, have 
haunted the GOP for much of the last two weeks and dominated Spanish-language 
media. It is bad timing for a Republican Party that has invested significantly 
in Hispanic outreach in recent years, given the surging influence of the 
minority vote.

Yet several Republican candidates have avoided the issue altogether, while 
those who have weighed in have declined to criticise Trump as strongly as many 
Hispanic leaders would like.

“The time has come for the candidates to distance themselves from Trump and 
call his comments what they are: ludicrous, baseless and insulting,” said 
Alfonso Aguilar, a Republican who leads the American Principles Project’s 
Latino Partnership.

“Sadly, it hurts the party with Hispanic voters. It’s a level of idiocy I 
haven’t seen in a long time.”

The political and practical Trump-related fallout has intensified in recent 
days. The leading Hispanic television network, Univision, has backed out of 
televising the Miss USA pageant, a joint venture between Trump and NBC, which 
also cut ties with Trump. On Wednesday, the Macy’s department store chain, 
which carried aDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
menswear line, said it was ending its relationship with him. Other retailers 
are facing pressure to follow suit.

The reaction from Republican presidential candidates, however, has often been 
far less aggressive.

In a recent interview on Fox News, conservative firebrand Ted Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz> said Trump should not apologise.

“I like Donald Trump,” said Cruz, a Texas senator who is Hispanic. “I think 
he’s terrific. I think he’s brash. I think he speaks the truth. And I think 
that NBC is engaging in political correctness that is silly and that is wrong.”

The former Florida governor Jeb Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeb-bush> said simply that Trump was 
“wrong”.

“Maybe we’ll have a chance to have an honest discussion about it on stage,” 
Bush said last weekend while campaigning in Nevada.

New Jersey governor Chris Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chris-christie>, who often talks about his 
re-election margins with Latino voters, called Trump’s comments “wholly 
inappropriate” during a news conference. In a subsequent radio interview, 
Christie described Trump as “a really wonderful guy [who’s] always been a good 
friend.”

Florida senator Marco Rubio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio>, 
silent on the issue for more than two weeks, took a more pointed tone in a 
statement Thursday evening.

“Trump’s comments are not just offensive and inaccurate, but also divisive,” 
said Rubio, whose parents came to the US from Cuba. “Our next president needs 
to be someone who brings Americans together – not someone who continues to 
divide.”

Former Texas governor Rick Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry> said on Thursday: “I don’t 
think Donald Trump’s remarks reflect the Republican Party.”

Among others, Wisconsin governor Scott Walker, former Arkansas governor Mike 
Huckabee, former technology executive Carly Fiorina and retired neurosurgeon 
Ben Carson have been silent.

“We’re listening very, very closely, not just what candidates say but what 
they don’t say – the sins of commission and the sins of omission,” said 
Reverend Gabriel Salguero, president of the National Latino Evangelical 
Coalition, who called Trump’s comments “xenophobic rhetoric”.

Trump is showing no sign of backing down.

“My statements have been contorted to seem racist and discriminatory,” he 
wrote in a message to supporters on Thursday. “What I want is for legal 
immigrants to not be unfairly punished because others are coming into America 
illegally, flooding the labor market and not paying taxes.”

“You can count on me to keep fighting,” he continued.

In his announcement speech, Trump said Mexican immigrants were “bringing 
drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists. And some, I assume, are good 
people.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-mexico-comments-nbc-universal-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435621332790%2FDonald-Trump-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump's%20attack%20on%20Mexico%20that%20prompted%20NBC%20to%20drop%20Miss%20USA%20and%20Miss%20Universe%20pageants%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-mexico-comments-nbc-universal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%27s%20attack%20on%20Mexico%20that%20prompted%20NBC%20to%20drop%20Miss%20USA%20and%20Miss%20Universe%20pageants%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-mexico-comments-nbc-universal-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435621332790%2FDonald-Trump-001.jpg>
 Donald Trump's campaign announcement remarks. 
Donald Trump: I get along great with Mexico but China should watch out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/01/donald-trump-i-get-along-great-with-mexico-but-china-should-watch-out>
Such rhetoric resonates with some of the Republican Party’s most passionate 
voters, who have long viewed illegal immigration as one of the nation’s most 
pressing problems. Yet GOP leaders have urged conservatives to adopt a more 
welcoming tone in recent years, as Hispanic voters have increasingly sided with 
Democrats.

Not since the 2004 re-election campaign of President George W Bush has a 
Republican presidential candidate earned as much as 40% of the Hispanic vote. 
Mitt Romney got a dismal 27% in the 2012 contest against President Barack Obama.

Leading Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton cast Trump’s remarks 
as “emblematic” of a larger perception within the Republican Party.

“A recent entry into the Republican presidential campaign said some very 
inflammatory things about Mexican immigrants,” she said in an interview last 
month. “Everyone should stand up and say that’s not acceptable.”

Meanwhile, the attention has helped Trump sell some books. Trump: The Art of 
the Deal, first published in 1987, and a release from 2007, Think Big and Kick 
Ass in Business and Life, were both in the top 2,000 on Amazon.com’s 
best-seller list as of midday Thursday. 

Think Big, co-written by Bill Zanker, was Amazon’s top seller for personal 
finance.
 