
A rather grubby, overpainted and at first glance unremarkable portrait of a 
17th-century lady in a white satin dress has been revealed to be the work of 
Joan Carlile (1606-1679), probably the first woman to work in Britain as a 
professional oil painter.

The Tate Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> has 
announced that Portrait of an Unknown Lady 1650-5 has the distinction of being 
the earliest work by a female artist to enter the national collection.

It was acquired by the Tate for £35,000 from the art dealer Bendor Grosvenor, 
who bought it at the end of 2014 from an auction house in Salisbury.

The painting was unattributed but was assumed to be the work of man. Grosvenor 
had a hunch, which proved correct, that it was the work of Carlile, a woman 
whom evidence suggests was living in Covent Garden in the mid-17th century and 
working as a professional artist.

“It is the earliest work by a woman artist to enter Tate’s collection,” said 
Tate Britain’s delighted director, Alex Farquharson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/29/tate-britain-appoints-alex-farquharson-director>
. “Carlile is thought to be the first British woman to become a professional 
painter and this is one of only 10 portraits known to be by her.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhistoric-first-as-tate-britain-buys-early-portrait-by-female-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F436dc3cc3cb4a471e056758b4de3c17c3513acfb%2F0_202_3568_2140%2F3568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Historic%20first%20as%20Tate%20Britain%20buys%20early%20portrait%20by%20female%20artist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhistoric-first-as-tate-britain-buys-early-portrait-by-female-artist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Historic%20first%20as%20Tate%20Britain%20buys%20early%20portrait%20by%20female%20artist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhistoric-first-as-tate-britain-buys-early-portrait-by-female-artist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F436dc3cc3cb4a471e056758b4de3c17c3513acfb%2F0_202_3568_2140%2F3568.jpg>
 Portrait of an Unknown Lady with Alex Farquharson, the director of Tate 
Britain Photograph: Guy Bell/Rex/Shutterstock 
The work will now go away for conservation before it goes on public display at 
a later date. It was one of more than 300 acquisitions made by the Tate in the 
past 12 months, details of which were announced on Wednesday.

Others include Mark Wallinger’s State Britain 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jan/16/humanrights.politicsandthearts>, 
his reconstruction of the Parliament Square peace campaign by the late activist 
Brian Haw. The work has been gifted to the Tate by the artist.

Another important work is Derek Jarman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/derek-jarman>’s Blue 1993, his last film 
before his death from Aids-related complications.

Blue is a single shot of just that, blue, with a soundtrack of Jarman 
contemplating both his life and death. It will be shown to coincide with the
Queer British Art exhibition planned for spring 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/19/queer-british-art-show-leads-tate-2017-programme>
.

Tate Britain also highlighted a beautiful work of late 19th-century British 
Impressionism, Le Passeur (The Ferry), 1882, by William Stott of Oldham.

Farquharson said Tate Britain had the greatest collection of British art in 
the world and that it got better every year.

The acquisition was announced as the Tate published its annual report, an 
event that will be the final time that the Tate’s director of 28 years, Sir
Nicholas Serota <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/nicholas-serota>, 
will be in charge.

Serota steps down next year and will in February succeed Sir Peter Bazalgette 
as chairman of Arts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/sir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate>
.

The Tate’s chairman of trustees, Lord Browne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-browne>, paid tribute to Serota’s 
vision and drive, which had made the Tate “one of the world’s great cultural 
institutions”.

He admitted Serota would be difficult to replace, but that it would be someone 
who had curatorial experience. “Let us be absolutely clear. Nick Serota is a 
unique individual ... there is no one else like Nick.”

“It would be foolish for us to search for another Nick, it is not possible. So 
we are searching for people who have high respect in the artistic community, 
who have the ability to command the leadership of a very complex set of 
galleries and relationships internally in the UK and outside.”

 