
Maybe you should learn to bite your tongue when you’re sitting in a New 
Zealand layby with a policeman at your window, having been pulled over for the 
third time in a week for going a few miles over the speed limit (and, once, a 
few miles under), and you have a sneaking suspicion it might be because you’re 
a woman in her early 20s with the audacity to drive a motorhome.

“Bit of a heavy vehicle this for you, isn’t it?” said the officer, adjusting 
his shades. “What do you drive back home, a hatchback?”

Actually, it was a hatchback: a souped-up Seat Ibiza complete with spoiler, 
alloys and boy-racer bucket seats. But I wasn’t telling him that. I told him I 
drove an articulated lorry. He told me to go to the nearest police station and 
pay my 80-dollar fine. Really, if was willing to flirt my way out of trouble 
more often in life, I’d have saved myself a lot of cash.

That trip around New Zealand, more than 10 years ago, was my first in a 
motorhome, and since then, they – and road trips – have become a major part of 
my life. I ogleFiat Ducato Swifts 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Fiat+Ducato&client=firefox-a&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&channel=sb&biw=2560&bih=1274&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=a2zTVN_MCtKXavTOgNgK&ved=0CAYQ_AUoAQ#rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&channel=sb&tbm=isch&q=fiat+ducato+camper&revid=118708369>
 on city streets. I lust after classic Hymers on campsites. You could say I put 
the perv in to camper van – but, although I’ll admit they’re cute, campers 
aren’t really my thing. I like the big guys. I want a shower and a cooker and a 
proper mattress, and if I could, I’d have a bath. You might call it cheating; I 
call it being 36 with sciatica. That said, asking yourself, “Did I leave the 
oven on?” does become more pressing when you’re hurtling down a B road and the 
oven is a metre behind you, connected to a large canister of gas. Sometimes, 
it’s good to keep things simple.

I want a shower and a cooker. You might call it cheating, I call it being 36 
with sciatica

The first trip I made closer to home was when I was in my mid-20s, a few years 
after New Zealand. I hired a motorhome for a week in February. Wait, friends 
said: you’re goingalone? But I needed space. Like, major space. Galaxies. 
Instead, I settled forCumbria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/series/a-holiday-guide-to-the-lake-district-and-cumbria>
, which turned out fine. I didn’t really know what I was doing with my life – 
washed up, with a bar job that ate (or drank) most of my wages. Something about 
upping and leaving appealed. I was inspired by Julie Christie’s freewheelingLiz 
in Billy Liar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wn3XxZTcrE0>.

I also needed a digital detox before there was even a term for it. An ex had 
set up a fake profile on MySpace (the thing at the time) to befriend/stalk me. 
(For the record, I don’t really blame him… not now.) Anyway, I found the 
perfect antidote. Because you know what the almighty internet still can’t 
conquer? A valley. Drive into one of those and you’re instantly liberated, 
purely by being somewhere without a scrap of signal.

It took a few days to adapt. A few nights of resisting the urge to get up and 
drive, in my thermal pyjamas, to the top of a mountain and desperately waggle 
my phone around. But once I’d got through the withdrawal period, the head‑buzz 
reduced to a manageable hum. Nothing was going to happen that couldn’t be 
sorted in a week. The world would get on just as well without me. And it wasn’t 
lonely, not really. I had company: the unassuming, reliable, dark presence of 
mountains.

There were others doing their solitary thing. I noticed how many lone 
travellers there are in campsites out of season. InPatterdale 
<http://www.ullswater.co.uk/patterdale.html>, a man with a long, ginger beard 
sat on the side of his van every morning, eating from the lid of a flask. I’d 
see him as I was smoking my morning cigarette and we’d nod hello. We didn’t 
speak, but it wasn’t unfriendly; we were just enjoying the quiet. He went 
hiking every day, and I’d watch for him coming back at dusk and it only struck 
me after a few days that he might be a substitute for something – that nightly 
family feeling; that sense of expected, and fulfilled, return.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F14%2Femma-jane-unsworth-solo-holidays-motorhome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423584091765%2F0bdb73f2-f2bc-48ff-b3fb-04f2b10a5536-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holidays%20for%20one%3A%20why%20I%20love%20to%20hit%20the%20road%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F14%2Femma-jane-unsworth-solo-holidays-motorhome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holidays%20for%20one%3A%20why%20I%20love%20to%20hit%20the%20road%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F14%2Femma-jane-unsworth-solo-holidays-motorhome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423584091765%2F0bdb73f2-f2bc-48ff-b3fb-04f2b10a5536-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Emma Jane Unsworth Photograph: Fabio de Paola for the Guardian 
Since then, I’ve been on many solo holidays – hitting the road almost every 
year. I am about to leave for Scotland for a fortnight. I have a ritual when 
getting into my solitary groove, and music is key. The first song on any trip 
has to be Tina Turner’sNutbush City Limits 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ipOz_k9zvzo>, which I like to play as I’m 
crossing the Salford border. I have favourite road albums I listen to over and 
over:Rabbit Fur Coat, by Jenny Lewis with the Watson Twins 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IhP_8MUS-ro>. Midlake’s The Trials Of Van 
Occupanther <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/jun/09/popandrock.shopping2>
.

Once I’m parked, I’ll cook myself a pretty spectacular dinner, if I do say so 
myself. It is possible to make gourmet meals for one in a teeny-tiny space, and 
this is important, because romancing your solo self is important. I’m not 
saying you have to put a rose on the table, or light candles, but a rib-eye 
steak and some dauphinoise potatoes don’t go amiss. The food you love is an 
instant way to feel at home. So is wine. And whisky.

I’ve turned down holidays with family and friends to go away alone. Friends 
have worried that it might mean I was depressed. But depressed is the opposite 
of how I feel. It’s exhilarating feeling self-sufficient, getting somewhere 
under your own steam. I feel as though I wouldn’t know who I was if I didn’t 
spend long stretches of time alone, and then I’d be no good to anyone.

Things can go very wrong if I invite someone else. My dad joined me on a trip 
to Scotland a few years ago, which seemed like a great idea at the time. We did 
some fishing and went on a cable car, and it was all very idyllic, until… we 
went to sleep. Or rather, I tried to sleep, with my dad half a metre away in a 
confined space – and he started snoring. It didn’t sound like snoring. It 
sounded like a fighter jet with a 50-a-day habit. By midnight I was just about 
ready to commit patricide, and vowed never again.

Sure, there have been times when I’ve wished for company: someone to turn to 
in the early morning and grip firmly with both hands and whisper gently in 
their ear, “OK, what is that clawing sound directly above our heads?” We all 
need that, sometimes. (It was a seagull on the roof. It sounded like a griffin.)

I’m often told it’s dangerous to be a woman on the road alone. As the writer 
Vanessa Veselka points out 
<http://theamericanreader.com/author/vanessa-veselka-2-2-2/>, in literature the 
road often symbolises the beginning of a journey for men, whereas for women it 
symbolises the end.

I must admit, I’ve been terrified a few times. On a recent trip to Derbyshire, 
I was turning a vintage motorhome around on frozen ground when the wheels got 
stuck in the ice. Terror: what if I couldn’t move it, more snow fell and I 
became trapped?

I tried putting old material under the wheels to get some traction, but it was 
no good. Why hadn’t I brought chains, or an ice pick – a shovel, even? I 
resorted to using a dessert spoon, a butter knife and a pan lid from the back 
of the van to hack and dig the wheels out. It took 45 minutes. As my friend 
said down the phone on my return, that kind of thing is character-building.

I lived with someone, but I got antsy, so I got in a van and drove. He drew a 
snail on the dashboard to make me miss him

In my late 20s, I bought a home with someone. Did it up. Lived there for a 
while. Loved it, because I loved him. But I started getting antsy. Every place 
I’ve ever lived in has had cardboard boxes in the corners, from the day I moved 
in until the day I moved out: the decor equivalent of not taking your coat off, 
of “not stopping”. I can’t quite settle. When I broke a mug and felt relieved 
to be able to throw something away, I knew that I probably needed to reassess 
my relationship with responsibility, and fast. So I got in a van, alone, and 
drove.

My partner drew a picture of a cartoon snail for my dashboard, some art for my 
temporary home. He knew how to bring me back: by acknowledging the very desire 
that had driven me away. It worked, too. I started missing home after just a 
few days, every last stupid mug and spoon, and the point on the horizon I 
looked to became my return date, rather than just the endless horizon.

When that relationship came to an end, I considered buying a motorhome. I’m 
just going to bite the bullet, I thought – now’s the time. But my friends 
stepped in and said it was a bad idea, that motorhomes are a nightmare, 
expensive to run year-round. They were right – about the expensive bit, anyway. 
But I felt as if I needed to go somewhere to clear the clouds from my head, so 
I got a 10-day rental and took it to the northernmost coast of Scotland.

I have a northern soul, so I usually head north. The south has its charms – 
Cornwall <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/cornwall>, and Penzance especially 
– but for me, nothing compares to the widescreen drama of thePeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/peakdistrict> and Highlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/highlands>.

When I passed my driving test at 17, I would drive around the M60 ring road 
for hours at night to clear my head of exam stress; but since then, I had 
forgotten how a long drive on quiet roads can be soothing. The amniotic swoosh 
of passing tyres. The LEDs of the spaceship dashboard winking. The semi-trance 
of doing something on autopilot. And moving forwards with things rolling by in 
your peripheral vision, that literal unspooling. I really think there is as 
much potential for mindfulness in a long, lonely drive as there is in a yoga 
class.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F14%2Femma-jane-unsworth-solo-holidays-motorhome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423584236223%2F368f9c10-30b2-4a8a-93de-ea213f70cb75-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holidays%20for%20one%3A%20why%20I%20love%20to%20hit%20the%20road%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F14%2Femma-jane-unsworth-solo-holidays-motorhome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holidays%20for%20one%3A%20why%20I%20love%20to%20hit%20the%20road%20alone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F14%2Femma-jane-unsworth-solo-holidays-motorhome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423584236223%2F368f9c10-30b2-4a8a-93de-ea213f70cb75-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Emma Jane Unsworth in ‘Maggie’, a Hymer S555, courtesy of hireahymer.com 
Photograph: Fabio de Paola for the Guardian 
For me, that trip to Scotland felt like plugging back in – despite being 
without internet and phone. And then the sensation of being halfway upElectric 
Brae in Ayrshire <http://www.undiscoveredscotland.co.uk/dunure/electricbrae/>, 
a gravity-defying road, where you feel as though you’re going uphill when 
you’re going downhill – a perfect metaphor of a world gone topsy-turvy – 
provoked a good old-fashioned, face-drenching bawl. You’ve got to let it all 
out, and it’s best on an A road with very little passing traffic.

I came a cropper, of course. Fierce independence is best when peppered with 
humiliating instances that remind you how much you rely on the people in your 
life, not to mention our NHS. For example, when you do things like get drunk 
and sleep with your foot out of your sleeping bag after forgetting to put the 
heating on. In Scotland. In October. I woke to find three of the toes on my 
right foot yellow-white, numb, freezing and sporting purplish rings at the base.

The campsite I was staying on was shut (the owner had kindly said I could park 
there for shelter), so I had no electric hook-up and had been unable to charge 
my laptop or phone; so, no way of contacting anyone, even if there had been 
reception. Oh, I thought, everyone was right. Iam an idiot. I should have gone 
to Spain or Greece like a normal person, and now I’m going to have the stumps 
to prove it.

As I saw it, I had two options: 1) I could start the engine and drive to try 
to find someone who could help, or 2) rub like hell. I went for the latter, and 
after 15 minutes of hectic massage and much wailing, my toes came back to life.

These trips have taught me a lot, if nothing more than reminding myself of my 
own innate ridiculousness. On the road, you can find out many things. You will 
not miss your phone as much as you think. You will miss your friends much more 
than you think. You can find noirish experiences of David Lynch proportions 
close to home – namely, with your pants down in a campsite toilet block at 2am, 
and Danny Boy gargling through speakers in the ceiling. You can sit in a canvas 
chair with a glass of wine and watch the sun set over a wild sea, and feel free 
and small and lost and found all at once. You do not need a satnav. And you’ll 
wish you still had that Seat Ibiza.
• Emma Jane Unsworth’s second novel, Animals, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/16/animals-emma-jane-unsworth-novel-review>
 is published by Canongate
 