
Take me there: Giant's Causeway, Northern Ireland 

The myths, legends and science behind Northern Ireland's most iconic natural 
attraction will be brought to life with the opening of the £18.5m Giant's 
Causeway Visitor Centre on Tuesday. An exhibition and audio tour will explain 
how the spectacular basalt columns were formed by volcanic activity 60m years 
ago (though local legend has it that the giant Finn McCool placed them there as 
stepping stones to reach Scotland), while new cliff-top walking trails give 
improved access to the rugged Antrim coast. See
nationaltrust.org.uk/giantscauseway <http://nationaltrust.org.uk/giantscauseway>
.

Travel clinic: The French Riviera 

The dilemma We are two couples looking for sun in September. We'd like 
somewhere lively a short walk from shops, restaurants and a beach and the 
option of doing day trips by public transport, as we don't want to hire a car. 
Lorraine and Steven, Hertfordshire

The French Riviera is delightful in September. Antibes makes a great base for 
a car-free break with its bustling old town, dazzling yacht marina and some of 
the best beaches on the Côte d'Azur all easily reached on foot or by public 
transport. Stay at the charming Hotel La Jabotte with just 10 bedrooms around 
a flower-filled courtyard, and you will be 50m from a sandy beach and 
a 15-minute walk into the town centre (doubles from €91;jabotte.com 
<http://jabotte.com>). If you want to be closer to the action, rent 
a beautifully restored fisherman's cottage in the heart of the old town (
holiday-rentals.co.uk/reviews/p666950a 
<http://holiday-rentals.co.uk/reviews/p666950a>). The two-bedroom house has 
availability from mid-September (€950 per week). The hotel and cottage are 
within walking distance of the station with regular trains along the coast to 
Cannes, Villefranche, Nice, Monaco and Menton. Buses run between Antibes and 
Nice Airport 20km away, or a taxi will cost approximately €45–€60.

Three of the best: holiday homes with tennis courts

Oast House, Kent It's love-all at this romantic bolthole for two with use of 
the owners' court. From £565 per week. Ref: KE008 (ruralretreats.co.uk 
<http://ruralretreats.co.uk>)

The Manor House, Shropshire Hold your own tournament on the grass court of 
this imposing house. Sleeps 11. From £1,150 per week (ludlow countryhouse.com 
<http://www.ludlowcountryhouse.com>)

Glebe House Cottages, Cornwall A cluster of 19th-century cottages near Bude 
with access to a court. Sleeps 4-6. From £359 per week (bluechipholidays.co.uk 
<http://bluechipholidays.co.uk>)
 