
15 pitch perfect UK campsites
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/23/uk-cool-campsites-camping-glamping-yurts-britain>
It was dark and chilly, and I was lying in a sleeping bag on a narrow camp 
bed. But I wasn’t in a tent, tipi or yurt – I was in a church. That’s because I 
wasn’t camping, nor even glamping; I was “champing”.

OK, it’s a terrible name, but what a brilliant idea! The Churches Conservation 
Trust <http://www.visitchurches.org.uk/> looks after 347 churches that are no 
longer used for regular worship: it repairs and maintains the buildings, and 
finds new uses for them: circus schools, GP surgeries, artists’ workshops. 
Church camping was the bright idea of Peter Aiers, one of the trust’s regional 
directors. He says that churches embody hundreds of years of British history, 
and are beautiful buildings to boot, so what better way to appreciate them than 
spending a night in one? And have it all to yourselves.
 St John’s Church, Duxford in Cambridgeshire. Photograph: Neil Randall 
St Mary the Virgin in Fordwich, Kent, where I stayed, is certainly historic. 
(Champing is also offered at medieval All Saints Church in Aldwincle, 
Northamptonshire, and in the Georgian interior of St Cyriac & St Julitta at 
Swaffham Prior, Cambridgeshire. The trust is hoping to add more.) St Mary’s 
dates from Norman times; there are 14th-century stained-glass windows, 
17th-century wall paintings and 18th-century wooden box pews. The church’s most 
famous object, the Fordwich stone, dates from about 1100 and once formed part 
of a saint’s shrine; perhaps St Augustine of Canterbury’s.

The best garden B&Bs, cottages and campsites in the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/19/best-wild-garden-cottages-campsites-uk>
A stroll around the churchyard revealed graves from the 1640s, and even 
older-looking stones whose inscriptions had weathered away over the centuries.

It was a bit overwhelming, especially when the key was handed over – a 
suitably huge, heavy, ancient-looking chunk of iron – and my friend and I were 
left alone. We couldn’t raid the mini bar, play music or call room service. 
And, unlike the average hotel, our bedroom was public property: when we 
neglected to lock the door, a man wandered in with his dog to look around.

The door safely locked, we explored the church’s nooks and crannies. We 
examined the rare bread shelf, where loaves for the poor were once left. We 
climbed the 14th-century bell tower (inadvisable: it is pretty rickety). We 
stood in the pulpit composing a sermon, examined the magnificent Royal Arms 
over the chancel arch, and played the organ (badly).

With fewer than 300 inhabitants, Fordwich is the smallest town in England. Its 
tiny town hall was built during the reign of Henry VIII and is believed to be 
the oldest still in use. It contains fascinating objects such as a ducking 
stool, for use on “scolds” and “gossips” in the 15th century. Fordwich is a 
sleepy place today, a town in name only, but it has a bittersweet air of faded 
grandeur. It was an important port until the Stour silted up; stone from Caen 
in Normandy, used to rebuild Canterbury cathedral in 1067, was unloaded at 
Fordwich.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fcamping-weekend-in-church-kent-church-conservation-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432816262353%2Fccce9ca5-a522-47f2-97b2-6d5895795a6c-1363x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holy%20nights%3A%20camping%20in%20a%20church&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fcamping-weekend-in-church-kent-church-conservation-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holy%20nights%3A%20camping%20in%20a%20church&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fcamping-weekend-in-church-kent-church-conservation-trust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432816262353%2Fccce9ca5-a522-47f2-97b2-6d5895795a6c-1363x2040.jpeg>
 St Mary’s Fordwich 
We had dinner at the Fordwich Arms <http://fordwicharms.co.uk/>, one of the 
town’s two pubs. The long-serving landlord regaled us with tales of Fordwich 
past as we ate potted shrimp and pork belly in the cosy bar. We would be back 
for breakfast (the trust had arranged for the pub to open specially to serve us 
a full English in the panelled dining room).

Ditch the camping stove – these sites have food trucks, cafes and even bars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/04/uk-camping-sites-with-food-trucks-cafes-and-bars>
Then it was time for bed. I had expected it to be spooky – just the two of us, 
walking through a graveyard in the dead of night to a dark, draughty old 
church. Nothing could have been further from the truth; it was simply quiet and 
peaceful. We lit lots of candles to illuminate our box pew “bedroom” and piled 
duvets and pillows on top of our spartan beds.

Champing isn’t billed as a luxury or romantic experience – the churches are 
still consecrated spaces, though guests are free to get up to whatever their 
consciences allow – but it was undeniably a special place to spend the night.

I had packed lots of layers, just in case, and had a great night’s sleep. We 
woke to jewel-like light filtering through the stained-glass windows and the 
morning calls of birds in the tree-shaded churchyard. It was the first time in 
years that I’d been in a church on a Sunday morning. With no strict checkout 
time, we lingered, loth to leave our sanctuary. But the lure of a proper toilet 
in the pub (we just had a camping loo in a tent outside the church’s north 
door) got us moving.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fcamping-weekend-in-church-kent-church-conservation-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432816085046%2Fc5a7bdea-34ea-4fdd-a667-760918e552c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holy%20nights%3A%20camping%20in%20a%20church&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fcamping-weekend-in-church-kent-church-conservation-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holy%20nights%3A%20camping%20in%20a%20church&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fcamping-weekend-in-church-kent-church-conservation-trust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432816085046%2Fc5a7bdea-34ea-4fdd-a667-760918e552c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 St John’s Church, Duxford in Cambridgeshire. Photograph: Neil Randall 
The trust offers two-day, one-night breaks, with optional activities: 
storytelling with your own personal storyteller, yoga and guided walks. 
Fordwich is on a scenic stretch of the Stour – St Augustine travelled along it 
in 597 on his way to become the first Archbishop of Canterbury – so we opted 
for a canoe trip. The five-mile paddle to Grove Ferry took us throughStodmarsh 
nature reserve 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/kents-national-nature-reserves/kents-national-nature-reserves#stodmarsh>
 and our guide, Andrew Magnell fromCanoe Wild 
<http://canoewild.co.uk/cw/fordwich-to-grove-ferry-by-canoe/>, pointed out 
herons and marsh harriers, and signs of beavers and woodpeckers.

Paddling a two-person canoe with a less-than-able seaman was something of a 
lesson in Christian values of forgiveness and so the Grove Pantry Pub & Inn, 
right on the riverbank, was a welcome sight.

Fordwich is a couple of miles from Canterbury and a short drive from the north 
Kent coast – we went to Whitstable – so there is plenty to do beyond the 
parish. At £60 a head, it is certainly not as cheap as camping. But considering 
that you have sole use of a historic building which has witnessed important 
events in people’s lives for hundreds of years, it is a bargain. More than 
that, it is a privilege.

• The trip was provided by the Churches Conservation Trust (0845 303 2760, 
visitchurches.org.uk 
<http://www.visitchurches.org.uk/latestnews/2015-03-17/Carry-on-champing-In-church-camping-to-three-sites-for-2015/>
); one night costs £60pp including breakfast, or £45 if booked before 14 June, 
not including add-on activities
 