
When Mark Titchner was a boy, he spent hours watching Black Sabbath's Master 
of Reality <http://www.black-sabbath.com/discog/masterofreality.html> album 
rotating on the stereo of his Dunstable home. Not so much to revel in frontman 
Ozzy Osbourne's Lovecraftian horror, or the guitar virtuosity of Tony 
Iommi who, only four years before the album came out, had lost the tips of two 
fingers in an accident at a Birmingham sheet-metal factory.

No, it was the spinning label that captivated Titchner. "It was my 
first experience of rotoscopic art, and it floors me every time I see it," he 
says in his east London studio. The label, known as the"Vertigo swirl" 
<http://www.vertigoswirl.com> after the record label that released Sabbath's 
albums, is a roto-relief,cribbed from those made by Marcel Duchamp 
<http://www.abandon.nl/opical3.htm>. "I used to put it on the turntable and 
spend a nice long time looking into it, rising and falling with it into the 
abyss."

That youthful fascination feeds into Titchner's work in his new solo show, Be 
True to Your Oblivion, at Walsall's New Art Gallery <>. It's part of 
a sprawling season of exhibitions and events celebrating Birmingham and the 
Black Country as the birthplace of heavy metal. I'm particularly looking 
forward to Hell Bent for Leather: Judas Priest and the Heavy Metal Look at
Walsall's Leather Museum <http://www.walsall.gov.uk/leathermuseum/>, which 
will, fingers crossed, tell the neglected story of fetish gear, homosexuality 
and heavy metal.

Little Mark's Sabbath records inspired much of the Turner nominee's later 
artistic practice. His 2006 piece Ergo Ergot, to be shown in Walsall, consists 
of two large spinning roto-reliefs that form a geometric arrangement calledthe 
Titchener Illusion <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ebbinghaus_illusion>, after 
20th-century psychologist Edward Titchener. "He's no relation," says the 
artist. "The illusion is that a circle surrounded by other circles looks 
smaller the larger the surrounding circles are."

This optical illusion is especially striking when, as in the case of Ergo 
Ergot,two circles of the same size are placed side by side, and then surrounded 
by circles – small circles on one, larger ones on the other 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/britain/turnerprize/2006/marktitchner.htm>.

I'd come to Titchner's work through his banners hanging outside Gateshead's 
Baltic Centre for Contemporary Art 
<http://www.balticmill.com/whatsOn/past/ExhibitionDetail.php?exhibID=70>, 
screaming bracingly fatuous messages such as "The Future Is Behind Us". Like
Barbara Kruger <http://www.barbarakruger.com/> or Jenny Holzer 
<http://www.jennyholzer.com/>, Titchner in his text-based work establishes what 
he calls "a dialogue about how you receive thought and ideas". He's had sour 
fun recently with banners subverting the government cuts agenda –images of them 
feature on his blog <http://thenewmt.wordpress.com/>.

One new work at Walsall will be a video portrait of Nic Bullen, founder member 
of Birmingham grindcore band Napalm Death. It consists of an extreme closeup of 
Bullen singing, slowed down so you can see his muscles working as he silently 
bawls – Titchner has muted his friend. The artist was inspired byBillie 
Whitelaw in Beckett's Not I <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M4LDwfKxr-M>: "All 
you see is that terrifying babbling mouth."

Before we carry on, let's define our terms. Grindcore music is not grime. 
Grindcore is a stupendously fast anarcho-punk music drawing from death metal, 
industrial music, noise and hardcore punk. It arose in Birmingham in the 80s 
(probably not as a response to Duran Duran, but you never know). Grime is dance 
music originating a few bus stops from Titchner's studio.

Is that a metal turd?

What's the allure of heavy metal? "The sensibility of metal has a darkness to 
it that draws me, but it has a social dimension – particularly as you get 
into the grindcore end of it. There's anarchism, but nihilism is far away."

I was brought up in Birmingham from the 1960s to the 80s, the very period 
during which some of the region's greatest metal bands –Black Sabbath 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/blacksabbath>, Judas Priest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/judas-priest>, Led Zeppelin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/ledzeppelin>, Napalm Death 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/ce7bba8b-026b-4aa6-bddb-f98ed6d595e4>, 
Godflesh 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/864aa861-e22a-4187-8baa-2ef0c215bc0a>, 
Diamond Head 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/d3dd86df-2f57-4a97-8100-d09915343f60> – 
were making ears bleed worldwide. I never claimed this music as my heritage 
since I regarded punk as deflating its pretensions.

"That's only one way of telling the story," counters Titchner. "Another is 
that after punk came these grindcore bands who said punks are effete – let's go 
faster, be angrier and be proper anarchists. That movement still has its hive 
in the Black Country."

Titchner's views prompted me to revisit my birthplace and reconsider 
its musical heritage. But there was an immediate problem. So much of the 
industry that fired the music has gone, crushed by deflationary Thatcherite 
budgets in the 80s. My dad's story is typical. He was an engineer for car, 
aeronautical and metalworking firms across the West Midlands, but spent his 
final years of working life as a Youth Training Scheme manager. I suspect he 
taught kids to manage down their expectations: the pride he took in being an 
engineer could hardly be theirs in this deindustrialised region.

I started at Longbridge, looking at the wastelands of the car plant that once 
employed 50,000 people. Then I drove over to Wednesbury to visit my nan's 
house. She died in 1976, but I still remember sitting on her back step looking 
over the fiery blast furnaces of the Black Country at night. It's all gone – 
that fire and unspeakable beauty. My upset intensified as I drove around Dudley 
and Bilston, both so leafy that they felt like the Green Country rather than 
the Black Country. Counter-intuitively, heavy metal wasn't obliterated by 
Thatcherism: after the industry that spawned it was destroyed, metal music 
became more political and harder to listen to – expressing, perhaps, a howl 
over what was lost and a rage for those who took it.

At Wolverhampton Art Gallery 
<http://www.wolverhamptonart.org.uk/wolves/whats_on/004652.html>, I experienced 
a corrective to this sense of loss in a show called From Iron Ore to Grindcore. 
On a table was something that looked like a metal turd –the final steel cast 
from Elisabeth of Bilston 
<http://blackcountryhistory.org/collections/getrecord/GB149_P_915/> (the last 
Black Country blast furnace) dating from 1979, the year the flames were 
extinguished for good. In the years when Elisabeth and her sisters burned, 
local bands such as Judas Priest did something alchemical with industrial dust, 
fire and noise, transmuting them into music rich with fantasy, leather, desire 
and metallised beats – all of which makes it sound as Wagnerian as Alberich's 
metalworking cave in Das Rheingold.

I play the riff to Paranoid

In the next room is You Should Be Living: the Visual Language of Heavy Metal. 
My favourite piece here isNic Bullen 
<http://www.homeofmetal.com/news/nic-bullen-on-zine-culture/> and Damien 
Deroubaix <http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damien_Deroubaix>'s installation in 
which visitors can sequence short grindcore audio loops at a mixing desk and 
scream into microphones. At least that's what I did: the guard eyed me narrowly.

Nihilistic art will figure prominently in some of Titchner's new work in 
Walsall. "I've long been intrigued by what happens when language ceases to 
communicate. That comes from Napalm Death – their almost primal scream music is 
a moral standpoint in the face of language that has lost its meaning." In a 
world of empty slogans, he seems to be saying, screaming is more authentic, 
more articulate, a nihilistic subversion of prevailing values.

Titchner says his latest work was inspired especially by Led Zeppelin's 
untitled fourth album, whose sleeve was decorated withintentionally baffling 
runic symbols <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Led_Zeppelin_IV>, and by US black 
metal band Wolves in the Throne Room. He shows methe latter's 2004 album sleeve 
<http://www.metal-archives.com/bands/Wolves_in_the_Throne_Room/35741>, 
featuring an unreadable hieroglyph.

"In this new work I was inspired by these kinds of metal non-typography to 
write strange neologisms on breeze blocks for a wall for the show. Then I 
carved them so it was like tomb carvings. Then I crossed everything out and it 
still wasn't right. So I obscured the text completely and mirrored it. I ended 
up with intractable symbols. It's a long, drawn-out process to arrive at a 
negation of words." It's the culmination of Titchner's text-based work, 
perhaps: instead of ironically subverting meaningless slogans, he batters them 
senseless. Very heavy metal.

Finally, I drove to Birmingham Art Gallery <http://www.bmag.org.uk/>, where, 
in a space in which I've seen Renaissance art, is a show chronicling 40 years 
of heavy-metal culture. There I met the man credited with devising the first 
metal riff (possibly the one on Black Sabbath'sEvil Woman 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ey2zwdErPvQ>), Tony Iommi. I shook his 
legendarily injured right hand. How did Iommi feel to see his music given the 
institutional imprimatur? "It's fabulous – but it's taken a long time. We spent 
a lot of time in the States because we were frowned on so much here."

Does Iommi think different bands have different riffs depending on the 
different metalworking jobs their members worked in? "Maybe. That might explain 
whyJudas Priest <https://www.theguardian.com/music/judas-priest> 
sound different from us. Certainly the riffs I played on Paranoid or Iron Man 
only make sense if you realise where I worked as a teenager."

Iommi and I stood before a huge roto-relief, the Vertigo swirl. I told him 
that Titchner used to spend hours looking into it. "Yeah, a lot of our fans did 
– on dope probably."

Iommi wandered off to be feted by fans. I explored another room with electric 
guitars plugged into headphones for visitors to play. I strapped on a Flying V 
and tried to play a song I know well, Sabbath's Paranoid (it's my 
brother-in-law's ringtone). It sounded woeful. Clearly I need to work harder at 
reclaiming my cultural heritage.
 