
Australia and South Africa shared the honours in a drama-packed start to the 
day-night Test at Adelaide Oval, where Faf du Plessis scored a sweet captain’s 
century and made a daring declaration.

Sport picture of the day: best view in the house for The Richies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/nov/24/sport-picture-of-the-day-best-view-in-the-house-for-the-richies>
Du Plessis ended his superb knock at 118 not out and the Proteas’ total at 
259-9 late on day one of the third Test. Australia were 14-0 in response at 
stumps on Thursday, having successfully negotiated 12 overs. At the same point 
of their first innings in Hobart, Australia were 15-4 and on track to lose the 
second Test, the series and almost all credibility.

It was an improved performance for many reasons, and David Warner was not at 
the crease. Warner had been off the field receiving medical treatment late in 
the Proteas’ innings, meaning he was unable to open the batting with 
20-year-old debutant Matt Renshaw when du Plessis called an early an unexpected 
end to the Proteas’ first innings.

Instead, Renshaw and Usman Khawaja faced the pink ball under lights, including 
two tricky overs from debutant left-arm spinner Tabraiz Shamsi. Steve Smith and 
Warner both appeared furious at the change of innings, when told the 
vice-captain was unable to open the batting. It was one of many engaging 
moments soaked up by a crowd of 32,255, who watched a mature performance from 
Australia’s youngest Test XI since 1986.

Renshaw, stationed at first slip, clutched a low slips catch to dismiss Hashim 
Amla for five. The Queenslander, who was presented his baggy green by Ian 
Healy, then patiently waited 19 deliveries before getting off the mark with a 
boundary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fhonours-even-as-australia-and-warner-caught-short-by-du-plessis-declaration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b7c039b48d2d8d8d6b0df330b748ac1e2674406%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Honours%20even%20as%20Australia%20and%20Warner%20caught%20short%20by%20Du%20Plessis%20declaration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fhonours-even-as-australia-and-warner-caught-short-by-du-plessis-declaration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Honours%20even%20as%20Australia%20and%20Warner%20caught%20short%20by%20Du%20Plessis%20declaration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fhonours-even-as-australia-and-warner-caught-short-by-du-plessis-declaration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b7c039b48d2d8d8d6b0df330b748ac1e2674406%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 The sun sets during day one at the Adelaide Oval. Photograph: Morne de 
Klerk/Getty Images 
Australia make steady start after du Plessis lights up Adelaide - as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/24/australia-v-south-africa-third-test-day-one-live>
Josh Hazlewood, who snared career-best figures of 6-70 in last year’s 
inaugural day-night Test at Adelaide Oval, was again a handful with the pink 
pill. Hazlewood removed Amla – for the fourth time this series – and JP Duminy 
in the opening session. The right-armer then dismissed Quinton de Kock, leading 
run-scorer of the series, and Vernon Philander in the post-tea session to 
finish with figures of 4-68 from 22 overs.

But Hazlewood couldn’t unsettle a determined du Plessis. The skipper ended a 
week of controversy in the best possible fashion, winning the toss and rescuing 
the visitors after they slipped to 44-3. Du Plessis was booed by many fans when 
he entered the fray, having been found guilty of ball tampering earlier this 
week.

The noise was reduced to a smattering of jeers when du Plessis reached three 
figures. They were largely drowned out by a lot of applause – from the outer 
and also from Smith and his teammates. Recalled keeper Matthew Wade completed a 
sharp stumping to bring some joy to off-spinner Nathan Lyon, who had gone 
wicketless for 110 first-class overs.
 