
Women in suits, mothers and daughters, hucksters selling “Nasty Women” pins 
and tens of thousands of members of the public came to Manhattan’s largestglass 
ceiling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/08/glass-ceiling-watch-blog-first-female-president-us-election>
 on Tuesday night, to await the result of a presidential election that many 
hoped would sweep away thehighest gender barrier in US politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/older-voters-hillary-clinton-woman-president>
.

Donald Trump wins presidential election, plunging US into uncertain future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
As the night went on and results did not go the Democrats’ way, the mood in 
and around the building grew darker.That barrier would stay standing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
. Past two in the morning, it was reported that Hillary Clinton had conceded 
defeat in the presidential election.

The Jacob K Javits Convention Center, the imposing glass structure named for a 
long-serving liberal Republican senator, had been selected as a fitting 
election-night venue for a candidate who eight years ago, after her defeat by 
Barack Obama in the Democratic primary, assured a crowd of tearful female 
supporters that they had helped place 18 million cracks in the “the highest, 
hardest glass ceiling”.

On election night, a halo of high-powered lights gave the building an ethereal 
glow. The lights also illuminated thousands outside, unable to gain access, 
some of them clutching tickets. TheNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> police made 11th Avenue an 
impromptu holding area. Burger vans did a thriving trade on a fresh fall 
evening by the Hudson.

Inside, Clinton was supposed to speak on a stage constructed in the shape of 
the United States, her podium positioned somewhere over Texas, a deep red state 
that would stay that way despite a nationwide increase in the Hispanic vote 
that had fuelled hopes of turning it purple, if not Democratic blue. American 
flags lined the stage. The pledge of allegiance was said, the national anthem 
played.

Thunderous cheers rang off that glass ceiling as newscasters announced that 
Clinton had won Illinois, the state where she was born. States came and went, 
largely as expected: Delaware, Vermont, Massachusetts and Rhode Island for 
Clinton, South Carolina, Alabama and more for Trump. But things were 
predictably close in Florida, and as Trump surged back into contention tension 
rose at the Javits.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fpath-election-day-hillary-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bumpy%20road%20to%20election%20day%3A%20Clinton's%20campaign%20in%20two%20minutes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fpath-election-day-hillary-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bumpy%20road%20to%20election%20day%3A%20Clinton%27s%20campaign%20in%20two%20minutes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fpath-election-day-hillary-clinton-video&media=>
Bumpy road to election day: Clinton’s campaign in two minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/08/path-election-day-hillary-clinton-video>
Outside, New York’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, addressed the crowd, who waved 
American flags. A coalition of women who have lost family members to gun 
violence or police killing also addressed the crowd.

“We are not going back, we are going forward,” said Gwen Carr, mother of Eric 
Garner, a black man from Staten Island who died in a police chokehold.

When news came in that Clinton had won New York, an unsurprising result, the 
audience cheered and waved. News that Trump was winning in Florida and that it 
was close in North Carolina, however, was met with an eerie silence. Both 
states were crucial to the Republican’s path to victory.

Jennifer Sutton, 44, of the Jersey shore, spoke to reporters over a barricade. 
She said she was enjoying the kindness and congeniality of the crowd, an 
antidote, she said, to the negativity of the last 18 months.

“It’s a bit of a scary time right now,” she said.

Brian Hassett, 55, an American from New York who now lives in Toronto, said he 
had driven down to witness history. As the race tightened in recent weeks, 
Hassett said, friends had called him to inquire about moving north if Trump 
were elected.
Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) 
This team has so much to be proud of. Whatever happens tonight, thank you for 
everything.pic.twitter.com/x13iWOzILL <https://t.co/x13iWOzILL>
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/796169187882369024> November 9, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/796169187882369024> 
The thousands outside the Javits faced an unplanned alfresco evening which was 
quickly dubbed a “block party”. They were able to watch events inside on large 
screens, as well as studying their phones.

At 8.55pm, the Clinton campaign put out a tweet 
<https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/796169187882369024> showing Clinton 
embracing a young girl. It did not carry a triumphalist message. “This team has 
so much to be proud of,” the tweet read. “Whatever happens tonight, thank you 
for everything.”

Inside the Javits, eyes were are glued to TVs as the returns rolled in. The 
mood dropped markedly. News that Trump had picked up Ohio and Florida was met 
with grimaces and head shakes. But it was North Carolina that really sent 
shivers down the spines of her supporters and staff. There was hardly a whisper 
from the thousands on the conference floor.

Whenever a network panned to the Javits, the glum crowd roared to life, 
cheering and applauding, seeking to send out a signal that they still had hope. 
The nominee was watching the results from the Peninsula hotel in Midtown 
Manhattan, having voted earlier in the day with her husband, former president 
Bill Clinton, near their home in Chappaqua, New York.

Election day: the key points as they happen with the votes being tallied
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/presidential-election-updates-trump-clinton-news>
At the hotel, an aide said at 8.30pm, the Clintons worked on the candidate’s 
planned remarks, and “noshed a little bit” on a buffet spread that included 
salmon, roasted carrots, vegan pizza and fries. Chelsea Clinton and Marc 
Mezvinsky were in the Clinton suite, with the grandchildren.


Asked about the mood of the campaign, the aide said: “We felt confident this 
morning and into the afternoon. Nothing has changed that.” The aide pointed to 
Nevada as a state the campaign felt good about, and said they had no reason “to 
feel different” about Virginia or Michigan. Virginia stayed blue. Nevada went 
blue. But Michigan was too close to call and other states were falling.

Radio silence descended, with campaign aides nowhere to be found at the 
Javits. Outside, at the so-called “block party” which hadn’t felt like much of 
a party, Carroll Shepard, a Florida voter, said she had come to New York with 
her three children to celebrate her retirement – and what she hoped would be 
the election of the first female president.

“I never thought [Trump] would win,” Shepard said. One of her daughters wore a 
striped seersucker suit, in honor of Clinton’s favorite ensemble.

“I’m just so disappointed and so sorry,” Shepard said, her voice shaking.

In the early hours of the morning, not long before the race was called and 
Clinton conceded, her campaign chairman, John Podesta, took the stage to ask 
supporters if they could hang a little while longer.

“I can say we can wait a little longer can’t we?” Podesta said. “They’re still 
counting votes and every vote should count. Several states are too close to 
call, so we’re not going to have anything more to say tonight.”

Supporters made a teary exit. Mothers carried weary daughters out of the glass 
structure that in the end hosted shattered hopes, not broken barriers.

“What just happened,” Gloria Lowell asked, shaking her head. She repeated the 
question. A man turned around and raised his beer.

“We lost,” he said. “We lost and it hurts.” The pair of strangers embraced. 


Lowell, an educator from Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, said she expected to cry. 
She was emotional all day just thinking about the history of the moment. She 
didn’t expect it would be tears of deep disappointment.


The mother of an adopted 12-year-old son from Guatemala, Lowell said she had 
to drive home tonight so that she could tell him in person. She wiped tears 
from her eyes again.

“I don’t know what’s going to happen tomorrow.” 

 