
Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hornby> plans to leave its 
historic Margate headquarters after transferring its warehouse to an outsourced 
operation.

The maker of model trains, Airfix kits and Corgi cars has moved the warehouse 
and its 21 permanent employees 11 miles away to an industrial estate at 
Hersden, near Canterbury. The plan is for adminstrative staff from the Margate 
offices to follow, early next year.

The move will come as a blow to Margate, the once-bustling resort on the Kent 
coast that is trying to revive its fortunes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/09/tesco-ditches-plans-build-superstore-margate-seafront>
.

The remainder of Hornby’s Margate site is occupied by the company’s visitor 
centre, which hosts thousands of enthusiasts a year. Sales, admin and visitor 
centre staff together employ 110 people.

In a statement accompanying its half-year results, Hornby said: “Consideration 
is being given to moving the offices and visitor centre to more suitable 
locations within the local area in order that the whole site can then be 
redeveloped.”

Hornby owns the freehold on the visitor centre site, where 35,000 people a 
year go to see company founder Frank Hornby’s early home-made toys in sheet 
metal and other attractions.

The plan is to move the centre closer to the seafront, possibly still in 
Margate but with nearby Ramsgate another option. Both towns are part of Thanet, 
the easternmost coastal district of Kent whereNigel Farage will contest the 
South Thanet seat for Ukip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/26/nigel-farage-selected-ukip-south-thanet>
 at next year’s general election.

Margate is trying to reverse decades of decay since Britons began flying to 
hotter countries for their holidays. The Turner gallery has attracted visitors 
andthe artist Wayne Hemingway is backing a redevelopment of the derelict 
Dreamland amusement park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/10/margate-dreamland-vintaghe-amusement-park>
, but Hornby remains a significant private sector employer.

The Margate site opened 60 years ago as a new factory for Hornby’s rival, 
Tri-ang Railways, and became Hornby’s home when Tri-Ang’s owner, Lines 
Brothers, bought Hornby’s parent, Meccano and merged the model rail brands 
under the banner Tri-Ang Hornby.

Hornby made its products at the plant until the 1990s, when it transferred 
manufacturing to Asia and the old factory became a warehouse. But the site 
became run down and struggled to handle big lorries used in modern deliveries.

Hornby has struggled for years with delays to products from its manufacturer 
in China. After freeing itself from the manufacturing agreement, the company 
said business was improving. For the six months to the end of September, sales 
rose 8% to £24.2m and pre-tax losses halved to £516,000.

Hornby has hired the commercial real estate firm Jones Laing Laselle to advise 
it on its options for the Margate site. The closure planfirst emerged when it 
announced the warehouse move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/27/horby-close-warehouse-kent> 
in June.
 