
Want to make a monster? Well, grab a big bag, head out to the countryside, and 
find the strangest creatures you can: bats, dragonflies, lizards, birds, 
snakes. Then lock yourself in your room, kill the animals and chop them up, 
keeping the most interesting bits: a bat’s wings, a serpent’s tail, an owl’s 
eyes. Stick these together to make a terrifying, marvellous, magical new being 
– and invite people round to see your new “pet” before it starts to stink.

This was how a young boy called Leonardo da Vinci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/davinci> made a monster in his 
bedroom, according to his 16th-century biographer Giorgio Vasari. Monsters: A 
Bestiary of the Bizarre – a new picture book of imaginary creatures in handy 
pocket format – shows Da Vinci was not alone. Artists have been creating 
monsters for centuries, using exactly the same splicing technique.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fmonsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff22e84dab9aa2a65191b00a669e2f0a62e7d6b75%2F0_0_4380_2252%2F4380.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Horny%2C%20hairy%20and%20horrifying%3A%20the%20scariest%20monsters%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fmonsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Horny%2C%20hairy%20and%20horrifying%3A%20the%20scariest%20monsters%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fmonsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff22e84dab9aa2a65191b00a669e2f0a62e7d6b75%2F0_0_4380_2252%2F4380.jpg>
 A 1551 engraving of a sea monster. 
Consider Caliban, the monstrous servant of Prospero in Shakespeare’s The 
Tempest. In about 1735,William Hogarth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hogarth> painted him with fin-like 
appendages that sprout from his shoulders, scaly legs and webbed feet. This 
seems only right since, in the play, Trinculo asks: “What have we here? A man 
or a fish? ... A fish: he smells like a fish.” Monsters in art frequently 
invite such category-challenging questions. A unicorn, for example, is simply a 
horse with a narwhal’s tusk on its forehead. In fact, in the past, real narwhal 
tusks – which boast a distinctive spiral pattern – were exhibited as unicorn 
horns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fmonsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aaacdbc16dcaf0320995b68f2a3b25fdbcdd76c%2F0_50_2993_3996%2F2993.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Horny%2C%20hairy%20and%20horrifying%3A%20the%20scariest%20monsters%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fmonsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Horny%2C%20hairy%20and%20horrifying%3A%20the%20scariest%20monsters%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fmonsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aaacdbc16dcaf0320995b68f2a3b25fdbcdd76c%2F0_50_2993_3996%2F2993.jpg>
 An engraving of animal-head gods from the 16th century 
The unicorn features in Monsters, as does the dragon (body of a lizard, wings 
of a bat, head of a snake). But it’s the werewolf that seems to have had a 
particularly fascinating relationship with art. When half-men, half-wolves make 
it into art, the results are generally terrifying. Take Lucas Cranach’s print 
of a hairy man on all fours stealing away from a 16th-century German village 
with a baby in his mouth; or the popular 18th-century image of the Wolf of 
Gevaudan, a gigantic creature that towers over a poor woman it is about to 
devour.

Was the Wolf of Gevaudan a werewolf – or simply a gigantic wolf? One thing is 
known: something ran rampant in rural south-west France in the 18th century, 
causing the gory deaths of animals and people. It may have been the age of 
Voltaire, a time when the Enlightenment was supposedly spreading science, but 
the willingness to blame the attacks on a monster shows the lingering spectre 
of the irrational.

This is the most startling thing about monsters: that people believe in them, 
or have done so in the past. In many ways, the pages of this monstrous bestiary 
resemble the work of the surrealists – as wild and wonderful as a Max Ernst 
collage of a man with wings in a Victorian drawing room. Yet Ernst never 
believed there really was such a creature, just as Picasso didn’t lock his 
bedroom door at night to keep out the Minotaur. The monsters depicted by 
artists before the modern era were different. They were things that people 
believed existed, out there in the depths of the night, at the edge of the 
world.

A giant octopus embraces a sailing ship that is about to be dragged under the 
waves, helpless in its tentacles. Beware the creatures of the deep. Men with no 
heads, and faces on their bellies, parade about naked. This is not whimsy but a 
serious medieval illustration to The Travels of Sir John Mandeville, which 
tells of seeing a race of such men in distant lands. Apparently, they grin 
happily because they are untroubled by thought, lacking a brain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fmonsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b2e267e4602d3a35081ca67c22fc364cfff8981%2F76_25_4940_3179%2F4940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Horny%2C%20hairy%20and%20horrifying%3A%20the%20scariest%20monsters%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fmonsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Horny%2C%20hairy%20and%20horrifying%3A%20the%20scariest%20monsters%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fmonsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b2e267e4602d3a35081ca67c22fc364cfff8981%2F76_25_4940_3179%2F4940.jpg>
 Not merely whimsy … an illustration for the 14th-century Travels of Sir John 
Mandeville. Photograph: Johansen Krause 
The most fantastically imaginative of all art’s monsters, however, appear in 
Renaissance paintings of hell, the devil, and the demons who tempted St 
Anthony. To imagine these fiends, artists took Leonardo da Vinci’s monster 
mashup to its extreme. Every monstrous possibility is showcased – from faces on 
stomachs or arses to skulls for heads and men’s bodies with goats’ legs. This 
is the art you get – horrific, demonic – in an age when hell is real.

The top 10 monsters in art
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/15/top-10-monsters-in-art> 
Scared? Probably not. Modern science has banished monsters to fantasy and 
fiction. We scan exoplanets for signs of life, but whatever may be out there, 
we’re fairly sure it’s not the Daleks. Monsters are for fun these days. Yet 
turn out the light, and the dark is still eerie. Look down while swimming and 
that shadow could be a shark.


Curiously, the most terrifying creation in Monsters takes the form of a giant 
skeleton stalking two men. This macabre masterpiece of Japanese art, which 
crept out of the imagination of Utagawa Kuniyoshi in the 19th century, is 
arguably not even a monster. It is us: the human form itself, stripped of 
flesh, returned from the grave – and more frightening than any dragon.

 * Monsters: A Bestiary of the Bizarre is published by Thames and Hudson on 11 
August.  