
Once Kate Downing and her husband Steve did the math, it was obvious that if 
they wanted to raise a family, staying in Palo Alto, California, was not an 
option. Although Steve, 33, works as a software engineer at a nearbySilicon 
Valley <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> technology 
company and Kate, 31, is a product attorney at another tech firm, the cost of 
owning a home near their jobs has simply become too steep for them.

If they wanted to purchase their current house – which they rent with another 
couple for $6,200 a month total – it would cost $2.7m plus monthly mortgage and 
tax payments of $12,177, adding up to more than $146,000 a year.

Instead, the couple will soon relocate 45 miles south to Santa Cruz, a city by 
the beach where they can afford to purchase a home and eventually raise 
children.

The Downings’ housing struggle in the northern California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> region that is home to many of 
the world’s wealthiest tech companies carries a special irony due to Kate’s 
second job: up until this week, she served as a planning and transportation 
commissioner for Palo Alto – a position in which she pushed city officials to 
build more housing and pass pro-development policies that could help solve the 
growing affordability crisis.

Kate vented her frustrations about the dangerous housing shortage in Silicon 
Valley in a Wednesday post onMedium 
<https://medium.com/@katevershovdowning/letter-of-resignation-from-the-palo-alto-planning-and-transportation-commission-f7b6facd94f5#.4hm5t0cqb>
 announcing her formal resignation from the Palo Alto planning and 
transportation commission.

The letter, which has spread on social media, sheds light on a harsh reality 
of the intensifying housing crunch that the California tech boom has greatly 
exacerbated in recent years. That is, home prices have skyrocketed so 
dramatically that even high-paid tech workers benefiting from the thriving 
local economy are choosing to relocate to cities where they can comfortably 
raise children without pouring a huge percent of their income into housing.

“If even people like me can’t remain in the heart of Silicon Valley, it tells 
you just how awful the situation is for everyone else,” Kate said in a phone 
interview. “It gives us an indication of how much suffering there is out there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-housing-official-resigns-california-home-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff71a8f97252d12dc46a6747e57cc62697a143d46%2F0_36_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Housing%20official%20in%20Silicon%20Valley%20resigns%20because%20she%20can't%20afford%20to%20live%20there&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-housing-official-resigns-california-home-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Housing%20official%20in%20Silicon%20Valley%20resigns%20because%20she%20can%27t%20afford%20to%20live%20there&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-housing-official-resigns-california-home-prices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff71a8f97252d12dc46a6747e57cc62697a143d46%2F0_36_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Kate: ‘If even people like me can’t remain in the heart of Silicon Valley, it 
tells you just how awful the situation is for everyone else.’ Photograph: 
Courtesy of the Downings 
In Palo Alto, she said she was particularly worried about teachers, first 
responders and service workers being priced out of the city – and the entire 
region.

The fight over housing in Palo Alto, which is about 40 miles south of San 
Francisco, mirrorspolicy debates across Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/05/high-house-prices-san-francisco-tech-boom-inequality>
, which is home to the headquarters of Apple, Google, Facebook and other 
smaller tech startups that have attracted significant wealth and new jobs.

The housing supply, however, has not matched the resulting demand, and 
officials and researchers have increasingly recognized the dire consequences 
for low-wage residents. Somestudies 
<http://www.sfgate.com/opinion/openforum/article/Suburbs-not-just-S-F-need-to-address-5455192.php>
 have shown that roughly 70,000 low-income workers in Silicon Valley nowcommute 
more than 50 miles to get to their jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/facebook-headquarters-expansion-menlo-park-california-housing>
.

Between 2000 and 2013, the region lost 50% of units defined as affordable 
while the number of low-income households jumped by 10%, according to onestudy 
<https://ww2.kqed.org/news/2015/08/27/uc-berkeley-bay-area-gentrification-displacement-map>
. Tech firms haveworsened inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/14/silicon-valley-tech-firms-income-inequality-world-bank>
, and in the shadow of the biggest companies, the region has seenmass evictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/07/silicon-valley-largest-eviction-rent-controlled-tenants-income-inequality>
, expandinghomeless encampments 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-silicon-valley-homeless-20141204-story.html>
, andmobile home parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2015/nov/13/residents-palo-alto-buena-vista-mobile-park-in-pictures>
 threatened with closure.

Analysts are now predicting 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/tech-starting-feel-silicon-valleys-housing-crunch-residents-leave-region-2330875>
 that the housing crisis is going to have aserious impact 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-05/san-francisco-tech-firms-see-workers-flee-from-4-500-rents>
 on higher paid tech workers, potentially encouraging a sizableexodus 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/03/silicon-valleys-exodus-begins>.

While many housing advocates have pressured tech firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/facebook-headquarters-expansion-menlo-park-california-housing>
 tocontribute significant funds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/01/tech-tax-san-francisco-homelessness-inequality>
 to help mitigate the crisis, others have argued that the blame lies with 
cities that promote a “not-in-my-back-yard” mentality and have blocked the 
rapid housing development that the region now needs.

“I have repeatedly made recommendations to the council to expand the housing 
supply in Palo Alto so that together with our neighboring cities who are 
already adding housing, we can start to make a dent in the jobs-housing 
imbalance that causes housing prices throughout the Bay Area to spiral out of 
control,” Kate wrote in her resignation letter.

The Downings and other tech workers who have recently left Palo Alto said the 
only homes they could afford would require them to live in areas far from their 
offices, forcing them to embark on hellish commutes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-housing-official-resigns-california-home-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd472ae8f40666759add095f4d491d4e15c0117e2%2F41_2_637_478%2F637.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Housing%20official%20in%20Silicon%20Valley%20resigns%20because%20she%20can't%20afford%20to%20live%20there&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-housing-official-resigns-california-home-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Housing%20official%20in%20Silicon%20Valley%20resigns%20because%20she%20can%27t%20afford%20to%20live%20there&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fsilicon-valley-housing-official-resigns-california-home-prices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd472ae8f40666759add095f4d491d4e15c0117e2%2F41_2_637_478%2F637.jpg>
 Kate and Steve Downing. Photograph: Courtesy of the Downings 
“We create jobs here, and we benefit from those jobs, but we outsource the 
housing burden to communities who can least afford it,” Kate said. She argues 
that the city and neighboring municipalities should loosen restrictions on new 
development and push for more dense housing.

Palo Alto mayor Patrick Burt, who has clashed with Kate on the commission, 
said the city was working to slow job growth and increase the rate of housing 
development, but added, “We’re not going to have a full catch-up [in housing] 
with the amount of jobs we have here.”

Andy Isaacson, a 35-year-old software engineer and friend of the Downings, 
recently moved from Palo Alto to Omaha, Nebraska, where he and his wife could 
afford to raise their daughter and newborn twins.


“Between paying rent and finding childcare … it was just basically, completely 
not sustainable,” he said.

'Largest-ever' Silicon Valley eviction to displace hundreds of tenants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/07/silicon-valley-largest-eviction-rent-controlled-tenants-income-inequality>
Joe Snider, a 31-year-old information technology analyst, left Palo Alto for 
Colorado and now works remotely for his company. He said he also supports fewer 
regulations and unrestricted housing development.

Snider and his partner are both from northern California and wanted to remain, 
but they ultimately decided that the idea of an hour-long commute was too 
daunting.

“The ideal situation would’ve been us staying in Palo Alto and seeing a 
long-term future there,” he said.

“If things changed,” he added, “we would honestly consider moving back.”
 