
When he’s lying in the bath on the top floor of his house in Edinburgh, 
architectRichard Murphy <http://www.richardmurphyarchitects.com/viewItem.php> 
is in a good position to survey the surrounding scene. The skirting board 
slides back to reveal a peephole slot down into the living room, a motor grinds 
into action and the ceiling opens up to the sky, while another lever is pulled 
and the entire corner of the building swings open, exposing his bathing body to 
the street. In this slipping, sliding transformer of a home, awardedHouse of 
the Year 2016 
<https://www.architecture.com/Awards/Awards2016/HouseoftheYear/RIBAHouseoftheYear2016.aspx>
 by the Royal Institute of British Architects this week, you have to be careful 
where you tread.

“I think I missed my vocation as a caravan designer,” says the portly 
60-year-old architect, as he deftly slides along his bookcase on a steel 
ladder, before flipping open a secret hatch in the staircase to pick up the 
day’s post. On a six-metre deep site at the end of a sloping Georgian terrace 
in Edinburgh’s New Town, he has concocted a three-dimensional spatial riddle 
that speaks of a lifetime of coming up with ingenious solutions to tight 
historic contexts, carving out a richly layered world that revels in its 
playful architectural tricks. A friend of Murphy’s has dubbed it the “Rubik’s 
cube house”, but it feels more like climbing through a game of snakes and 
ladders: one wrong move and you could be catapulted out on to the street.
 Window on the world... one of the Murphy House’s many openings. Photograph: 
Keith Hunter 
The fun begins on the outside where, to eyes accustomed to the neighbourhood’s 
19th-century townhouses, the building might not quite look finished. The corner 
of the house appears to have been unzipped, with big gaps between the stone 
blocks like missing teeth, an effect that becomes more pronounced at night when 
these gaping holes glow from within. A rubble wall – traditionally used for the 
cheaper, unseen facades around the back of the neighbouring terraces – runs 
along the side of the house, seemingly standing free from the building (the 
trick of a mirror, it turns out). The stone walls give way to layers of lighter 
materials, as if the home had been built inside an existing ruin, with a 
collage of glass blocks and timber screens, glazing and steel I-beams, along 
which garage doors and window shutters roll on little wheels. Even the bits 
that don’t move look like they could, or maybe once did, as if the whole house 
had been composed from a kit of parts that might one day be reconfigured inside 
the stone shell. It’s a busy bricolage of bits and bobs – and a bit of an 
eyeful.

“I suppose I’m a bit of a maximalist,” says Murphy, whose 20-strong practice 
has worked on everything from stealthy private homes touniversity campuses 
<http://www.richardmurphyarchitects.com/viewItem.php?id=7146&projectTypeId=143>
, and has just completedan extension to the first Carnegie library 
<http://www.richardmurphyarchitects.com/viewItem.php?id=2403> in nearby 
Dunfermline. “I try to wring every maximum possible opportunity for 
architecture out of a site. I freely admit that perhaps this house is 
‘over-designed’.” It was too much for the planners, who recommended refusal, 
but were overturned by the committee, perhaps mindful that another one of 
Murphy’s award-winning mews houses had been turned down before, as the local 
newspaper pointed out with glee 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/house-that-council-rejected-twice-wins-prize-1-1317861>
.

The outside might be odd, but the spatial sleights of hand begin to make more 
sense when you step inside. Entering the house, you’re greeted with a 
curvaceous wall of pink polished plaster, which leads you on to a narrow 
dog-leg staircase, lined with bookshelves and more mirrors (doubling Murphy’s 
decades-long collection of National Geographics), punctuated with little 
windows, framed through the gaps in the facade. The tight stair spills on to a 
multilevelled sitting-cum-dining-cum-kitchen space, a terraced tableau of the 
functions of living, disaggregated into their component parts, each pulled back 
into its own nook, framed with different-coloured plaster walls.
 One of the Murphy House’s three bedrooms. Photograph: Keith Hunter 
The walls don’t simply rise to the ceiling, but make their way there via a 
series of staggered ledges and shelves and clerestory glass panels, a measured 
sequence of layers and levels reminiscent ofFrank Lloyd Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/20/frank-lloyd-wright-and-the-zombie-building-boom>
’s interiors, always pausing to create little places for the body, or eye, to 
rest. Perhaps counter-intuitively for a tight site, the walls are castle-thick 
– up to 600mm (2ft) – but they are layered so as to make the rooms feel larger 
rather than more cramped, expanding to accommodate stairs and sliding shutters, 
or house a pulley to operate another hidden contraption.
 The house, left, next to its neighbour, somewhat mirroring its stonework. 
Photograph: Keith Hunter 
A big sliding glass door leads on to a small patio, designed as a homage to 
Murphy’s hero, the Italian architectCarlo Scarpa 
<http://www.archdaily.com/638534/spotlight-carlo-scarpa>. It’s inspired by his 
garden at theQuerini Stampalia 
<http://www.querinistampalia.org/eng/contemporary/architecture/carlo_scarpa.php>
 in Venice, and uses exposed aggregate concrete walls and a frieze of metallic 
tiles sourced from the same manufacturer. Other key touchstones were theMaison 
de Verre 
<http://www.archdaily.com/248077/ad-classics-maison-de-verre-pierre-chareau-bernard-bijvoet>
 in Paris by Pierre Chareau, a 1920s hymn to steel, glass blocks and mechanical 
fixtures, and the interlocking vertical spiral of rooms in Adolf Loos’s 1930
Villa Müller <http://architectuul.com/architecture/villa-muller> in Prague. In 
a similar vein, Murphy has somehow packed eight levels into the building’s four 
storeys, juggling three bedrooms, three bathrooms, a study, garage and the main 
living space in an interlocking puzzle, always prising open unexpected glimpses 
between the multiple levels.

Sir John Soane’s Museum <http://www.soane.org/> in London, with its intricate 
universe of mirrors, views and pivoting walls, was clearly a key influence. As 
Murphy puts it, the project is “a quarter Soane, a quarter Scarpa, a quarter 
eco-house and a quarter Wallace and Gromit.” A lot of the complexity comes from 
the project’s long gestation: it won planning permission in 2007, but the 
recession put the brakes on, happily allowing four years of “fiddling about” 
with the design.

The result is more than just a collage of quotations and madcap inventions 
(including a soon-to-be-installed log-lift from the cellar). All the flaps and 
shutters create a home that feels truly responsive to the seasons and different 
modes of inhabitation. Citing another precedent, Murphy calls on Dutch architect
Aldo van Eyck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/jan/28/guardianobituaries.jonathanglancey>
, who said that a house should be both a bird’s nest and a cave, an extrovert 
place in summer and a retreat in winter, which makes particular sense here. “In 
Edinburgh, we can have 20 hours of daylight a day or six,” he says, as the 
wintry leaden sky begins to fade to dusk. “The house needs to close down as 
much as open up.”

With that, he potters around the living room, pressing buttons and pulling at 
wires, and the space is instantly transformed from a light-flooded Scandinavian 
conservatory to a cosy timber-lined bothy.
 