
Tell us a bit about your job

I represent the British government in Cuba. This involves, among other things, 
helping British companies invest, ensuring the embassy provides an excellent
consular service 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/317474/FCO_Brits_Abroad_2014.pdf>
 to British tourists and residents, trying to persuade the Cuban government to 
agree with us on burning international issues, celebrating British culture and 
working with the Cuban health authorities to send doctors to help fight Ebola 
in Sierra Leone. Of course, I don’t do all this myself: I’ve got a great team 
that works really hard. But I do try to meet as many Cubans as possible, either 
face-to-face or through social media, and tell them about the UK – what we 
stand for, what we believe in, what makes the UK special.

How to become a charity chief executive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/09/how-to-become-a-charity-chief-executive>
What qualifications do you need to do your job?

No formal qualifications are required but ambassadors do need to be able to 
speak the language of the country they work in. The Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office (FCO) provides training and has just reopened its excellent language 
centre. I spoke French before joining the FCO 13 years ago, having worked for 
Christian Aid and Save the Children in francophone Africa. I’ve learned 
Portuguese (for Mozambique) and Spanish (for Cuba) since I joined the FCO. 
Thankfully, Latin has not been a requirement for a couple of decades.

What other skills and experience would help someone to do your job?

Like all civil servants, diplomats need to demonstrate the civil service 
competences: leadership, people management skills, the ability to work at pace 
and deliver to a high standard, communication skills, judgment, resilience. All 
of these are important, as is a good sense of the political context both at 
home and abroad. A good sense of humour helps, too.

How to join the civil service fast stream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>
But the real skill for a diplomat overseas is to be able to put yourself in 
someone else’s shoes, understand their perspective, read between the (normally 
blurred) lines, spot and tackle the flaws in their argument, identify shared 
interests, common ground and any policy implications – and then relay all this 
back to the department in London in a short email.

If you were looking for your replacement, how could someone stand out in the 
interview?

Christopher Meyer, ex UK ambassador in Washington DC, once suggested a good 
diplomat needs “a quick mind, a hard head, a strong stomach, a warm smile and a 
cold eye”. Demonstrate in an interview that you’ve got the lot and you should 
be in with a shout.

What do you wish you’d known when you started your career?

I knew a lot about Africa when I joined the FCO, because I’d spent many years 
there as a teacher and aid worker and studied politics and economics at 
university. But I wish I’d known a lot more about everything else. In my job I 
meet a huge number of people and have conversations about everything from 
turtle smuggling to debt financing, counter narcotics to Isis, the Beatles (who 
are still very big in Cuba) to Opec oil pricing policy. So having a wide and 
deep general knowledge helps.

What is the worst advice you’ve ever received?

 * Sir Henry Wotton, a 16th-century diplomat, is reputed to have said that “an 
ambassador is an honest man sent to lie abroad for his country”. Not in my 
experience. Telling the truth gains people’s confidence and builds a 
relationship of trust. 
 * “Always start a speech with a quote from Leon Trotsky.” Need I say more? 
Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 