
By any standards, it was a remarkable year for news, from Syria to Brexit and 
Trump. But on all of these big stories, which lent themselves to powerful 
visual images, TV news felt increasingly unreliable, a great, sucking vortex 
wasting viewers’ time when they can get hits of information faster and more 
personally tailored elsewhere.

Indeed, the big news for TV news came in June when media watchers from the 
University of Oxford found thatsocial media had overtaken TV 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36528256> as young people’s main source of news. 
Of the 18- to 24-year-olds surveyed by the Reuters Institute for the Study of 
Journalism, 28% cited social media as their main news source, compared with 24% 
for TV. TV news audiences are in freefall (in the UK, they’ve declined by 3% to 
4% a year on average since 2012).

But it’s not only the young who are turning off TV news. I’m 54 and thus part 
of a generation for whom TV news was once the go-to source for breaking news. 
Today, I hardly ever watch TV news, because it seems scantly to repay my 
attention; the only certainty is it will insult my intelligence. Perhaps it was 
always like that. However, in the marketplace of news, there’s less and less 
reason to expose myself to it. And if fiftysomething media drones are turning 
off TV news and looking for their information elsewhere, whois watching?

Twenty years go, the latest developments in the so-called Battle of the Bongs 
(the ratings feud between the BBC and ITV’s 10pm news bulletins) would have 
been significant, perhaps even front-page, news. Today? Not so much. Reports 
that ITV’s News at Ten is revamping and shifting to 10.30pm in January felt 
like moving deckchairs on the Titanic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fhow-tv-news-failed-to-keep-up-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76a268d280d639e2df1f2de092118b94786ddbd5%2F194_393_2427_1456%2F2427.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20TV%20news%20failed%20to%20keep%20up%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fhow-tv-news-failed-to-keep-up-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20TV%20news%20failed%20to%20keep%20up%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fhow-tv-news-failed-to-keep-up-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76a268d280d639e2df1f2de092118b94786ddbd5%2F194_393_2427_1456%2F2427.jpg>
 ‘TV news seems scantly to repay my attention’ ... BBC News at Ten’s Huw 
Edwards. Photograph: Jeff Overs/BBC 
The BBC’s technology correspondent, Rory Cellan-Jones, put his finger on what 
is really terrifying about what happened to TV news in 2016. “While there still 
seems to be a big appetite for news, it is to social media platforms that users 
are increasingly turning to find it. This means Facebook is the most powerful 
force in global news, potentially offering publishers access to vast audiences, 
but leaving them dependent on the whims of its algorithm.”

For a public service broadcaster such as Cellan-Jones, this change is surely 
tragic. The great hope for institutions such as the BBC was that they would 
free viewers and listeners from the shackles of their feedback loops instead 
of, as in the business models of Amazon’s Jeff Bezos and Facebook’s Mark 
Zuckerberg, offering us stuff – coffee capsules, movies, friends, news – based 
on our previous preferences. News has become a commodity, rather than what it 
should be – a means of informing us about the world and challenging our 
sensibilities. While many British newspapers supply news that confirms only the 
worldview of their readers, the great hope ofReithian public broadcasting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/25/public-service-television-ofcom-bbc-channel-4>
 in Britain was that it would offer serendipity. Today, that means not only 
challenging bigoted newspapers, but also encouraging news consumers to break 
the mental chains with which Facebook and others ensnare us.

However, in 2016, that didn’t happen – and the future is even grislier. “There 
are no reasons to believe that a generation that has grown up with and enjoys 
digital, on-demand, social and mobile video viewing across a range of connected 
devices will come to prefer live, linear, scheduled programming tied to a 
single device just because they grow older,” says the Reuters Institute’s 
Rasmus Kleis Nielsen. What is the solution? The Reuters Institute argues TV 
news must reform or die, but it is sketchy about how.

One of the many dismal truths about Brexit, for instance, was how TV news 
missed the story. It never really called the leave campaign on its lies and 
misdirections and instead gave it airtime. It was not until a month after the 
country voted for Brexit that the BBC political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, 
showed – in her documentaryBrexit: The Battle for Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/09/the-battle-for-britain-review-laura-kuenssberg-post-brexit-who-do-your-job-now>
 – that the leave campaign’s claim that £350m a week of British taxpayers’ 
money went to Brussels was a house of cards that a single puff would flatten; 
pro-remain chancellor George Osborne’s claim that the average British family 
would lose £4,300 a year if we left the EU also received scant scrutiny. It was 
only then that she took Nigel Farage to task over that vile, cunning Breaking 
Point poster, asking the former Ukip leader if it was racist.

But the questions and the analysis no longer mattered: the country had voted 
for Brexit, in part inspired by the lies and distortions TV news didn’t 
properly analyse.

This year should have been one in which TV news was the only thing to watch. 
Instead, it was the year in which TV news demonstrated its irrelevance. In the 
end, it reported on nothing more poignantly than its own looming death.
 