
Twitter is being sold to Disney 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-09-26/disney-said-to-be-working-with-adviser-on-potential-twitter-bid>
. No,Microsoft 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/09/26/microsoft-seen-as-possible-twitter-bidder-source.html>
. No,Salesforce 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/salesforce-weighs-twitter-bid-to-spur-growth-1474839478>
. No,Alphabet <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-twitter-m-a-idUSKCN11T1GT>. 
The troubled, often controversial microblogging service is suddenly the 
prettiest tech company at the dance, with suitors clandestinely announced 
through media outlets including Bloomberg and CNBC throughout the weekend and 
into Monday morning. None have yet confessed they are serious.

Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> closed at $18.63 per 
share on Thursday, the day before the rumors started; by the time the bell rang 
on Monday afternoon, the stock had reached heights of $23.37, up further than 
the stock has been since January.

If Twitter is up for sale, what will potential suitors get for $15bn?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/23/twitter-sale-rumors-google-alphabet-salesforce>
Each sale has its apparent advantages – the Salesforce and Alphabet 
negotiations were initiated by Twitter executives themselves,according to 
Reuters <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-twitter-m-a-idUSKCN11T1GT>. Alphabet 
has been trying to get into social media since the good old days when it was 
called Google, with Google Wave, Google Buzz and more recently Google+.

Microsoft’s incentives would seem to be similar – the company’s recent $26.2bn 
acquisition of LinkedIn points toward a more aggressive social media strategy.

Brian Weiser of Pivotal Research Group told investors the purchase made sense 
for Google, whose “moonshot” investments in long-lead engineering and social 
projects may seem frivolous to investors. “We would argue that an acquisition 
of Twitter would be far better a use of capital than sitting on cash or on 
investing more in an unrelated business such as, let’s say, Google Fiber or 
self-driving cars,” Weiser wrote. “There is also the value of securing access 
to data associated with tweets, as this data can benefit Google’s search 
product. ForAlphabet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/alphabet>, the 
question of the appropriateness of an acquisition is simply one of value.”

Salesforce can also incorporate the kind of data that Twitter generates into 
its software. Twitter’s acquisition would be closer to a merger for Salesforce, 
which is a far smaller company than Google.

With respect to Disney, the ballgame is much different. The company’s 
ownership of ABC and ABC News, as well as ESPN, suddenly puts every news 
organization that uses the service to promote, source and engage with news 
coverage under the aegis of a single news organization-controlling outlet.

“The risk to Twitter is that ownership by one news-gathering organization 
might cause competitors (ie Fox News, CNN, NBC, CBS) to refrain from using the 
platform or favor a competitor such as Facebook, potentially leading to fewer 
users of the platform,” Weiser wrote. “However, we can imagine how usage could 
hold up or even improve if managed well, meaning that an acquisition could 
still make sense even if many of its contributors relied on the platform less 
in the future.”
 