
The Trussell Trust’s latest statistics 
<https://www.trusselltrust.org/news-and-blog/latest-stats/> show that food bank 
use in the UK remains at record levels, and that the supply of emergency food 
parcels has increased by 2% in the last year.

Amid the passionate discussion that these figures arouse, one comment by David 
McAuley, the trust’s chief executive, deserves attention: “Reducing UK hunger 
will require a collective effort from the voluntary sector, government, the 
Department for Work and Pensions, businesses and the public. The Trussell Trust 
is keen to work with all these groups to find solutions that stop so many 
people needing food banks in future.”

Trussell Trust CEO: ‘Half a million people struggle to put food on the table’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/dec/10/trussell-trust-ceo-food-banks-last-resort>
An admirable aspiration, but how can you unite these disparate agencies around 
a problem with such jagged edges and complex causes and effects? I believe the 
answer might lie in data science.

Over the past 18 months, the trust has been working with researchers from Hull 
University Business School <http://www2.hull.ac.uk/hubs/> and us at social 
innovation agencyAAM Associates <http://www.aamassociates.com/> to explore how 
new technologies can help them to fight UK hunger.

Using technology

The initial research <http://www.nemode.ac.uk/?page_id=1575> phase identified 
56 technologies that are already being used in food banks globally, and we held 
workshops with Trussell Trust staff to identify what might help them most with 
their operational needs. While digital fundraising methods and volunteer 
management systems were of great interest, most ideas felt like “nice-to-haves” 
rather than game changers. There was one exception – data analysis.

Charities all over the world, such as Citizens Advice 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/what-citizens-advice-learning-about-data-driven-innovation>
 and theSouth Carolina Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy 
<http://www.tableau.com/learn/stories/small-non-profit-answers-big-questions-tableau?src=recommended&block=block-views-recommended-similar-block>
, and public bodies includingthe New Orleans Fire Department 
<http://www.nola.gov/performance-and-accountability/nolalytics/>, have shared 
encouraging results from data analysis projects.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fdata-science-helping-charities-fight-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7015edb83f69f1b15c186dde67dece83744eb7ae%2F0_8_1099_539%2F1099.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20data%20science%20is%20helping%20charities%20to%20fight%20hunger%20in%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fdata-science-helping-charities-fight-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20data%20science%20is%20helping%20charities%20to%20fight%20hunger%20in%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fdata-science-helping-charities-fight-hunger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7015edb83f69f1b15c186dde67dece83744eb7ae%2F0_8_1099_539%2F1099.jpg>
 Trussell Trust graphic, mapping the use of food banks in south-east England. 
This aligned well with the trust’s More Than Food 
<https://www.trusselltrust.org/what-we-do/more-than-food/> initiative, which 
looks beyond providing emergency food and towards tackling the underlying 
causes of hunger and poverty. To do that, they need to know more about the 
people who come to them for help.

The trust’s core data includes food bank locations and individual client data, 
such as their names, addresses, ages and underlying causes of crisis – benefit 
delays, school holidays, homelessness, etc.

With data science firm Coppelia <http://www.coppelia.io/> recruited to the 
project, and having taken advice directly from theInformation Commissioner’s 
Office <https://ico.org.uk/> on appropriate data security, our initial analysis 
highlighted some noticeable regional variations and delivery patterns year on 
year.

On the map

A mapping tool <https://vimeo.com/164281583> was used to show how the trust’s 
users are distributed geographically. Heat maps showing demand – the darker the 
colour, the greater the demand – have allowed us to visualise regional patterns 
of need.

Even a cursory glance at the map suggests countless questions: how far do most 
clients travel? Are food banks located in the areas of greatest need? Why are 
particular crisis types more prevalent in certain areas?

More creatively, the platform also looks to predict potential areas of “unmet” 
need. The data was crunched to show the number of people fed by the trust, per 
head of population, in each local area since 2014. Various census statistics 
(levels of deprivation, unemployment) were then used to pinpoint key 
characteristics of the areas that received the most support. The results were 
used to predict – again using heat maps – where need for the trust’s services 
may be greatest across the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fdata-science-helping-charities-fight-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01836f6fbea16d4c5f2aa7d653daca198228b16b%2F0_0_1085_507%2F1085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20data%20science%20is%20helping%20charities%20to%20fight%20hunger%20in%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fdata-science-helping-charities-fight-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20data%20science%20is%20helping%20charities%20to%20fight%20hunger%20in%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fdata-science-helping-charities-fight-hunger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01836f6fbea16d4c5f2aa7d653daca198228b16b%2F0_0_1085_507%2F1085.jpg>
 Trussell Trust graphic, mapping the potential need for food banks in 
north-west England. 
The model is not perfect, but it already poses the question: how might the 
charity respond to signs of unmet need?

What next? 

For charities – especially those on the frontline helping people in crisis – 
this project highlights the importance of collecting data, and how the 
potential for aligning open data sets (a charge led well by theOpen Data 
Institute <http://theodi.org/>) with that data is rapidly becoming a reality. 

 Data scientists can be expensive, but data-hungry academics are always 
looking for frontline partnerships, and bodies such as theOR Society 
<https://www.theorsociety.com/> run great pro-bono programmes 
<http://www.theorsociety.com/Pages/Probono/Probono.aspx> to help. 

There are two next steps for the Trussell Trust in relation to this work – and 
neither is easy. First, they need to answer some of the many questions 
highlighted here. Data can provide new insights, but how do you act on them? 
How can you change focus, practice or even business model to respond to the 
issues?

Trussell Trust to give financial advice to people referred to its food banks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/12/trussell-trust-finance-debt-advice-food-banks-martin-lewis>
More strategically, the trust is beginning to look outside of its own walls 
for solutions. Sharing data with other charities – safely, securely and with 
the appropriate permissions – could create a significant step forward in 
understanding and answering local need.

The causes of poverty are complex, brittle and often unique to the individual 
case. Each cry for help, each visit to a food bank, each call to a debt advice 
line, paints an individual brush stroke in a much richer picture of local need.

Pooling data might provide users of crisis services with some small comfort 
that they are helping to deepen this country’s understanding of poverty, and in 
doing so, perhaps shielding others from its harsh glare.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> – it’s free!
 