
Our online lives have become highly personalised. Every digital action, 
whether liking a page on Facebook, or binge-watching a series on Netflix, helps 
to create a clearer picture of who you are online – information that businesses 
use to feed into their future strategies. While the for-profit world has 
embraced these processes, there are far fewer examples of charities and 
voluntary organisations doing the same.

In 2014, 79% of charities that use social media for fundraising reported a 
rise in the funds they received 
<http://eleventygroup.com/site/2015/03/31/noteworthy-nonprofit-fundraising-survey-findings/>
 compared with the previous year. This, combined with the fact that 44% of 
donors admit that they have the capacity to give more than they already do, 
means it is essential for you to better understand what motivates your 
supporters to donate.

What I learned during the Ice Bucket Challenge: be ready for anything
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jul/01/what-i-learned-during-the-ice-bucket-challenge-be-ready-for-anything>
We at Social Misfits Media surveyed 100 charities about the way they collect, 
analyse and use data to inform their fundraising strategies. The majority of 
those who responded were collecting data, but cited a lack of time to do any 
proper analysis or make any use of it. Data is an important part of the future 
of charities and digital fundraising, and charities need to change their 
culture if they don’t want to be left behind.

To help charities use data more efficiently we’ve produced What’s Data Got to 
Do with It?: A Free Guide to Data & Fundraising 
<http://pages.justgiving.com/whats-data-got-to-do-with-it>. The guide, produced 
in partnership withJustGiving <https://home.justgiving.com/> and the Institute 
of Fundraising <http://www.institute-of-fundraising.org.uk/home/>, is designed 
to help you begin to think about how to use data.

Using data to inform a strategy takes the guesswork out of a fundraising 
approach. It may seem daunting at first, so we’ve broken down the process into 
the four stages.

1. Data collection

What data should you collect? Demographic data – such as names, ages and 
locations – are an important first step, says Andrew Means, founder ofData 
Analysts for Social Good <http://dataanalystsforsocialgood.com/> and The Impact 
Lab <http://www.theimpactlab.co/>. “Beyond demographic information, there are 
two types of data that are really key: attitudinal data (how a person thinks or 
feels about themselves, the world or your cause) and behavioural data (what 
people actually do).”

You must think about the questions they want answered and avoid 
over-collecting data. Use tools to automate as much as possible, and test 
hypotheses around how people want to engage with you. This doesn’t have to be 
costly, or overly complicated. CharitySolarAid <http://solar-aid.org/> invested 
in Salesforce to store contact data, but also makes use of free and easy-to- 
use tools such as Excel, SurveyMonkey and Piktochart.

2. Analysis

Analysing data can help you identify valuable donors, the most effective 
channels to target your audience, and what direction you will need to take in 
the future.

The questions you want your data to answer should be formed at the collection 
stage, says Nik Shah, measurement partnerships lead at Facebook. Expertise does 
matter as bad analysis can undermine what you are trying to accomplish, but a 
good understanding of your organisation’s needs is key. “I think the best 
analysts are not the ones who have necessarily the flashiest skills, or can 
build the most sophisticated models, but rather those who are aware of all the 
business needs,” says Shah. “They create theories and interrogate the data to 
prove or disprove those theories. Quality of analysis doesn’t come from 
sophisticated technology. It comes from asking the right questions and keeping 
the organisation’s goals in mind.”

3. Implemention

Using insights from the data analysis stage, implement changes as part of an 
ongoing fundraising strategy. “There is enormous value in understanding the 
networks of the individuals that support your cause,” says Mike Bugembe, the 
chief analytics officer at JustGiving.

Should all charities merge their communication and fundraising teams?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jun/24/merging-departments-charities-benefits>
Using behavioural data, the online fundraising platform found that individuals 
were often motivated to start a fundraising campaign after the death of a loved 
one. As a result, JustGiving created an “In Memory” product, giving users a 
tailored and more sensitive experience, while also giving charities visibility 
so they could add those supporters to a more appropriate supporter-care 
programme. Implementing these changes improves the user experience, which can 
lead to greater fundraising success.

4. Creating a data-led culture

Internalising a data-led fundraising culture has to start incrementally, and 
should be flexible. Keep experimenting, try new things and make sure that 
everything you learn along the way influences your next campaign. According to 
fundraising and data expertBeth Kanter <http://bethkanter.org/> a lot of this 
is down to forming good habits in the form of running A/B tests and doing 
goodexperimentation. The goal is to get your team excited, with the added bonus 
of strengthening your relationship with supporters. UK charityMarie Curie 
<https://www.mariecurie.org.uk/> has encouraged its team to champion data by 
appointing a dedicated fundraising monitoring and evaluation officer.

How will this benefit my organisation?

Your charity will benefit from a broader insight into what your donors and 
supporters want, need and are responding positively to. As Bugembe says: “In an 
increasingly noisy digital universe, charities need to create a seamless 
user-journey across all channels to retain their audience’s attention.”

It’s no longer feasible to implement or invest in a fundraising campaign that 
isn’t evidence-based, but it is a scenario that we still see far too often, 
particularly for organisations where even adopting a presence on social media 
may have been an uphill battle.


While this process won’t take place overnight, there is no doubt it will 
produce valuable insights. Both successes and failures drive learning, and by 
taking an approach with genuine curiosity, you’ll able to get close to your 
supporters and understand what they want from their interactions with you.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community – it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 