
Tell us a bit about your job

I am head of libraries, culture and heritage for Devon county council. I lead 
a service with 50 libraries, four mobile libraries and three prison libraries, 
as well as having broader strategic responsibility for heritage and cultural 
services in the county. I am also president of theSociety of Chief Librarians 
<http://www.goscl.com/>, which leads and manages public library services across 
England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

Libraries <https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> are an important part 
of local community life: nationally there are more visits to libraries than to 
the cinema and premier league football matches combined. They have an important 
role in tackling digital inclusion, and increasingly people are turning to 
libraries for online help in applying for work, benefits or housing.

I enjoy my job – leading a really committed and engaged team and responding to 
the challenges of developing modern and inclusive services at a time of huge 
financial austerity. It is a time to rethink the role of libraries in local 
communities and explore new solutions to sustaining libraries. So often the 
media stereotype is of an old-fashioned service that’s in decline, but the 
reality is that libraries are providing much needed help that stretches beyond 
their traditional role as “street corner universities”.

What qualifications do you need to do your job?

I have a degree in English and an MA in librarianship. I’ve gained lots of 
skills and qualifications over the past 20 years and was a fellow on theClore 
Leadership Programme <http://www.cloreleadership.org/> a few years ago.


How to become a charity chief executive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/09/how-to-become-a-charity-chief-executive>
What other skills and experience would help someone to do your job?

So much of what we do in libraries is based on collaboration and working in 
partnership with other organisations, so an ability to broker and sustain a 
wide range of partnerships is key. In Devon, for example, every October we run 
a programme called Active Life, Active Mind, which encourages older people to 
take part in free activities in their library to boost their wellbeing or help 
them be more physically active. Partnerships with local GPs, public health and 
voluntary sector organisations and other parts of the council, such as the 
economy team, are all key to maximising the impact of this work.

At a time of significant financial austerity, it is essential that a head of 
libraries can powerfully articulate what a library can offer its community and 
demonstrate how the service aligns with broader council priorities, such as 
reducing loneliness, increasing economic growth or helping communities become 
more dementia-friendly. It is also becoming more important for heads of library 
services to be entrepreneurial, rooting out funding in addition to core council 
funding.

If you were looking for your replacement, how could someone stand out in the 
interview?

A genuine passion for the service and a commitment to the core values that 
underpin libraries around free access to information and learning, along with a 
belief in the power of books and reading. That passion, aligned with solid 
management and leadership skills, particularly finance skills and leadership 
experience, topped up with an instinct for partnerships and an understanding of 
how digital is transforming the way people read and learn, would make a 
candidate stand out.

What do you wish you’d known when you started your career?

I wish I’d known how much fun it would be to work in libraries and wish I’d 
relaxed a little more.

Celebrate National Libraries Day with #libraryshelfies in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/gallery/2015/feb/07/national-libraries-day-best-library-shelfies>
What is the worst advice you’ve ever received?

We had very little careers advice when I was at school and I’m sorry now that 
no one helped me see the wide range of jobs I could potentially do. I’ve always 
felt a real passion for public libraries and don’t regret the choices I’ve 
made, but I do feel strongly that access to good-quality information and advice 
is important for people at every stage of their lives.


Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 