
The two adaptations may not seem closely related. This week the film version of
Paula Hawkins <https://www.theguardian.com/books/paula-hawkins>’s bestseller 
The Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/08/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-review-novel>
, starring British actorEmily Blunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emily-blunt> but transposed from south-east 
England to the New York commuter belt, was released in the UK. Meanwhile, later 
this month, a new dramatisation of Wilkie Collins’sThe Moonstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jul/22/book-beach-the-moonstone-wilkie-collins>
, initially published as a weekly serial in 1868, will be screened by the BBC.
The Girl on the Train is being trumpeted with all the noise that a major 
Hollywood studio can make;The Moonstone will be shown on five consecutive days. 
Yet the books from which they derive are closely connected. Hawkins’s novel is 
one recent, hugely successful incarnation of a type of fiction that Collins 
invented. We call it the “psychological thriller”.

Collins is simply one of the most influential of all English novelists. In the 
1860s he published his four great “sensation novels” (as they were dubbed by 
contemporary reviewers):The Woman in White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/nov/26/woman-in-white-150-years-sensation>
,No Name, Armadale and The Moonstone. Wildly popular for a time, his books were 
largely scorned as melodramatic crowd-pleasers after his death in 1889, but 
began to be reassessed in the late 20th century (now almost all of them are in 
print as “classic” editions). Look closely at his most powerful books and it is 
extraordinary how many of the features of the modern psychological thriller he 
foresaw.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emily%20Blunt%20on%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%3A%20'The%20vomit%20was%20not%20my%20own'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emily%20Blunt%20on%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%3A%20%27The%20vomit%20was%20not%20my%20own%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview&media=>
Emily Blunt on The Girl on the Train: ‘The vomit was not my own’ – video 
interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/29/emily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview>
The Moonstone is the story of a crime within a family. In the first instance, 
a famous diamond is stolen during a weekend house party at a country home. In 
trying to discover what has happened to the jewel, the novel’s characters, 
including the falsely accused hero Franklin Blake, begin stumbling on the dark 
secrets at the heart of their respectable social circle. What began as the 
story of a theft eventually takes in obsessive sexual passion, suicide, 
embezzlement and murder. Sergeant Cuff, the great detective who is dispatched 
from London, fails to find the thief but is the catalyst for the uncovering of 
these secrets. Collins elaborates his plot entirely through the accounts of 
witnesses and participants. The reader must piece it all together.

Calling a thriller “psychological” credits it with a kind of literary 
complexity. The very first recorded use of the term “psychological thriller” 
was in an admiring review of Somerset Maugham’sThe Painted Veil 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/painted-veil.html> in 1925. Most dictionaries 
of literary terms lack an entry for this genre, as if it were a figment of 
reviewers’ or publishers’ imaginations. A cynical interpretation would be that 
it is a thriller that an intelligent person is happy to be seen reading. 
Hawkins’s novel gained a place on Barack Obama’ssummer reading list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/19/all-the-presidents-reading-lists>
, thereby endorsed as the thinking person’s page-turner. A couple of years ago 
it was Gillian Flynn’sGone Girl <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl>, 
also made into a glossy and violent film, that successfully filled this niche.

In this genre, the killer is not a dedicated monster, but someone close to us, 
someone familiar

It is where genre fiction and literary fiction overlap. One of the books on 
this year’s Man Booker shortlist, Ottessa Moshfegh’sEileen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/eileen-by-ottessa-moshfegh-review-bell-jar>
, is declared to be a “taut psychological thriller” in a quotation from an 
admiring reviewer blazoned on its cover. Certainly it displays some of the key 
features of the psychological thriller. It has a first-person narrator on whom 
we rely, yet whose view of the world sometimes seems warped.Eileen works as an 
administrator in a prison for young offenders, whom she likes to study. “The 
best was when I could see the hard face of a cold-hearted killer breaking 
through the chubby cheeks and callow softness of youth. That thrilled me.” Like 
those of a character in a novel byRuth Rendell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ruth-rendell> (the British doyenne of the 
psychological thriller), her thought processes are at once logical and twisted.
Eileen has a narrative that, we know with delicious apprehension, is heading 
towards a nasty, probably violent, conclusion. There is already talk of a film 
adaptation of Moshfegh’s novel. This is hardly surprising: “psychological 
thriller” has long been a description applied equally to novels, on the one 
hand, and film or TV dramas, on the other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb191b4ebe69633554690ed9960ec37750c5e5929%2F0_322_2760_3449%2F2760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb191b4ebe69633554690ed9960ec37750c5e5929%2F0_322_2760_3449%2F2760.jpg>
 Sarah Hadland and John Thomson in the BBC’s The Moonstone. Photograph: Ray 
Burmiston/BBC/King Bert/Ray Burmiston 
In one way these stories are the opposite of the serial killer fantasies with 
which we have been diverting ourselves for several decades. In the 
psychological thriller the killer is not a dedicated monster, it is someone 
close to us, someone familiar. The genre thrives in domestic settings. Tell 
Amazon that you like “psychological thrillers” and you will be offered novels 
with titles such asThe Woman Next Door by Cass Green, Follow You Home by Mark 
Edwards orBehind Closed Doors by BA Paris. It is no accident that the settings 
of bothGone Girl and The Girl on the Train are banal. Gone Girl is mostly 
located in a numbingly ordinary Missouri town where Nick and Amy move after 
their careers in New York falter.The Girl on the Train takes place in a 
fictional commuter town on the rail line from Euston.

Each novel concerns itself with the mysteries within marriages. Indeed, both 
rely on the unsettling, fascinating idea that a man or a woman might not really 
know the person to whom he or she is married. They are tales of shocking 
marital discoveries, seen from within. The trick of Flynn’s novel is to set the 
husband’s and the wife’s narratives alongside each other. For a long while it 
looks as though Nick has the secrets and knows better than Amy – but slowly you 
begin to understand that the reverse is the case. And indeed, that Nick has 
little idea of the full force of his wife’s insight and willpower.

This discovery of what might thrill us in domestic circumstances should also 
be credited to Collins. It was Henry James who famously saw his originality in 
these terms. “To Mr Collins belongs the credit of having introduced into 
fiction those most mysterious of mysteries, the mysteries which are at our own 
doors.” The bourgeois household is his stage: no wonder his mysteries turn so 
often on the testimonies of servants. Terrible things happen in familiar 
places. InThe Woman in White the most frightening location is a comfortable 
family home in Hampshire, within a few minutes’ walk of a railway station.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcb22334443769a37b4f2c24c130816341980cd1%2F0_224_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcb22334443769a37b4f2c24c130816341980cd1%2F0_224_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
 Ben Affleck and Rosamunde Pike in the film version of Gone Girl. Photograph: 
Allstar/New Regency Pictures 
In his great novels of the 1860s, Collins invented a series of narrative 
tricks and peculiar plot elements that thriller writers still draw on.The Girl 
on the Train depends on the fact that one of its narrators, Rachel, suffers 
from alcohol-induced memory loss. She struggles through the book to recover the 
memories that might explain a woman’s mysterious disappearance. She even 
wonders whether she might somehow be responsible. It was Collins who introduced 
to the English novel this strangest of possibilities: that a person might not 
know what they know – might not even know what they have done. InThe Moonstone 
opium removes some characters from conscious control over their actions. In
Armadale Lydia Gwilt, the beguiling villainess, swears by it. “Who was the man 
who invented laudanum? I thank him from the bottom of my heart.” (Laudanum was 
opium steeped in alcohol.) Collins’s close friendCharles Dickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens> was so intrigued by the 
fictional possibilities of opium addiction that he put it at the heart of his 
own, unfinished psychological thriller,The Mystery of Edwin Drood, in which the 
frighteningly obsessive choirmaster John Jasper is wedded to the drug.

One returns to Collins’s novels with the thrill of recognition. Even some of 
his unaccountable quirks have become conventions of thriller writing, though 
modern practitioners will have been unaware that they were following a pattern 
set by this unconventional Victorian. So, for instance, Collins liked to use 
physical disabilities in his mystery stories. The heroine ofHide and Seek 
(1854) is deaf. It was followed byThe Dead Secret (1857), in which the heroine, 
Rosamond Treverton, marries a blind man. His later novelPoor Miss Finch (1872) 
features a blind heroine. This exploration of radically restricted perceptions 
seems to be another version of his interest in altered states of consciousness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda810dec59148fcf9cb768e3f9143ccdaeb37f5%2F201_178_2477_3096%2F2477.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda810dec59148fcf9cb768e3f9143ccdaeb37f5%2F201_178_2477_3096%2F2477.jpg>
 Wilkie Collins (1870). Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
Some of this interest was rooted in experience. Collins himself had become an 
opium addict as a result of taking large doses of laudanum to relieve his 
rheumatism. He knew all about the narcotically induced trances of which he 
wrote. Indeed, it is hard to imagine that his stories could carry such 
conviction if he had not himself led such an unconventional life. The son of a 
painter, he came from a bohemian background and remained a sworn enemy to 
bourgeois conformity. He liked to dress idiosyncratically and he flaunted his 
Francophilia. He loved French cooking and approved of liberal French attitudes 
to sexual mores. He never married but had long-term relationships with two 
women. The first was Caroline Graves, a widow with whom he lived for almost 
three decades and whose daughter he adopted. The second was Martha Rudd, a 
servant he met on a holiday in Norfolk, by whom he had three children and whom 
he maintained in comfort in a separate London household. All were acknowledged 
and provided for in his will.

Though Collins was the pioneer, there were, of course, other sensation 
novelists. Writers like Mary Elizabeth Braddon, Charles Reade and Mrs Henry 
Wood thrilled the Victorian reading public with their tales of bigamy, fraud 
and sexual passion. Yet Collins was singular not just because he was the first, 
or because his plots remain the most intriguing, but because he was formally 
adventurous. Above all, he pioneered the use of multiple narrators. His preface 
toThe Woman in White declared, “An experiment is attempted in this novel, which 
has not (so far as I know) been hitherto tried in fiction. The story of the 
book is told throughout by the characters of the book.” Collins made it 
possible that a narrator might even be a culprit. He showed how to extract 
thrills from narrative unease. InThe Moonstone the characters are like 
witnesses in a courtroom. They include the garrulous steward, Gabriel 
Betteredge, the heroine Rachel Verinder’s absurdly moralistic cousin, Miss 
Clack, and the opium addict Ezra Jennings. Often they have misunderstood what 
they have seen. No Godlike narrator presides.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F03%2Fgone-girl-you-night-draft-day-life-after-beth-video-reviews&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412269710341%2FBen-Affleck-in-Gone-Girl-021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gone%20Girl%2C%20You%20and%20the%20Night%2C%20Draft%20Day%20and%20Life%20After%20Beth%3A%20the%20Guardian%20film%20show%20%E2%80%93%20video%20reviews&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F03%2Fgone-girl-you-night-draft-day-life-after-beth-video-reviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gone%20Girl%2C%20You%20and%20the%20Night%2C%20Draft%20Day%20and%20Life%20After%20Beth%3A%20the%20Guardian%20film%20show%20%E2%80%93%20video%20reviews&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F03%2Fgone-girl-you-night-draft-day-life-after-beth-video-reviews&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412269710341%2FBen-Affleck-in-Gone-Girl-021.jpg>
Gone Girl, You and the Night, Draft Day and Life After Beth: the Guardian film 
show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/oct/03/gone-girl-you-night-draft-day-life-after-beth-video-reviews>
Multiple narration is common in the modern psychological thriller. The Girl on 
the Train has three alternating narrators. Gone Girl shifts back and forth 
between the narratives of Nick and of Amy. No one can quite be trusted. “I’m a 
big fan of the lie of omission,” Nick tells us inGone Girl. A candid admission 
of deceitfulness, it is the novel’s way of alerting the reader to the need for 
suspicion. We are a third of the way through Flynn’s novel before Nick happens 
to mention that he has been conducting a torrid affair with one of his students 
for the previous year (though the intermittent call alerts of his disposable 
mobile phone have already made us aware that his narrative was not complete). 
“Now is the part where I have to tell you I have a mistress and you stop liking 
me … I have a pretty, young, very young mistress, and her name is Andie. I 
know. It’s bad.” (Worse in the film, where her age is reduced from 23 to 20.) 
“My vote for unreliable narrator of the year,” declares one reviewer ofThe Girl 
on the Train in a quote reproduced on the cover of the British edition of the 
novel. A phrase – “unreliable narrator” – coined in the early 1960s by a little 
known American prof, Wayne C Booth, in a densely academic book,The Rhetoric of 
Fiction, has become a standard term in book reviews and publishers’ puffs.

Collins’s febrile states often surface in today’s thrillers as characters 
question their own fears and memories

Collins liked to experiment with different narrators. His longest and most 
complicated novel,Armadale, begins as a conventional third-person narrative, 
but then expands to include letters and first-person testimonies, and finally, 
grippingly, a diary written by the villain Lydia Gwilt, a formidably 
intelligent, red-haired governess, a murderer and a blackmailer, who uses her 
sexual allure to trick men. (One contemporary reviewer called her “Lydia Guilt” 
by mistake). She is fond of quoting Byron’s poetry and for relaxation plays 
Beethoven sonatas on the piano. Though ruthless, she finds herself falling in 
love with one of her intended victims. Eventually, her love for him prevents 
her gaining the fortune she seeks. She schemes to cheat the novel’s hero out of 
his inheritance, finally deceiving him into spending the night in a private 
asylum in Hampstead, where, with the assistance of the corrupt alienist Dr 
Downward, she attempts to murder him with poison gas as he sleeps. All this 
would be so much melodrama if we did not have her own account, and in 
particular the journal in which she records her mental torments as well as her 
infernal plotting.

The documents that make up Collins’s narratives are not inert records: they 
become part of the story. InThe Woman in White, in a coup de theatre that would 
be called postmodern if it happened in a novel of the early 21st century, the 
diary written by the novel’s wonderfully resourceful heroine, Marian Halcombe, 
which we have been reading for more than a hundred pages, is suddenly 
interrupted by a “Postscript by a Sincere Friend”. With a chill we realise that 
the new narrator is the ingenious villain Count Fosco himself, relishing the 
“unexpected intellectual pleasure” he has taken from reading the journal of the 
woman who has been trying to frustrate his nefarious schemes against her 
sister, Laura. Marian has fallen ill and he has purloined her narrative, 
joining the disconcerted reader in praising her talents and her courage. “Yes! 
These pages are amazing”, and increase his admiration of “this sublime 
creature”. “The presentation of my own character is masterly in the extreme.” 
How he regrets that he and she are foes. “I condole with her on the inevitable 
failure of every plan that she has formed for her sister’s benefit.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ff3e92308b3dcb229cfd3c0af0a8197899fb0a%2F0_83_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ff3e92308b3dcb229cfd3c0af0a8197899fb0a%2F0_83_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 James Mcavoy in the film adaptation of Atonement (2007). Photograph: 
Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Flynn, something of a devotee of Victorian fiction, has learned Collins’s 
trick. InGone Girl – in a narrative twist that the film version of the story 
found hard to replicate – the apparently ingenuous diary being written by Amy 
turns out to be her device. “The diary, yes! We’ll get to my brilliant diary.” 
We are more than halfway through the book before we discover – one of those 
overturnings of expectations that Collins relished – that this diary, one of 
the narrative threads that we have been following, is a fiction Amy is using to 
incriminate her husband. It has become a familiar trick of literary fiction 
(Ian McEwan uses it in bothAtonement 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/atonement.html> and Sweet Tooth 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sweet-tooth.html>), but is peculiarly suited 
to the psychological thriller. The firm narrative ground disappears from under 
our feet. Collins’s interest in unsettling our confidence in a narrative is 
what makes him seem so modern. One of the first reviewers ofArmadale noted 
shrewdly, “If it were the object of art to make one’s audience uncomfortable, 
without letting them know why, Mr Wilkie Collins would be beyond all doubt a 
consummate artist.”

Collins turned the apprehensions of his characters into the stuff of his 
fiction. “Nervous” is one of his favourite adjectives: characters suffer 
“nervous restlessness” or “nervous dread” or “violent nervous agitation”. Often 
their “nerves” are “shaken”; sometimes they are “shattered”. They are 
sensitised to the terrors of the plots in which they find themselves entangled. 
Their febrile states still often surface in psychological thrillers, as 
characters question their own fears and perceptions. Rachel, the main narrator 
inThe Girl on the Train, descends from Collins. A partially recovering 
alcoholic, she struggles to tell the difference between her memory and her 
imagination. She is not sure what she saw on the night that a woman 
disappeared. Much of Hawkins’s novel is narrated in the present tense, enacting 
the feverishness of its main characters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6aa6c483da58b43c767ea36a924aba5a5b49fae%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20got%20to%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%20%E2%80%93%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20psychological%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fhow-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6aa6c483da58b43c767ea36a924aba5a5b49fae%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Emily Blunt as Rachel Watson in the film adaptation of The Girl on the Train. 
Photograph: Allstar/Dreamworks SKG 
All of these are women and it has frequently been noted that contemporary 
psychological thrillers often feature “difficult” female protagonists. (In an 
article in the London Review of Books, criticJacqueline Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jacquelinerose> arraigned both Flynn and 
Hawkins for producing post-feminist fiction that in fact encouraged “hatred of 
women”.) Collins invariably put women – usually unconventional, difficult women 
– at the centre of his novels. InNo Name, the resourceful Magdalen Vanstone 
uses disguise and elaborate deceit to try to win back her rightful inheritance. 
InArmadale the notional protagonist, Alan Armadale, is an impetuous, 
good‑hearted bore, but the villainess, Gwilt, is constantly surprising and 
intriguing. Collins felt and wrote passionately about the injustices that women 
suffered as a result of illiberal marriage and divorce laws, and intolerant 
attitudes to “fallen women”. AfterThe Moonstone he started using his novels 
rather too bluntly to campaign on such issues. But he had shown later novelists 
how to combine narrative suspense with psychological complexity.

His novels have their Victorian preoccupations, naturally. They always depend 
on arcane legal issues, usually to do with the conditions of wills and rights 
of inheritance, about which Collins took detailed advice from lawyer friends. 
He had had a legal training, though he never practised as a lawyer, and was an 
avid reader of accounts of trials. Each of his novels also satisfied his first 
readers by achieving something like poetic justice at its conclusion. He knew 
that the Victorian public demanded happy endings. Yet his readers were also 
invited to glimpse the possibility that crimes could go unpunished. In a 
memorable exchange inThe Woman in White, Count Fosco undermines the confidence 
expressed by Marian and Laura that “crimes cause their own detection”. Only if 
the criminal is a fool, he retorts. The Count strokes his pet mice and laughs 
“inwardly and silently” at the pious thought that criminal deeds bring 
retribution. “Ask Coroners who sit at inquests in large towns if that is true, 
Lady Glyde. Ask secretaries of life-assurance companies if that is true, Miss 
Halcombe. Read your own public journals.” All around them crimes take place 
that are not even identified as such – “bodies that are not found” and “wise 
criminals who escape”. Those crimes are still there for novelists to uncover.

 * The Moonstone begins on 30 October on BBC1.
 