
January 

The new year got off to an impressive start with a headline 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3398484/How-rise-childless-women-change-face-Britain-Rampant-infidelity-struggling-economy-Meltdown-NHS-shorter-life-expectancies.html>
 that managed to blame childless women for the struggling economy, NHS meltdown
andshorter life expectancies. Plague of locusts soon expected to follow. 

February 

US talk show host Wendy Williams criticised singer Kesha 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/wendy-williams-kesha-record-sexual-abuse_us_56cc9522e4b0ec6725e40a3a>
 for speaking out about alleged sexual abuse: “If everybody complained because 
somebody allegedly sexually abused them ... contracts would be broken all the 
time.”
 Kesha … under fire. Photograph: Noam Galai/Getty Images 
March 

 In a month of inane cleavage obsession, everybody, from talented actresses 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.co.uk/fashion/style/news/a41675/the-sun-titsee-index-rating-cleavage-oscars/>
 topoliticians 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/archives/news/1088684/busty-budget-as-osborne-speaks-to-commons-twitter-goes-into-meltdown-over-theresa-mays-cleavage/>
, became obsessed with puns about their breasts. It made for an exciting new 
journalistic angle that delighted readers everywhere, and certainly didn’t make 
women want to stab their own eyes out.

April 

The new junior doctors’ contract 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism/status/716909486154375168> openly 
discriminated against women. Luckily, we were repeatedly reassured that “any 
indirect adverse effect on women is a proportionate means of achieving a 
legitimate aim”, which made women doctors feel much better. Meanwhile, April 
also saw legendary abolitionist Harriet Tubman become the first woman in the 
world to be told,“give us a smile, love” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/best-responses-to-people-who-want-harriet-tubman-to-smile_us_5718d4c5e4b0479c59d7156e>
, 100 years after her death, when her appearance on the new $20 bill wasn’t 
cheerful enough to satisfy some men.


May

Muirfield golf course proudly confirmed its utter lack of connection with the 
21st century with avote to keep female members out 
<http://www.espn.com/golf/story/_/id/15605581/muirfield-loses-open-championship-vote-allowing-women-members>
, only to later suffer cruel revenge when the female population of Edinburgh 
excluded its members from sitting on a particularly fetching park bench.Touché. 
<http://golfweek.com/2016/12/19/edinburghs-female-population-bans-muirfield-members-from-bench/>

 Women only … Muirfield gets a taste of its own medicine. Photograph: Andrew 
Milligan/PA 
June 

The murder of Labour MP Jo Cox by rightwing terrorist Thomas Mair threw a 
spotlight on theongoing abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/18/vile-online-abuse-against-women-mps-needs-to-be-challenged-now>
 faced by large numbers of female MPs – and suggested that perhaps it might be 
dangerous to normalise violent threats as a way to silence an uppity woman in a 
position of power.


July 

Leslie Jones received racist and misogynistic Twitter abuse  
<http://fusion.net/story/327103/leslie-jones-twitter-racism/>for the cardinal 
sin of taking part in an all-female movie remake. Meanwhile, Nottinghamshire 
police’s decision torecord misogyny as a hate crime 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3687983/Wolf-whistling-HATE-crime-Police-force-starts-recording-uninvited-verbal-engagement-men-women-category-racist-abuse.html>
 was met with widespread panic, but fears of innocent men being locked up for 
compliments were proved misplaced when women instead reported abuse and assault.

August 

Olympic commentators desperately competed for the honour of providing the “
most sexist coverage 
<http://www.vogue.com/13466818/sexist-moments-olympics-coverage/>”, and men 
worldwide were gifted some insightful advice about how to talk to women in the 
street, even when they are wearingheadphones 
<http://www.themodernman.com/dating/how-to-talk-to-a-woman-who-is-wearing-headphones.html>
 and might not want to talk to you. Meanwhile,France’s burkini ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/french-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach>
 proved that trying to score political points through the misogynistic policing 
of women’s bodies and choices never goes out of style.

September


A woman Nasa astronaut was “corrected” on Twitter 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/09/random-man-mansplains-space-to-actual-nasa-astronaut.html>
 by a man who had once been to space camp. He provided inspiration for another 
2016 hero who later in the year challenged renownedCambridge professor Mary 
Beard 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/ukip-arron-banks-mary-beard-rome_uk_5845c2d5e4b07ac7244927f6>
, mansplaining the fall of Rome, based on what he had seen inGladiator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gladiator>. 


October 

Tapes were released in which Donald Trump boasted about grabbing women “by the 
pussy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
”. When women objected,#RepealThe19th 
<http://www.refinery29.com/2016/10/126224/trump-supporters-repeal-the-19th-hashtag>
 began trending on Twitter, as Trump supporters effectively reassured them that 
there really wasn’t any misogyny to worry about after all. Meanwhile, 
footballer Ched Evans was acquitted of rape following theadmission of evidence 
in court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/14/social-media-naming-of-ched-evans-accuser-raises-questions-law>
 about his accuser’s sexual history. This news was met by online vitriol 
matched only by that spewed in her direction after he had been found guilty in 
his first trial.

 The Moroccan TV channel offering advice on how to cover up evidence of 
domestic violence. Photograph: Channel 2M 
November 

Every woman in the world gave a sigh of recognition as Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> was beaten by a man 
infinitely less qualified than her to do the same job. Meanwhile, Moroccan 
state TV made important strides towards eliminating domestic violence by 
showing a helpful programme showing womenhow to use make up to cover it up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/27/moroccan-state-tv-shows-women-how-to-hide-domestic-violence>
.


December 

Article 50 claimant Gina Miller received a torrent of racist and sexist abuse 
online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/article-50-claimant-gina-miller-safe-outside-brexit>
 after making a legal challenge to Brexit, notedanti-feminist MP Philip Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/anti-feminist-tory-mp-philip-davies-elected-to-equalities-committee>
 was elected to the commons’ Women and Equalities committee, and Fifa announced 
it had solved the problem of getting girls into football withnice-smelling bibs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/schoolgirls-say-fa-paper-on-football-treats-them-like-brainless-baby-barbies>
. And finally, a Silicon Valley entrepreneur who pleaded guilty to battery 
charges after police said hepunched and kicked his girlfriend 117 times in 2013 
(although he disputes the extent of his assault) was given a great new job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/19/gurbaksh-chahal-domestic-violence-new-job-venture-capital>
 at a venture capital firm, while still awaiting sentencing. Because if 2016 
has taught us anything, it’s that allegations of sexual assault don’t ruin a 
man’s career.
 