
Far from the soy and cattle that dominate its vast fertile pampas, Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> harbours another valuable 
commodity that is rocketing in price and demand and luring newly welcomed 
foreign investors.

Lithium, the so-called “white petroleum”, drives much of the modern world. It 
forms a small but essentially irreplaceable component of rechargeable 
batteries, used in consumer devices like mobile phones and electric cars. It 
also has pharmaceutical and other applications. Over half of the earth’s 
identified resources of the mineral are found in South America’s “lithium 
triangle”, an otherworldly landscape of high-altitude lakes and bright white 
salt flats that straddles Chile, Argentina andBolivia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bolivia>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec23884e7d2c2af277931d101b78a6b757bc5d61%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20South%20America's%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20South%20America%27s%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec23884e7d2c2af277931d101b78a6b757bc5d61%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 An aerial view of the brine pools and processing areas of the Rockwood lithium 
plant on the Atacama salt flats. Photograph: Ivan Alvarado/Reuters 
Until recently, that was not great news for investors. Argentina and Bolivia 
lacked predictability and a friendly business environment, whileChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> kept strict control over lithium 
output. But that may be all about to change.

In Chile, a sale of state lithium deposits and a shake-up in the way the 
country manages its resources has awakened interest from everyone from 
early-stage mining companies to electric carmakers likeTesla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla>. In Argentina, already the 
world’s No 3 lithium producer after Chile and Australia, investors are hopeful 
that the new Mauricio Macri government that took over in December will herald a 
brighter future.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb1f4a3ff62eca3b4d046157cb612676d2f9a76b%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20South%20America's%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20South%20America%27s%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb1f4a3ff62eca3b4d046157cb612676d2f9a76b%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 The good stuff: a worker showing a sample of lithium carbonate processed from 
the Rockwood Lithium mine. Photograph: Ivan Alvarado/Reuters 
 Business-friendly Macri has begun making sweeping changes in a bid to return 
the country to economic orthodoxy, removing onerous capital controls and 
sending a message that the country is open for business again after more than a 
decade of protectionism. “For 10 or 12 years, (Argentina) was a do-not-invest 
zone. The tone of doing business has just swung 180 degrees,” said Tom Hodgson, 
the chief executive of Western Lithium, which is developing a project in the 
country due to begin production next year. Argentina now has a “major 
opportunity” to build a lithium export business, Hodgson told Reuters earlier 
this month at a mining conference in Toronto.

 Western Lithium is working with Korean steelmaker POSCO , whose chairman was 
in Argentina last month to meet with Macri and begin the construction of a new 
lithium plant, due to begin commercial production within a year. The 
exploratory mining company Orocobre is also developing a project. But the 
company perhaps best set to benefit from an Argentine lithium revolution is US 
agricultural and chemical conglomerate FMC Corp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6665e4b33953277fe9ec39c7a256d32bd93fc54%2F0_230_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20South%20America's%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20South%20America%27s%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6665e4b33953277fe9ec39c7a256d32bd93fc54%2F0_230_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Workers use a boat to take samples from a brine pool at the Rockwood Lithium 
plant on the Atacama salt flat. Photograph: Ivan Alvarado/Reuters 
 FMC is already producing lithium from the Salar de Hombre Muerto salt flat in 
northern Argentina. Lithium provides a small but growing part of FMC’s 
revenues, with sales of around $250 million forecast for this year. “Now the 
(Argentine) administration is starting to change policy, it’s giving us even 
more confidence that it will be a predictable and cost-effective operation,” 
FMC Lithium Vice-President Tom Schneberger said. “We expect significant 
year-over-year improvement for lithium in 2016 and we see that going clear to 
2020.” Demand for lithium is set to outstrip supply by 2023, according to 
specialist consultants Stormcrow Capital, with the lion’s share coming from 
rechargeable batteries.

 Chile climate ‘perfect’

 Bolivia has more identified lithium resources than any other country, but 
commercially it’s likely to be “shunted to the side for an extended period”, 
says Jon Hykawy, Stormcrow’s president. Bolivia has natural challenges – too 
much rain, other chemicals in the mix – as well as a prickly investment 
environment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf695cf0f6fa07692a41b2464e8eaf61b22e7b36%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20South%20America's%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20South%20America%27s%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf695cf0f6fa07692a41b2464e8eaf61b22e7b36%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 A worker cleans a pipe at a brine pool of the Rockwood lithium plant on the 
Atacama salt flat. Photograph: Ivan Alvarado/Reuters 
 Chile, though, is popular with investors for its free market credentials, 
while the dry desert climate is “perfect” for lithium production, said Brian 
Jaskula, a US Geological Survey mineral commodity specialist. The key lithium 
site in Chile is the vast Salar de Atacama salt flat, where local firm SQM and 
foreign-owned Rockwood have operations. SQM was privatised in the 1980s during 
General Augusto Pinochet’s regime and a former son-in-law of the late dictator 
owns a controlling stake. But it is on uneasy terms with the current leftist 
government. In the last two years, it has run foul of authorities over market 
manipulation and dubious tax invoices, and is in arbitration with economic 
development agency Corfo over royalties.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1a84c08eedc35234438077e68f7c0dfcf752917%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20South%20America's%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20South%20America%27s%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1a84c08eedc35234438077e68f7c0dfcf752917%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 A worker closes a warehouse of lithium carbonate processed from the Rockwood 
Lithium mine. Photograph: Ivan Alvarado/Reuters 
 Now US specialty chemicals firm Albemarle Corp is muscling in on SQM’s turf. 
Having spent $6 billion (£4.26) last year to buy Rockwood, it then signed a 
deal with Corfo in its drive to triple lithium output in Chile.Chile’s 
government said it sees public-private partnerships as the way forward and is 
planning to put more deposits up for tender. It denies favouring any particular 
company. “Chile is willing to work with anybody who wants to explore and 
produce ore, provided they comply with Chile’s requirements and standards,” 
Mining Minister Aurora Williams told Reuters.

 However, Corfo head Eduardo Bitran insisted private lithium investment must 
be “sustainable” and in the interests of Chileans. Albemarle and SQM declined 
to be interviewed for this story. But SQM said in an investor conference call 
in early March that it wanted to increase lithium output in Chile, as well as 
look at unspecified “opportunities around the world“.

Supply and demand

 Industry insiders warn that, no matter how friendly the government, the 
process of ramping up output is a complex one. That leaves battery makers and 
other end users of lithium largely at the mercy of the big providers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f792449e896c13d6143c6c886afbdbe2cd5ff9%2F0_71_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20South%20America's%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20South%20America%27s%20lithium%20triangle%20is%20gearing%20up%20to%20feed%20our%20battery%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbattery-lithium-south-america-chile-argentina-bolivia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f792449e896c13d6143c6c886afbdbe2cd5ff9%2F0_71_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 A worker takes samples of lithium carbonate processed from the Rockwood 
Lithium mine on the Atacama salt flat. Photograph: Ivan Alvarado/Reuters 
 In addition to Tesla, traditional car companies including Nissan and BMW 
operate in the burgeoning electric vehicle industry. Germany’s Daimler recently 
announced that it would build a new lithium-ion battery factory, while 
technology firms like Samsung and Foxconn are also key users.

 As prices rise, they are keen to lock in deals. Lithium carbonate is selling 
for $6,400 per tonne, up from $5,180 in 2011. Prices in the opaque Chinese 
market are reportedly higher. Tesla and other car manufacturers have been to 
Chile to see if they could ensure future lithium supplies, according to Ignacio 
Moreno, Chile’s deputy mining minister.

 Tesla declined to comment on talks, but said it has signed three deals with 
exploratory companies outside Chile that would “not provide all” its lithium. 
Battery makers “are looking for any source across the world that they can 
establish joint ventures with, no matter how risky they are,” said Jaskula.

Reporting by Rosalba O’Brien in Santiago and Rod Nickel in Toronto, Writing by 
Rosalba O’Brien; Editing by Christian Plumb and Mary Milliken.

• This article was amended on 25 March 2016. An earlier version referred to a 
price of lithium carbonate of “$6,400 per kilo” where “$6,400 per tonne” was 
meant.
 