
When a woman goes into labour, Liberata Musabyimana always accompanies her on 
the walk to the health centre. Sometimes the knock on Musabyimana’s door comes 
in the middle of the night announcing a baby is due. Or the birth is so swift 
there is no time to reach the clinic. Instead, the 35-year-old farmer must act 
as midwife as happened recently.

“It was 10pm and the baby came so quickly it was born by the roadside,” 
recalls Musabyimana, who lives in Rwanda’s rural eastern province. “The 
mother-in-law cut the umbilical cord then someone arrived on a motorbike and 
drove the little one off to the centre.” Nine months on, both baby and 
40-year-old mother are thriving.

Musabyimana is one of this east African country’s 45,000 community health 
workers (CHW), including 15,000 dedicated to improving maternity support, who 
are helping transform healthcare. Elected by village committee, these 
volunteers have contributed significantly to Rwanda’s progress in reducing the 
deaths of mothers and young children. Between 2000 and 2015, this country of 
just under 12 million people achieved the highest average annual reduction in 
both the under-five mortality rate and the maternal mortality ratio in the 
world. The UN estimates 590,000 children have been saved, with child deaths now 
at 42 per 1,000 births compared with 300 in 1994. The figure for maternal 
deaths is 210 per 10,000, around a fifth of the rate in 2000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhow-text-messages-volunteer-midwives-saving-lives-rwanda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f42462647620212e21e6c7341081a36c5a810d3%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20text%20messages%20and%20volunteer%20midwives%20are%20saving%20lives%20in%20Rwanda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhow-text-messages-volunteer-midwives-saving-lives-rwanda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20text%20messages%20and%20volunteer%20midwives%20are%20saving%20lives%20in%20Rwanda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhow-text-messages-volunteer-midwives-saving-lives-rwanda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f42462647620212e21e6c7341081a36c5a810d3%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Before RapidSMS, mothers who did make it to hospital arrived late, placing a 
strain on doctors and nurses unprepared for their arrival. Photograph: Tom 
Maguire/Tom Maguire/RESULTS UK 
Behind this success is RapidSMS, a simple mobile phone and data collection 
system used by CHWs to monitor pregnant women and newborns. Since being piloted 
by the health ministry in 2009, the text messaging system has gone through 
several upgrades and now enables healthcare workers to track child nutrition as 
well as analyse maternal deaths. Rwanda’s health minister, Dr Agnes Binagwaho, 
says: “We still have unnecessary deaths but RapidSMS makes it easier for us to 
support pregnancy. It’s about having a tool linking people with knowledge – we 
bring these skills to the mother.”

This is how RapidSMS works: each CSW, who must be able to read and write, 
lists the women of childbearing age (15-49) in their village, then recommends 
that those showing signs of pregnancy visit the health centre. Once a pregnancy 
is confirmed, the CHW texts the mother-to-be’s details including weight, 
previous pregnancies and check-up dates to a central database where staff 
create an individual record that all healthcare professionals can share. When 
check-ups are due, the system messages the CHW who visits the mother and 
reminds her to attend.

CHWs are not medical experts. They have been educated to primary or secondary 
school level and receive only basic training in maternity support such as how 
to identify at-risk mothers. Instead, their role is to be the eyes and ears for 
doctors by referring on health issues such as early bleeding via RapidSMS. This 
is done using acronyms – for example, RED means high risk and EAR is red alert. 
A few weeks before a due date, the CHW receives a reminder, then encourages 
their patient to contact them the moment labour pains start.

Before RapidSMS, women from poor communities would give birth at home without 
medical support. Mothers frequently bled to death after birth, a tragedy easily 
prevented with hospital care. Fortunee Uwantege, a community health manager, 
says mothers who did make it to hospital arrived late, therefore placing a 
strain on doctors and nurses unprepared for their arrival. “RapidSMS has 
improved the situation greatly because more women deliver at health clinics – 
they’re only transferred to a district hospital if complications occur. 
Everyone involved in her pregnancy is informed and there are less delays – it’s 
saving lives.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhow-text-messages-volunteer-midwives-saving-lives-rwanda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f7f8ff2685a44cc2265d1737d342bf134040566%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20text%20messages%20and%20volunteer%20midwives%20are%20saving%20lives%20in%20Rwanda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhow-text-messages-volunteer-midwives-saving-lives-rwanda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20text%20messages%20and%20volunteer%20midwives%20are%20saving%20lives%20in%20Rwanda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhow-text-messages-volunteer-midwives-saving-lives-rwanda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f7f8ff2685a44cc2265d1737d342bf134040566%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Women from poor communities used to give birth at home without medical 
support. Photograph: Tom Maguire/Tom Maguire/RESULTS UK 
Jean Baptiste Byiringiro is the IT manager responsible for RapidSMS, whose 
goal is helping “every single pregnant woman.” There are challenges, he 
acknowledges, such as women refusing to take part, the lack of electricity for 
charging mobiles in some parts ofRwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> (solar panels are being provided) 
and accessing health clinics, which can be a five kilometre walk away. However, 
he points out, RapidSMS has “saved many mothers from bleeding to death”. He 
adds: “I feel proud of what we’ve achieved.”


Aaron Oxley, executive director of Results, an NGO campaigning to end extreme 
poverty, says innovative initiatives such as RapidSMS are the result of strong 
political leadership on health and a system that is “most responsive to the 
priorities of the people, starting with a strong, well-staffed health system”.

Musabyimana has been a CHW for the past two years. Although unpaid, she shares 
any performance-related remuneration with local cooperative members. A short 
drive from Musabyimana lives Zeburiya Niyonshima, 31, who is eight months 
pregnant with her third child and has been suffering nosebleeds. “I’ve felt 
quite weak,” says Niyonshima. “But I know I could contact Musabyimana – she’s a 
friend and I trust her. Before, it was hard having just my mother and 
neighbours for support.’ Musabyimana has also been teaching Niyonshima about 
being a good mother with the help of laminated photographs that show women 
breastfeeding and hanging mosquito nets over a cot.

The women who Musabyimana has supported call her doctor, something she dreams 
of being one day. She says she gets excited every time a baby is born – even 
when it means despatching the newborn to a clinic on a motorbike.

Sophie Goodchild’s trip was organised by Results UK, an NGO focused on cutting 
poverty and improving life chances for all.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 