
If and when Donald Trump’s administration executes on his deportation 
strategy, immigration advocates are starting to formulate a plan.

The resistance movement in Austin, Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>, centers on a diminutive reverend 
ready to create a physical barrier between undocumented migrants and 
immigration enforcement agents.

Related: What might Trump's deportations look like? 'A system that defies 
imagination' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/donald-trump-deportations-undocumented-immigrants>

When agents arrive at the door, undocumented immigrants can call for help and 
one or more US citizens will quickly arrive to stand in front of the door, 
watching, challenging and filming law enforcement with the goal of ensuring 
constitutional rights are respected and encouraging a media spotlight.

“We have kind of a canned spiel that one person just keeps repeating,” said 
Babs Miller, a minister at St Andrew’s Presbyterian Church in Austin: “‘I am a 
trained and certified immigration observer, notice has been given that there’s 
an incident to be observed, do you have a search warrant, may I see it please?’”

Miller is part of the Sanctuary in the Streets initiative, which aims to 
frustrate immigration raids –an enforcement strategy that was used to target 
Central American families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/23/democrats-call-on-obama-to-end-deportation-raids-on-women-and-children>
 by the Obama administration last year and is expected to be a feature of the 
next president’s term.

Activists in Austin and elsewhere are seeking to publicise and expand on 
methods that were developed in recent years during the White House tenure of 
the man activists derisively dubbed “deporter-in-chief”.

“We’re trying to respond now to the threat of the Trump administration and the 
possibility that it will get even more severe than it has been,” said Sofia 
Casini, immigration programmes coordinator for Grassroots Leadership, an 
anti-mass incarceration group that announced its upcoming plans at a press 
conference in Austin on Monday.

Trump has pledged to remove up to 3 million undocumented immigrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-deportation-immigration-criminals>
 quickly. “I think that we should take him at face value; everything that he 
says we should believe,” Carmen Zuvieta, of the ICE [Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement] Out of Austin group, said through a translator. A mother of three, 
her husband was deported to Mexico four years ago.

Unless they have a warrant signed by a judge, ICE employees are not allowed to 
enter homes without permission.

Last January’s high-profile sweeps in several states including Texas prompted 
advocate groups to urge undocumented immigrants to know their rights and not to 
open their doors to federal officials.

Miller said that there are more than 100 volunteers trained so far, organised 
according to city council district to make response times quicker. Training 
takes four hours. “Our goal is to train at least 500 in the next month or so,” 
she said.

The intent is to extend the hotline from four to eight hours a day and cards 
are being handed out – one side in Spanish, the other in English. They advise: 
“NO ABRA LA PUERTA” (Don’t open the door) and provide migrants with a spiel if 
agents arrive: “I do not wish to speak with you, answer your questions, or sign 
or hand you any documents based on my fifth amendment rights under the United 
States constitution”.

Related: California prepares to push back on Trump's promise to deport millions
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/california-trump-deportation-promise-immigration>

On average, according to Grassroots Leadership, 19 Austin-based immigrants are 
deported per week. With an estimated 1.5 million undocumented immigrants, Texas 
has the second-largest such population in the country, behind California,
according 
<http://www.migrationpolicy.org/data/unauthorized-immigrant-population/state/TX>
 to the Migration Policy Institute. Most have lived in the state for more than 
a decade.

Miller’s interest in the cause grew when her church gave sanctuary last 
February to two Guatemalans, Hilda Ramirez and her son, Ivan. They are still 
living there but gained relief from deportation in October, which allows them 
to leave the building without fear of being detained. Agrowing number of US 
churches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/undocumented-immigrations-us-churches-sanctuary-trump>
 are expected to open their doors to undocumented immigrants in the coming 
months in the knowledge that ICE policy discourages enforcement operations in 
“sensitive locations” such as places of worship.

“People of privilege have a responsibility and obligation to do this for folks 
who don’t have that privilege, and I know what it’s like to not have that 
privilege because I am a lesbian and there was a time when I could not wear 
this collar. So I understand,” Miller said. “And it was because of people who 
could wear the collar and their allies that I can, and I have a responsibility 
to pay that back; to pay it forward.”

Families in Austin are also being encouraged to prepare binders with personal 
information such as forms of identification, marriage certificates, power of 
attorney letters and character references. If someone is detained, family 
members can then quickly provide attorneys with details that could speed a 
release on bond and may help gain quicker access to financial assets if the 
main breadwinner is in custody.

City leaders have offered some encouragement. In common with several other 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/dc-politics/dc-will-go-beyond-sanctuary-create-legal-defense-fund-for-illegal-immigrants/2017/01/09/0d6c7adc-d68e-11e6-9f9f-5cdb4b7f8dd7_story.html?postshare=861484067458951&tid=ss_tw-bottom&utm_term=.f1cb653001a7>
 Democratic-leaning cities, Austinintends 
<http://kxan.com/2016/12/15/austin-to-pay-for-immigrant-legal-services-documented-and-undocumented/>
 to use tax dollars to help fund legal defences for immigrants.

And the new sheriff of Travis County (which includes Austin), Sally Hernandez, 
is a Democrat who ran on a platform of ending compliance with ICE requests to 
hold people who have been detained by local law enforcement for an extra 48 
hours so they can be picked up by federal immigration authorities.

But politicians in Texas’s Republican-dominated legislature are set to debate 
a bill that would eliminate “sanctuary cities” that do not cooperate with 
federal immigration enforcement. The proposalhas the support 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/news/307634-tex-gov-says-he-will-sign-law-banning-sanctuary-cities>
 of the governor, Greg Abbott.
 