
So you’ve jumped through the hoops and vaulted the hurdles to reach the 
assessment centre for thecivil service’s sought-after graduate fast stream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>
. What should you expect from the day? An assault course for the brain? An 
aggressive Hunger Games-style tournament with your fellow applicants? A 
bewildering psychological personality test?

None of these (but maybe a pinch of them all) suggests Philip Wilson, the 
chief assessor and chief psychologist on the fast stream team, who has been 
involved in the assessments for six years.


How to join the civil service fast stream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>
“We want people with good interpersonal skills, emotional intelligence,” says 
Wilson. “But of course we need people with intellectual capacity as well, 
because there is a lot of information that you need to be on top of as a civil 
servant. We’re also looking for people with drive, energy and commitment.” 
Finally, Wilson adds, assessors are looking for evidence of candidates’ values. 
“We want people who are going to be impartial who are balanced, honest and show 
integrity,” he says.

The day’s tasks include a group exercise, a leadership exercise, a written 
analysis and an interview. So what’s the best way to impress the assessors?

Prepare

The civil service offers pre-assessment advice 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-apply> and job 
sites provideonline exercises 
<http://www.cebglobal.com/shldirect/en/practice-tests/>. “It was definitely 
challenging,” says Imran Bhaluani, a current fast-streamer who aced the 
assessment last year. “But I had a good idea about what to expect because once 
you get through to the assessment centre you get an information pack. So you 
can prepare for it.”

As well as the online exercises, Bhaluani prepared for the interview by 
thinking of examples from his university and internships that demonstrated his 
skills in four civil service focus areas: managing a quality service, 
delivering at pace, collaboration and building capacity. So for managing a 
quality service he used an example of where he ran an event for a society at 
university. “It’s worth having at least two examples for each,” he says. 
“Although you can talk about some things you’ve done from multiple angles.”

Dress for a day at the office

Wilson says the assessment day has no dress requirements at all and the 
assessors won’t be judging you on what you wear. But applicants might feel most 
comfortable in office clothes, as that’s what most people will be wearing. “The 
danger is that if you come in very casual wear you may feel slightly 
uncomfortable if someone else is wearing a suit,” says Wilson.

Bhaluani, who has done placements in the Department for Business, Innovation 
and Skills and the Department for Work and Pensions, agrees it’s a good idea to 
turn up in business wear. “It means that you can get into the right mindset. 
You should think of it as a day at the office.”

What is it like to work in the civil service fast stream?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/04/civil-service-fast-stream-like-to-work-advice>
Stay focused and engaged

On the day, Wilson says one of the common mistakes people make is to lose 
concentration. It’s a long, challenging and tiring day and if applicants are 
too nervous or distracted they can lose points.

“We want people who will engage with the day, who will show enthusiasm and 
commitment and will focus, will concentrate,” says Wilson. “You need to be on 
top of your brief in order to respond to a task and if you switch off, or 
become too anxious, that may undermine your performance.”

There are regular refreshment breaks throughout the day, and Bhaluani brought 
some cereal bars with him to keep his energy levels up.

Don’t dominate

Even though everyone is being judged and the fast stream is very competitive – 
of the 37,000 graduates who apply, 2,700 attend the assessment centre and about 
1,000 get through – cooperative rather than domineering behaviour is rewarded. 
“It’s not about trying to beat everybody else,” says Bhaluani. “It’s about 
trying to show the best of yourself but also help other people to show the best 
of themselves.”

Wilson agrees overbearing characteristics will not go down well. “We’re 
interested in people who are very collaborative and supportive,” he says. “We 
won’t like people who are overly aggressive or domineering or too disruptive.”

But don’t be too modest

In the interview in particular candidates will be expected to talk at length 
about what they’ve done in the past that has demonstrated their strengths. 
“Don’t feel shy about talking about what you’ve done,” says Bhaluani. “It’s 
very important, especially if you’re a bit more introverted, to be confident 
enough to give full answers.”

Enjoy yourself and find out if the fast stream is right for you

It might be hard to believe, but Bhaluani and Wilson say the day can be very 
enjoyable, and the people who perform best are the ones who stay positive. And 
for the first time this year the interview will assess people on their 
enthusiasm for the work, as well as their ability to do it.

“We’re trying to get people who really are engaged,” says Wilson. “It’s good 
to have people who are capable and competent of course, but any organisation 
wants people who really want to make a difference.”

The day is a chance for you to sense if the fast stream is right for you 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/04/civil-service-fast-stream-like-to-work-advice>
. “In the middle of the day you will get a chance to a meet a current 
fast-streamer and ask questions to get a feel for the role and the highlights 
and the challenges,” says Wilson. Prospective fast-streamers can also interact 
with current fast-streamers throughFacebook <http://www.facebook.com/faststream>
 orTwitter <http://www.twitter.com/faststreamuk>.

What to do if you don’t get on the civil service fast stream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/03/civil-service-fast-stream-other-routes>
If you don’t get through, don’t despair

“Whether you get through or not you get very detailed feedback on what you did 
well on and what you could improve on,” says Bhaluani, who is now going on a 
secondment in the private sector. “You get a score and that score breaks down 
into each component. If you don’t get through and you want to apply again it’s 
very helpful.”

There are also other ways in to the civil service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/03/civil-service-fast-stream-other-routes>
, aside from the fast stream.

Final top tip from the chief assessor

“Try to imagine that you are already in the organisation,” says Wilson. In 
other words, the assessors and the other candidates are colleagues, you’re 
already part of the culture. It will give you a mindset of confidence.”

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> here for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 