
While new revelations about Russian hacking during the US election continue to 
make headlines, they were by no means the only big cyber-attacks of the last 
year. In fact, there were so many that you could dub 2016 as “the year of the 
hack”.

A hallmark of 2016 cyber-attacks has been just how public they have become. On 
21 October, an attack oninternet infrastructure provider Dyn 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/technology/2016/oct/22/cyber-attack-hackers-weaponised-everyday-devices-with-malware-to-mount-assault>
 with a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack took down access to 
Netflix, Facebook, Twitter plus the Guardian, CNN, the New York Times, the Wall 
Street Journal and others.

In addition to the high-profile nature of the hack, it was noteworthy because 
of its cause: exploitation of internet-connected everyday devices such as 
webcams and digital recorders.

White House says FBI is investigating hack of 1bn Yahoo user accounts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/15/fbi-investigation-yahoo-hack-one-billion>
Last month, the bank operated by UK supermarket chain Tesco was hit 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m>
, resulting in £2.5m being stolen from the accounts of some 9,000 customers.

And then there was the massive Yahoo hack. It technically took place in 20013, 
but therevelation 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/technology/2016/dec/14/yahoo-hack-security-of-one-billion-accounts-breached>
 came this month that data from more than 1bn user accounts was compromised, 
with some dubbing it the largest such hack in history. This news followed a 
September revelation of a 2014 incident that allowed hackers to steal the 
personal data associated with at least 500m Yahoo accounts.

Russia was not the only country involved in a hacking controversy in 2016. For 
the first four months of the year, Apple was in a well-publicized tussle with 
the FBI over whether the company would help hack into the iPhone of San 
Bernardino gunman Syed Farook.

“2016 was most notable for the evolution of nation state attacks,” said 
Richard Stiennon, author of There Will Be Cyberwar. “Cyber espionage has been 
an important tool for hackers and intelligence agencies since at least 2004 and 
Titan Rain. But releasing the emails from the Democratic National Committee and 
John Podesta was new and scary.”

He also suggested that the lessons for 2017 could begin with looking at who is 
doing the attacking and then at how much work organizations will have to do in 
improving data protection.

Releasing the emails from the Democratic National Committee and John Podesta 
was new and scary
Richard Stiennon, cyberwar expert 
Stiennon said the level of data protection an organization needs to prevent 
similar breaches and embarrassing “doxing” (wherein stolen documents are 
released to the public) is daunting to contemplate, but necessary.

Craig Fagan, policy director at the World Wide Web Foundation, agrees. “Every 
citizen has the right to know that their personal data is being stored securely 
and privately online,” he said. “Yet the scale and breadth of the hacks we’ve 
seen in 2016 show that governments and companies must do more to safeguard 
these essential digital rights. 2017 must be the year to change this.”

It also looks like the growing scale of attacks will affect how they tackle 
the threat of hacking in 2017. In the September announcement of its 2016Internet
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Organised Crime Threat 
Assessment (IOCTA), the European Police Office (Europol) highlighted the 
growing range of cyber threats.

Obama says he warned Russia to 'cut it out' over election hacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/barack-obama-final-press-conference-election-hacking>
The past year “has seen the further evolution of established cybercrime 
trends”, according to Steven Wilson, head of Europol’s European Cybercrime 
Centre. “The threat from ransomware has continued to grow and has now expanded 
into sectors such as healthcare. Europol has also seen the development of 
malware targeting the ATM network, impacting cash services worldwide.”

Rob Guidry, CEO of social media analytics company Sc2 and a former special 
adviser to US central command, suggested that money was still a big motive 
behind many attacks and played a major role in Russian hacking.

“Russian hackers, specifically, tend to be motivated by the value of the data 
that they take. They have also been known to [for compensation] back Russian 
national strategic pursuits with DDoS and other means, to drive a political 
aim,” he said. “The Russian government has had a cozy relationship with 
professional private hackers for years, and it has been highly useful to them.”

In addition to being active players in the encouragement of hacking, some 
governments, the World Wide Web Foundation’s Craig Fagan also warns, are 
“unravelling the security of the internet for everyone” through new legislation.

“For instance, the UK’s new Investigatory Powers Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/extreme-surveillance-becomes-uk-law-with-barely-a-whimper>
 forces ISPs [internet service providers] to store everyone’s browsing history 
for 12 months, creating an ideal target for scammers and blackmailers,” he 
said. “The act is likely to embolden other countries to follow the UK’s bad 
example, with grave consequences for all of our privacy.”

The tech winners and losers of 2016 (hint: Facebook – and Facebook)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/20/2016-tech-winners-losers-facebook-peter-thiel>
Andrew Crocker, an attorney on the Electronic Frontier Foundation’s civil 
liberties team, echoed this sentiment and warned against fear of cyber-attacks 
and hacking being used by lawmakers to pass sweeping anti-hacking legislation 
that could have unintended consequences. “The prevalence of these data breaches,
botnets <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Botnet>, and other attacks highlight the 
importance of data security best practices and the need to reject government 
proposals to weaken security, such as mandating encryption backdoors,” he said.

Sc2’s Rob Guidry suggests that by the time we get to the end of 2017, we may 
look back on the major hacks of 2016 as being not so bad.

“It’s going to get worse before it gets better,” he says. “Hacking is going to 
become a price that people pay for doing business over the internet much in the 
same way that piracy was once a cost of doing business through shipping.”
 