
“I have vivid memories of my son at about four months old, sitting in a 
cardboard box in my sitting room while a friend and I were having a meeting 
about a show.” Sally Cookson is recalling what it was like, 20 years ago, to 
manage a new career as an actor-turned-director with two young children, Arthur 
and Nell. “We were setting up our next production and doing it with Arthur in 
this box, stuffing things in it so that he wouldn’t fall over, trying to get 
the show on the road. It was that endless juggling.”

Now her children – Nell, 19, a student, and Arthur, 22, a jazz musician – are 
grown-up and Cookson has quietly become known as one of the UK’s most 
innovative directors, especially in family theatre. She is married to the 
composer John O’Hara and the two often collaborate on projects.

Peter Pan – review
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/06/peter-pan-review> 
Based in Bristol, she started her career in directing at the Bristol Old Vic 
by co-founding its youth theatre. She went on to win plaudits for her 
productions ofJane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/27/jane-eyre-lyttleton-national-theatre-review-sally-cookson-passion-and-madness>
,Boing! <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/dec/19/boing-review> and 
Cloudland and was Olivier-nominated forHetty Feather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/22/hetty-feather-review-stage-adaptation>
 andCinderella: A Fairytale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/dec/16/cinderella-a-fairtytale-review>. 
Now she’s directing a breathtakingly ambitious version of Peter Pan at the 
National Theatre in London, a transfer fromBristol Old Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/06/peter-pan-review>, where it 
opened to rave reviews in 2012.

She has always been influenced by her own family in her work. “Oh, of course 
it mattered to me what the children thought!” she laughs. “A lot of the work I 
made was informed by what stage they were at. We’re Going On a Bear Hunt [the 
adaptation ofMichael Rosen’s book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2014/apr/10/we-re-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-helen-oxenbury-video>
], for example, came out of the fact that it was a favourite book in the 
household. They were obsessed with it, and that’s sort of why I turned it into 
theatre. My relationship with them and reading to them sparked a lot of the 
work that I made.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fcaptain-hook-peter-pan-sally-cookson-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf7f62bc420234075d41bf48a8c934c36bfdc4b1%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20I%20made%20Wendy%20the%20real%20star%20of%20Peter%20Pan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fcaptain-hook-peter-pan-sally-cookson-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20I%20made%20Wendy%20the%20real%20star%20of%20Peter%20Pan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fcaptain-hook-peter-pan-sally-cookson-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf7f62bc420234075d41bf48a8c934c36bfdc4b1%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
 Madeleine Worrall as Wendy. Photograph: Mark Douet 
Cookson is also well-known for challenging gender stereotypes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/04/bristol-old-vic-gender-swap-panto-riotous-subtle-sleeping-beauty>
 in her productions for adults and for children. Jane Eyre at the National was 
described by one critic as “a picture of exultant feminism”. When she last 
directedSleeping Beauty as a Christmas show at Bristol Old Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/28/sleeping-beauty-turned-into-prince-theatre-gender-swap-bristol-old-vic>
, Sleeping Beauty was a prince, destined to be rescued by a woman. And why not?

Her latest ruse is inspired by JM Barrie’s original concept for the staged 
version ofPeter Pan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/02/peter-pan-was-pioneering-work-of-child-psychology-claims-new-study>
, which first premiered in 1904, although Barrie didn’t publish a script until 
the late 1920s (because he kept altering it). Barrie always intended that the 
roles of Mrs Darling and Hook be played by the same person, even though he 
never achieved this in any of the productions he staged. “Barrie wanted the 
actress playing Mrs Darling to double up as Hook because Hook is Peter’s 
nemesis and his arch enemy is really the mother figure.”

“Peter was rejected as a tiny infant by his own mother. We learn about that in 
[the 1906 novel]Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/212474>. There’s a 
chapter where we find out that his nursery room has bars and he has been denied 
access to his mother. This provides the emotional essence of the story. If Hook 
is a man you don’t get that ‘mother figure’ theme running through the story, 
which is hugely important to the piece.” The part of Mrs Darling/Hook is played 
by Anna Francolini, last seen inDamon Albarn’s musical wonder.land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/03/wonderland-review-manchester-international-festival-damon-albarn>
, stepping in after Sophie Thompson broke her wrist in rehearsals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fcaptain-hook-peter-pan-sally-cookson-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81574f5f6c70060a65824f7ac1b48030b756b0c9%2F0_82_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20I%20made%20Wendy%20the%20real%20star%20of%20Peter%20Pan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fcaptain-hook-peter-pan-sally-cookson-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20I%20made%20Wendy%20the%20real%20star%20of%20Peter%20Pan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fcaptain-hook-peter-pan-sally-cookson-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81574f5f6c70060a65824f7ac1b48030b756b0c9%2F0_82_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Breathtakingly ambitious … Sally Cookson’s Peter Pan at Bristol Old Vic. 
Cookson grew up in Twickenham in a theatrical family. Both parents, Barry 
Cookson and Avril Conquest, were actors. “I didn’t have much chance,” she 
laughs. “Well, I had a choice. And my parents tried to get me to do other 
things. But I was hooked from an early age. I can cite the moment I wanted to 
be in the theatre. I was about six and was taken to a panto at the Thorndike 
theatre [now Leatherhead theatre]. It was a classic pantomime, Cinderella, I 
think, and the fairy godmother was magical. She has this incredible sparkly 
wand with a twinkly, tinselly thing on the end which I was convinced was real. 
I just knew what I wanted to do was be on stage and make magic.”

She went to the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art and worked as an 
actor for 10 years, appearing in classic staples of 80s TV such as The Gentle 
Touch and Dempsey and Makepeace. “I never considered in a million years that I 
would be a director. But when I was in my late 20s I was getting a bit 
frustrated with the work I was doing and I wanted more control. I was working 
at the Bristol Old Vic and I started to become very interested in making work 
with young people. They didn’t have a youth theatre, so I set that up in the 
90s with a friend. That’s how I started my directing.”

Bristol Old Vic's gender-swap panto: a riotous but subtle Sleeping Beauty | 
Zoe Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/04/bristol-old-vic-gender-swap-panto-riotous-subtle-sleeping-beauty>
Peter Pan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/27/peter-pan-jm-barrie-house> was a 
long-held dream. “It’s one of those titles everybody knows and it’s almost 
taken on this mythical status. I was interested in discovering what its 
enduring power was. And why we’re still interested in it a hundred years after 
it was first turned into a production.”

And what is the secret of that appeal? “The most successful aspect of Peter 
Pan is that it manages to speak to different ages. It indulges a child’s love 
of play and imagination. But it also taps into our own adult tragic awareness 
of the fleeting nature of childhood pleasures and of facing our own mortality. 
It’s a multilayered thing, bringing these two audiences together so that we 
have something that is playful yet sophisticated, tragic and comic, big and 
small. It brings all this together so that we share this playfulness and this 
incredibly moving material.”

In the book, Wendy is nothing more than a domestic goddess. Which is not at 
all useful in this day and age
Sally Cookson 
Cookson develops her productions in workshops with input from the cast and 
music and movement directors. This version of Peter Pan is based on extensive 
research into Barrie’s original play scripts. “The play was due to open on 22 
December in 1904. But it was such an extraordinary production that they didn’t 
get through the [technical issues]. So it didn’t open until the 27th, which 
enabled Barrie to rewrite act five during Christmas Day. He handed out the 
parts to the actors on Boxing Day morning. You can imagine their delight. I 
find that very comforting, as that’s how I work. We’re constantly rewriting.”

She apologises for being late for this interview because the company got stuck 
reworking a scene, even though the production is days away from opening. “We 
were grappling with a scene in act five where Hook and Wendy have a 
confrontation. It’s one of the areas in our version that we’re trying to bring 
into the 21st century. In the book, Wendy is quite passive, she’s nothing more 
than a domestic goddess. Which is not at all useful in this day and age. So, 
without completely altering Barrie’s vision, we want to make her active. 
Devising her character takes a lot of time and effort. We just want to make her 
into a real person and for her to become as big a part of the adventure as the 
other characters.”

This is clearly at the heart of Cookson’s reinterpretation. “What’s 
fascinating about our Wendy is she wants to enjoy her childhood and have 
fantastic relationships. And she’s beguiled by Peter – like all the other 
characters are. But she understands that she can’t get a satisfying, fully 
formed relationship with Peter. And that’s the turning point. She falls in love 
with him and realises that he can’t give her what she wants because he’s 
incapable of loving. So she makes the decision that she’s going to go home and 
grow up. Because that’s what’s fulfilling about being human: becoming an adult 
and moving into the next phase and not staying in an arrested, childlike state. 
So she’s the heroine, really.”

Cookson is no theatre diva: she’s a collaborator. Just as she wants the whole 
company to “own” a production, she’s happy to hand it over to the audience to 
“fill in the gaps”. “That’s what I like doing when I’m in an audience. I don’t 
like to be fed every idea and be told what I’m meant to be feeling in every 
single moment. I am always trying to offer up different interpretations. Each 
person who sees it will take something different from it.”

And her definition of the best kind of family theatre? “It has to have lots of 
different elements. It’s got to be a fantastic story. You’ve got to be on the 
edge of your seat. There’s got to be emotional heart and you’ve got to care. 
The best stories remind us of what it is to be human.”

• Peter Pan is at the National Theatre until 4 February, with half-price 
tickets for under-18s. Suitable for ages 7+,nationaltheatre.org.uk 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/peter-pan>
 