
As a solemn man with albinism courses through the empty streets of Tianducheng 
in an ice-blue Subaru Impreza, hundreds of Chinese teenagers with uniform, 
bleach-blond haircuts sprint towardsa rusty, imposing replica of the Eiffel 
Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/jan/07/china-copycat-architecture-seeing-double>
. Behind the eerie development in Hangzhou, in eastern China’s Zhejiang 
province, a smoggy skyline looms.

Film-maker Romain Gavras’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/sep/25/romain-gavras-born-free> 
cinematic vision forJamie xx’s Gosh 
<https://embed.itunes.apple.com/gb/embedded-player/idsa.b6576151-3f67-11e6-912a-f3a39e98b691>
 – which features a cast of 400 people and eschewed CGI and 3D effects – came 
with one instruction for its viewers: fully immerse yourselves in the 
apocalyptic experience. “Please watch full-screen with loud speakers or 
headphones,” Gavras tweeted  
<https://twitter.com/romain_gavras/status/748806653491818496>on its release 
this month. The video was a moment, rolled out for a track that was originally 
released more than a year ago. It’s a track that really doesn’t need a music 
video, let alone a physical copy,designed to look like a knock-off DVD 
<http://noisey.vice.com/en_uk/blog/jamie-xx-romain-gavras-gosh-video-trailer>, 
of a 40-second trailer for said video, which was delivered to journalists days 
before its official premiere.

At a time when the music world is still dealing with illegal downloads and 
streaming culture, such an ostentatious approach to promoting an old song may 
appear incongruous. But thanks to the power of a small number of elite artists, 
music videos are having a renaissance and once more becoming events in 
themselves, the way they were when Michael Jackson released Thriller or Madonna 
put out Erotica. Some are cinematic: Beyoncé’s visual album Lemonade, which is
set to sweep the board at this year’s MTV Video Music awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/26/beyonce-adele-2016-mtv-video-music-awards-lemonade>
; Rihanna’s Sledgehammer, the first video shot using solely Imax cameras. 
Others, such asDavid Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/23/david-bowie-instagram-blackstar-unbound>
 andRadiohead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/03/radiohead-unveil-clips-from-album-number-nine->
, have engaged with a new demographic using short, shareable Instagram 
vignettes.

Major artists and their labels are again spending serious money on music 
videos. However, unlike a few years ago, when the likes of Robin Thicke and 
Miley Cyrus were going for the shock factor, artists are taking artistic, 
inventive approaches. When theydo try to provoke outrage – as with Kanye West’s 
Famous or Rihanna’s Bitch Better Have My Money – it’s a step beyond Blurred 
Lines or Wrecking Ball.

Sarah Boardman, head of music at award-winning film studio Pulse Films – whose 
client list includes one of Lemonade’s directors, Kahlil Joseph – says the 
problem is that this flurry of invention is limited to pop’s top tier. “At the 
moment, you have no middle in budgets – you have £30,000 for the majority of 
artists, then you have £200,000 for [Justin] Bieber or Carly Rae Jepsen, for a 
big pop star, but there’s nothing in between. You used to get £50,000, £60,000, 
£70,000, £90,000 quite often. Now you have good, credible artists and they’re 
getting £30,000 or £40,000, and it’s really difficult to make something stand 
out for that sort of money.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fhow-pop-music-video-got-weird-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f613c236b59f69a1bcc930ad39c39ba67ccd944%2F346_200_2214_1038%2F2214.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20pop%20video%20got%20weird%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fhow-pop-music-video-got-weird-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20pop%20video%20got%20weird%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fhow-pop-music-video-got-weird-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f613c236b59f69a1bcc930ad39c39ba67ccd944%2F346_200_2214_1038%2F2214.jpg>
 David Bowie used Instagram vignettes to share his work with a new demographic. 
Photograph: YouTube 
Even so, while the biggest stars have revived the video-as-spectacle, artists 
with fewer resources have had to find new ways to make an impact with video. 
The gradual decline of “premiere culture 
<https://medium.com/cuepoint/music-blog-premieres-342daf3c47d2#.z4x4fxayh>” – 
in which one website or blog gets the exclusive launch of an artist’s video 
and, theoretically, reap the benefits of the traffic it generates – has had a 
profound impact on low- and medium-profile artists, who have neither the budget 
to make dramatic videos nor as wide a variety of platforms on which to promote 
them. Streaming services such as Spotify and Tidal – which compete for monthly 
subscriptions – have become the first place an artist will deliver new music, 
with some videos funded by the services themselves. When Apple Music launched 
in 2015, it looked as if it might become a key facilitator, in terms of funding 
and promoting all levels of artists (it reportedly footed the bill for Drake’s
Hotline Bling <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uxpDa-c-4Mc> video).

Boardman certainly hoped so. “We did a Purity Ring 
<http://purityringthing.com/> video and we got $100,000 [from Apple] – they 
aren’t a big band, we were super excited. We thought: ‘This is going to be our 
saviour! It’s going to become this platform like MTV!’ But it has moved away 
from that. They are still investing in music videos, but only the big ones.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp7FCgw_GlWc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp7FCgw_GlWc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp7FCgw_GlWc&media=>
 ‘A step beyond Blurred Lines or Wrecking Ball’ – Famous by Kanye West. 
“Production teams and directors increasingly walk away, losing money on video 
projects, and the financial risks and hits artists and labels take on each 
video are hefty,” says Samuel Strang, creative director at the indie label 4AD. 
“Taking third-party funds can help, [but] it often means sacrificing rights and 
content hiding on specific platforms and channels.” At the same time, finding 
ways to cut corners can add a fresh dynamic to a project, he says.

A DIY attitude is something that director Rollo Jackson has noticed emerging 
more often among those with a dedicated fanbase who are unable to get a wedge 
of cash from an investor. While he was shooting a documentary in Tokyo with 
Stormzy at the start of 2016, the grime star took it upon himself to film and
upload a video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MhESGrnUieU> within the first 
24 hours of arriving in the city. “It was a freestyle video, rather than a big 
complicated video, but in the space of a week it had done a million hits. 
That’s a power in itself.”

The absence of cash isn’t the only reason why artists outside the elite are 
less inclined to make the type of glamorous videos that were prevalent in the 
1990s. When social media, in particular Snapchat and Instagram, gives fans a 
chance to see – supposedly– what an artist’s life is like behind the curtain, 
the fake flamboyance of music videos appears more overtly manufactured.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyzTuBuRdAyA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyzTuBuRdAyA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyzTuBuRdAyA&media=>
 Grant Singer says his video for the Weeknd’s track The Hills ‘has created a 
sort of internal conversation’ among online commenters. 
“Maybe the world [an artist] exists in isn’t quite as grand,” Jackson says. 
“It isn’t quite the P Diddy world that it used to be. You see fewer videos 
where people are in golden palaces with tigers and yachts, because you’ve 
probably seen how they live on a day-to-day basis anyway. If you think of all 
the videos by Young Thug – he does a lot of videos and they are pretty constant 
– they look pretty real to how he’s living. It’s just extensions, 
better-produced versions, of his Instagram. They’re not these massively grand 
spectacles.”

Grant Singer, who has made chilling videos for the likes of Ariel Pink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/02/a-year-in-pop-videos-iggy-azalea-charli-xcx-arca>
 andthe Weeknd <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KEI4qSrkPAs>, says 
below-the-line commentary has also pushed artists and directors to favour a 
more ambiguous, unusual approach, something that gives the final creation 
greater longevity.

“A lot of artists have really great taste and can do bold, transgressive 
things and it won’t hurt their brand,” he says. “When I madeThe Hills with the 
Weeknd <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yzTuBuRdAyA>, which has had almost a 
billion views now, a lot of the comments were people trying to interpret what 
the video means. I think that that’s great, I think that that’s really 
important. You create a visual that is very simple in some ways, that for 
almost a year now has created a sort of internal conversation. I think that’s 
really cool. Maybe five, 10 years ago, most videos didn’t have that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fhow-pop-music-video-got-weird-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F292b10d3156b8385c20dd40efca2c1579d866c7c%2F0_79_2547_1263%2F2547.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20pop%20video%20got%20weird%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fhow-pop-music-video-got-weird-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20pop%20video%20got%20weird%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fhow-pop-music-video-got-weird-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F292b10d3156b8385c20dd40efca2c1579d866c7c%2F0_79_2547_1263%2F2547.jpg>
 Aphex Twin’s CIRKLON3 [ Колхозная mix], as filmed by 12-year-old Ryan Wyer. 
Photograph: YouTube 
James Lees, whose recent work has included a condensed romcom for Lil Dicky 
and a desert dance spectacle for Unknown Mortal Orchestra, is not totally 
convinced this burst of creativity can last. “The optimistic side of me says I 
would hope people now expect to be challenged and made to think a little more, 
that purely sex and the shock factor are not enough. The pessimistic side of me 
says that music videos, like all forms of art and culture, go through trends, 
and we’ve simply entered a new trend, and within three years it will be 
something completely different again.”

Boardman predicts that, in the future, more emphasis will be placed on virtual 
reality (although she believes “no one has properly figured out how to make a 
really good music video with it yet”) and short-form, social-media-orientated 
videos. But what of the renegades, the rulebreakers of the music video world? 
Can the nextChris Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chris-cunningham> break through in this 
climate?

Maybe Aphex Twin, always one to push the boundaries of visual marketing, has 
the answer. For the release of his trackCIRKLON3 [Колхозная mix] 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZEP-Qpw3lHg>, Richard D James enlisted 
12-year-old Ryan Wyer from Rush, County Dublin, to direct the video, having 
reportedly found his YouTube gaming channel,epic1:40d Gaming 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCjjcBgtyIsVijmPC1Y9jY3Q>, where he posts 
Aphex Twin reviews alongside gaming commentary. The result is eight minutes of 
frantic camera filters, infrared and dodgy camera work: all in all, a vibrant, 
yet overwhelmingly nightmarish, creation.
 