
Cruise holidays can be incredibly good value – often beating land-based 
holidays in price-for-price comparisons, because food, accommodation and 
entertainment are included (two nights can start from as little as £279 for a 
no-fly mini-cruise or £579 for seven nights). Plus going on a cruise gives the 
opportunity to visit lots of destinations on one trip, while only unpacking 
once.

If you’re a first-timer, start with the country or places you would like to 
visit and research the cruise lines that call there. Decide what’s important to 
you: size of ship? staff ratio? kid-friendly? adventurous activities? Talk to a 
travel agent – look for one via theCruise Lines International Association 
<http://www.cruising.org/> – to get the best deal. 

40 of the world's best cruise holidays
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/27/worlds-40-best-cruise-holidays> 
In general, booking early is advised. The best cabins and most popular travel 
dates and itineraries sell out first and there are often incentives for early 
bookers: free balcony upgrades, drinks packages or onboard spending money.

Otherwise “wave period” – usually December to March – is a time when cruise 
lines offer lots of great-value deals; and towards the end of the summer, and 
around National Cruise Week in September, special offers also become available.

Cruises <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/cruises> are brilliant for 
families because so much is included and you can leave your kids at the onboard 
clubs for hours on end and go off to the spa. Flights during school holidays 
can push the cost right up, so consider cruising to/from a British port, such 
as Southampton or Dover, to keep the costs down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fhow-to-book-a-cheap-cruise-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7a38096fde2af2d75d9fc326482749161ba7a5f%2F0_145_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20book%20a%20cheap%20cruise%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fhow-to-book-a-cheap-cruise-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20book%20a%20cheap%20cruise%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fhow-to-book-a-cheap-cruise-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7a38096fde2af2d75d9fc326482749161ba7a5f%2F0_145_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
 Family cruises offer a range of entertainment aimed at keeping adults and 
children happy. Photograph: Kent Phillips 
Before you book your cruise, it’s always worth checking exactly what’s 
included: many luxury ocean and river cruise lines will include drinks and 
excursions as well as the usual meals, for example, while others will bill you 
for that “welcome” cocktail. Some will charge for Wi-Fi, while others do not, 
and even include laundry. So research, again, is key.

Liz Jarvis is editor of Cruise International <http://cruise-international.com/>
 