
In 2011, aged 81, I moved from London to Bristol to be closer to my youngest 
daughter and grandsons. I had lived in London since 1956, and left behind my 
friends, family and my painting class. Apart from my daughter, I hardly knew 
anyone in Bristol. But I did know that I couldn't spend my life hanging on to 
her coat tails, turning up on her door step saying "I'm lonely".

So I made it a policy not to do that, and to make my own life. I got back in 
touch with an old friend who was living in Bristol and she told me she was part 
of a fortnightly walking group and that I should join. I told her that I'm the 
type of woman who takes the car to the letterbox, and that the last time I went 
on a big hike was in Cumbria 30 years ago. I don't do walking. She said: "Yes 
you do," and took me immediately to buy boots, socks and the all-important 
walking poles.

The first expedition was five miles long and I spent most of it falling over. 
The next day, I was so stiff I could hardly get out of bed. I managed to 
survive with a hot bath and a hot water bottle, and I've kept at it. I'm now a 
regular member of the group â€“ and the oldest.

It's an excellent way to get healthy. I would feel nervous walking by myself: 
I wouldn't want to fall or get lost. In a group, everyone keeps an eye on each 
other. And it's very sociable. On some of the walks, through the most beautiful 
countryside, we're chatting so much we miss the view. We talk about what we saw 
at the cinema, or on television, and have a good moan about that. Children and 
grandchildren are a big topic. We talk about what went on at Christmas and what 
we're planning for the summer. And of course we finish in the pub, where I'm 
always the first to order a large glass of wine.

Thinking back to before I left London, I would never have imagined the life I 
am now living in Bristol. By picking up an old friendship, I have built a new 
life. I have also gone from being an extraordinarily lazy sybarite to a quite 
energetic old person in walking boots.
 