
When John Glenn was waiting to be fired into orbit aboard Friendship 7 in 
1962, there was one person he trusted with the complex trajectory calculations 
required to bring him down safely from his orbital spaceflight: Katherine 
Johnson, an African-American mathematician who worked in Nasa’s segregated west 
area computers division.

“Get the girl, check the numbers,” Glenn said before boarding the rocket. “If 
she says they’re good, I’m good to go.”

Johnson was one of three female African-American mathematicians known as the 
“computers in skirts” who worked on the Redstone, Mercury and Apollo space 
programmes forNasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa>. Now, thanks to 
an award-tipped movie, Johnson, Mary Jackson and Dorothy Vaughan are about to 
become more widely celebrated.

The film, Hidden Figures, stars Taraji P Henson of TV series Empire, soul 
singer and actress Janelle Monáe, Octavia Spencer fromThe Help movie, and 
Academy Award winner Kevin Costner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fblack-women-mathematicians-nasa-john-glenn-space-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd35d4eaccf7e6c6f73f8540632161cf5af7d2b21%2F91_280_2909_1745%2F2909.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20three%20black%20women%20helped%20send%20John%20Glenn%20into%20orbit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fblack-women-mathematicians-nasa-john-glenn-space-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20three%20black%20women%20helped%20send%20John%20Glenn%20into%20orbit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fblack-women-mathematicians-nasa-john-glenn-space-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd35d4eaccf7e6c6f73f8540632161cf5af7d2b21%2F91_280_2909_1745%2F2909.jpg>
 Katherine Johnson at Nasa Langley Research Center in 1980. Photograph: Nasa 
Glenn’s death at the age of 95 last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/08/john-glenn-us-astronaut-dies>, 
coupled with the film industry’s desire to correct last year’s damaging 
#OscarSoWhite controversy and celebrate how the women broke through the racial 
and gender discrimination of an all-male flight research team, suggests the 
film will now have the momentum to launch itself forcefully into the film 
awards season.

Monáe, who plays Jackson, told the Observer that the three women broke through 
and changed the face of a white male profession. Jackson fought through the 
courts to join courses that would allow her to even be admitted to the Nasa 
programme. “These women were told that their dreams were not valid because of 
their gender and the colour of their skin,” said Monáe. “But these were two 
things they could not change – and would not want to – because [Jackson] was a 
proud black woman.”

A corresponding breakthrough, said Monáe, was Hollywood’s willingness to make 
a mainstream film about African-American women. “Most of the time we’re 
portrayed as the maid, the nanny or the secretary,” she said. “But to be 
portrayed as brilliant-minded, outspoken, to dress sharply and be the voice of 
a new generation of women – now audiences are going to see a different side of 
us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fblack-women-mathematicians-nasa-john-glenn-space-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3761e793ed6e757e45f4b925f3b40bc115a05141%2F0_399_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20three%20black%20women%20helped%20send%20John%20Glenn%20into%20orbit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fblack-women-mathematicians-nasa-john-glenn-space-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20three%20black%20women%20helped%20send%20John%20Glenn%20into%20orbit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fblack-women-mathematicians-nasa-john-glenn-space-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3761e793ed6e757e45f4b925f3b40bc115a05141%2F0_399_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Mary Jackson at NASA Langley Research Centre in 1980. Photograph: Bob Nye/NASA 
The filmmakers hope the movie, based on the book Hidden Figures: the American 
Dream and the Untold Story of the Black Women Mathematicians who helped win the 
Space Race by Margot Lee Shetterly 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hidden-figures.html>, will also help to lift 
the stigma that is often attached to women in the sciences. “If a girl, of 
whatever age or ethnicity, is inclined toward science, technology engineering 
and math, they should be encouraged and that passion should be fostered because 
if we only had the male perspective, women will continue to be marginalised and 
objectified,” said Spencer, who plays Vaughan.

Monáe hopes Hidden Figures will help to boost the Fem the Future  
<http://www.femfuture.com/>gender-equality project that she launched over the 
summer with Kenyan-Mexican actressLupita Nyong’o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lupita-nyong-o>, who won an Oscar for 12 
Years a Slave.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fblack-women-mathematicians-nasa-john-glenn-space-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e298c5323d390e6700227c5d1aa9ca59197952%2F265_491_1834_2291%2F1834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20three%20black%20women%20helped%20send%20John%20Glenn%20into%20orbit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fblack-women-mathematicians-nasa-john-glenn-space-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20three%20black%20women%20helped%20send%20John%20Glenn%20into%20orbit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fblack-women-mathematicians-nasa-john-glenn-space-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e298c5323d390e6700227c5d1aa9ca59197952%2F265_491_1834_2291%2F1834.jpg>
 Dorothy Vaughan in her twenties. Photograph: Courtesy the Family of Dorothy 
Johnson Vaughan 
Their plans include putting on a women-focused pop and tech festival next 
year. “We’re out there but it’s going to take all of us coming together – just 
like going into space – to get it done or it does not get done,” Monáe said.

Pharrell Williams, one of the film’s executive producers who also wrote 
several songs for the film, added his voice to calls for women’s role in 
science to be more widely acknowledged. “Up until recently, a woman’s 
contribution to history has often been dismissed, discounted and often at times 
even erased from public acknowledgment,” he told the Directors Guild of America 
last month.

The story of Nasa’s black female mathematicians has always been celebrated 
within the agency, but not widely known about beyond. Following an executive 
order prohibiting racial discrimination in the defence industry, Nasa’s 
predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (Naca) began 
recruiting African Americans with college degrees in the 1940s for the computer 
pool.

The agency considered women more patient and detail-oriented than men – and 
they could be paid less. They were assigned the work of reading, calculating 
and plotting test data. But the in the pre-civil rights era, African Americans 
occupied a segregated wing and used separate facilities.

In the late 1980s, a Nasa researcher noticed the black women in agency 
photographs from the period. The film’s director, Theodore Melfi, explained 
that parts of their story were known but that the segregated computer group 
existed only for a short time before IBM brought in the first computers in 1961.

John Glenn obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/08/john-glenn-obituary> 
“Nasa has never hidden these women and always held them up and celebrated 
them,” he said. “It’s always been a progressive place and it was always about 
the value of your brain. The agency was terrifically helpful with the making of 
the film.”

It is believed that Glenn, a former Democrat senator for Ohio, died before 
seeingHidden Figures. Melfi said Glenn was supportive of the film and gave the 
production the use of his photographs for free. He was known to have disliked
The Right Stuff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/02/the-right-stuff-reel-history>, 
the film of Tom Wolfe’s account of the early days of the space programme that 
depicted him, he felt, as conservative in contrast to hell-raising colleagues.

Details of Glenn’s funeral are still being decided but he is to lie in state 
in Ohio’s capitol building in Columbus before a memorial service at Ohio State 
university. He is to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery in Washington DC.
 