


One of the most important regional galleries in England is to reopen on Friday 
after a £5.2m refurbishment, paid for in part by a cash-strapped local council 
that said cuts to culture funding were a “false economy”.

The Ferens in Hull <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> has been closed 
for the last 16 months while it underwent an essential revamp to fix the 
gallery’s temperature, humidity and lighting systems. The work was deemed 
necessary if it was to be trusted to care for world-class art.

The investment, £3.7m of which came from the local council, is already paying 
dividends as Hullbegins its UK City of Culture celebrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/01/fireworks-launch-hull-uk-city-of-culture>
. On Thursday, 100 years after local industrialist TR Ferens purchased the plot 
of land on which the museum stands, its new star attraction was revealed: a 
restored 14th-century gold panel painting, Christ Between Saints Paul and 
Peter, by Italian Pietro Lorenzetti, saved for the nation after the government 
placedan export bar 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/culture-minister-defers-export-of-a-rare-700-year-old-panel-painting-depicting-christ-between-saints-paul-and-peter-by-pietro-lorenzetti>
 to stop it being snapped up by a foreign buyer.
 Pietro Lorenzetti’s Christ Between Saints Paul and Peter. Photograph: Gary 
Calton for the Observer 
Unveiling the painting on Thursday, Dr Gabriele Finaldi, the director of the 
National Gallery, said he was “very envious” of Hull for owning such an 
exquisite piece of art. “I do hope one day you will consider lending it to us,” 
he said.

 The gallery will also redisplay its permanent collection including important 
work by Frans Hals, Canaletto, Henry Moore, Barbara Hepworth and Mark Wallinger.

Also at the Ferens in 2017 is the show Francis Bacon: Nervous System 
<https://www.hull2017.co.uk/whatson/events/bacon/>, and works by the 
internationally acclaimed sculptor Ron Mueck. Rembrandt’sThe Shipbuilder and 
his Wife 
<https://www.royalcollection.org.uk/collection/405533/the-shipbuilder-and-his-wife-jan-rijcksen-15602-1637-and-his-wife-griet-jans>
 will also arrive on loan from the Queen’s royal collection.

Hull council has been criticised by some residents who are unhappy that the 
city’s cultural budget has remained untouched while brutal savings have been 
made in almost every other non-ring-fenced area, admitted the deputy council 
leader, Darren Hale. Central government funding to Hull in 2020 will be 55% of 
what it was in 2010, he said, representing a loss of £136m over 10 years.

“Many cash-strapped councils are making difficult choices, with some choosing 
to cut arts, leisure and culture. At Hull city council we will not be doing 
that,” he said. “We have managed to not just preserve but enhance our cultural 
offering. It has been a struggle. People say ‘why are the cuts not applied 
evenly?’ But we see that investment in culture boosts the economy. To cut the 
culture budget would be a false economy. We spend £1.5m on galleries each year 
and we know that they bring in two or three times that amount to the local 
economy – hopefully much more than that this year. It’s a no-brainer.”
 The restored gallery will reopen to the public on Friday. Photograph: Gary 
Calton for the Observer 
Matt Hancock, the culture minister, said councils that cut culture budgets 
were acting “politically”. The government contributed £1m to the Ferens revamp, 
with the Arts Council providing a further £500,000.

Hancock told the Guardian at the Ferens relaunch: “All the evidence shows that 
investment in culture improves the towns and cities where that investment is 
made. It improves these places socially, it brings people together and it 
boosts the economy.”

Asked if he had sympathy for councils that have slashed arts budgets, such as 
Lancashire, which isclosing more than 20 libraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/11/government-to-probe-lancashire-library-closures>
 and shutting museums, he said: “Hull shows that you can make efficiencies 
elsewhere and deliver investment in the arts. Making a political decision not 
to do that is a mistake. I think that people right across the country in 
councils that are looking to balance their books should see the impact of 
cultural investment in places like Hull.”

During its closure, Ferens lent out one of its treasures, Nicolas Régnier’s 
Saint Sebastian Tended By the Holy Irene and Her Servant, to the National 
Gallery for itsBeyond Caravaggio exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/09/beyond-caravaggio-review-a-masterpiece-of-surprise>
. Reviewing the show on Radio 4, an eminent broadsheet art critic said he had 
not seen the painting before because it had been “hidden away in Hull”. Hancock 
urged such critics to leave London. “Get on the train,” he said.
 