
In a Scandinavian hotel a few years ago, I came across a documentary I didn’t 
expect to watch for more than a minute or two, but at least it was in English. 
It was past time to go to bed, but I ended up watching the whole thing.
Aftermath: Population Zero 
<http://channel.nationalgeographic.com/aftermath/episodes/aftermath-population-zero/>
 imagines that overnight humanity vanishes from the planet.

Related: The 13 impossible crises that humanity now faces | George Monbiot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/13-crises-we-face-trump-soil-loss-global-collapse>

You may have seen it. The immediate effects of human departure are 
sentimentally saddening: pets die, no longer competent to fend for themselves. 
Some livestock fares poorly, though other domesticated animals romp happily 
into the wild. Water cooling fuel rods of nuclear power plants evaporate, and 
you’d think that would be the end of everything – but it isn’t.

Radioactivity subsides. Mankind’s monuments to itself decay, until every last 
skyscraper has rusted and returned to dirt.Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals> proliferate, flora thrive, forests 
rise. Bounty, abundance and beauty abound. Antelopes leap from wafting golden 
grasses. It was all very exhilarating, really. I went to sleep that night with 
a lightened heart.

Ever since, that wafting grasses image has been a comforting touchstone. We 
speak often of “destroying the planet” when what we mean is destroying its 
habitability for humans. The humblingly immense else-ness of what is, in which 
our species is collectively a speck, extant for an eye blink, lets us off the 
hook. Global warming, Syrian civil war, domestic violence, Donald Trump? This 
too shall pass.

Related: What is giving you hope for 2017? | Sarah Marsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/what-is-giving-you-hope-for-2017>

I’m not a religious person. Chances are that the universe neither treasures 
nor regrets us. It permits us, with a marvellous neutrality, and later it may 
permit artificial intelligence, humanity 2.0, or a lot more bugs instead. We 
can’t comprehend all that phantasmagorical stuff out there, but we also can’t 
kill it. That gives me hope. Although we’re a remarkably successful biological 
manifestation – and so is mould – our aptitude for annihilation is largely 
limited to wiping ourselves out. The gift of self-destruction is a minor, not 
to mention stupid, power, and apparently humanity’s suicide would be relatively 
safe, like a controlled explosion. The universe would get on perfectly well 
without us once we’d gone.

I strongly associate the notion of aftermath with TC Boyle’s short story 
Chicxulub <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2004/03/01/chicxulub>. While 
relating the intimate, personal account of learning that his teenage daughter 
has been hit, perhaps fatally, by a car, the narrator digresses to explain the 
shockingly high likelihood that our planet will be hit by an asteroid large 
enough to extinguish our species. For the narrator, his daughter’s death and 
the end of the world are indistinguishable. The text is shot through with a 
piercing sorrow, over all our pending losses – of children, of the world we’ve 
made together as a race. This, too, gives me hope – that I’m not a misanthrope 
after all. I would miss my brother, my husband; with all our shortcomings, I 
would also miss the family of man. The capacity for grief, the flipside of 
love, consoles me as much as the detached long view of aftermath.
 