
Hundreds of migrants and refugees have left Calais on buses for accommodation 
centres elsewhere inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> on the 
first day of an operation to clear and then demolish the refugee camp in the 
northern port town.

Queues of people carrying their few possessions, some in donated holdalls, had 
begun forming before dawn outside a warehouse where processing took place.

Calais refugee camp: first bus leaves as police prepare for demolition – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/oct/24/calais-camp-riot-police-prepare-demolish-refugees-migrant>
As the gates opened people surged towards the warehouse, with no idea where 
they were to be taken but having been warned they must leave or risk arrest and 
deportation.


Four hours after the operation began, about 900 people had departed Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> on 23 buses. The process appeared 
orderly, though riot police did move in for a short time to control the queue 
as people started to push and shove at the front just before midday. A further 
85 buses were expected to arrive on Tuesday and Wednesday.

In the UK, another 20 children, all male, arrived in Devon from the makeshift 
camp on Monday. They had left before a temporary halt was put on the transfer 
of vulnerable refugee children to Britain on Monday at the request of the 
French authorities while the clearance of the camp was under way. The UK home 
secretary, Amber Rudd, will update MPs later on Monday.

The scenes in Calais on Monday contrasted with violent clashes that took place 
over the weekend, as camp residents threw stones at French riot police who 
retaliated with teargas.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Funrest-in-calais-ahead-of-camp-demolition-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unrest%20in%20Calais%20ahead%20of%20camp%20demolition%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Funrest-in-calais-ahead-of-camp-demolition-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unrest%20in%20Calais%20ahead%20of%20camp%20demolition%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Funrest-in-calais-ahead-of-camp-demolition-video&media=>
Unrest in Calais ahead of camp demolition– video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/24/unrest-in-calais-ahead-of-camp-demolition-video>
Police vans and fire engines were positioned on the perimeter while those 
choosing to leave were herded into the warehouse. They were then put on one of 
the white buses taking them to centres across France.

The first coachload, carrying 50 Sudanese, left at 8.45am, and headed for the 
Burgundy region, French news agency AFP reported.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffrance-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29a7e69b5a8be9d35c6e4856bb8de0ea801454d1%2F0_0_3798_2527%2F3798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hundreds%20leave%20Calais%20by%20bus%20on%20first%20day%20of%20operation%20to%20clear%20refugee%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffrance-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hundreds%20leave%20Calais%20by%20bus%20on%20first%20day%20of%20operation%20to%20clear%20refugee%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffrance-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29a7e69b5a8be9d35c6e4856bb8de0ea801454d1%2F0_0_3798_2527%2F3798.jpg>
 People queue outside a hangar where they were to be sorted into groups and put 
on buses for shelters across France. Photograph: Philippe Huguen/AFP/Getty 
The French aim is to clear 3,000 adults and children from the centre on Monday 
as part of a major three-day operation to close the sprawling camp. The aim is 
to relocate up to 10,000 people in total to specialist accommodation centres 
for formal registration and processing.


The chief executive of the port of Calais, Jean-Marc Puissesseau, described 
Monday’s operation as “the D-day” and himself as a “very, very happy man”. 
However,there were concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/23/france-uk-process-children-unaccompanied-minors-calais-refugee-camp-demolition>
 about demolition starting with thousands of children and vulnerable adults 
still living there.

Youth charities voiced concerns over the support being given to children in 
the “rush” to clear the camp. “The question should be ‘when can we demolish the 
site’ and the answer should be ‘once we have the children cleared’ – not the 
other way round,” said Michael McHugh, a volunteer who has worked in the camp 
with Refugee Youth Service.

The charity Help Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> said 
the fact the UK Home Office had not been allowed to register children on 
Monday, so pausing the transfer of vulnerable children to the UK, had added to 
the chaos. It said there were 49 unaccompanied children aged 13 and under at 
the camp eligible to come to the UK.


Unaccompanied minors are believed to be the only group staying in Calais, 
where they will be taken to containers within a secure area of the camp 
previously used to house adults. But conflicting advice over where children 
should go was “extremely distressing and confusing” to children who were 
struggling to understand where they should go and how they were supposed to get 
there, the charity said.


“Up to a thousand children are expected to be housed in the shipping 
containers and at present it appears there is nothing in the way of youth 
workers to be responsible for, and help calm, these young people and children,” 
it said.

Many of those queuing to leave were Sudanese and Eritrean. As officers opened 
the gates, people were guided into four queues – adult, family, child, and 
vulnerable or disabled – and given a coloured wristband.

Calais map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/calais_camps_map/giv-14064m7PauCmEyR6/>
Many said they were happy to leave. Among them, Mohamed, 23, from Eritrea, who 
said: “The camp is dirty and dangerous.” He had been there for three months, he 
told the Guardian, and had tried to get asylum in France before.

Are you affected by the events at the Calais camp?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/are-you-affected-by-the-events-at-the-calais-camp>
“My fingerprints were taken in Italy and wherever you go in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> after that they say you have to 
go back to Italy under the Dublin regulation. Now they say for the first time 
the fingerprints don’t matter and we can start applying for asylum again. I am 
happy.”

Yusef, 35, a pharmacist from Sudan, who spent three months living rough in 
Calais, and hopes to claim asylum in France, said he had no idea where he would 
end up: “I will close my eyes and put my finger on the map.”

But he was optimistic. “I want to integrate to start a new life, contribute. I 
trust France to keep me safe.” Once he had hopes of making it to the UK. “But 
that dream died here,” he said. “That bridge is closed.”


Hours before the evacuation, some people were still clinging to the hope of 
reaching the UK. “We have yet to convince some people to accept accommodation 
and give up their dream of Britain. That’s the hardest part,” Didier Leschi, 
head of the French immigration office OFII, told French news agency Agence 
France-Presse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffrance-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46a4a784b53f989ef99571d7e69387b5d6a35f9e%2F1436_0_2765_3456%2F2765.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hundreds%20leave%20Calais%20by%20bus%20on%20first%20day%20of%20operation%20to%20clear%20refugee%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffrance-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hundreds%20leave%20Calais%20by%20bus%20on%20first%20day%20of%20operation%20to%20clear%20refugee%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffrance-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46a4a784b53f989ef99571d7e69387b5d6a35f9e%2F1436_0_2765_3456%2F2765.jpg>
 A man sits on his suitcase as he prepares to leave the makeshift camp at 
Calais. Photograph: Thibault Camus/AP 
Some were concerned that if they joined the queue to be processed, they would 
not be able to join family in the UK. Tafsu, 48, a carpenter from Eritrea, has 
a wife and two children in London, including a nine-year-old daughter he has 
never met. “I don’t know what the future holds. I want to explain my case but I 
can’t get heard,” he said.

According to the British founder of the charity Care4Calais, the camp would 
probably re-emerge despite its demolition. Clare Moseley said: “I think people 
will still come. With refugees, deterrents don’t matter because a refugee by 
definition is fleeing something. In February, they demolished over half the 
camp and yet here we are, seven months later, with a camp bigger than it’s ever 
been.”

Q&A: what happens now to the Calais refugees?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/24/q-and-a-what-happens-to-calais-refugees-now>
Concerns about the fate of about 1,300 children in the camp remained. Yvette 
Cooper, who chairs the Commons home affairs committee, said children in the 
camp were at risk from people traffickers. “That’s what’s really worrying, 
because once the clearances start we know there is a significant risk that many 
of those children and young people just disappear,” she told BBC Radio 4’s 
Today programme.

In the past week, about 200 children have been brought to the UK from Calais, 
approximately 15% of the total, according to a Citizens UK estimate. There has 
beenscepticism in some parts of the media about the ages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/child-refugees-dental-tests-verify-age-david-davies>
 of some of the arrivals.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffrance-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabdcfc8430ab91f57dae7b8138bcdb45a7f6a16b%2F0_0_4818_2892%2F4818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hundreds%20leave%20Calais%20by%20bus%20on%20first%20day%20of%20operation%20to%20clear%20refugee%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffrance-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hundreds%20leave%20Calais%20by%20bus%20on%20first%20day%20of%20operation%20to%20clear%20refugee%20camp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Ffrance-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabdcfc8430ab91f57dae7b8138bcdb45a7f6a16b%2F0_0_4818_2892%2F4818.jpg>
 Wristbands are placed on a table at a processing centre. Photograph: Emilio 
Morenatti/AP 
Another 24 refugee children from Calais reached the UK on Sunday afternoon. 
They follow the 54 unaccompanied minors – mostly girls from Eritrea – who were 
the first to be brought to Britain under the Dubs amendment, the government’s 
pledge to help unaccompanied minors.

The immigration minister, Robert Goodwill, said the government remained 
committed to safeguarding and protecting children in Calais and transferring 
“all eligible minors” to the UK as soon as possible.

An extra 3,000 police are expected in and around Calais this week. Migrants 
and refugees who do not want to claim asylum in France are expected to set up 
small camps in the region.

Almost two-thirds of people surveyed in the camp have said they do not want to 
be taken to French accommodation, while a third said they would continue to try 
to get into the UK, according to the Refugee Rights Data Project.

 