
Hundreds of churches in the US have said they are willing to provide sanctuary 
for undocumented migrants threatened with deportation following the election of
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> as president.

About 300 churches nationally have come forward in the past two weeks, 
according to the Philadelphia-based New Sanctuary Movement. It has also seen 
the number of people in the city registering as volunteers for its “sanctuary 
in the streets” programme rise from 65 to more than 1,000 since the election.


Catholic leader ready to help refugees settle in US despite Trump policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/trump-immigrant-refugee-policy-catholic-church>
The Church World Service estimates 400 churches nationwide are willing to open 
their doors to people at risk of deportation. A growing number of synagogues 
are also involved in actions to prevent deportations.


Meanwhile, about two dozen cities – including New York, Chicago, Seattle, 
Philadelphia and Los Angeles – have declared themselves “sanctuary cities”, 
with mayors pledging to refuse to cooperate with federal immigration orders 
that could lead to deportations. Trump has said he will block federal funding 
to such cities.


During his election campaign, Trump said he would deport an estimated 11 
million undocumented migrants from the United States. Since becoming 
president-elect, he has said he plans to immediately deport or incarcerate 2 to 
3 millionundocumented migrants who have been convicted of crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-deportation-immigration-criminals>
.


“What we are going to do is get the people that are criminal and have criminal 
records, gang members, drug dealers, we have a lot of these people, probably 2 
million, it could even be 3 million, we are getting them out of the country or 
we are going to incarcerate. But we’re getting them out of our country, they’re 
here illegally,”Trump told 60 Minutes 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/60-minutes-donald-trump-family-melania-ivanka-lesley-stahl/>
 a few days after the election.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=3%20million%20'criminal'%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=3%20million%20%27criminal%27%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&media=>
3 million ‘criminal’ immigrants to be deported, says Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/14/3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
According to Peter Pedemonti of the New Sanctuary Movement, “people are very 
scared. There are waves of despair, anger and disbelief at Trump’s election and 
the rise of white supremacism. This is a very shocking part of US society that 
was in the shadows before, and with Trump it has come into the mainstream. It’s 
very disturbing.”


He said he had seen a “pretty dramatic swell in congregations coming forward 
and asking questions about how to get involved. We’ve had a wave of people 
contacting us about sanctuary.”


Pedemonti added: “The faith community has a specific role to stand up and 
speak out, and offering sanctuary is a bold way of doing that.”


Javier Flores, an undocumented Mexican who has been deported several times, 
took sanctuary in the United Methodist Church in Arch Street, Philadelphia, 
five days after Trump’s election although his current deportation process 
started before the 8 November poll.


“The church is providing space and support for as long as Javier wants to be 
here,” said the Rev Robin Hynicka. The father of three’s “first and foremost 
desire is to stay with his family”.


Anxiety over immigration issues before the election had been exacerbated, said 
Hynicka. “People are feeling more vulnerable than before. [But] people of faith 
and conscience are walking alongside the immigrant community. Sanctuary 
provides a moral alternative to what we think is an immoral policy.”


Flores was not in hiding, Hynicka added. “Immigration knows where he is – he 
has a monitoring bracelet on his ankle. He’s not hiding, he’s resisting.”


The concept of sanctuary can be traced back to the Book of Numbers in the 
Hebrew Bible. Today, places of worship are considered to be “sensitive 
locations” by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) and Customs and Border 
Protection (CBP). “Enforcement actions at or focused on sensitive locations 
such as schools, places of worship, and hospitals should generally be avoided,” 
sayguidelines <https://www.cbp.gov/border-security/sensitive-locations-faqs>.


Since the election, several Anglican bishops have offered sanctuary 
<https://www.churchtimes.co.uk/articles/2016/18-november/news/world/us-episcopalians-pledge-resistance-to-hate-crimes>
. The Right Rev Kirk Smith, the bishop of Arizona, said the church would 
“promote a safe space for those who are feeling vulnerable and afraid, and for 
good reason”.


The bishops of Virginia told Latino congregants: “We stand with you not only 
symbolically, but will be there to stand with you literally if and when the 
time comes.”

The diocese of Oregon pledged that its churches would be “sanctuaries for 
those whose safety and security is threatened”.


Alison Harrington, pastor of the Southside Presbyterian church in Tucson, 
Arizona, said the number of churches joining the sanctuary movement was 
“growing every day as people are horrified at what lies ahead, knowing that 
Trump has said he’s going after immigrants”.


Harrison has sheltered two undocumented Mexicans in her church over the past 
two years. “By and large, the authorities respect sanctuary. We’re hoping that 
the tradition of honouring sacred space will continue in the future. But we 
don’t need the Department of Homeland Security to tell us that a church is a 
sacred space – that is a fundamental truth and one we will defend.”


California prepares to push back on Trump's promise to deport millions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/california-trump-deportation-promise-immigration>
In Los Angeles, a multi-faith gathering at the city’s Islamic Centre next week 
will consider possible forms of resistance to agencies seeking to deport 
undocumented migrants. “We’re coming together to try to figure out the best way 
to push back, focusing on sacred resistance and sanctuary,” said Rabbi Jonathan 
Klein.

As well as providing refuge for individuals, places of worship which offer 
sanctuary draw attention to broader issues, said Pedemonti.


It was important to remember that “although there has been a huge increase in 
fear [among migrants] after Trump’s election, with the expectation of more 
draconian enforcement, the Obama administration deported 2.5 million 
undocumented migrants – so the immigrant community has lived with fear for 
years.”


Pedemonti said he could not “wrap my head around” the fact that 81% of white 
Christian evangelicals backed Trump in the election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/white-evangelical-christians-vote-trump>
. “I don’t understand how a Christian can vote for a person whose policies so 
blatantly contradict the Bible’s teaching to love your neighbour.”

 