
Hundreds of American children’s authors and illustrators have put their names 
to a declaration citing their commitment to using literature “to help eliminate 
the fear that takes root in the human heart amid lack of familiarity and 
understanding of others”.

The National Book Award-winning children’s author Jacqueline Woodson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/25/jacqueline-woodson-national-book-awards-invisible>
 is one of more than 400 writers tosign the statement on website the Brown 
Bookshelf 
<https://thebrownbookshelf.com/2016/11/14/a-declaration-in-support-of-children/>
. The site was set up to promote African American children’s writers by the 
authorsKelly Starling Lyons <http://www.kellystarlinglyons.com/content/bio.html>
,Tameka Fryer Brown <http://tamekafryerbrown.com/>, Olugbemisola 
Rhuday-Perkovich <http://olugbemisolabooks.com/>, Don Tate <http://dontate.com/>
,Gwendolyn Hooks <http://gwendolynhooks.com/>, Tracey Baptiste 
<https://traceybaptiste.wordpress.com/>, Crystal Allen 
<http://www.crystalallenbooks.com/>, Paula Chase-Hyman 
<http://www.paulachasehyman.com/>, Varian Johnson 
<http://www.varianjohnson.com/> and Jerry Craft <http://www.jerrycraft.net/>, 
who are all signatories to the letter.

Pointing to how “deeply divided” the US is, hundreds of authors say that last 
week’s election of Donald Trump as president “is a clear indication of the 
bigotry that is entrenched in this nation”. Describing children’s literature as 
“the most influential literary genre of all”, they say it is time to “think of 
the children” and produce books that eliminate “the type of fear that feeds 
stereotypes, bitterness, racism and hatred; the type of fear that so often 
leads to tragic violence and senseless death.”

“As children’s book creators, we feel a special connection and responsibility 
to amplify the young voices that too often go unheard. When the headlines fade, 
the impact on children’s lives remains. They are left feeling confused, afraid, 
angry, hurt. We believe it is our duty to not just create, but also to empower 
children, affirm their lives and stand up for change,” they write.

The authors promise that “for our young readers, we will create stories that 
offer authentic and recognisable reflections of themselves, as well as 
relatable insight into experiences that on the surface appear markedly 
different”.

“We will use our books to affect a world brimming with too many instances of 
hostility and injustice,” they say. “We will plant seeds of empathy, fairness 
and empowerment through words and pictures. We will do so with candour and 
honesty, but also in the spirit of hope and love.”

Other signatories include picture book writer Mo Willems 
<http://www.mowillems.com/> and young adult authors Daniel José Older 
<http://ghoststar.net/> and Jay Asher <http://jayasher.blogspot.co.uk/>.

The organising authors from The Brown Bookshelf thanked their fellow writers 
for “standing with us against hate and standing up for kids”, urging others to 
join them and sign up to the declaration viathe Brown Bookshelf’s Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/thebrownbookshelf/?fref=ts>.

“The values of adults can often be traced back to early influences. It is our 
collective mission, therefore, to promote understanding and justice through our 
art; to bolster every child’s visceral belief that his or her life shall always 
be infinitely valuable. This is a matter of life and death,” they say.

“With paintbrushes and pens in hand, we, the undersigned, will continue to 
press toward the goals of equality, justice, and peace. We will write. We will 
draw. We will listen to the children. We invite you to join us.”
 