
More than 700 British solicitors have applied to register with the Law Society 
ofIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> this year as lawyers 
scramble to secure professional rights of audience in European courts.

The precautionary investment, which cost each applicant about £300, is a way 
of guaranteeing access to the higher EU courts and tribunals in Luxembourg that 
deal with community law, which would be lost in the event of Brexit. Only 
lawyers from EU states can appear at the European court of justice.

Ken Murphy, the director general of the Law Society of Ireland, confirmed that 
543 solicitors from England and Wales and 21 solicitors fromNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> have been admitted to the roll 
of solicitors in Ireland so far this year. A further 145 applications are being 
processed. The figures compare with an average of 50 to 100 admissions a year 
from England and Wales in previous years.

Brexit border headache: what can other EU frontiers teach Britain and Ireland?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/17/ireland-brexit-headache-border>
“Of the EU member states, Ireland is the legal jurisdiction most equivalent to 
the UK,” said Murphy beforethe referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/17/call-to-keep-uk-in-eu-should-be-treason-urges-tory-councillors-petition>
. “We are both English-speaking, both common law jurisdictions and our legal 
institutions are much the same. This makes Ireland the destination of choice 
for solicitors in England, in particular, who are concerned about the 
possibility of the UK voting to leave the EU.”

“The right to argue before EU tribunals such as the court of justice of the 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-justice> is 
only afforded to lawyers qualified in an EU state. It is our understanding that 
the majority of the solicitors who are completing this process will continue to 
practise in London or Brussels and do not intend to set up a physical practice 
in Ireland.”

Most of those applying this year from England and Wales cited Brexit as the 
reason for their registration.

Stephen Denyer, the director of strategic relationships at the Law Society of 
England and Wales, said: “It’s a long-established practice for English 
solicitors to qualify as Irish solicitors. It works in both directions. We 
fully understand why these solicitors would think it was a useful insurance 
policy. No one knows actuallywhat Brexit is going to look like 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/brexit-britain-cost-divorce-bill-questions-answered-uk>
.”

Mickael Laurans, the head of the Law Society of England and Wales’s Brussels 
office, said: “A lot of people are applying. There’s a next step in order to 
practise but a lot of them are not going the full way and obtaining [an Irish] 
practising certificate. Maybe it’s an insurance policy.”
 