
When was the last time you phoned your local council? Did you need to get your 
child into a school? Or book a registrar for a wedding? Or perhaps there was a 
pothole in the road. The chances are, whatever you phoned for, you spoke to 
someone like me.

More and more council services are using part of their budget to fund contact 
centres like mine, to filter calls and emails. Different councils run these 
offices differently, but in mine, officers like me are trained on up to five 
different services.

My next call could be anything from renewing a library book, to helping a 
parent navigate the school admissions process for their disabled child. 
Incidentally, the latter is something I’m not officially trained to do – but 
I’m easier to get hold of than a case worker. And that’s because the services 
are too busy struggling to do their jobs to answer the phone. I am there to 
answer because I am cheaper.

With councils pushing towards self-service options, even my job is ​​beginning 
to look uncertain.

Our office prides itself on answering calls within thirty seconds, but an 
unexpected storm is all it takes to send call waiting times into double-digits.

The first service I took calls for was the registration of births, marriages 
and deaths: these are considered the simplest because they mostly involve 
asking a script of questions, and taking the caller’s details in order to book 
people in for appointments with the registrar.

But just because they are simple doesn’t mean they are easy. I have been in 
the job for over a year and I have seen the cycle of life and death through 
these calls. Spring brings an influx of birth registrations, with a flutter of 
marriages around Valentine’s Day. Summer sees a lot of slightly panicked 
brides, and as the days get colder, the number of death registrations 
increases. Deaths around the Christmas period are particularly difficult, 
especially when I have to explain to a relative we have no appointments until 
after the holidays.

The very first call I took was a death registration from a gentleman who had 
lost his wife. I had to ask him to call back later: he didn’t have the medical 
certificate from the doctor, and we are not allowed to book appointments 
without it. Why? Because if there aren’t enough appointments, we need to 
prioritise. Like all council services, registrars are feeling the financial 
squeeze, and it falls on me to explain the service’s limitations.

I worked in local government – show me a robot that could do my job better
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/29/local-government-robot-job-automation>
I recently spoke to a woman in her 80s who needed to register the death of her 
sister. The doctor had told her to call us for an appointment. Unfortunately, 
she had been given an outdated pamphlet that listed the register offices, 
including ones closed by budget cuts. Trying to explain to her why she had to 
travel an extra 45 minutes by bus made her frustrated with me, and me 
frustrated with the system.

It’s on these tricky calls, when callers don’t like the answer I am giving, 
that they often ask to speak to the service itself. When someone asks to speak 
to the registrar, or any other specialist, I always feel slightly offended. I 
still have a vast amount of knowledge in my head – and unlike the specialists, 
I actually have time to speak to you. But with councils starting to push 
towards self-service options for many departments, even my job is beginning to 
look uncertain:it costs the council £2.83 each time you speak to me 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/documents/10180/11553/Transforming+public+services+using+technology+and+digital+approaches/ab9af2bd-9b68-4473-ac17-bbddf2adec05>
. If you were to do it online, it would be 15p.

So while I might not be as good as a specialist, be thankful that I am there – 
because very soon there might be no one.

This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contactkirstie.brewer@theguardian.com <mailto: kirstie.brewer@theguardian.com>


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 