
The farmer knelt down by one of the dead sheep and pointed to the tell-tale 
signs of a lynx kill. “Damn rewilding experts!” he growled. “These beasts are 
natural born killers. My kids don’t go outside any more.” As if on cue, the 
howling started: not lynxes, but the Devon wolfpack, in the shadows and hungry. 
The bears would be on their way too, no doubt. Raising their flaming torches, 
the farmers cocked their automatic rifles. “Them bears took a man off the high 
street in Budleigh Salterton last night. We’d best be getting back to the fort.”
Devon Map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/devon-zip/giv-12515fH61kpkP06na/>
OK, apologies for the Simon Pegg, Hot Fuzz-style melodrama, but this, some 
people might have you believe, is where rewilding ends up: that process of 
bringing back species that humans have previously eradicated, whether by 
accident or design. But all over Europe, like it or not, it has been happening.
Wolves have been seen 40 miles from Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/12/wolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife>
, bison are back in Poland, and the lynx is on the rebound in Spain. And, 
rather than the scene sketched out above, what has happened is that people are 
eager to see the animals. Rewilding is bringing a worldwide tourist revolution 
to wildlife watching, with new tours appearing on the back of every campaign, 
be it Romanian bison, Tasmanian devils or Greek bears.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24d2f36d989e9717c64a68d33050a1952196c4ef%2F0_233_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'll%20be%20dammed!%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27ll%20be%20dammed%21%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24d2f36d989e9717c64a68d33050a1952196c4ef%2F0_233_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 The river Otter estuary at Budleigh Salterton. Photograph: Alamy 
England was relatively untouched by the revolution until 2014, when a family of
beavers was spotted living quietly on the Otter river at Knightstone Farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/27/wild-beavers-england-devon-river>
 in east Devon. No one knows how they got there, but it’s the first time in 
more than 500 years that wild beavers had been seen in the country. That is how 
I came to be sitting on a log by that river at 11pm one night, listening 
attentively to every rustle and squeak in the darkness, imagining that crazy 
scene with the wolf, lynx and bear. Torch at the ready, I was hoping to catch a 
glimpse of the beavers, animals usually only sighted in the crepuscular 
twilight.

Earlier that day I’d been out with Steve Hussey from the Devon Wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Trust and scouted a stretch 
of river near Ottery St Mary, about eight miles from the coast. In an oxbow 
lake on land owned by farmers David and Vicki Lawrence, we had found traces of 
the animal – trees gnawed off at the base – but nothing like lodges. “They 
don’t always build dams or lodges,” said Steve. “On fast-flowing water, they 
can utilise old otter holes in the bank. They can be discreet – not easy to 
spot. The best months are July and August.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff237f0d2d0a0014884cb2cc9b92c8efabe8a4c65%2F0_146_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'll%20be%20dammed!%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27ll%20be%20dammed%21%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff237f0d2d0a0014884cb2cc9b92c8efabe8a4c65%2F0_146_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
 The interior of the Shepherds Hut, Knightstone Farm 
After their discovery in 2014 the river Otter beaver community expanded 
rapidly to a dozen, and has now been augmented with two outsiders to expand the 
gene pool. Traces of beaver activity have been recorded all along the river, 
right up to the headwaters 20 miles away in Somerset. So far, tourist benefits 
have been small, but local pubs and restaurants report increased trade and 
people enquiring about the animals. The more important benefits, perhaps, will 
be environmental. Beavers create opportunities for all sorts of fish, 
amphibians, insects and plants to flourish. One study by Exeter University 
reported that frog populations quadrupled in areas where beavers lived. Initial 
results in Devon show the beavers helping increase insect life and consequently 
bat populations. The animal is one of a few exceptional creatures that have an 
extraordinary impact on other wildlife.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5b4aaf015fbbcb1c60ff34e2e651dbce4c16fda%2F0_86_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'll%20be%20dammed!%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27ll%20be%20dammed%21%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5b4aaf015fbbcb1c60ff34e2e651dbce4c16fda%2F0_86_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Steve Hussey from Devon Wildlife Trust inspects a tree felled by beavers on 
the river Otter. Photograph: Kevin Rushby for the Guardian 
That first night, however, I had no luck. All I spotted were two other 
wildlife-watchers creeping towards me, wondering what kind of a beast I might 
be. When I stood up, they ran away shouting, thus ending any hopes of seeing 
wildlife.

Fortunately a trip to east Devon does not rely on fickle wildlife to make it 
worthwhile. I walked or swam most of the river length from Ottery St Mary down 
to the sea, discovering en route an excellent pub in Tipton St John (the Golden 
Lion <http://www.goldenliontipton.co.uk/>), a wonderful cafe-restaurant-arts 
centre atOtterton Mill <http://www.ottertonmill.com/>, and a great fish and 
chip shop in Budleigh (thePremier Café  <http://www.budleighfishandchips.co.uk/>
on Chapel St). The river is an idyllic stream with plenty of spots to stop and 
swim or just watch the kingfishers zipping past. Close to Ottery St Mary I 
watched a woodpecker chick poke its head out of a hole in a beech tree, nagging 
its parents to fetch more grub.

A mile’s walk east from Otterton Mill is Ladram Bay, a geological marvel 
hidden behind a massive caravan park. To avoid a £5 charge you’ll have to park 
at the top and walk down to the beach. It is worth it and there are kayaks to 
hire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66fd287045c3a390d40d3db7b9cefa023a9ec705%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'll%20be%20dammed!%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27ll%20be%20dammed%21%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66fd287045c3a390d40d3db7b9cefa023a9ec705%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Ladram Bay. Photograph: Alamy 
Right at the end of the river Otter, hemmed in by red cliffs, is Budleigh 
Salterton. The river mouth has a nature reserve with bird hides. Walking down 
to the sea there, I discovered the rising tide forcing its way upriver and 
could not resist jumping in to ride the current upstream. In the water, 
cruising under the surface like a submarine pack, were some big grey mullet.

Back at Knightstone Farm <http://knightstonesafaritent.co.uk/> I asked David 
Lawrence, the farmer, how he felt about the beavers being discovered on his 
land. “By coincidence we had just built our first glamping safari tent close to 
where the beavers were found,” says David, “so they’ve brought us a few 
visitors and not caused any problems at all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d5a13c07dbc9ae2e5bec23ec86c83494b492049%2F0_281_5307_3184%2F5307.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'll%20be%20dammed!%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27ll%20be%20dammed%21%20Beavers%20are%20Devon%E2%80%99s%20latest%20visitor%20attraction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fbeavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d5a13c07dbc9ae2e5bec23ec86c83494b492049%2F0_281_5307_3184%2F5307.jpg>
 A beaver grooming itself on the bank of the river Otter after being checked 
for diseases and re-released. Photograph: Alamy 
The main objections, initially at least, came from anglers who had not 
realised that beavers were probably more interested in their wooden fishing 
stools than any fish, since they are entirely herbivorous. This year there have 
been sightings around Otterton, which is worth the six-mile walk downriver from 
Ottery St Mary anyway, because it is so beautiful and there is plenty of other 
wildlife to watch out for, including otters.

On my last night I went out again and spent a lovely, tranquil couple of 
hours, sitting in the gloaming, staring at the stars. I did not see beavers, 
but I didn’t mind. It was sufficient to know they were out there, gnawing away 
at those English willows for the first time since Henry VIII sat on the throne.
• Accommodation was provided by Knightstone Farm. The Shepherds Hut 
<http://knightstonesafaritent.co.uk/otters-holt-devon-shepherds-hut/> sleeps 
four from £80pn(knightstonesafaritent.co.uk) 
<http://knightstonesafaritent.co.uk/>. Devon Wildlife Trust monitors the beaver 
population and hosts walks, trips and wildlife events (devonwildlifetrust.org 
<http://www.devonwildlifetrust.org/>). Information on rewilding at 
rewildingeurope.com <https://www.rewildingeurope.com/> and 
rewildingbritain.org.uk <http://www.rewildingbritain.org.uk/>. Trips inspired 
by rewilding projects atwildlifeworldwide.com 
<http://www.wildlifeworldwide.com/> and naturetrek.co.uk 
<http://www.naturetrek.co.uk/>
 