
January is a time for New Year’s resolutions and if you’re one of the world’s 
one billion smokers, your resolution may be to stop smoking. For some people, 
this year’s quit attempt might involve an electronic cigarette, and arecent 
study <http://www.bmj.com/content/354/bmj.i4645> in England, published in the 
BMJ, suggested that these devices helped at least 18,000 smokers to stop in 
2015 who would not otherwise have done so. That’s very good news, but will 
there be as many quit attempts in 2017 as there have been in the past with 
e-cigarettes? I’m not so sure.

Since I last wrote about e-cigarettes in this column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/sifting-the-evidence/2015/dec/31/no-theres-still-no-evidence-e-cigarettes-are-as-harmful-as-smoking>
 one year ago,headlines 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/living/1693653/e-cigs-are-just-as-bad-for-your-heart-as-smoking-fags-as-they-damage-key-blood-vessels-say-experts/>
 about the dangers of these devices have continued to appear and show no sign 
of abating. The result is clear. More people believe today, compared with a 
year ago, that e-cigarettes are as harmful as smoking. In fact theseincorrect 
perceptions 
<http://ash.org.uk/information-and-resources/fact-sheets/use-of-electronic-cigarettes-vapourisers-among-adults-in-great-britain/>
 have risen year on year, from fewer than one in ten adults in Great Britain in 
2013 to one in four this past summer. Surveys of smokers show similar patterns, 
with an increasing proportion believing that e-cigarettes are more or equally 
harmful than tobacco.

Why can't scientists agree on e-cigarettes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/sifting-the-evidence/2016/sep/14/why-cant-scientists-agree-on-e-cigarettes-vaping>
Yet we know that these harm perceptions are wrong. There is now very strong 
evidence, from a range of studies, that vaping - inhaling nicotine without the 
combustion involved in smoking - is far less risky than smoking cigarettes. 
Just a few months ago this body of evidence was brought together by the Royal 
College of Physicians who published anauthoritative report 
<https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/outputs/nicotine-without-smoke-tobacco-harm-reduction-0>
 analysing dozens of studies and concluded that the hazard to health arising 
from long term vapour inhalation from e-cigarettes is unlikely to exceed 5% of 
the harm from smoking tobacco. The RCP, and since then other UK doctor’s 
organisations such as theRoyal College of General Practitioners 
<http://www.rcgp.org.uk/clinical-and-research/clinical-news/to-vape-or-not-to-vape-the-rcgp-position-on-ecigarettes.aspx>
, have made clear that it is important to promote the use of e-cigarettes, 
along with other non-tobacco nicotine products (like Nicotine Replacement 
Therapy such as gum or inhalators) to smokers who are trying to quit. The work 
of these organisations is underpinned by aconsensus statement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/534708/E-cigarettes_joint_consensus_statement_2016.pdf>
 endorsed by many of the main health charities and public health bodies in the 
UK. They agree that vaping is safer than smoking, and while these products are 
not risk free and should not be promoted to children or never smokers, they 
have a legitimate and positive role to play in tobacco control.

But this consensus is not shared around the world. The regular stream of media 
scare 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/lifestyle/health/scientists-say-flavoured-e-cigarettes-9374556>
stories 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3535995/E-cigarettes-instantly-damage-lungs-Devices-cause-inflammation-30-minutes-inhaling.html>
 driving harm perceptions often originates in other countries where there is no 
such view about relative risks. Some media headlines are driven by poor science 
but others originate from reports by credible organisations who focus on the 
absolute risk of any e-cigarette use without comparing it to smoking (which is 
uniquely deadly and kills one in two regular users). 2016 saw at least two 
major reports of this kind.

In September the World Health Organisation published a report 
<http://www.who.int/fctc/cop/cop7/FCTC_COP_7_11_EN.pdf?ua=1> that set out a 
series of steps on e-cigarette regulation for countries signed up to the 
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, a global public health treaty. These 
options were primarily about banning or severely restricting the sale, 
distribution and marketing of e-cigarettes. The WHO report was comprehensively 
critiqued by theUK Centre for Tobacco and Alcohol Studies 
<http://www.ukctas.net/news/commentary-on-WHO-report-on-ENDS&ENNDS.html>, but 
its findings mean that e-cigarettes will continue to be unavailable to millions 
of smokers in many countries who have banned these devices or are considering 
doing so.

Does a tobacco-free world need to be nicotine free?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/sifting-the-evidence/2016/mar/09/no-smoking-day-does-a-tobacco-free-world-need-to-be-nicotine-free-e-cigarettes-vaping>
December 2016 saw the publication of a review authored by the US Surgeon 
General <https://e-cigarettes.surgeongeneral.gov/>, which focused on 
e-cigarette use in young people. This described e-cigarette use as a public 
health concern, arguing that e-cigarettes are now the most commonly used 
tobacco product amongst US youth and that nicotine use in any form is unsafe 
for young people and also pregnant women. While some of the science in the 
report is accurate, the conclusions endorsing heavy regulation of e-cigarettes 
were not. The report did not compare the risks of smoking and vaping, failed to 
make clear that e-cigarettes are not tobacco products, and drew conclusions 
about nicotine that would also apply to Nicotine Replacement Therapy - which is 
safe and licensed for use in pregnancy and by young smokers. It also endorsed 
policies which could deter current smokers from switching to e-cigarettes. 
American scientists havecritiqued data from the USA 
<http://ntr.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2016/12/24/ntr.ntw388.abstract> 
that provided the basis for the Surgeon General’s report, but it is likely that 
this publication will contribute to public perceptions that e-cigarettes are 
dangerous.

These two reports largely ignore the fact that there are already measures in 
place in many countries (including all of the EU) to protect the public from 
any risks from e-cigarettes. These include policies like age of sale, limits on 
advertising and child- and tamper-proof packaging - all important to protect 
children while still allowing sales to adult smokers and ex-smokers. Concerns 
about exploding batteries and nicotine poisoning can also be dealt with by 
following simple safety rules, such as those set out by theRoyal Society for 
the Prevention of Accidents 
<http://www.rospa.com/home-safety/advice/product/vaping/>. 

I believe that e-cigarettes have huge potential to save lives by providing an 
alternative to smoking. Yet this can only be realised if we address negative 
harm perceptions and communicate honestly with the public. Ongoing research can 
help with this, and 2016 has seen the start of important studies, many 
commissioned byCancer Research UK 
<https://medium.com/@CRUKresearch/growing-the-research-evidence-on-e-cigarettes-768c7f5a23ff#.9dpw8x6kr>
, which will tell us more in the future. We also need to keep our eye on new 
technology, such asheat not burn tobacco products 
<http://ash.org.uk/media-and-news/press-releases-media-and-news/ash-reaction-to-new-philip-morris-iqos-heat-not-burn-product/>
, which are emerging and about which we know little. Only time will tell 
whether the UK’s positive approach towards e-cigarettes strikes the right 
balance between risks and benefits. For now, however, we must do all we can to 
encourage smokers to try to stop at New Year or any other time. For those 
trying with e-cigarettes, this is a positive choice that should be supported.

Linda Bauld is Professor of Health Policy at the University of Stirling 
<http://rms.stir.ac.uk/converis-stirling/person/11372>, Deputy Director of the 
UK Centre for Tobacco and Alcohol Studies 
<http://www.ukctas.net/applicants.html> and holds the CRUK/BUPA Chair in 
Behavioural Research for Cancer Prevention at Cancer Research UK. 
<http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-us/cancer-news/press-release/2014-08-04-cancer-research-uk-launches-ps6m-funding-initiative-to-help-cut-cancer-lifestyle-risks>
 She is a former scientific adviser on tobacco control to the UK government and 
chaired theNICE guidance group on tobacco harm reduction 
<https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph45>.
 