
I long for a world where when I listen to patients tell me about their lives, 
I don’t have to subtly check them for bruising.

I catch myself doing it; so keen to maintain rapport and show empathy by 
maintaining eye contact, I sneak what chances I can to glance at exposed parts 
of the body, particularly the wrists and the upper arms. Experience has taught 
me that the markers of domestic violence, both physical and mental, are almost 
always hidden with an unfortunate, practised skill. Those who suffer it over 
time become experts in misdirection and alternative explanation.

I have had to learn from mournful experience that domestic violence cuts 
across all social factors and remains, despite increasing awareness and 
campaigning, a shameful constant of our society. It matters not what someone’s 
job is, their background, how educated they are, or where they live.

While cultural and legal frameworks have changed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/ng-interactive/2014/nov/28/domestic-violence-legislation-timeline>
, domestic violence has been present throughout time. It respects no 
boundaries; it appears to be a disease of humanity.

Within our supposedly civilised society here in the UK, a woman is killed by 
their partner every three days 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/get-help-now/what-is-domestic-violence/domestic-violence-the-facts/>
. In the time between each episode of Strictly Come Dancing there are two women 
no longer alive because their partners (or ex-partners) have killed them. It is 
so commonplace that this no longer even registers as news. Moreunborn children 
are harmed by violence, than by gestational diabetes 
<http://www.mumsnet.com/relationships/what-is-domestic-violence> or 
pre-eclampsia.

I’m a human and I want to see a world where domestic violence doesn’t happen, 
and if it does, I want those responsible to be severely punished. I want to see 
society rail against this, not accept it as a norm.

But I’m a GP too, and GPs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> have to 
live in the real world. I must accept that this is how things are and I have my 
part to play in dealing with it. As with most things in general practice, that 
is both a wonderful privilege and a frightening responsibility.

So how do I see my role? I need to have awareness and constant suspicion – 
which is draining and depressing, but vital – and I need to know my subject. I 
haven’t learned about domestic violence from books, or from training sessions. 
I have learned from my patients, my trainers and colleagues, and from my 
experiences.

I have to remember that while it is usually men doing this to women, 
relationship violence is pervasive: women, men, same-sex relationships, 
families and children are all affected and the perpetrator can be anyone, even 
a doctor. “But he seemed so normal, so … nice,” just doesn’t cut it. And there 
is, of course, so much more to domestic abuse than the extremes of violence.

I must avoid professional denial, which can be so damaging, and the temptation 
to accept a patient’s excuse or explanation. I must use all my skills to 
demonstrate empathy.

Over the minutes and years I must build sufficient therapeutic rapport with my 
patients so that, if today is the day that they might admit it to someone and 
ask for help, I make that possible. I may only get one chance with my patient 
and I don’t know when that chance is coming. So I must give the impression I 
have time even when I might not, and I must listen and watch for the clues, 
verbal and non-verbal, which might be so subtle as to hardly be there. The 
patient must feel they can tell me anything and that I won’t judge or betray. 
They must trust me. And I must try to be their expert friend.

I need to be brave enough to ask the easy and the difficult questions: “How 
are things at home?”, “How are things with you and your partner?”, “Do you feel 
safe?”, “Has your partner ever hurt you?” If I haven’t built sufficient 
rapport, then these questions are pointless, but I never said this was easy.

I must deal with the fact that I may have to care for the perpetrators of 
violence. That the very person who has beaten the patient I see one day, may be 
my patient the next. I must manage with professionalism the conflict and 
emotion that this brings.

Finally, I have to familiarise myself with the support available for my 
patient, nationally and locally. They need to know that if they disclose this 
to me not only can I be trusted, but also I actually know what to do. I can 
help.

 This is society’s problem – in my opinion one of its greatest – and solutions 
must come at that level. But while I feel powerless, maybe I can be a small 
part of the solution. The privilege, the responsibility. This is general 
practice. Yes, I long for a world without bruises, but for now I’ve got a job 
to do.


Dr Dom Patterson tweets at @DocDomP <https://twitter.com/DocDomP>

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 