
Robots <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/robots> don’t do my job as a GP 
yet, but computers are definitely the third person in the room in every 
consultation. The computer can feel like an attention-seeking teenager, asking 
random questions that demand a response. A person comes in to discuss their 
suicidal ideas or recent cancer diagnosis and the computer flashes reminders 
about smear tests and flu jabs.


But to ignore the computer is to run the risk of missing vital information. 
Integrating the machine into the face-to-face encounter between doctor and 
patient is an art form most of us never master. And working with a robot is an 
even more daunting prospect.

A report 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/where-machines-could-replace-humans-and-where-they-cant-yet>
 by McKinsey shows technologies available today could automate 45% of the 
activities people are paid to perform and that about 60% of all occupations 
could see up to a third of their constituent activities automated. Does primary 
care, as practised in the UK, fall into the 60%?

Robots are already used widely in surgery. Robot-assisted or robotic surgery, 
such as theda Vinci <http://www.davincisurgery.com/> system, allows surgeons to 
access hard-to-reach areas of the body via tiny incisions, operating with more 
precision and control than they could manage if they held a scalpel in their 
hand.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
The last job on Earth: imagining a fully automated world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/video/2016/feb/17/last-job-on-earth-automation-robots-unemployment-animation-video>
Robots can perform repetitive tasks like checking blood pressure and weight. 
Robots such asVeebot 
<http://www.medgadget.com/2013/07/robotic-phloebotomist.html> can even take 
blood. But I can’t see us replacing practice nurses with robots. Our nurses do 
so much more than just the task in hand.

A recently bereaved person comes in, ostensibly for a blood test, and the 
nurse checks if they’re eating, how they’e coping, updates medication and 
provides some vital human contact and warmth. I just can’t see a robot doing 
that, although I accept not all practice nurses manage it either.

With the cutbacks in community services, especially district nursing, and the 
growth in frail and housebound people, I can see the appeal of 
remote-controlled robots likeAnybots <http://www.anybots.com/>. They can 
interact with patients, check living conditions and arrange appointments with 
healthcare professionals when necessary.

In the same way, people who live in remote areas can benefit hugely from 
access totelehealth <http://www.intouchhealth.com/>. This technology allows 
emergency consultations with patient and clinician using a tablet or PC and has 
been used for strokes, heart attacks and burns in particular.

Exoskeletons 
<https://www.technologyreview.com/s/546276/this-40000-robotic-exoskeleton-lets-the-paralyzed-walk/>
 – robotic devices that help paralysed people to walk – are likely to be 
increasingly used to allow carers to lift people who can’t move after a stroke, 
spinal cord injury or extreme frailty. The price remains prohibitively high at 
the moment but devices like this may augment the role of physiotherapists and 
occupational therapists in future.

 So I think robots are likely to take over many of the tasks we do in general 
practice. The doctors of the future may come to view the robot as a member of 
their multidisciplinary team.

I would welcome a robot in our practice, but they’d need to meet the same 
requirements as everyone else: a necessary skill set; high standards of 
professionalism; a sense of humour; and a willingness to make the tea when it’s 
their turn.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 