
When was the last time you read all the terms and conditions for a service you 
used? Have you everread the terms and conditions? Probably not.

So why do we spend so much of our time ignoring the thousands of words of 
legally binding “end-user licence agreements” (EULAs, if you like) 
legally-binding contracts we agree to every day? Is it even possible to read 
the T&Cs for everything a typical person does? Is there any value in reading 
all this anyway?

“The biggest lie on the internet is ‘I have read and agree to the terms and 
conditions’,” says security expert Mikko Hyppönen. Setting out to prove his 
point, Hyppönen’s company F-Secure set up a free WiFi hotspot in the heart of 
London’s financial district in June 2014.


Buried in the terms and conditions of the free network was a “Herod clause” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/29/londoners-wi-fi-security-herod-clause>
: in exchange for the WiFi, “the recipient agreed to assign their first born 
child to us for the duration of eternity”.


Six people signed up.

“EULAs suck – we can all agree on that,” said Hyppönen. “They shouldn’t be 
binding, because nobody reads them. But from a legal point of view, they just 
might be.”

Agustín Reyna of the European consumer-rights organisation BEUC told me why: 
“It’s a consumer contract. No matter what you call them, it’s a contract.”

To get a sense of just how much legal chaff we’re buried under, I decided to 
spend a week of my lifenot checking the box marked “I have read and agreed to 
the terms and conditions” until I had actually, you know, read them. Worse, I 
would do it retroactively, sitting down to read the T&Cs of services I’d been 
using for years.

The end results: I collected 146,000 words of legalese – enough to fill three 
quarters of Moby Dick, just to explain what I can and can’t do online – from 
just 33 terms-of-service documents. Each document only took me about 15 minutes 
to read (or, if I’m honest, to skim-read), but I still spent well over eight 
hours of the week just sitting reading page after page of dry, impenetrable 
prose.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34c889762cc0832a54fb2424bbd414d39fd74604%2F0_22_4086_2452%2F4086.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34c889762cc0832a54fb2424bbd414d39fd74604%2F0_22_4086_2452%2F4086.jpg>
 I swapped reading novels for 146,000 words of legal chaff, what did you do 
with your week? Photograph: Lasse Kristensen/Alamy 
Apple: out of date terms and conditions

The worst day, as expected, was the first. My iPhone is also my alarm, which 
means that at 6am on a Monday, I was greeted by 21,586 words to read before 
breakfast. In deference to my girlfriend, who was still asleep, I also broke my 
rules straight away and turned off the alarm before settling down to read the 
iPhone T&Cs.

Apple may strip out obsolete parts in pursuit of simplicity, but that 
philosophy hasn’t reached its legal department

Going first with the iPhone ended up making sense, though, because in many 
ways Apple’s practices are emblematic of everything that’s wrong with the 
culture of mindlessly hitting “accept”.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> may be famous for 
products that ruthlessly strip out obsolete parts in pursuit of ease-of-use and 
simplicity, but that philosophy hasn’t reached its legal department.

The terms typically start with an introduction where every word is 
capitalised, because not a single lawyer cares about anyone being able to read 
their actual documents. The capitals are included because ofan American legal 
regulation <http://www.adamsdrafting.com/all-capitals/> which stipulates that 
certain parts of a text must be “conspicuous”. Since there’s no corresponding 
requirement that it be legible, the consensus is that capitalising the 
necessary parts fits the bill.

Where Apple didn’t innovate, one company did: credit goes to music service 
Bandcamp, which explains, in its introductory paragraph, that “we’ve done our 
best to make it all go down smooth – you won’t find any 8-point type, or long 
sections of TOTALLY UNREADABLE ALL-CAPS intended to fulfill the legal 
definition of “conspicuous” (we’re pretty sure Your Honor will accept yellow, 
bold text instead).”

Perhaps the best marker of how little Apple cares about the terms of service 
it requires its users to read can be found several paragraphs down the iCloud 
terms and conditions. (Incidentally, despite being broken into separate 
documents, it’s all-or-nothing when it comes to agreeing or rejecting the 
terms.)

Under the heading “Google Maps Service” is the proviso that:

use of the Google Maps service is subject to the following additional terms: 
Google Maps Terms of Service available at 
http://maps.google.com/help/terms_maps.html andGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Maps Legal Notices at 
http://maps.google.com/help/legalnotices_maps.html.

That’ll be the Google Maps service which was famously dropped from iPhones in 
2012, over two years before the debut of iOS 8.2, the version I am running.

It seems that no one at all reads Apple’s terms and conditions – even people 
who work for Apple.

Simplenote: a blissful 140 words 

The rest of the morning wasn’t as depressing as Apple, though it was still 
terrible. Next up was Simplenote, a cloud note-taking service.

Like night and day, Simplenote’s terms of service come in at 140 words.

Sure, Simplenote only needs to cover a relatively simple text hosting and 
syncing service, while Apple’s cover a gaming social network, a music, app and 
video store, a voice-control service, and an operating system. But it’s clear 
that Simplenote actually cares about what a non-expert user who ends up on 
their page will see, and has strived to make the document as clear and readable 
as possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67243eedbc968900d80fc101921d577f1e0286ca%2F0_790_4500_2702%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67243eedbc968900d80fc101921d577f1e0286ca%2F0_790_4500_2702%2F4500.jpg>
 Simplenote’s terms of service: day to Apple’s night. Photograph: Stephen 
Studd/Getty Images 
The basic terms, in their entirety, read: “You are responsible for keeping 
your login and password safe. The Service should not be used to store sensitive 
information such as bank account numbers, credit card information, or 
passwords. We are not responsible for any information stored with the Service.”

I was feeling good. I had barely finished breakfast, and already I’d read two 
sets of terms and conditions, and one of them was positively pleasant. Maybe 
the week wouldn’t be so bad?

And then I went online.

BT: they will pay up if I die

For most people, a licence agreement for a broadband connection is more of a 
“real” contract than the terms and conditions for digital services they click 
but largely ignore.Broadband <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/broadband> 
comes with a requirement to pay, early cancellation fees, and a credit check.

All the same, I still hadn’t actually read my contract with BT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup>, so downloaded a copy to read on 
the way in to work. I was already late because of Apple, and didn’t need to 
make things worse.

The good news is that BT’s terms and conditions, freed from the American 
requirement for “conspicuous” warnings, is actually legible; the bad news is 
that it turns out that I have to pay them money until the day I die, and they 
aren’t really obliged to do anything in return. I may be paraphrasing a little.

In a way, it shouldn’t be a surprise. It’s not like the company actually gives 
me good service as it is: I live inone of the worst constituencies in the 
country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/09/london-has-the-worst-broadband-in-britain-government-statistics-show>
 for high speed broadband, and on top of that, my flat is a new-build,
notoriously overlooked by telecoms companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/apr/20/bt-failure-connect> eager to 
make developers pay for the cost of wiring.

On the plus side, if I am injured or die as a result of BT’s negligence, they 
will accept responsibility. Which is nice, because no other company bothered to 
mention this in their documentation.

It didn’t help that I read the whole thing standing up on a packed Tube, 
squinting at the tiny writing on my phone

On the minus side, while BT “aims” to provide broadband service, it qualifies 
that aim by stating: “We do not guarantee either the quality of the service or 
that the service will be available at all times.” The terms and conditions 
remind me that I can cancel within the first three months if the speed isn’t up 
to scratch, but beyond that, I’m not entirely clear what I’ve actually been 
paying for. Goodwill?

It didn’t help matters that I read the whole thing standing up on a packed 
Tube, squinting at the tiny writing on my phone. After 6,000 words, and an 
hour-long commute, I arrive at work. And in the process of booting up a laptop, 
signing in to my work mail account (provided by Google) and openingTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, I commit myself to another 
35,000 words of legal documents, and feel a little part of myself die.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32595e8235f64d29180cfb890b4096a6e5c92203%2F0_1640_3628_2178%2F3628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32595e8235f64d29180cfb890b4096a6e5c92203%2F0_1640_3628_2178%2F3628.jpg>
 Modern life is rubbish part 16,784: reading BT’s EULA on a packed tube 
carriage. Photograph: aophotography.com/Alamy 
Google: actually in plain English

When I headed into the week, I’d expected Google to be the worst. After all, 
it’s the company that is the epitome of theinternet adage that 
<http://www.metafilter.com/95152/Userdriven-discontent#3256046> if you are not 
paying for it, you’re the product being sold. I was expecting byzantine 
documents, deliberately difficult to read to obscure the dastardly passage 
where they claim the right to sell my mother’s maiden name to Russian hackers 
for peanuts.

Yet the 5,500 words of Google’s terms of service (including a separate but 
linked privacy policy) are actually surprisingly legible and sane. Faced with 
never-ending scrutiny, from users as well as regulators, competitors and the 
press, the company responded by providing plain English terms of service.

The passage about ownership of uploads – always a hot-button topic when it 
comes to sites like YouTube which allow user-generated content – is clear and 
easy to understand:

Some of our Services allow you to upload, submit, store, send or receive 
content. You retain ownership of any intellectual property rights that you hold 
in that content. In short, what belongs to you stays yours.

A similar passage in Twitter’s terms is also fairly well written (for a legal 
document – this is relative), only tripping up when it attempts to list every 
single thing you could conceivably do online in one sprawling mass of verbs:

You retain your rights to any Content you submit, post or display on or 
through the Services. By submitting, posting or displaying Content on or 
through the Services, you grant us a worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty-free 
licence (with the right to sublicense) to use, copy, reproduce, process, adapt, 
modify, publish, transmit, display and distribute such Content in any and all 
media or distribution methods (now known or later developed).

Twitter's 'worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty free license' gives it leeway to 
do what they want with your content

These companies have learned the hard way that just because no one reads the 
terms and conditions before they sign up, it doesn’t mean that no-one reads 
them ever. Indeed, Twitter, along with Facebook (whose 3,300-word terms and 
conditions I read as I prepared to edit the Guardian’s page), regularly has to 
fight back againstviral hoaxes 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news/facebook-hoax-social-network-not-4924151>
 purporting to reveal the social networks’ plans to steal everyone’s material.

At the same time, the sites do benefit from a certain lack of legal 
understanding. It’s true that you “retain your rights” to anything posted on 
Twitter; but it’s also true that the “worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty free 
licence” gives the company almost infinite leeway to do what they want with 
your content, regardless of the rights.

ALL CAPS ARE MEANINGLESS

By the end of the day on Monday, I had done little other than read terms and 
conditions. Yet another huge chunk of Apple documentation accompanied my 
laptop, requiring different agreements for the operating system and for iTunes 
(20,000 words altogether); the requirements for Dropbox (1,500 words) and my 
Oyster card (2,200 words) were svelte in comparison, although both failed the 
readability test, with MEANINGLESS ALL-CAPS out in force.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434364417131%2F5542172347_888d98ef9d_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434364417131%2F5542172347_888d98ef9d_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Note to legal writers – STOP SHOUTING. Photograph: Garry Knight/flickr 
Still, getting over the initial burst of agreements meant I could relax a bit 
into the flow on Tuesday, and find out a bit more about the legal background 
behind these documents. After, of course, reading and agreeing to the terms of 
service on the Guardian (6,900 words, pretty standard stuff) and Buzzfeed 
(3,788 words, ditto), just to leave a couple of comments on each site.

What’s the penalty for breaking the terms?

Some have argued that the vast bulk of legal verbiage encountered in the 
information age is worth little more than the pixels it is written on. Citing 
British common law, they point out that a valid contract must offer, at least 
theoretically, the opportunity for negotiation. End user license agreements - 
the rules that govern the use of software and even hardware which, 
overwhelmingly, has already been bought and paid for - violate that legal 
principle.

If you hit “disagree” while setting up an iPhone, for instance, it doesn’t 
call up an Apple lawyer and offer you the opportunity to renegotiate the terms 
under which you use the iTunes Store. Instead, it simply bounces you back to 
the page before, and waits for you to try again.


The argument that such documents have little strength is reinforced by the 
rarity of them ever affecting court cases. By and large, the penalty for 
breaking the terms and conditions of a service is being thrown off it: losing a 
Twitter account, for instance. While having clearly laid-out terms and 
conditions helps clarify things for both sides in the event of unpleasantness, 
it’s not actually necessary for that tier of enforcement.

A private business is allowed to stop serving a customer for pretty much any 
reason it likes (although not if the EU has its way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/24/eu-warns-internet-firms-regulated-amazon-etsy>
), and they have little recourse. But in the internet world, that’s pretty hard 
on consumers who have to choose between a handful of all-powerful companies 
that dominate consumer electronics, digital services and retail.

Has any company ever enforced an end user agreement?

More serious enforcement of the terms and conditions tends to be done through 
other legal mechanisms. In 2006, video game developers Blizzard sued MDY, a 
company which made software that let users cheat in World of Warcraft, 
Blizzard’s bestselling massively-multiplayer online game. The case alleged that 
using the software, called Glider, violated Blizzard’s terms of service.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqkC12Rnvga4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqkC12Rnvga4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqkC12Rnvga4&media=>
Two years later, however, and Blizzard won a summary judgement based largely 
on a very different legal argument. The company’s copyright had been infringed 
when Glider had let players cheat at the game; and the way MDY had circumvented 
its anti-cheating software also meant it had illegally broken copy protection. 
Two years after that, many of the rulings were reversed at appeal, but the 
judgement that MDY illegally broke copy protection stood.

The court case did, however, reaffirm one crucial aspect of the law that 
surrounds EULAs: you are not the owner of software you buy. Instead, you are 
merely a licensee, and that licence can, and most likely does, come with 
conditions.

Just last month, we saw that taken to its obvious end point as Microsoft 
sought to enforce a contract signed with testers for its upcoming game Gears of 
War. The testers hadleaked information about the game 
<http://www.polygon.com/2015/5/14/8607841/microsoft-bans-gears-of-war-xbox-one-leakers>
, breaking the agreement they’d make with Microsoft. The company’s response? It 
banned the leakers from Xbox Live, the online service required to use a vast 
array of the console’s features, permanently.

It even temporarily blocked use of their console offline – something that was 
well within its rights because, as the testing service explained in a letter 
its testers, the leak broke the terms and conditions. “The nature of the leak 
having had occurred through Xbox One, actually also went against the Microsoft 
EULA, which is agreed upon when creating an Xbox LIVE account, or any other 
type of Microsoft account,” the company, VMC, wrote.

As I discovered on Tuesday evening, Sony’s Playstation has similar language. I 
should have known I wouldn’t be allowed to relax, even in my own home. Sitting 
down to play some video games required three separate sets of terms and 
conditions, for the console itself, the online service attached to it, and the 
specific game, Bungie’s Destiny, that I wanted to play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677b1f28a83efe53490749725710c9c053921b81%2F0_227_3452_2073%2F3452.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677b1f28a83efe53490749725710c9c053921b81%2F0_227_3452_2073%2F3452.jpg>
 Unwind in front of the Playstation – after the small matter of 20,000 words of 
legalese. Photograph: Thomas Peter/Reuters 
And sure enough, if Sony discovers that I have violated any term of its 
collective 20,000 words of legal agreements, which I and perhaps three other 
people in the world have read in their totality, the company reserves the right 
to:

take any action to protect its interests such as disabling access to or use of 
some or all System Software, disabling use of this PS4 system online or 
offline, termination of your access to PSN, denial of any warranty, repair or 
other services provided for your PS4 system, implementation of automatic or 
mandatory updates or devices intended to discontinue unauthorized use, or 
reliance on any other remedial efforts as reasonably necessary to prevent the 
use of modified or unpermitted use of System Software.

In other words, break rules you don’t know about, and Sony reserves the right 
to turn your £350 console into a brick. And those rules are ridiculously broad.

If you don’t install the most recent version of the system software as soon as 
you reasonably can, you’ve broken the agreement. If you “lease, rent, 
sublicense, publish, modify, patch, adapt or translate” the PS4’s software, 
you’ve broken the agreement. If you “use any … modified hardware” with the PS4, 
you’ve broken the agreement.

Sony doesn't intend to go around bricking users’ consoles – but if they want 
to, they are within their rights to do so

As with so many of these rules and regulations, it’s not that Sony intends to 
go around bricking users’ consoles; but if they want to, they are perfectly 
within their rights to do so.

And, naturally, the company does not provide any promise that the software or 
hardware will work or do what it says it will do, but it does require access to 
your personal information including your IP address and console ID for 
marketing purposes. And no, you can’t complain. It says so in capital letters.

While licence agreements are enforceable contracts, as the BEUC’s Agustín 
Reyna points out, it is possible for them to go too far even for the courts. 
“In European law and also at national levels, we [have] what’s called ‘unfair 
terms legislations’,” he says. If a given contract has unfair terms, “the judge 
can do a kind of balancing test and see whether the terms are unfair. Not 
everything that is in the contract will be enforceable.”

In fact, one of the big wins in recent years for consumer rights in Europe was 
against Sony. “A couple of years ago there was a case by the Norwegian consumer 
council, in relation to the Playstation,” Reyna says. “In the terms of the 
licence there were clauses allowing Sony to automatically update or even erase 
operating systems that were not those provided by Sony.”

What’s more, it was possible to install other operating systems on the 
console, including the open source operating system Linux. But that too “was 
prevented by Sony in the terms of the licence. So the Norwegian consumer 
council took them before the ombudsman”, Reyna says.

After ploughing through the Sony terms of service, the best I can say about 
Destiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/07/destiny-how-house-of-wolves-builds-on-story-why-theres-no-raid>
’s EULA is that it was short. Just 2,000 words meant that I finished it before 
bedtime, hoping I’d be able to play on Wednesday.


I did not play Destiny on Wednesday

Just halfway through the week, but significantly more than halfway through the 
legal agreements I would end up having to read, I began to run out of energy. I 
found myself purposefully changing my behaviour so as to not have to read any 
more EULAs. I’d already agreed to the Playstation’s terms of service; I wasn’t 
going to read the one for Valve’s Steam just so that I could play PC games in 
the same week.

But still they kept coming: Netflix (4,000 words, and starts off by offering 
false hope with a cheery, human, “Welcome to Netflix!”, before descending into 
grey legalistic mush); Apple TV (another 4,000 words, and as bad as the 
previous Apple agreements); Storify (5,300 words, again introduced with a 
“Thanks for using Storify!”, again sapping my will to live); and Bandcamp, with 
its 7,100 word, over-long EULA saved by being broken up with lime-green text 
instead of block-capitals.

I didn’t manage to play Destiny on Wednesday - I just read legal text.

On Thursday, I was mercifully out of the house in the evening. Say what you 
will about the scourge of drinking, but no pub I’ve been to demands you return 
your pints if you don’t obey their rules. Andboard and card games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/14/netrunner-took-over-my-life-and-why-it-should-take-over-yours-too>
 have not yet followed video games into the requiring arcane license agreements 
before you can play them with your friends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F550f18c49a0a7160c89924180a93a91cf43425d3%2F0_54_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20read%20all%20the%20small%20print%20on%20the%20internet%20and%20it%20made%20me%20want%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-read-all-the-small-print-on-the-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F550f18c49a0a7160c89924180a93a91cf43425d3%2F0_54_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 The pub: safe from the tyranny of license agreement – for now. Photograph: 
Alamy 
By the time I hit Friday, I had narrowed the pool sufficiently that only two 
more EULAs crossed my radar: comics app Comixology, and mobile payment service 
Yoyo. Both had thousands of words of terms and conditions, though without any 
nasty surprises, and one even offered me £5 of free coffee at work for signing 
up. But even though I knew it was over, I was broken.

The problem: there’s no negotiating power

The problem is that reading the terms and conditions simply doesn’t help. 
Sure, you find out how pitifully small your rights are compared to those that 
even a medium-sized company will reserve when you use its product. But the 
issue isn’t just one of obscurity: it’s also a problem with the power 
relationship. With no negotiating power, it ends up being mostly depressing 
reading.

Finding out that Sony can brick my console at will if they decide I haven’t 
downloaded the software update quickly enough doesn’t give me any power to 
fight back. I can’t offer them £50 extra for a console that doesn’t come with 
that clause, nor can I jump ship to a competitor with better terms – because 
one doesn’t exist.

A glimmer of hope exists in the world of social media, where the worst of T&C 
over-reach has, occasionally, been defeated by user revolt. In 2012, Instagram, 
then newly acquired by Facebook,changed its terms 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/economics/2012/12/instagram-asserts-right-sell-your-photos>
 to allow the use of photos uploaded to the website for advertising purposes 
(without paying the photographer). Itsparked outrage 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/12/20/instagram-terms-of-service-change_n_2333284.html>
, and eventually resulted in the company updating the terms to clarify what 
rights it was, and was not, requesting.

It was a rare example of a company demanding the broadest possible legal 
interpretation of what it intended to do and was forced back into clearer, 
narrower terms.

There are groups fighting for a world with clearer language, and narrower 
terms. Agustín Reyna, of BEUC, is one: “Of course consumers have to be aware 
what they’re signing into. The problem is that one side has to work on the 
transparency of these terms. You cannot expect that the consumer will spend 20 
minutes reading the terms and conditions of a specific service.”

In general, reading the terms and conditions won’t be as exhausting as my week 
was. You don’t have to do it all in one go, after all. But it will likely end 
up being as pointless. Are you really going to leaveFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> if it is a little more 
aggressive about the rights they claim? After all these years? Is that the hill 
you’re going to die on?

Reyna, however, has hope. “To be honest, I’m more optimistic. I think that it 
will improve with time, because at the end of the day it’s a matter of consumer 
trust: companies won’t gain consumer trust and confidence if they don’t display 
clearer terms of use about what is behind the service as such, especially when 
we see that all these consumer concerns about privacy issues are going up.”

In the meantime, though, my advice is this: carry on not reading the terms and 
conditions. Hope someone with more time, a better legal education, or a weird 
fetish for huge chunks of block capitals, does it instead. And just hope you 
don’t sign away your first-born in the meantime.
 