
At first glance the DNA ancestry “craze 
<http://stream.aljazeera.com/story/201610110031-0025300>” may seem like yet 
another navel-gazing fad cleverlymonetized 
<https://www.ancestry.com/corporate/newsroom/press-releases/ancestrycom-llc-reports-first-quarter-2016-financial-results>
 by the tech industry. But personal genetic testing is much more than a kind of 
Snapchat filter for your family album.

By combining the complex science of DNA testing and the data riches uncovered 
by the Human Genome Project into an accessible, relativelyinexpensive 
<http://www.ancestry.com/cs/offers/subscribe?sub=1> self-testing kit, the 
genetic heritage industry has created an ingenious product: a consumer 
must-have that tickles one of the deepest, most ancient and potent of human 
wishes. This wish is not, as it happens, to have scientific proof of your 
genetic heritage. The beguiling promise that these ancestry kits offer is the 
possibility that you just might be someone else.

 Not that I, like most folks, consciously walk around wishing I were living 
someone else’s life. Nor are the tests, as objects, lust-inducing: there’s not 
much industrial design involved with the little cardboard boxes, no beguiling 
surfaces, rounded corners or hip insignia. But after many months of being 
unsure of why I wanted – no,needed – a genetics test, I broke down, spent the 
cash and spit in the tube.

 The kits, which generally retail for around $99 <https://www.23andme.com/> – 
MyHeritage 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/11/07/myheritage-launches-dna-testing-service-to-help-you-uncover-your-familys-history/>
 just launched a competing kit for$79 <https://www.myheritage.com/dna/> – are 
packed with a test tube to spit in or Q-tips to swab your cheeks and a 
pre-addressed padded mailer. If you feel like splurging on something more 
glamorous, for$199 
<https://shop.nationalgeographic.com/product/genographic-2.0-kits/geno-2.0-next-generation-genographic-project-participation-and-dna-ancestry-kit>
 you can buy the National Geographic Society’s kit, which tests your ancestral 
DNA to discover, among other things, if you’re part Neanderthal.

The craze to discover your DNA roots isn’t a particularly American phenomenon: 
India 
<https://www.thequint.com/health-fitness/2016/11/04/its-more-than-just-a-fad-dna-ancestry-testing-in-india>
 is in the midst of a boom,Living DNA <https://www.livingdna.com/en-us>, a 
British startup, claims to trace customers’ ancestor DNA to aregional level 
<http://www.express.co.uk/finance/city/728095/Living-DNA-customers-journey-past-family-tree>
, andancestryDNA 
<http://blogs.ancestry.com/ancestry/2016/02/23/ancestrydna-now-offered-in-29-new-countries/>
 is available in 29 countries (including Vatican City).

When I got the results of my DNA test – which were exactly what I had expected 
– a powerful feeling of disappointment flooded through me. I felt silly, but I 
didn’t care about scientific proof that confirmed who I am. I really wanted 
those results to surprise me.

I know I’m not alone with this feeling. One of the great human fantasies that 
riddles the narratives of global cultures from prehistory to today is that, 
like baby Moses in his basket, Harry Potter under the Dursleys’ staircase, Luke 
Skywalker on Tattooine or Cinderella with her bucket and mop, we are not who we 
seem to be. And the ancestry DNA kits stir up the powerful unconscious wish 
that we are meant for a greater, or at least, a different, destiny.

Perhaps not everyone, certainly, but many of us, have had the experience of 
looking around a dinner table or a subway car or a laundromat and being sure 
that we are not where we are supposed to be or with our people.

Which is actually true for some people. Holocaust survivors, adoptees 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/social-issues/dnas-new-miracle-how-adoptees-are-using-online-registries-to-find-their-blood-relatives/2016/10/12/10433fec-8c48-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html>
 andAfrican Americans 
<http://fusion.net/story/351054/dna-ancestry-reveal-videos/> have fraught and 
difficult relationships to this powerful technology. But that is not my story.

Nor did I relate to writer Maud Newton 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maud_Newton>’s reasoning in her essay 
<http://harpers.org/archive/2014/06/americas-ancestry-craze/6/> examining the 
American DNA ancestry fad, that: “The discovery that I am almost exactly as 
white as I have always appeared was deeply,irrationally disappointing 
<http://harpers.org/archive/2014/06/americas-ancestry-craze/6/>”. Newton 
ascribed her disappointment to a kind of shame about her forebears’ behavior 
that might have been “mitigated” by a different genetic result.

I am more of a recreational ancestral DNA tester, if you will.

But human curiosity is formidable. Like my ancestors before me, who paid 
crystal-ball gazers in the Middle Ages or commissioned people to interpret star 
charts, I spit in a tube and waited for it to reveal its hidden truths: who I 
really, really am; what secret grand ancestors lie hidden in my DNA. But then 
the spit was sent to a lab tech, not a kind woman at a carnival who would tell 
me what I was aching to hear – that I’m special, from a long line of special 
people.

Unless you are someone who has been cut off from your origins, the ancestry 
kits (most often) will provide you with scientific proof that you are pretty 
much who you think you are. Your life isn’t a fable; you weren’t switched at 
birth; your exasperating family really is the one you’re stuck with forever. 
And just like your mom always said, Uncle Bob’s need to play the bagpipes on 
Thanksgiving is more about Uncle Bob than about any family ties to Scotland.
 