
It began on 12 April 1906 in Azusa Street, Los Angeles. That was where William 
J Seymour <http://www.azusastreet.org/WilliamJSeymour.htm>, the one-eyed son of 
former slaves, firstbegan to speak in tongues 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Azusa_Street_Revival>, thus kicking off the 
whole Charismatic movement that was in large part responsible for the 
extraordinary revival and numerical success of global Christianity throughout 
the 20th century. John Wesley had done something similar in the 18th century in 
England, with thousands turning out to hear him speak. Charism, charismatic, 
charisma are an odd group of words. Originating in theGreek for grace 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charism>, they suggest that the transformative 
power of speech and personality has some divine – or at least, mysterious – 
quality.

Charisma is something that is given as opposed to something that can be 
learned. Like the ability to make a powerful conference speech or the capacity 
to persuade others with a sermon: you either have it or you don’t. William J 
Seymour had it. Wesley had it. And their revivalist style of public speech was 
so effective that it has been extensively copied by those seeking political 
office ever since. Martin Luther King’s revivalist-style “I have a dream” 
speech is still commonly held up as the ultimate in political rhetoric.

The political significance of charisma long pre-dated television, though the 
intimacy of television made it all the more necessary in a leader. Those who 
issue the call “come follow me” require something of that puzzling, sometimes 
dangerous, quasi-revivalist quality, in order for people to respond. Like 
charm, its more modest etymological cousin, charisma is also connected to 
sexuality on some subconscious level. For sexuality is that elusive umami of 
motivation through which one person is able to impress themselves and their 
ideas upon another. When you meet one of those “charming” people, they look you 
directly in the eye, they grasp your hand firmly, they deliberately establish 
an emotional connection. It’s a seduction, of course, typically reinforced by 
all the sartorial accoutrements of power: the dark power suit, the polished 
black power shoes. And we the voters are total suckers for it. Which is why, 
time and again, we have woken up the morning after the election to discover 
that we had been persuaded to get into bed with some charming rotter.

Yes, I also voted for Blair in 1997. And I still remember the direct 
cut-through humanity of his smile, his swagger and confidence, his beguiling 
turn of phrase. It is embarrassing to admit it now, but I was seduced. Only 
later, as the killing fields ofIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> 
grew more bloody, as those WMD proved non-existent, did many of us realise that 
charismatic swagger can be a supremely dangerous quality in politicians.

This is probably where anti-politics politics began. And is why many of us now 
supportJeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, not 
just in spite of a rhetorically clumsy conference speech, but almost because of 
it. For this now feels like some sort of hallmark of authenticity. Or, at 
least, a style of politics that is devoid of sexual manipulation and knowing 
wink-at-the-camera charisma. Gone is the faux West Wing swagger, thank God. 
Gone the aping of revivalist preaching. He’s a decent bloke, saying what he 
thinks in some fundamentally non-flashy way. And three cheers for that. No, two 
cheers.

Because there is a but. And the but is that I fear there is something missing 
with his beige-party-meets-socialism. And it has something to do with the 
Methodist roots of the Labour party that I feel are so important. For while I 
agree with pretty much everything Corbyn says, I don’t get to hear the poetry 
of his vision. And I can’t tell yet whether this is me not yet having fully 
kicked the need for the intoxicating drug of religious/political charisma, or 
whether this lack of what I call poetry represents some fundamental lack that 
Corbyn has to make good. I just don’t know. Yes, I want a new style of politics 
that refuses to feed us charisma junkies with the cheap promise of some 
narcotic cocktail of personality and rhetorical prowess. But I also want to be 
taken to the mountain top and be shown the promised land. I suspect I want the 
impossible. Probably we all do – so maybe we have to choose.

@giles_fraser 
<https://twitter.com/giles_fraser?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author>

 * The headline of this article was amended on 5 October 2015 to better 
reflect the writer’s view.
 