
A year ago, the political institutions in Northern Ireland were saved by what 
was called thefresh start agreement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/a-fresh-start-for-northern-ireland>. After 
another period of crisis, Stormont has walked away from the edge of collapse, 
but not everything was settled. The issue of a process to address the past – 
how to answer the questions from the conflict period – was again put on hold. 
Perhaps the truths of the so-called Troubles are just too ugly to be shovelled 
to the surface; the information revealed by bright investigative lights might 
exact toohigh a cost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/09/troubles-envoy-damage-row-prosecuting-uk-troops-denis-bradley-northern-ireland-policing-informers-secret-files>
.

On Monday, Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
secretary of state James Brokenshire signalled yet further delay when he spoke 
of the need for “broad political consensus” before beginning a public phase or 
consultation on a proposed legacy structure. This would include a historical 
investigations unit, an independent commission on information retrieval and an 
implementation and reconciliation group – a variation of a model that first 
began to take shape as part of a consultation process that began in 2007 and 
reported two years later. There has been indecision and delay ever since.

So, does anyone seriously believe that more talking involving the same people 
is likely to lift this issue out of the political mud? In a BBC interview, 
Brokenshire spoke of “one chance to get this right”. But there is no chance 
unless something changes.

A year ago, in my book Unfinished Peace 
<https://northernireland.foundation/2016/12/01/unfinished-peace-brian-rowan-journalist-and-author/>
, I wrote the following: “Governments and politicians here need to step back 
from the past and leave it to independent others. A government cannot be a 
neutral observer or facilitator in this kind of process. It is a player with 
questions to answer, and much to protect and shield. Nor can you properly shape 
a legacy structure without knowing the contributions of others. Will the IRA be 
prepared to enter an ‘answering process’ on the past. Will the loyalists? We 
still don’t know.”

Troubles envoy warns of damage from row about prosecuting UK troops
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/09/troubles-envoy-damage-row-prosecuting-uk-troops-denis-bradley-northern-ireland-policing-informers-secret-files>
What we do know is that the political and peace processes in Northern Ireland 
have worked best with outside help.Senator George Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/jul/21/northernireland.marktran> guided 
the political talks towards theGood Friday agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/jun/07/guardian190-good-friday-agreement-1998>
,General John de Chastelain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/jun/29/northernireland.nicholaswatt>, in 
direct contact with the IRA and other armed groups, worked out a 
decommissioning process that eventually resulted in arms being put beyond use.
Chris Patten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/sep/10/northernireland.johnmullin> and his 
commission wrote the report that brought about sweeping reforms within 
policing. So, the proof that outside help works is there for all to see.

Today, the past still stands large in the present, the new politics, new 
policing and new beginnings are weighed down and contaminated by the many 
unanswered questions. Political fears are expressed about a rewriting of 
history. Any process on the past will disturb and correct narratives; 
simplistic storylines will be shaken because the past cannot be reduced to a 
clearcut tale of goodies and baddies. There are questions for all sides – for 
security and intelligence as well as theIRA <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira>
 and loyalists.

And this is where we get to the real fear and the real reason behind a decade 
of delay; for to allow this process to be designed and determined by an 
international team means losing control of it. Governments and parties would be 
unable to manage and shape it to suit their purposes.

In recent days there have been screaming headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/08/inquiry-killings-british-troops-police-troubles>
 on legacy investigations that are focused on soldiers who served in Northern 
Ireland. They are not new. They are part of a wider, ongoing and protracted 
process reviewing hundreds of killings involving all sides – a review that 
stretches across the entire conflict period.

Inside the negotiations, the latest standoff concerns the question of national 
security and what information will be withheld from families seeking answers to 
questions that date back to the earliest days of the Troubles. But that is not 
the only unresolved issue. There is no certainty about levels of cooperation 
across the frame, from security, intelligence, IRA and the loyalist 
organisations.

I believe that an international team would be best placed to get answers to 
those questions; to determine what maximum assistance should look like; who 
should be involved in the process; and whether the initiative is designed for 
information gathering or for investigation that could lead to prosecutions. 
Loyalists, who have been excluded from the discussions, say the process cannot 
be both and expect information to be freely given. “I don’t think turkeys vote 
for Christmas,” spokesman Winston Irvine told me. Would a process shaped by 
governments and domestic political parties be able to untangle such issues? 
Probably not. But perhaps an international team would. Handing responsibility 
to such a team would demonstrate seriousness. It might finally lift this 
process out of the mud and the fear.
 