
What’s the CIA’s brilliant plan for stopping Russian cyber-attacks on the US 
and their alleged interference with the US election? Apparently, some in the 
agency want to escalate tensions between the two superpowers even more and 
possibly do the same thing right back to them.

NBC News reported late last week 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/cia-prepping-possible-cyber-strike-against-russia-n666636?cid=sm_tw>
 that the CIA is working up blueprints for an “unprecedented cyber covert 
action against Russia”, and it sounds a lot like they’re planning on leaking 
documents on Vladimir Putin, just as the Russians are accused of doing to the 
Democratic National Committee and the Clinton campaign.


NBC reported that former intelligence officials said “the agency had gathered 
reams of documents that could expose unsavory tactics by Russian President 
Vladimir Putin” and another former official said the US “should … expose the 
financial dealings of Putin and his associates”.


Hacking foreign governments – including political parties – is a US pastime, 
as even the former ex-NSA chief Michael Haydenopenly admitted this week 
<http://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/301667-former-cia-and-nsa-head-suggests-us-also-hacks-political-parties>
. “A foreign intelligence service getting the internal emails of a major 
political party in a major foreign adversary? Game on. That’s what we do,”
Hayden said 
<http://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/301667-former-cia-and-nsa-head-suggests-us-also-hacks-political-parties>
. He added: “By the way, I would not want to be in an American court of law and 
be forced to deny that I never did anything like that as director of the NSA.” 
(Hayden probably doesn’t want to find himself in an American courtfor 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/michael-hayden-played-right-up-to-the-edge-of-legality-and-then-took-a-big-leap-off/>
a lot 
<http://www.today.com/news/ex-cia-director-michael-hayden-torture-report-i-didnt-lie-1D80349126>
of reasons 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2013/08/its-highly-likely-the-nsa-hoovered-up-mitt-romneys-emails-in-2002/278892/>
, but that’s another story.)


If Russia is trying to hack America, it is not to help Donald Trump win | 
David Klion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/russia-hack-america-not-help-donald-trump-win-election>
It’s the leaking of documents that is relatively new. The US, of course, has a 
long history of interfering in foreign elections as well, asWashington Post’s 
Ishaan Tharoor detailed last week 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2016/10/13/the-long-history-of-the-u-s-interfering-with-elections-elsewhere/?postshare=6881476381676721&tid=ss_tw-bottom>
. That’s not to excuse Russia’s alleged actions, but everyone feigning shock 
and horror over this needs to take a deep breath because we are rapidly 
spiraling towards not just a digital cold war, butperhaps something far worse 
<https://twitter.com/adamjohnsonNYC/status/787189230929870848>.


The question a lot of people were asking when this NBC News story came out is: 
why was it leaked? There’s a couple of possibilities beyond the usual “theCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> can’t keep a secret” – which they 
obviously can when they want to. To me, the most likely scenario is this could 
be the CIA’s attempt to back President Obama into a corner by putting public 
pressure on him to approve such an escalation in cyberwarfare.


So far, Obama has (commendably) been virtually the only official or politician 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/almost-everyone-gets-russia-wrong-apart-from-obama>
 in DC not to succumb to scaremongering and dramatic cold war 2.0 rhetoric when 
it comes to Russia. That hasn’t stopped him from criticizing Putin when he 
should. But he’s not pretending like Putin is some 11th-dimensional chess 
mastermind, pulling the strings behind every twist and turn in presidential 
poll numbers, like the rest of Washington.


There’s also a chance the whole thing is a ruse, where the CIA purposefully 
leaks a fake story for the purposes of attempting to scareRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. But assuming the CIA plans are 
real, why on earth do all these national security geniuses think this is a good 
idea? Countless politicians have spent the last four months saying how 
“unprecedented” and “dangerous” Russia’s actions are, so now the magic solution 
is to do it back to them?


The rush to blame Russia for the DNC email hack is premature | Trevor Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/25/russia-blame-dnc-email-hack-premature>
Who thinks that once the US leaks some documents back on Putin that he’ll 
suddenly be like ‘oh, you got me, I guess we’ll stop!’ The more likely scenario 
is that this half-baked idea will escalate the cyber tensions rather than act 
as a deterrent.


Remember, Putin reportedly thinks 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/08/world/europe/vladimir-putin-panama-papers-american-plot.html>
 that the Panama Papers leak was the work of the US government (even though 
there’s no evidence to suggest it was) and some think the current leaks 
involving US politicians are his revenge. This potential CIA operation will, in 
his mind, only confirm his suspicions.


Putin is also much less susceptible to public pressure than US politicians are 
(given his alleged heavy-handed dealings with his opponents) and has 
increasingly attempted to implement draconian internet surveillance laws which 
he’ll surely use to his advantage if the US does go through with this plan.


Why does the reaction to alleged Russian actions have to turn into a contest 
in who’s the bigger tough guy? It’s hard to remember that just a year and a 
half ago, the supposed biggest cyber threat in US history was China. They were 
alleged to have stolen billions of dollars of intellectual property and then 
were accused of hacking tens of millions of people’s security review files from 
the US government going back decades.


Instead of saber rattling about an unprecedented wave of cyber-attacks, the US 
government negotiated with China 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-06-28/u-s-cyber-deal-with-china-is-reducing-hacking-official-says>
, and the attacks on the US, at least on the hacking of commercial secrets, 
slowed down significantly. (So much so that cybersecurity defense contractors
took a big hit <http://fortune.com/2016/08/05/fireeye-stock-feye-earnings/> on 
the stock market. Lucky for them Russia is the new bogeyman!)


Russia’s not going to stop gathering intelligence on American political 
parties just like the US is not going to stop on theirs, but maybe the US 
should attempt to actually de-escalate tensions by starting the process of 
negotiating some form of an international cyber treaty before this gets too out 
of control.
 