
What is it about dinosaurs? They never really go out of fashion, but with 
Jurassic World stomping across multiplex screens for the past few weeks and 
scientists at National Geographic staging a televised “T rex autopsy” (fake, 
obviously), there’s no escaping them this summer. Maybe now’s the time to 
discover your inner palaeontologist and try fossil hunting. There are plenty of 
sites across the UK from beaches to quarry beds where you can give it a go, but 
some more popular spots are prone to falling rocks and are dangerous at high 
tide, so a little bit of research is a good idea. Go to ukfossils.co.uk for 
advice on the safest sites to visit.

Charmouth on Dorset’s Jurassic Coast is ideal for first-timers, says 
palaeontologist Simon Penn, as it’s quite safe and set up for holidaymakers who 
want to amble along and do the odd bit of fossil spotting. “At that end of the 
coast, you’re likely to find ammonites and belemnites that are around 190 
million years old,” he says. (If you’re heading to Camp Bestival at end of 
July, keep an eye out for Jurassic CSI, which Penn helped to set up – mocked-up 
crime scenes where the culprit is one of six possible dino-villains.)

So if you stumble across something exciting, can you keep it? “It’s not like 
archaeology where you have to hand in anything amazing, but we encourage people 
to tell local museums if they find anything special,” says Penn. You never know 
what you might find – last month, experts identified Britain’s oldest sauropod 
dinosaur from a fossil in Whitby. Who knows what you might uncover?


Jurassic CSI will be at Camp Bestival 30 July to 2 August. For details of 
organised fossil hunting walks and “rockpool rambles” in Charmouth, visit
charmouth.org. <http://www.charmouth.org/> A guide to UK fossil hunt sites can 
be found atukfossils.co.uk <http://www.ukfossils.co.uk/>.
 