
I knew early on that hostels were not for me. Tales from my InterRailing mates 
made hostels sound like an endurance test. Food eaten by mice in the night; 
drunk interlopers comatose in your bunk; and even a story about a bloke fried 
on LSD attempting to pile all the furniture against the dormitory door. At 4am.

Once, in Amsterdam (naturally, I was in a hotel), I ended up drinking with a 
group of Australian backpackers who appeared to be tolerating one another 
solely because, as solo travellers, they badly needed the companionship. The 
loudest of them was very proud of the large felt-tip penis that somehow (use 
your imagination), had been drawn on his belly in the red-light district. Were 
these the kind of people you had to put up with in hostels? Because, frankly, I 
am not a big felt-tip-penis kind of guy.
 The work of graffiti artist Small Kid adorns the walls 
What I do like, though, is value for money, which in the hotel world is 
increasingly hard to find. A standard room in most UK cities is now £100-plus 
at the weekend, even in many supposedly “budget” hotels. Fundamentally, all you 
need is a comfortable bed, a toilet, shower, TV and mirror. Why are rooms that 
expensive?

Despite my historic prejudice, therefore, I was intrigued by Igloo Hybrid, a 
hip new “ho[s]tel” in Nottingham, which includes several private double rooms 
(some en suite), family rooms, pod-like “sleep boxes” for two (decorated by 
local graffiti artist Small Kid), and dorms with up to six beds. Private rooms 
start at £29, and, naturally, are basic. You have to bring your own toiletries 
and, unless you rent Igloo’s thin ones, your own towels. You are politely asked 
to strip your bed. But wherever you stay, you get a memory foam mattress and a 
guarantee, from personable owner Bettina Kristiansen, that there won’t be any 
stag dos rampaging around on Saturday night.
 The ‘cute’ courtyard 
Bring ear-plugs anyway, because the thin walls of this former office building 
do not block out the general noise from the adjacent rooms, never mind any 
late-night larking about. I liked my loosely beach-themed room, though. The 
hardwearing carpet is an institutional charcoal grey, but there is enough 
homespun colour (a cartoon palm tree illustration; digital-print sunset 
wallpaper from eBay) that it feels warmly cosy. The idiosyncratic mismatching 
of Ikea-ish and vintage furniture pieces is also pleasing. The en suite 
bathroom (heated towel rail but no drinking glasses) is fine, despite the 
shower’s domestic power. Generally – plenty of hooks, if no hangers; 
idiot-proof TV; full-length mirror; clever, built-in writing desk – I like the 
room’s neat, clutter-free functionality.

Guests can cook in the ground-floor kitchen or hang out in the communal lounge 
and cute courtyard (there’s no bar or restaurant). On this midweek visit, it 
was far from raucous. A couple of people nursed beers, but there was little 
chatter. Most were sitting, headphones on, tapping at laptops. The Libertines 
had played Nottingham the night before. Perhaps everyone was coming around from 
that. Or were they just dumbstruck to see someone of my advanced years (in this 
context, anyone over 25) in a youth hostel?
 Dorms have up to six beds 
Either way, I beetled off to Junkyard <http://www.junkbars.com/>, an ace craft 
beer bar just minutes away. The Malt Cross <http://www.maltcross.com/>, a bar 
and arts centre in a restored Victorian music hall, is also recommended and, 
again, close to centrally located Igloo. Next morning, two minutes after 
check-out, I was in coffee shop200 Degrees <http://200degs.com/>, enjoying an 
excellent flat white and a bagel. Who wouldn’t prefer to swerve Britain’s 
overpriced chain hotels and spend the money saved at such local independents? 
It is a win-win.
• Accommodation was provided by Igloo Hybrid (4-6 Eldon Chambers, 0115 948 
3822,igloohostel.co.uk <http://www.igloohostel.co.uk/igloo-hybrid/>); doubles 
from £29 room-only (en suite £39), dorm beds from £19. Travel between 
Manchester and Nottingham was provided byCross Country Trains 
<http://www.crosscountrytrains.co.uk/>

Ask a local

Iain Simons, co-director, Nottingham’s National Videogame Arcade 
<http://gamecity.org/> 
 Castle Rock and Nottingham Castle. Photograph: David Sillitoe 
• Eat 
The Hockley area, just east of the centre, is exploding with eateries. Café 
Hockley <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Cafe-Hockley/149358208436908> delivers 
the best Marmite on toast (it’s all about slice thickness), and Annie’s Burger 
Shack <http://www.anniesburgershack.com/> has just opened a brilliant new 
street-food deli place, Pico. For me,The Larder on Goosegate  
<http://www.thelarderongoosegate.co.uk/>serves the best steak in town.

• Drink 
A bar disguised as a combi-boiler showroom, Boilermaker 
<http://boilermakerbar.co.uk/> prides itself on offering “seriously comfortable 
and fun drinking”.

• See 
The grounds of Nottingham Castle  <http://www.nottinghamcastle.org.uk/> are 
great to wander around. It’s not a huge space, but with all those hidden paths, 
bandstands and caves, it feels it. TheGalleries of Justice  
<http://www.galleriesofjustice.org.uk/>, in the old courthouse, is also 
fantastic.

GameCity Festival  <http://gamecity.org/festival/> runs October 22-31
 