
Outside the conference hall of the Moon Palace 
<http://www.moonpalacecancun.com/en-us>, a luxury Cancun resort, warm waves 
lapped white sands, bathed in a pink Mexican sunset. Inside, close to two 
hundred delegates to the United Nations’2016 biodiversity conference 
<https://www.cbd.int/cop/> huddled around a doorway, desperate to get into a 
windowless room for the final evening’s negotiating session. In the end, most 
of the crowd made it into room, to witness twenty or so country delegates 
hammer out compromise text late into the night. This wasn’t what they had 
expected from a UN summit. But the issue under discussion – synthetic biology – 
is an unusual topic.

Synthetic biology <https://www.theguardian.com/science/synthetic-biology> is 
often described as the application of engineering principles to biology. Some 
see it a fundamentally new approach to biology; others as the next stage of 
biotechnology; and others as simply an exercise in rebranding. As social 
scientists researching this field, we’ve seen the confusion of synthetic 
biologists as to why a treaty about biodiversity is attempting to govern their 
research.

The reason lies in the broad mandate of the UN’s convention on biological 
diversity (CBD). One of thelargest 
<https://www.cbd.int/information/parties.shtml> international environmental 
agreements, the CBD’s three objectives include conservation of biodiversity; 
sustainable use of biodiversity; and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits 
from genetic resources of biodiversity.

In 2010, when Craig Venter’s “creation of synthetic life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/may/20/craig-venter-synthetic-life-form>
” was generating headlines around the world, the CBD’s scientific advisory body 
first engaged with synthetic biology. Since then, the CBD has become the most 
active international forum on the issue, consistently calling for a
precautionary approach 
<https://www.cbd.int/doc/decisions/COP-11/cop-11-dec-11-en.pdf> and effective 
risk assessment <https://www.cbd.int/decision/cop/default.shtml?id=13387>. 
Through anon-line forum <https://bch.cbd.int/synbio/open-ended/discussion.shtml>
 and a regionally-balancedexpert group 
<https://www.cbd.int/doc/?meeting=SYNBIOAHTEG-2015-01>, it produced an 
operational definition of synthetic biology 
<http://sdg.iisd.org/news/cbd-ahteg-report-proposes-operational-definition-of-synthetic-biology/?rdr=nr.iisd.org>
 and began to considerpotential benefits and adverse effects 
<https://www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/synbio/synbioahteg-2015-01/official/synbioahteg-2015-01-03-en.pdf>
 in relation to the CBD’s three objectives.

The latest round of negotiations <https://www.cbd.int/conferences/2016> in 
Cancun, which ran from 4-17 December 2016, provided the largest stage yet for a 
rehearsal of the promises and perils of synthetic biology. For the first time, a
contingent of researchers and students 
<http://allianceforscience.cornell.edu/blog/public-sector-researchers-defend-science-un-biodiversity-meeting-cancun>
 working in biotechnology and synthetic biology participated as observers. 
These scientists, alongside delegates from the biotech industry, talked up the 
prospects of a new industrial revolution, fuelled by engineered microbes to 
produce fuels, chemicals, medicines, crops, and food ingredients. On the other 
side of the debate, coalitions of civil society and community groupschallenged 
such optimism 
<http://www.boell.de/en/dossier-synthetic-biology?utm_campaign=ds_cbd_cop13_en>
, and warned of detrimental impacts on rural livelihoods, and the consequences 
of engineering nature in the pursuit of profit.

Going into the negotiations, many expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2016/jun/09/the-national-academies-gene-drive-study-has-ignored-important-and-obvious-issues>
 the debate to focus on biosafety, and specifically the development ofgene 
drives <http://nas-sites.org/gene-drives/>. Instead, a row erupted over 
shifting methods of accessing biodiversity for research and development. 
Genetic resources from tropical regions have long been a source of new drug and 
product discovery for the pharmaceutical and biotech industries. One of the 
CBD’s main achievements has been to establish that these genetic resources were 
not simply there for the taking, and that countries had sovereign rights to 
them. ItsNagoya Protocol  <https://www.cbd.int/abs/about/>was designed to give 
legal effect to this principle, ensuring “fair and equitable” exchange between 
providers and commercial users of genetic resources.

Many countries are still in the process of enshrining the Nagoya Protocol in 
domestic law (although the EU did this in 2014), and there are growing concerns 
that a loophole is developing. The widespread availability of DNA sequencing, 
combined with the falling costs of DNA synthesis, ischanging 
<http://blogs.plos.org/synbio/2016/12/15/regulating-the-use-of-genetic-sequence-data/>
 how genetic resources travel around the world. Increasingly, scientists can 
download or email genetic information remotely, and engineer it into a cell to 
express or mimic the property of its “in-situ” kin. With the rise of 
open-source online genetic databases, many developing countries are concerned 
about the creation of new routes for unfair commercial exploitation of their 
biodiversity.

From the start of the Cancun summit, developing countries were clear they 
wanted action to close this loophole. Highlighting the pace of technological 
development, negotiators from Brazil, Namibia and Malaysia insisted that using 
digital sequence information without consent and benefit-sharing arrangements 
is biopiracy, and should be acknowledged as such. Some wealthier nations argued 
that the issue had been sprung on negotiators, others that it was premature to 
resolve it at this stage. They also said that attempts to regulate digital 
sequence information would demand the impossible, and put science at risk.

No agreement was reached by the end of the meeting, but the issue wasn’t swept 
under the rug. A newtechnical expert group was established 
<https://www.cbd.int/conferences/2016/cop-13/documents> to lay the groundwork 
for a decision at the next session in 2018. Another process will explore the 
need for aglobal benefit-sharing mechanism 
<https://www.cbd.int/conferences/2016/np-mop-2/documents> as one possible 
approach to handling digital sequence information.

Without such agreements at an international level, it seems unlikely that the 
future bioeconomy will be fair, especially when so much hype and hope rides on 
the use of big biodata. As the Cancun summit demonstrates, scientific 
communities - and the societies they serve - need institutions like the CBD to 
debate and decide how advances in science and technology can support more 
sustainable futures.

Molly Bond 
<http://www.bristol.ac.uk/geography/people/molly-rose-r-bond/index.html> is an 
ESRC-funded PhD researcher at the University of Bristol.Deborah Scott 
<http://www.stis.ed.ac.uk/people/academic_staff/deborah_scott> is a research 
fellow in science, technology and innovation studies at the University of 
Edinburgh. They both attended this month’s UN biodiversity conference in 
Cancun, Mexico.
 