
When I had to leave my role as a senior NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> manager, I discovered that the health 
service has a well-used but little-known system for easing people out of top 
jobs. And I learned that it doesn’t work well for anyone: trusts, our 
healthcare system, managers, patients or the taxpayer.

It’s quite common for senior leaders to have to step down, even when there are 
no performance issues and their actions haven’t risked patient safety. 
Sometimes, as in any sector, people simply end up in jobs that aren’t right for 
them. And just as often, managers, keen to support NHS bodies through difficult 
change projects, take on tasks that prove impossible to accomplish.

My case is typical. Individual hospitals are being pushed to group together in 
larger organisations, centralising specialist care and closing some common 
services with overlapping coverage. And the timetables for these ambitious 
reforms are sometimes built around political cycles, rather than good medical 
care or change management. I ended up overseeing a major change programme – but 
the deadline was unrealistic, and staff shortages were so acute that we 
couldn’t recruit enough experienced medics. After a period we got things under 
control; but senior management made clear that they wanted a change of 
leadership, believing that it would draw a line in the sand and signal a fresh 
start.

NHS plans could bring benefits but we're barred from telling the public
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/aug/26/nhs-plans-bring-benefits-barred-telling-public-sustainability-transformation-plans>
In the private sector, I’d have been given a fat pay-off and sent on my way. 
But in UK public healthcare it’s not acceptable to spend taxpayers’ money that 
way, and departing managers have nowhere else to go: the NHS is the only game 
in town. So I was summoned to a meeting, and offered a sideways move into a 
national role at NHS Improvement: the agency responsible for improving practice 
across the health service.

I soon learned that most such roles at NHS Improvement are one-year contracts, 
where people do useful work that is rarely followed through into delivery. 
Working there, some people apply for other NHS jobs and eventually move into 
senior roles elsewhere in the system. But many, wounded by their treatment and 
unsure of their chances in the job market, instead use the role as a 
springboard into interim work; and the NHS is desperately short of skilled, 
experienced leaders, so it ends up paying them £1,000 a day to plug gaps in its 
management structures.

Many people offered a one-year job at NHS Improvement would instead be willing 
to take a less senior job with their current employer, if it meant a permanent 
job and the chance to stay in the locality. But few are offered this option, 
and there’s a stigma attached to dropping grades. It’s seen as a sign of 
personal failure, and there’s an expectation that careers only ever go upwards 
– which, in these days of long careers and merging organisations, isn’t 
realistic.

Political leaders and senior management need to recognise that, while not all 
appointments work out, these people still have skills the NHS needs. And they 
should understand that failing in an impossible job is a verdict on the job, 
not the person. After all, those jobs only become impossible because managers 
are trying to both keep their staff happy, and push through the systemic 
changes required by national policymakers. The NHS needs to reform, and 
ministers have a democratic mandate to reshape the system; but currently, the 
best way to protect your career is to keep your head down, build support among 
your staff, and resist risky reforms.

The secret hospital manager's diary: 'There's a bed crisis and staff are off 
sick'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/17/the-secret-hospital-managers-diary-theres-a-bed-crisis-and-staff-are-off-sick>
With budgets in decline, demand rising, a growing recruitment crisis, and an 
endless series of new policies and organisational changes, it’s easy for 
organisations to become over-stretched and leaders to fall out of favour. If 
the NHS wants people to be ambitious in these very difficult jobs, it shouldn’t 
push those who run into trouble into temporary non-jobs – and then into an 
interims market where the NHS must rent their skills back at exorbitant cost.

National leaders need to be more open about the difficulty of succeeding in 
these hugely challenging jobs, and do everything they can to retain good 
managers who’ve taken a step back – offering them permanent employment in less 
high-profile roles. Then people would be more willing to take on the most 
difficult jobs in NHS management, and there would be less gaps in management 
grades. That, in turn, would cut the interims bill and improve continuity in 
organisations that can ill afford excessive staff costs and unstable leadership.

The current system evolved to help protect NHS staff while facilitating 
necessary leadership changes, but it’s a huge waste of talent as well as money. 
Politicians and the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> need to be more open, both about 
the flaws in redeployment processes, and about the pressures that brought us to 
this point. That would take courage; but if they’re ready to have that 
conversation, the benefits will be felt by patients and taxpayers as well as 
NHS managers and policymakers.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 