
About 240 people are suspected to have drowned this week in four separate 
incidents in the Mediterranean, raising the total annual death tollto an 
unprecedented 4,500 <http://data.unhcr.org/mediterranean/country.php?id=105>.

Deaths in the Mediterranean are now nearly 20% higher than last year’s total 
of 3,771, which was the previous annual record.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fin-one-week-240-feared-drowned-in-med%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb334f8594b1b46b691baa5258d60677a805d7355%2F0_24_3100_1860%2F3100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20one%20week%2C%20240%20feared%20drowned%20in%20Med&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fin-one-week-240-feared-drowned-in-med%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20one%20week%2C%20240%20feared%20drowned%20in%20Med&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fin-one-week-240-feared-drowned-in-med%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb334f8594b1b46b691baa5258d60677a805d7355%2F0_24_3100_1860%2F3100.jpg>
 A Libyan Red Crescent rescuer with one of the drowned migrants found on the 
shore of al-Maya last week. Photograph: STR/EPA 
About 130 asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/migration> are missing after a 
rubber boat capsized on Sunday night, while another 100 are thought to have 
drowned on Tuesday night in a separate incident, the UN refugee agency said. Up 
to 10 people died in two further tragedies in recent days, bringing the death 
toll this week to at least 240.

More than 2,200 people rescued from dinghies in Mediterranean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/05/over-2200-people-rescued-from-dinghies-in-mediterranean>
In the accident on Sunday 15 survivors were left in the water for 10 hours, 
clinging on to a piece of a capsized boat, before being rescued by an oil 
tanker. Nine are still in hospital, Iosto Ibba, a spokesman for UNHCR, said in 
a phone call.

Migration <https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration> between Turkey and 
Greece has lessened significantly since March, after Turkey agreed to re-admit 
people deported from Greece. But crossings between Libya and Italy continue 
unabated. More than 165,000 people have reached Italy so far this year from 
north Africa, and the final annual total is likely to surpass the previous 
record of 170,000.

Ibba said the continuing migration flows, and rising death tolls, showed why 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> needed to provide asylum 
seekers with more legal routes to safety.

“Without alternative ways to reach Europe, refugees will always try to reach 
safety in dangerous ways,” said Ibba. “That’s why it’s so important to expand 
legal pathways for refugees, including humanitarian admissions, family 
reunification programmes, private sponsorship, and student visas for refugees. 
At the same time it’s also important to support the countries of origin and 
transit, and to keep up search-and-rescue missions, without which the death 
toll would be even higher.”

Libya's people smugglers: inside the trade that sells refugees hopes of a 
better life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/24/libyas-people-smugglers-how-will-they-catch-us-theyll-soon-move-on>
European countries are attempting to stem migration flows by providing more 
aid to African countries that agree to re-admit deported asylum seekers. 
Additionally, navies from countries such as Britain are intercepting and 
destroying Libyan smugglers’ repurposed fishing trawlers after they enter 
international waters. But that strategy has failed because smugglers have 
instead packed their customers into disposable rubber boats – which can be 
operated by the refugees themselves, allowing the smugglers to remain inLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>.

The rising death toll in 2016 can be partly explained by the increasing use of 
the inflatable boats, which are even more dangerous than the wooden ships they 
replaced.

Syrians are no longer using Libya as a springboard to reach Europe. Instead, 
Libya is mainly used by people fleeing war and poverty in Nigeria and Sudan, or 
repression in Eritrea and Gambia. Others are migrant workers who tried to find 
jobs in Libya, but fled after the civil war there led to the collapse of law 
and order.

Many migrants are kept in slavery-like conditions by their Libyan employers, 
while others are tortured or extorted, sometimes by the authorities. About 70% 
say they faced some kind of exploitation in Libya, according to research by the 
International Organisation for Migration.
 