
Jon McGregor

First, a warning. If you read Tom Drury’s first novel The End of Vandalism 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/end-of-vandalism.html> (1994)you will become 
one of those people who try to foist it on others, your eyes shining with the 
unsettling delight of having lived through it. You will become one of those 
people who quote the best sentences, flicking through the pages to where you 
have them underlined. Listen to this description of the vet, you’ll say: “His 
face was narrow, his hair thick, his eyes widely spaced. He’d been working with 
horses a long time.” Or this account of someone working on a broken-down car: 
“She had got down on her hands and knees and looked, but this hadn’t fixed it.” 
Or the scene with Sheriff Dan Norman painting his own election signs late at 
night: “The signs were nothing fancy. They said things like DAN NORMAN IS ALL 
RIGHT.” I could go on. You probably will. But be careful. It’s not enough to 
tell people that this book is funny. There’s more to it than that.

Advocates of Drury’s work have a problem: his novels look very similar to many 
other quietly spoken realist novels of the rural American midwest, and there is 
no easy way of explaining why this one is so different. Grouse County, the 
setting forThe End of Vandalism and the follow-up novels Hunts in Dreams and 
Pacific, is a fictional location, but one we think we recognise: a flat land, 
with gravel roads, scattered farmhouses, and the occasional lake. Water towers. 
Ditches. Barns. This is unremarkable territory, which has been well mapped in 
American fiction of the last 150 years. And yet. There is something a little 
off-kilter. Drury has talked of drawing on his childhood memories – he grew up 
in Iowa – while setting these stories in the present day. So there is a kind of 
dislocation; a 1950s or 60s sensibility dropped into a 90s social landscape. 
“Family agriculture seemed to be over,” the narrator notes, “and had not been 
replaced by any other compelling idea.” These people seem adrift, uncertain of 
their place in the world while at the same time all too certain of their own 
identity. This is realism, then, but a realism jolted a little bit sideways.

There is no resorting to archetype, no easy use of shorthand; Drury's 
characters are, in particular ways, downright odd

And it’s those sideways jolts – a retiree who takes LSD to ease his aching 
neck, a man who dies in his attic “surrounded by the jars of his jar 
collection”, the time Dave Green flew to Hawaii by accident – that giveThe End 
of Vandalism the vivid come-aliveness that distinguishes it from the other 
quietly spoken realist rural novels for which it could easily be mistaken. 
There is a steady accumulation of unexpected detail, as, page by page, we meet 
new characters, and are given new information about them, and learn new and 
more complicated ways in which their lives intersect. There is no resorting to 
archetype, no easy use of shorthand; these people are, in very particular ways, 
downright odd. As all of us are. In the stories of our own lives things happen 
moment by moment, and we keep getting stranger, and this is the truth Drury is 
leading us to here.

The characters in this novel are in love with storytelling. They launch into 
wildly tangential stories with little prompting, usually knowing that they will 
be patiently heard or at the least not interrupted, and their tales have the 
air of being honed in the retelling. (As does Drury’s careful prose.) We learn, 
in passing, of Lester Ward, who ran the hatchery in Pinville and always wore a 
hat; we learn why the sheriff’s department has no more than a barbershop’s 
worth of space (it goes back to 1947, “when the sheriff was a popular fellow 
called Darwin Whaley”); we hear, very briefly, about the failed Mixer cult of 
Mixerton; and we are reminded of Helene Plum, who “reacted to almost any kind 
of stressful news by making casseroles, and had once, in Fairibault, Minnesota, 
attended the scene of a burned-out 18-wheeler with a pan of scalloped potatoes 
and ham”. (Notice the geographical detail there; an essential part of the 
story, to those hearing it told in Grouse County. Notice, too, the deliciously 
impeccable punctuation.)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftom-drury-small-town-america-the-end-of-vandalism-hunts-in-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446806794100%2Fc68a393b-8e89-45bd-8b77-999f7a5ee047-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20praise%20of%20Tom%20Drury's%20small-town%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftom-drury-small-town-america-the-end-of-vandalism-hunts-in-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20praise%20of%20Tom%20Drury%27s%20small-town%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftom-drury-small-town-america-the-end-of-vandalism-hunts-in-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446806794100%2Fc68a393b-8e89-45bd-8b77-999f7a5ee047-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Scattered farmhouses in The End of Vandalism. Photograph: Ryan McGinnis/Alamy 
These stories are the novel’s subject and its method. We move through the 
book, from scene to scene, character to character, location to location, by way 
of story: stories told, stories lived, stories hinted at. It’s been said, by 
people I wish could know better, thatThe End of Vandalism lacks a plot. And 
it’s true that, if you’re the kind of reader who can get to the end of a novel 
where 60 characters muddle their way through a great variety of incident and 
tangled interaction, and still complain that “there wasn’t much of a plot”, 
this may not be the book for you. But if you live in the real world, where life 
stalls and lurches forward with little real pattern and where the textures of 
our relationships accumulate moment by moment, then this is a novel you will 
recognise as being crammed with narrative. These are not just quirky rural 
anecdotes Drury is spinning out for us. These are intricate, interconnected 
stories of the big things that happen in people’s lives; the failures and 
successes of relationships, businesses and families, the making and thwarting 
of plans.

I don’t think it would be too much of a spoiler – this is a book about real 
life, after all – to say that while everyone talks about how outrageously, 
laugh-out-loud funny this book is, they sometimes forget to mention that there 
is a great sadness at its heart. When it comes, after much quiet detail and 
story and straight-faced laughter, it hits with the shock of a bird striking a 
window; a great blue heron, say, gliding into the picture window of a newly 
renovated frame house overlooking a peaceful and unruffled lake. There is 
tranquility, and gentle good humour, and then there is a crash and a bloody 
mess, and then there is tranquility again and things are changed. It’s a 
particular, lasting sadness, one from which there is no easy recovery or 
resolution; one which is in fact still vivid 17 years later, when we meet these 
same characters again in Drury’s fifth novel,Pacific. Forget all that stuff 
about the healing power of time, Drury tells us. Time won’t heal a thing. This 
book will hurt you, if you read it properly, and it will make you feel 
complicit, the way two happy homeowners feel complicit when they step outside 
to look at the still-warm body of a broken bird and think that if only the 
house hadn’t been built just there the bird would still be alive. (I’m 
wondering, here, if it’s any coincidence that the image I’ve chosen for a 
sudden shock is that of a bird striking a window, when just such an incident 
occurs in the book a few pages earlier. I suspect it’s a mark of Drury’s 
carefully worked sophistication that it is not.)

Complicit? Well, yes. If you read this book with something approaching the 
patience and empathy and open-heartedness that Drury has offered his 
characters, you will become invested in these lives. And this investment will 
be something you have created, as a reader, in collaboration with Drury. You 
will have given life to these people, only to let them experience pain. You 
will have allowed yourself to feel something like love for a group of 
complicated characters who do messy and regrettable and sometimes unlikable 
things. Charles “Tiny” Darling, to take one example, spends most of the book 
slouching towards trouble for what are often, in his telling, perfectly 
reasonable motives. And he does these things with such a good-natured 
acceptance of his own failures that we find ourselves rooting for his future 
well-being. “I don’t consider myself a loser,” he says, in what I take to be 
one of his and therefore the entire novel’s defining moments; “and yet, I have 
lost things.” How can you not love someone with such saint-like humility and 
self-knowledge?

This is the love that the best fiction teaches.

The best fiction teaches us to be better readers, and to be less tolerant of 
weaker or softer writing, andThe End of Vandalism does that. But the best 
fictions also make us better readers of the world, and of the people around us: 
more attuned to the stories lying about the place, more aware of 
particularities, more likely to see the humour that insists on arising, and the 
sadness.The End of Vandalism does all of that as well. Brace yourself. Don’t 
say I didn’t warn you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftom-drury-small-town-america-the-end-of-vandalism-hunts-in-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb986ab07587e7063a1fd5de664214b6b26df0d5%2F1790_3_1714_2573%2F1714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20praise%20of%20Tom%20Drury's%20small-town%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftom-drury-small-town-america-the-end-of-vandalism-hunts-in-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20praise%20of%20Tom%20Drury%27s%20small-town%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftom-drury-small-town-america-the-end-of-vandalism-hunts-in-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb986ab07587e7063a1fd5de664214b6b26df0d5%2F1790_3_1714_2573%2F1714.jpg>
 Tom Drury. Photograph: Baltel/Sipa/REX Shutterstock 
Yiyun Li 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/30/yiyun-li-my-generation-kinder-than-solitude-tiananmen-square>

Between the Russians and the Irish, you would think all the good hunting 
scenes in literature had been written, that the drama of the chase – Somerville 
and Ross’s horses,Tolstoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/leonikolaevichtolstoy>’s dogs, the handlers 
and the serfs and the rabbits and foxes – is a thing of the past. More pressing 
concerns occupy our lives: we hunt for jobs, for houses, for status on social 
media.

A little over halfway through Drury’s Hunts in Dreams 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/298327/> (2000), a 
fox sneaks past two characters in conversation.

As he spoke, a fox slipped from the trees and stood for a moment with one paw 
raised before trotting away along the lane, nose down, tail high. There wasn’t 
much to it. The fox jumped on to a stone wall, walked on it for a short 
distance then dropped off into a field. Lost in his calculations, the hunter 
did not see the fox, and Lyris couldn’t say a word.

What kind of writer offers such an anticlimactic hunting scene? Or perhaps a 
more pertinent question would be: what kind of hunter hunts so obliviously? One 
who hunts in dreams, we could cheat and say, but then what kind of dream is 
that?

Recently, I participated in a discussion in which a writer termed a book 
“necessary” because it was about here and now. I was reminded of the minor 
society hostess inWar and Peace 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-and-peace-20.html> who was fond of 
“mentioning our time as limited people generally like to do, supposing that 
they had discovered and appreciated the peculiarities of our time and that 
people’s qualities change with time”. In truth, all lives are indispensable 
lives. There are only well written and poorly written books. The obsession with 
the status of necessity – or worse, newsworthiness – seems the least democratic 
way of reading in a democratic country.

I wonder if this obsession explains why Drury is not yet a household name in 
US literature. His characters have little means to claim necessity, and seldom 
make the effort to become somebodies. The characters inHunts in Dreams live in 
the American midwest around the turn of the 21st century: they are farmers and 
townsfolk, petty thieves and arsonists, orphans and widows, amateur hunters and 
actors, incompetent governors and half-hearted protesters. They are also people 
who christen their house afterThomas Hardy 
<http://http://www.theguardian.com/books/thomashardy>’s cottage, puzzle over 
Montaigne’s words past midnight, reciteTennyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-tennyson> after lovemaking, and 
rehearse aChekhov <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chekhov> play in an 
abandoned reform school. There wasn’t much to it. These words could be taken to 
apply not only to the fox and its casual escape, but to all existences in 
Drury’s fiction. Yet there is much to it, even too much, as Drury makes clear 
in this entrancing novel.

How does one write about a nobody, or a collective of nobodies? A character 
can be enlarged into something beyond lifesize – there are enough tragedies to 
make that transformation possible. Or else she or he can be diminished. And a 
small nobody rarely fails to provide laughter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftom-drury-small-town-america-the-end-of-vandalism-hunts-in-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446807075264%2F58c4b2e7-4fb7-4bd7-b31c-14b89ae6ca79-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20praise%20of%20Tom%20Drury's%20small-town%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftom-drury-small-town-america-the-end-of-vandalism-hunts-in-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20praise%20of%20Tom%20Drury%27s%20small-town%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Ftom-drury-small-town-america-the-end-of-vandalism-hunts-in-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446807075264%2F58c4b2e7-4fb7-4bd7-b31c-14b89ae6ca79-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Vivid visions of the midwest … Kansas, Ellsworth County. Photograph: JC/John 
Coletti 
To write any character life-sized is a challenge; Drury’s rare achievement is 
to populate a novel with a group of life-sized nobodies. How does he do this? 
By abandoning both tragedy and comedy, in the recognition that life’s damages 
are often done and felt in the least dramatic ways, and absurdity results from 
people’s efforts to be honest or serious.

When the seven-year-old Micah accidentally locks himself outside his 
grandmother’s house in the middle of the night (after she has fed him brandy 
with the hope of making him sleep), he thinks of calling out for her.

Instead, he spoke her name in a low and confident voice that she might not 
have heard if she were standing beside him. “Grandma,” he said calmly and 
generously, as if bringing to her attention in the kindest way some obvious 
flaw in her logic. “Grandmother.” And what difference did it make? The night he 
was afraid of was inside the house, not outside.

When Joan, an actor-turned-proselyte-turned-mother, abandons her family, those 
left behind – father and children and a visiting uncle – sit down at dinner.

No one talked about Joan. It seemed unfair to her that in her absence 
everything was so normal. Of course, things could still go very wrong; it was 
only seven o’clock.

There are loaded guns in Drury's Dreams, but it's left to a wooden 
cloth-hanger or a child-sized knife to cause injuries

There are loaded guns in the novel, but it is left to a wooden cloth-hanger or 
a child-sized knife to cause injuries. The drumming hoofs and braying hounds of 
the 19th century have given way to a group of baffled hunters, whose main feat 
is to catch a young man in a fox trap and stop him from burning down a house.

Drury is a strange writer. Not eccentric, because he neither indulges nor 
exploits the innocence of his characters (and it’s from their innocence that 
humour is born); not experimental, because he does not prize his own 
strangeness above that of his characters’.

It is difficult to introduce Drury’s work. Perhaps the best method is to push 
the novels into the hands of a friend or a student and insist that she or he 
read it, which is what I’ve done over the years. My hope is to find others who 
appreciate his writing, who share the belief that we are all necessary – and 
that this is what needs a closer look, in life and in literature.

• Tom Drury’s third Grouse County novel, Pacific, is out this month from Old 
Street (RRP £12). To order a copy for £9.60, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/298328/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 