
One afternoon in late August, we joined others assembling with rugs, chairs 
and picnics on the spreading lawns in front of the great house atMinterne Magna 
<http://www.minterne.co.uk/mjs/index.php> to see a dramatisation of The 
Woodlanders <http://hardyonline.org/the-woodlanders/>, a story that Thomas 
Hardy had set in this very part of Dorset.

Prompted by the play, we went back a week or two later to the Cerne valley, to 
see some of the villages Hardy had in mind when he created his settings, and 
where his people got their living from the crafts of growing and tending apple 
trees, making cider, sawing timber and fashioning spars for thatching.

In a preface dated 1912, Hardy lamented the fact that such traditional 
woodlanders' trades were then declining owing to the increasing use of metals 
and decreasing use of thatch. But, as you pass through the woodlands today, 
there are neat piles of sawn logs at the roadside and thatched roofs in the 
villages. Not far away, atPiddletrenthide 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piddletrenthide>, I talked with a man who managed 
a long-established hazel coppice and still pursues, with inherited skills, the 
same crafts as some of Hardy's characters.

We found only one cider orchard, and that a very small one, at Up Cerne. No 
longer a working village, this is a tiny collection of thatched cottages in 
banded flint, familiar building material in the Dorset and Wiltshire chalkland. 
Up Cerne is hidden in a valley beneath rounded hills, where a clear stream 
leads to lakes in the grounds of the manor and then feeds the river Cerne,which 
wanders on through Cerne AbbasÂ to join the Dorset Frome at Dorchester 
<http://www.dorsetforyou.com/393033>.

We knew Cerne Abbas and the giant on the hillside but it was good to find 
Nether Cerne, tucked away witha little flint church 
<http://www.visitchurches.org.uk/Ourchurches/Completelistofchurches/All-Saints-Church-Nether-Cerne-Dorset/>
 on a grassy space close to the old manor house and the river flowing fast a 
few yards away.
 