
More than 30 members of Congress will boycott Donald Trump’s inauguration on 
Friday, amid escalating outrage overalleged connections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/mike-pence-trump-campaign-russia>
 between the president-elect’s team and Russia and disparaging remarks about
civil rights veteran John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-john-lewis-mlk-day-civil-rights>
.

Related: Jared Kushner has Trump’s trust but lacks experience for Middle East 
role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/jared-kushner-has-trumps-trust-but-lacks-experience-for-middle-east-role>

 As the US marked its national holiday honoring Martin Luther King Jr on 
Monday, the number of Democrats pledging to shun Friday’s ceremony and 
celebrationsrose 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2017/01/16/more-than-30-democratic-lawmakers-now-skipping-trumps-inauguration/?utm_term=.b445715ff79f>
. Keith Ellison, the first Muslim elected to Congress and a candidate for chair 
of the Democratic National Committee,joined them 
<https://twitter.com/keithellison/status/821107264853602306>. Their 
extraordinary step was praised by progressive leaders.

A little before 1pm, however, Martin Luther King III, the oldest child of 
Martin Luther King <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> Jr, 
arrived at Trump Tower in New York to meet the president-elect.

Around 50 minutes later, King emerged from the building’s elevators and spoke 
to reporters. Asked why he had met Trump, who did not talk to the press but was 
seen shaking his guest’s hand, he said it was a constructive meeting and added: 
“We have got to move forward.”

King and William Wachtel, a New York lawyer, said they spoke to Trump about 
voter participation and how to carry forward King’s father’s legacy by making 
it “easier for everyone to vote”. “President-elect Trump has committed to 
working with us,” Wachtel said.

In 2013, a supreme court decision struck down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/jun/25/supreme-court-voting-rights-act-obama>
 key elements of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, a central achievement of the civil 
rights movement designed to protect minority voters.

“This president may well” be in adherence with the spirit of the Voting Rights 
Act “and once again make it easy for all Americans to vote”, Wachtel said.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
John Lewis at Martin Luther King event: ‘Never, ever hate’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/16/john-lewis-martin-luther-king-event-never-ever-hate-video>
Asked about Lewis, King said: “Things get said on both sides in the heat of 
emotion. And at some point in this nation we’ve got to move forward.” He added 
that he would “continue to evaluate” Trump’s commitment to representing all 
Americans.

“I believe we have to consistently engage with pressure, public pressure,” 
King said. “It doesn’t happen automatically, my father and his team understood 
that, did that.

“I think my father would be very concerned about the 50 to 60 million people 
living in poverty. It’s insanity that we have poor people in this nation, it’s 
unacceptable. We need to be talking about how to clothe people, how do we feed 
people.”


One civil rights veteran told the Guardian she supported the Trump-King 
meeting but also praised members of Congress who plan to boycott the 
inauguration.


“Those members of Congress feel that not attending the inauguration is making 
a statement that they are against the politics put forth byDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>,” Doris Crenshaw, who 
campaigned with Rosa Parks and met Martin Luther King Jr before his 
assassination in 1968, told the Guardian.

She called on Trump to call Lewis and “have a conversation”.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Civil rights hero John Lewis challenges legitimacy of Donald Trump’s election 
win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/15/civil-rights-hero-john-lewis-challenges-legitimacy-trumps-election-win-video>
Cornell William Brooks, president of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), hasdemanded  
<https://twitter.com/CornellWBrooks/status/820879895446388739>that Trump 
apologize to Lewis, the long-time Georgia congressman who had his skull broken 
by the police during the pivotal Selma to Montgomery march of 1965.

Lewis said last week he would not attend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/democrats-inauguration-boycott-john-lewis-trump>
 the inauguration and did not regard Trump as a legitimate president, following 
intelligence reports of Russian interference in the election.

Trump launched a fierce counterattack on Twitter in which he accused 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/820251730407473153?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 Lewis of being “all talk 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/820255947956383744?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
” and warned him to focus on his district which was “crime infested”.

Related: Donald Trump starts MLK weekend by attacking civil rights hero John 
Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-john-lewis-mlk-day-civil-rights>

On Monday in Miami, Lewis spoke at a breakfast to celebrate the MLK holiday. 
He did not mention Trump but invoked King’s philosophy of non-violence in a 
hinted rebuke at the president-elect’s vitriolic style.

“You must never, ever hate,” he said. “Stand up, speak up, when you see 
something that is not right and not fair and not just, you have a moral 
obligation to do something and say something.”

Lewis spoke of his childhood, of trying out his voice as a preacher while 
tending chickens at his family farm.

“The chickens listened better than some of my fellow members in Congress 
listen to me now,” he said, to laugher. He also told of a member of the Ku Klux 
Klan who once beat him up later coming to his office on Capitol Hill, where he 
has been a congressman since 1987, to apologize and ask for forgiveness.

Lewis added that he did now know where his career – or America – would be 
without Martin Luther King Jr. “He freed us, he liberated us,” he said.
 The Martin Luther King Jr memorial in Washington DC, seen the morning of MLK 
Day on 16 January. Photograph: UPI / Barcroft Images 
Martin Luther King III was ushered into Trump Tower by the president-elect’s 
surrogate and former reality TV participantOmarosa Manigault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/trump-the-apprentice-president-elect-reality-tv>
. The agenda for the meeting was not publicised beforehand.

“I think it’s good that he meets Trump,” said Crenshaw, who was vice-president 
of the NAACP youth council during the civil rights years.

“You cannot operate with a ‘no talk’ policy: someone has to get in there and 
talk to Donald Trump and I think King should be congratulated for his efforts. 
It’s important to address poverty and education problems that we have 
nationwide.”

Some of the members of Congress boycotting the inauguration, such as Luis 
Gutierrez of Illinois, Nydia Velazquez of New York and Pramila Jayapal of 
Washington, have said they will attend the Women’s March on Washington on 
Saturday instead.

The Women’s March is expected to attract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/womens-march-on-washington-protest-size-donald-trump>
 hundreds of thousands rallying for progressive causes, from women’s and racial 
equality to reproductive rights, the environment and the minimum wage.

Kaylin Whittingham, president of the Association of Black Women Attorneys, a 
partner organization of the march, said those marching instead of going to the 
inauguration were showing Trump the power of action over words.

Related: Women's March on Washington set to be one of America's biggest 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/womens-march-on-washington-protest-size-donald-trump>

“If you go to the inauguration and you do not go to the march it looks like 
you are supporting whatever Donald Trump stands for,” she said. “But if you go 
to the march you are lending your voice and being part of this movement.”

Whittingham said Trump had shown great disrespect to Lewis. “John Lewis has 
been in action since Trump was a little boy,” she said.

Trump’s remarks about Lewis brought anger among congressional opponents to 
boiling point. Some planning to boycott the inauguration followed Lewis in 
citing Trump’s alleged links with Russia, which are the subject of 
controversial reports ranging frombusiness dealings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/donald-trump-russia-vladimir-putin-us-election-hack>
 to whether Russian intelligence hascompromising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-report-opposition-research-john-mccain>
 material on him.

Trump has said he thinks Russia was behind hacks against Democratic party 
bodies, but he has also deepened apotentially damaging rift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/john-brennan-trump-nazi-germany-russia>
 with the intelligence agencies.

Congressman Mark DeSaulnier of California said in a video statement 
<https://twitter.com/RepDeSaulnier/status/820095627983982593> he would not 
attend the inauguration because he believes Trump as president will be in 
violation of the constitution, because of conflicts of interest with his 
business empire.
 