
One of Donald Trump’s key campaign allies has warned Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> countries that there will be “a 
consequence” for them if they do not contribute more towards the alliance.

The comments by Carl Paladino, who ran the president-elect’s campaign in New 
York state, came as Anders Fogh Rasmussen, the former Nato secretary general, 
said that if the US pulled back from protecting Europe thenRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> would certainly take advantage.

“If the United States were to withdraw from Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> then, without any doubt, Russia 
would advance and exercise more assertive behaviour in the east,” Rasmussen 
told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “That would weaken European security.”

Trump’s sometimes dismissive attitude during the election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/donald-trump-america-automatically-nato-allies-under-attack>
 towards Nato has prompted alarm in Europe. Also speaking on Today, Paladino 
argued that people should not believe everything Trump said on the campaign 
trail, but stressed the president-elect was serious about changing Nato.

Asked what would happen if European Nato nations did not contribute more to 
the alliance’s budget, Paladino said: “I don’t think what happens has been 
clearly defined.”

He continued: “I think you describe correctly the offence which is, if you 
don’t pick up your part, as was agreed to many years ago, then there’s going to 
be a consequence.

As global axis of power shifts, a cold wind blows through the Baltic states
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/12/lithuania-donald-trump-nato-putin-fears>
“We don’t know what that consequence will be, but I think most Americans are 
in favour of that. They think everybody should pay their fair share. There’s no 
reason why the United States of America has to put up with the nonsense of 
caring for the defence and the security of a country that doesn’t pick up its 
fair share.”

Asked if this meant a reduction in Nato’s status or role, Paladino said: “I 
don’t think we’re changing the status of Nato, we’re enforcing the agreement as 
it was originally drawn out. Enforcing the agreement is the intent.

“It’s not to scare people. But they should, just as the United States has 
accommodation for its defence budget, these other countries are going to have 
to start making accommodation themselves. In other words, times are changing.”

Paladino – who at one point in the interview appeared to accuse Barack Obama 
of deliberately not intervening to help Syrians in their own country so as to 
“build the voting base of the Democratic party for the future by bringing in 
refugees” – said Trump should be judged by his actions after the election.

“He’s my friend and I’ll tell you – the guy on the campaign trail is not the 
guy you’ve seen in the past five or six days. It’s not the guy who’s going to 
be running this country,” he said.

“The guy who’s going to be running the country has an even temperament. He’s 
going to keep his promises, he’s going to readjust a lot of things that are out 
of sync in the world, and he’s going to show America can lead the world.”

Rasmussen, the former Danish prime minister who led Nato from 2009 to 2014, 
said there were worries about Trump’s comments.

“If Mr Trump were to carry out his campaign statement then it would definitely 
weaken Nato,” Rasmussen said.

“But, as you indicated, he has actually made some more pragmatic statements 
after his election. In order to ensure clarity, a Nato summit should be called 
very soon, to send a very clear signal to friends and foes alike that America’s 
commitment to defending all allies is unchanged.”


On European nations paying more, Rasmussen said the Nato summit two years ago 
committed all members to spend at least 2% of their GDP on defence, something 
that was being worked towards.

“In that respect I actually agree with not only Mr Trump but most Americans 
that the Europeans should pay more,” he said.

At the weekend, Nato’s current secretary general warned Trump: “Going it alone 
is not an option, either for Europe or for the United States.”

Writing in the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/12/us-must-not-abandon-nato-europe-go-alone-jens-stoltenberg>
, Jens Stoltenberg said the west faces its greatest security challenge in a 
generation.
 