
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> called Evan 
McMullin the “puppet” of a “loser” on Saturday, prompting the third-party 
candidate who threatens to beat Trump in Utah to retort that the Republican 
nominee was “deeply corrupt”.

Kellyanne Conway: Trump fan chanting ‘Jew-S-A’ behaved in ‘deplorable’ way
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/donald-trump-rally-jew-s-a-media-kellyanne-conway>
McMullin launched his quixotic presidential campaign in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/08/republican-evan-mcmullin-presidential-run-trump>
, presenting himself as analternative for conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/evan-mcmullin-independent-presidential-candidate-trump>
 who do not want to vote for Trump. A Mormon and former counter-terror 
operative with the CIA, McMullin has shot into competition in his native Utah.

He is only a few points behind Trump 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/ut/utah_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein_vs_mcmullin-6154.html>
 in the deeply religious state, where many Mormons have rejected the 
businessman in the wake ofaccusations of harassment and sexual assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/list-of-donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations>
.

In an interview with Fox News on Saturday night, Trump directed his ire toward 
McMullin, whom he had previously ignored. “He takes votes away from me, this 
man who I never heard of,” he said.

His running mate, Mike Pence <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence>, 
said the same: “Nobody ever heard of him.”

“He’s going from coffee shop to coffee shop,” Trump continued, apparently 
alluding to local campaign stops. “It’s a full-time thing. He can’t do 
anything. But he hurts us inUtah <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/utah>.”

Trump then blamed Bill Kristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2009/apr/24/william-kristol-bradley-prize-iraq>
, aconservative pundit <http://www.weeklystandard.com/author/william-kristol> 
with whom the businessman has feuded for more than a year, for bringing a 
potential spoiler into the race.

“He’s a loser,” he said. “He’s called me wrong. He’s called everything wrong. 
He’s called the wars wrong. Everything he does is wrong. He gets his puppet to 
go and run in Utah. The guy takes votes away from me.”

Trump argued that McMullin could deliver a national victory to Hillary 
Clinton, costing Republicans the ability to approve supreme court nominees – 
the issue of most concern to many wavering conservatives.

“That means we’re probably going to lose the supreme court of the United 
States for 60 years,” he said. “By that time it won’t matter, because we won’t 
have a country left.”

McMullin replied on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Evan_McMullin/status/792558096862371843>, saying: “You’ve 
never heard of me because while you were harassing women at beauty pageants, I 
was fighting terrorists abroad.

“You’re an authoritarian, life-long liberal who disrespects life, liberty 
[and] equality,” he continued. “We can’t trust you on justices. You think 
you’re entitled to Utahns’ and other Americans’ votes. We’re earning them.

“We will not sit by while two corrupt, self-serving, big government liberals 
like you and Clinton destroy our country.”

On Sunday, McMullin continued to attack. 

“This is a man who has unhealthy relationships and admiration for dictators 
overseas,” he told NBC’s Meet the Press. “I believe that he has some of the 
same ideas about leadership or domination that they do. I think he’s dishonest 
with the American people.

“Where are his tax returns? We don’t know much about Donald Trump.”

Clinton and Trump camps duel over FBI director's late email revelation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-fbi-director-comey-emails>
He went on to call Trump “unethical”, “dangerous to our country” and “somebody 
who doesn’t understand the constitution”.

McMullin acknowledged that he had no path to the 270 electoral college votes 
necessary to win the presidency, and instead said he hoped for the unlikely 
scenario of stopping the major party nominees reaching that target, which would 
send the election to the House of Representatives.

He did not answer questions about whether he felt comfortable knowing his 
success in Utah could help Clinton win the election and said he remained “very 
skeptical” that the Republican party could be reformed after its marriage to 
Trump.

He also said that he has received no financial support from Mitt Romney, the 
party’s 2012 nominee and a fellow Mormon who has emphatically denounced Trump.

“We would welcome it,” McMullin said. “Unfortunately, it’s not the case.”
 