
India’s training session in Perth on Wednesday took an unexpected turn when 
their one-day vice-captain,Virat Kohli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli> verbally confronted a 
journalist in a case of mistaken identity.

Kohli stunned onlookers when he walked over to and shouted at the Hindustan 
Times journalist Jasvinder Sidhu without apparent provocation. Reports 
suggested Kohli had incorrectly identified the writer as another journalist who 
had written about his private life.

An India spokesman sought to play down the “misunderstanding” and insisted the 
26-year-old batsman had offered his apologies directly to the journalist. 
“There was a misunderstanding and no abusive language was used, Virat has 
spoken to the concerned gentlemen immediately and [the] matter ends.”

However Sidhu, writing about the encounter in the Hindustan Times 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/cricket-world-cup-2015/worldcup2015-dontmiss/first-person-account-when-virat-kohli-hurled-a-barrage-of-abuses-at-ht-journalist/article1-1322686.aspx>
, denied receiving a direct apology, and said Kohli had sent another 
journalist, Sumit Ghosh, to say sorry on his behalf.

“Sumit, an old friend of mine, walked toward me and said: ‘Sidhu, he has 
apologised to you for his behaviour. He mistook you for a reporter from another 
English daily … It was mistaken identity’.

“However, I told Sumit that such behaviour doesn’t behove of an international 
player, even if it was not directed at me. I told Sumit: ‘Go and tell him that 
he is an international player and he should learn how to behave. How can he 
abuse and intimidate someone?’”

Sidhu, who is understood to have made a formal complaint to the ICC, added: “I 
would like to reiterate that Kohli did not apologise to me directly.”

Kohli is set to take over as India’s new Test captain following Mahendra Singh 
Dhoni’s decision to step down from the post after the series defeat to 
Australia in January.

India have won their three games at the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/indiacricketteam> to sit top of Pool B and 
will play West Indies at the Waca on Friday.
 