
Mahendra Singh Dhoni, India’s limited-overs captain, was the first pick by the 
new Pune franchise while Rajkot chose the batsman Suresh Raina at the Indian 
Premier League draft for the next two seasons on Tuesday.

The western Indian cities of Pune and Rajkot were named as home to two new 
franchises for the next two years, filling the void leftby the two-year 
suspensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/14/chennai-super-kings-rajasthan-royals-ipl-indian-supreme-court-panel-proposes-two-year-ban>
 on the Chennai and Rajasthan franchises following an illegal betting scandal.

T20 cricket looks old hat: get ready for the Ram Slam and the Super Smash | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/11/t20-cricket-ram-slam-super-smash>
Players from the two suspended franchises were made available in the draft, 
allowing the two teams to pick five players each.

New Rising, a consortium led by Sanjiv Goenka, chairman of the RP-Sanjiv 
Goenka Group, bagged the Pune team while mobile manufacturers Intex made a 
successful bid for Rajkot in a reverse bidding process.

Pune, having made the most successful bid, got the first pick and went for the 
34-year-old Dhoni, who led Chennai in all eight previous seasons of theIPL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl>.

The Australia captain, Steve Smith, South Africa’s Faf du Plessis and the India
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> batsman Ajinkya Rahane and the 
off-spinner Ravichandran Ashwin were the other players selected by Pune.

The New Zealand captain Brendon McCullum will play for Rajkot, who also added 
the Australia all-rounder James Faulkner, the former West Indies captain Dwayne 
Bravo and India’s spin-bowling all-rounder Ravindra Jadeja.

Both franchises will lose 390m rupees (£3.85m) from their total purse of 660m 
for next year’s IPL auctions in which the remaining players from the suspended 
team will be added to the pool.

The Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> league, with a 
£2.3bn estimated brand value and boasting Bollywood stars and major 
conglomerates as investors, has been dogged by corruption allegations for years.

In July, a panel set up by India’s top court recommended suspending the 
franchise owners of the two teams following an illegal betting and spot-fixing 
scandal surrounding the IPL, the ninth edition of which will be played from 9 
April to 29 May.
 