
Lokesh Rahul hit his maiden century, Virat Kohli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli> his fourth of the series but 
Australia’s Shane Watson hit back with two wickets in as many balls to leave 
India on 342 for five after the third day of the fourth test on Thursday.

Kohli, who became the first player to score centuries in his first three 
innings as test captain, was still at the crease on 140 when stumps were drawn 
after a hot, sunny day packed with incident at the SydneyCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Ground.

India, already 2-0 down in the four-match series, had resumed on 71-1 in reply 
to Australia’s 572-7 declared and restored a great deal of pride as well as 
reducing the deficit to 230 runs. Rahul had more to prove than most after his 
torrid introduction to test cricket in Melbourne last week, where he scored 
four runs in two innings.

The 22-year-old rode his luck and was forced to dive bat-less into the Sydney 
dirt to prevent being run out soon after Rohit Sharma (53) had become the only 
batsman to fall in the opening session. He was perhaps even more fortunate to 
escape with his wicket just before lunch when, on 46, he ballooned the ball 
into the air but Steve Smith failed to hold the catch.

The Australian captain, who later also dropped Kohli on 59 at second slip, 
made it clear he believed the wire that holds the overhead TV camera – 
Spidercam – in placehad prevented him from dismissing Rahul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/08/australia-captain-steve-smith-spidercam-interference>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F08%2Fsteve-smith-cricket-test-india-dropped-catch-spidercam-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420698639149%2FSteve-Smith-Test-cricket-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Smith%20fuming%20after%20Spidercam%20blamed%20for%20missed%20catch%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F08%2Fsteve-smith-cricket-test-india-dropped-catch-spidercam-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Smith%20fuming%20after%20Spidercam%20blamed%20for%20missed%20catch%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F08%2Fsteve-smith-cricket-test-india-dropped-catch-spidercam-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420698639149%2FSteve-Smith-Test-cricket-001.jpg>
 Steve Smith fumes after Spidercam blamed for dropped catch. 
Rahul and Kohli batted cautiously through the second session in a partnership 
of 141, the opener reaching the century mark with his 11th four just before tea 
having faced 253 balls. He was gone soon after the break for 110 when he skied 
another pull shot to be caught and bowled by paceman Mitchell Starc but his 
captain soon joined him as a Sydney centurion with a drive down the ground for 
two runs.

Australia captain Steve Smith fumes at Spidercam interference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/08/australia-captain-steve-smith-spidercam-interference>
Kohli, who scored a century in each innings in Adelaide and another in 
Melbourne, joined English batsmen of the 1920s Wally Hammond and Herbert 
Sutcliffe as the only visiting players to have scored four centuries in a 
series in Australia.

Indian cricket fans have become used to batting collapses over the last year, 
however, and all rounder Watson roused the crowd by dismissing Ajinkya Rahane 
(13) and Suresh Raina in consecutive balls. Wriddhiman Saha held firm to 
prevent Watson’s hat-trick and will resume with Kohli unbeaten on 14 on Friday.
 