
England

Alastair Cook (369 runs at 37)

For such a consummate player of spin, he got out too often to the wrong shots, 
the bat coming cross the ball instead of meeting it straight down its path. 
Half of his dismissals were LBW or bowled, modes that are creeping into his 
game as he ages. Perhaps, turning 32 on Christmas Day, his eyes might be tiring 
a little, tiny delays in picking up line and length leading to problems with 
foot movement and balance – and slip catching. His captaincy came in for much 
criticism and he could have attacked more at times (leg slip should have been 
posted for every delivery by a spinner) and he was often curiously reluctant to 
bowl Ben Stokes, but I’d suggest that any captain in the world, given this 
attack, would have gone down 4-0, so captaincy hardly mattered in the end.

Haseeb Hameed (219 runs at 44)

He took on one of the hardest jobs in cricket and made it look, well, if not 
easy, then certainly natural, with technique, attitude and temperament that 
appears too good to be true in a teenager. He can expect plenty of short stuff 
in the future, but has tenacity to burn and a dedication to improvement that 
will surely produce a method that works for him. There will be struggles to 
come, but he can take enormous confidence from a wonderful start to his Test 
career. It was also splendid to see him embrace touring, watching on from the 
stands with his family, a smile never far from his face.

Keaton Jennings (167 runs at 42; 5-1-20-0 average n/a, economy 4.0)

He cashed in with a century after being dropped on 0 in his first knock and 
backed that up by top-scoring in two of his first four innings in Test cricket. 
Like most left-handers, he fancies it outside off stump and will need to learn 
to rein in that instinct for half an hour or so until the feet are moving 
properly and head is well across towards the ball. He’ll probably find himself 
at No3 in the immediate future and might want to take a leaf from India’s No3 
in terms of adding strike rotating singles and a willingness to hit the bad 
ball very hard to his game. But a few scoreboards showing England 145-1 at Tea 
on the first day of a Test would be very welcome indeed.

Captaincy question hangs over Alastair Cook with England stagnating | Ali 
Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/21/alastair-cook-england-captaincy-future>
Ben Duckett (18 runs at 6)

Many of us wondered if he could survive with the game he showed in Bangladesh 
and we didn’t have to wait long for the answer. Should definitely continue to 
play T20Is and probably ODIs too, but has to find a way to get into Division 
One of the County Championship and then bat through at least two sessions 
against canny red ball operators. A few long sessions on the bowling machine 
with the single objective of playing every ball under his eyes would be a good 
place to start the long road back to the Test XI.

Joe Root (491 runs at 49; 16-2-57-2 average 28.5, economy 3.6)

Got in and got on with it as usual and looked the class of the field when 
England were batting. Scores of 53, 78, 77 and 88 (and even his series-opening 
124) can hardly be deemed failures, but, in India, that means (more often than 
not) that another player has to better that score if the Test is to be won. The 
daddy hundreds really count on pitches like these and he couldn’t go on to post 
any. OK, that’s harsh criticism, but descriptions such as “England’s finest 
post-war batsman” have been bandied around about him, so the standards to which 
he is held are sky high – maybe unfairly so.

Moeen Ali (381 runs at 42; 188.1-21-649-10 average 64.9, economy 3.4)

What a curio he is! He can bat like a dream, a David Gower resurrected, and 
then play a shot that would embarrass even him (and Gower knew a bit about 
getting out to crazy, lazy strokes). His bowling can go the same way – the 
jaffa suddenly turning up between the half volleys and long hops. He copped 
some unfair stick about some spells though, because the batsmen to whom he was 
bowling were pretty good and would simply make length (and sometimes line) 
their decision with positive footwork allied to extreme confidence. The sad 
fact remains that it seems unlikely that England will take wickets quickly 
enough on turning pitches or control runs on flat tracks if Moeen is expected 
to deliver 15 overs or so per day. So, is his batting enough to justify a role 
as a change bowler only? For such a wonderful player to watch and such a 
dedicated team man, one has to hope that it is.

Jonny Bairstow (352 runs at 44; 11 catches, 2 stumpings)

Keeping wicket and batting with the expectation of scoring the runs of a 
specialist is a tough ask in India with so much standing up to spinners in heat 
and humidity. It is a testament to his fitness that, at the end of a long year 
of unprecedented success, he seldom looked tired (though he must have felt it). 
The keeping, for all the stats piling up, is still scrappy and there are too 
many relatively straightforward chances missed and too few hard chances taken. 
4-0 is a time for home truths to be spoken and “you’re our Five Jonny, but Jos 
is getting the gloves and doing Seven” might have to be said if the team is to 
progress.

Ben Stokes (345 runs at 38; 106.2-16-357-8 average 44.6, economy 3.4)

He scored 227 of his 345 runs in his first three innings and was underbowled 
by Cook throughout the series, especially when England needed to start sessions 
with a bang. Given his workload, he must have a few aches and pains but was he 
carrying something more restricting? More than any other England player, he 
needs his workload managed with sympathy through rotation, not through extended 
periods in the covers – strangely, he was often not found in the slips, despite 
being England’s best man in the cordon since Ian Botham.

So many mistakes on England’s tour to India it is hard knowing where to start 
| Vic Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/vic-marks-england-cricket-tour-to-india-and-bangladesh-review>
Jos Buttler (154 runs at 38.5)

He looked a far better batsman than when he last played Test cricket, the feet 
less anchored, the defensive game more rounded. Surely this huge talent cannot 
be confined to white ball cricket only, but if he is to be a game-changer at 
No7 (his most natural position) then he pretty much has to take the gloves. 
Will that slay the golden goose that has been Jonny Bairstow in 2016? It’s a 
risk worth taking.

Liam Dawson (66 runs at 66; 43-4-129-2 average 64.5, economy 3.0)

Liam Dawson showed great sangfroid in dropping straight into a Test team and 
batting as if it were midsummer at the Rose Bowl with Hampshire 270-4, 
particularly after a second ball ear-ringer on the helmet. He bowled with 
discipline too, earning more respect from India’s batsmen than England’s other 
spin options. But there’s a reason why David Hussey never played a Test for 
Australia, and Dawson is probably his inferior in batting, bowling and fielding.

Chris Woakes (70 runs at 14; 77-16-244-3 average 81.3, economy 3.2)

The quicker he bowled, the quicker the ball arrived in the middle of the home 
team bats. After a golden run of form, he had neither the pace nor the movement 
to trouble the Indian batsmen on home tracks – hardly the first to learn that 
harsh lesson. He has enough credit in the bank to stay a crucial member of 
England’s fast bowling squad, from whom three or four will be chosen for each 
Test.

Adil Rashid (113 runs at 14; 232.2-19-861-23 average 37.4, economy 3.7)

Adil Rashid suffers a bit for the profligacy of his team-mates in that his 
(standard issue leg spinner) boundaries look worse because there are fours and 
sixes coming at the other end too. He took plenty of wickets (and not just 
tailenders) with sharp spun leg breaks and a mystifyingly underused, largely 
unpicked googly, but too often I found myself saying, “Well, I could have hit 
that for four,” the bad balls being really bad balls. Whether England can get 
Moeen and Rashid in the same XI outside the subcontinent is a tricky one to 
call – like setting a field for a long hop, it feels like a decision rooted in 
distrust, especially if Joe Root can fiddle a few overs when required. And, 
just when his batting gifts looked completely squandered in a series in which 
late middle order runs were crucial, he made a lovely 60 in Chennai to remind 
us what we’d been missing.

Zafar Ansari (36 runs at 12; 43-3-163-3 average 54, economy 3.8)

For Surrey, he has played sometimes as a top order batsman and sometimes as a 
specialist spinner. Unfortunately, in his two matches in this series, he bowled 
like a top order batsman and batted like a specialist spinner.

Stuart Broad (44 runs at 11; 89-24-248-8 average 31.0, economy 2.8)

England missed his nous and cutters in the two Tests he sat out injured and 
his figures do not do him justice in the three he played, he can take solace 
from the thought that he was the only England bowler not comprehensively 
outbowled by his opposite number. Seemingly out of the picture for white ball 
cricket, is there a chance that he might take the captaincy of the Test XI? It 
wouldn’t harm the gate receipts Down Under next winter for sure.

Gareth Batty (1 run at 1; 19.2-0-65-0 average n/a, economy 3.4)

Gareth Batty is not the new Shaun Udal after all. He did not embarrass himself 
by any means, but his captain didn’t seem to want to throw him the ball – as if 
he were a man who still hasn’t paid his subs in July.

Jake Ball (45 runs at 11; 41-7-140-1 average 140, economy 3.4)

It was a tough gig for the wholehearted trier from Notts, the pitches not 
really suiting his “hit the deck” style, although he did try a few cutters 
(that we could pick on the TV screens). Ravi Bopara – eight inches shorter, 30 
clicks slower, 10 times as cunning – might have been a better option. Hells 
bells, if Gareth Batty got a game, why not Darren Stevens!

James Anderson (20 runs at 5; 79-17-214-4 average 53.5, economy 2.7)

He was given plenty of respect from the Indian batsmen, but seldom got the 
ball to swing conventionally or reverse and he didn’t seam it much either. His 
12 wickets in four Tests in 2012 now feels a long time ago.

India
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fengland-india-test-series-haseeb-hameed-alastair-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca4d40b4979513da94bf9f6015415b1feaad62ae%2F0_6_2543_1526%2F2543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%204-0%20England%3A%20report%20cards%20for%20every%20player%20involved%20in%20the%20Test%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fengland-india-test-series-haseeb-hameed-alastair-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%204-0%20England%3A%20report%20cards%20for%20every%20player%20involved%20in%20the%20Test%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fengland-india-test-series-haseeb-hameed-alastair-cook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca4d40b4979513da94bf9f6015415b1feaad62ae%2F0_6_2543_1526%2F2543.jpg>
 India captain Virat Kohli celebrates after his team’s victory in the fifth and 
final Test. Photograph: Arun Sankar/AFP 
Murali Vijay (357 runs at 45)

After England opened the series with 537, he made 124 in over eight hours, a 
crucial ship-steadying innings. He looked in good nick throughout, but cashed 
in only once more, in Mumbai. His tactic of attacking the first ball of a 
spinner’s over worked well, his straight sixes particularly sweetly hit.

Gautam Gambhir (29 runs at 15)

Already feels like part of a past generation of Indian batsman – a fine 
servant whose time has almost certainly gone.

KL Rahul (233 runs at 58)

KL Rahul was in and out of the XI with injury but, once he found his feet at 
Chennai, he produced one of the daddy hundreds that proved the difference 
between the sides. He was desperately disappointed to miss out on a double 
century after a nervous loss of concentration, but it was the 199 runs scored 
that mattered, rather than the one that got away.

Parthiv Patel (195 runs at 65; 11 catches 2 stumpings)

Back in the team after a long absence, he seized his chance well, batting with 
fluency especially at the top of the order against the seamers. His glovework 
was scrappy at times (what keeper in world cricket isn’t these days?) but it 
was adequate for what was required. Very much lived up to his captain’s desire 
for every player to put the team first by opening in Chennai in place of the 
injured Vijay immediately after keeping for 157 overs. With his place on the 
line, that’s an impressive show of attitude and confidence.

Cheteshwar Pujara (401 runs at 50)

A more aggressive batsmen this time round than in previous showings against 
England, Cheteshwar Pujara hit centuries in the first two Tests, proving the 
value of his orthodox defensive technique now allied to more ambitious 
strokeplay. After a period out of the side – and with young guns establishing 
their credentials – Pujara 2.0 has turned up at exactly the right time to lock 
down the No3 slot for the foreseeable future.

Virat Kohli (655 runs at 109)

Compelling in every element of his game, he made big runs with the bat (the 
ball pummelling a tattoo on the middle of his bat throughout the series) and 
captained his side with tremendous energy and skill. Started the series by 
standing on his own stumps, but didn’t put a foot wrong thereafter until he 
failed in Chennai, only to watch, almost paternalistically, the new generation 
of Indian batsman win their spurs. He really, really wanted to win this 
match-up and wasn’t afraid to show it – and that matters, not just for Indian 
Test cricket, but for Test cricket as a whole.

Karun Nair (320 runs at 160; 1-0-4-0 average n/a, economy 4.0)

Wise judges told me that the 25-year-old from Karnataka would go big once 
given a start. In Chennai, that forecast proved to be true in a 
record-shattering 303* in which he showed that he could graft early on, build 
an innings and then flog tiring bowlers all round the ground. We will be seeing 
a lot more of him in the future.

Ajinkya Rahane (63 runs at 13)

He looked out of sorts, especially when cleaned up by Adil Rashid’s googly 
like, well, like an Englishman. Injured, he ceded the vice-captaincy to R 
Ashwin, an unstoppable force at home, and will be looking over his shoulder at 
the men now in possession. He will be back, but the decision on whom to drop 
and when, is hardly an easy one for selectors with an embarrassment of riches.

Ravichandran Ashwin (306 runs at 44; 307.1-45-847-28 average 30.3, economy 2.8)

He eyed England’s left-handers like a cat with a cornered mouse, knowing they 
were his, only the time of their demise to be decided. Bowled a tight 
wicket-to-wicket line to the right-handers too, the subtle changes of flight, 
spin and speed placing him in the company of India’s legendary tweakers of any 
age. His carrom ball to trap Jonny Bairstow LBW in Mumbai was a thing of 
beauty, poor Jonny missing the delivery by feet rather than inches. Ashwin 
batted with the lazy elegance that prompts memories of VVS Laxman scoring vital 
runs in India’s powerhouse late middle order. And he still wasn’t Man of the 
Series!

Wriddhiman Saha (49 runs at 12; 6 catches)

All at sea with bat in hand and not much better with the gloves, he lost his 
place to the recalled Parthiv Patel, who immediately improved India’s batting 
and fielding units.

Ravindra Jadeja (224 runs at 37; 290.1-67-672-26 average 25.8, economy 2.3)

The man who makes things happen – a component all sides aspiring to greatness 
need. With ball in hand, he hustles through his overs, some balls spinning, 
some balls sliding, seldom giving much to hit. In the field, he bristles under 
his beard, a brilliant catcher and ground fielder, setting standards for a team 
that needs them. He walked to the wicket to replace his captain with his team 
still 79 runs behind in Mohali and biffed a momentum-shifting 90, before holing 
out going for the quick runs the match situation demanded. He’s not the most 
skilful bowler or the most technically correct batsman, but he is the most 
watchable cricketer in the side – possibly in the world.

Jayant Yadav (221 runs at 74; 81.3-17-266-9 average 29.6, economy 3.3)

What on earth is he doing at No9? Brought in to keep it tight as a support 
spinner, he delivered that job description to the letter and then batted like a 
dream to demoralise England’s bowling with an array of orthodox strokes and 
splendid concentration, even when discomfited by the short ball. He might need 
an injury or two to be selected overseas, but what a player to have as back-up 
to the spin twins in front of him.

Amit Mishra (0 runs at 0; 75.5-12-275-5 average 55.0, economy 3.6)

Rather like his opposite number, Rashid, he bowled too many release balls and 
too few jaffas when given his opportunities. In an age when bowlers look to 
apply a tourniquet of dot balls to strangle the scoring rate, his old-fashioned 
tossing it up above the eye line, looks a little out of place.

Mohammed Shami (35 runs at 35; 103-22-252-10 average 25.2, economy 2.4)

Flogging 10 wickets from three Tests on those pitches is an admirable return 
from a bowler who was quick and accurate, particularly with a short ball that 
was directed under the chin and seldom wasted in an unnecessary show of macho 
bravado. England’s senior seamers may have over 800 Test wickets between them, 
but Shami was the pick of the pacers.

England report card: five areas to focus on before the Ashes series next 
winter | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/20/england-india-test-series-alastair-cook>
Bhuvneshwar Kumar (9 runs at 9; 17-1-60-1 average 60.0, economy 3.5)

Back in the side to pitch it up and swing it, he extracted more movement than 
any other bowler and will look forward to future tours of England, where his 
method has found success in the past.

Umesh Yadav (38 runs at 10; 143.5-23-464-8 average 58.0, economy 3.2)

A big-hearted trier who bent his back all day long for his captain and whose 
figures do not reflect his contribution at all. He bowled 37 more overs then 
any seamer on either side and he deserved to celebrate the series win as much 
as anyone.

Ishant Sharma (DNB; 31-8-59-3 average 19.7, economy 1.9)

It’s always nice to roll up for the final Test of a series already secured, 
but the tall paceman justified his place with some accurate hit-the-deck 
bowling against a batting line-up who knew they were beaten. Incredibly, he’s 
still only 28!

• This article appeared first on The 99.4 Cricket Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> on Twitter
 