
The NHS is the largest employer in the UK, has an ethnically diverse 
workforce, and its aim is to improve population health and wellbeing. It may be 
reasonable to propose, therefore, that the organisation would be ideally placed 
to promote the wellbeing of its staff irrespective of their ethnicity, and be a 
role model for other sectors. Our findings, illustrated in a review which I led 
with my co-author Jacqueline Stevenson to explain the persistently lower levels 
of wellbeing reported by black and minority ethnic (BME) populations in 
England, disproved this assumption. Far from being an exemplar for staff 
wellbeing, theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> illuminated the 
consequences and impacts of ethnic inequalities in wellbeing across society, as 
well as the likely explanations for these differences.

Of all staff for whom data are available in the NHS and community health 
services, 11% are foreign nationals, while 14% of professionally qualified 
clinical staff and 26% of doctors are from outside the UK. Overall, 40% of 
doctors in the NHS are from a BME background. This ethnic diversity is not 
proportionately represented through the NHS hierarchy. A study by Roger Kline,
The snowy white peaks of the NHS 
<http://www.hsj.co.uk/Journals/2014/04/09/w/n/j/The-snowy-white-peaks-of-the-NHS.final.docx.pdf.pdf>
, examined BME progression in the health service in London and exposed the 
stark contrast between the city's demography, with 45% of the population and 
41% of its NHS staff made up of BME people, and BME representation of only 8% 
of trust board members, and 2.5% of chief executives and chairs. The London 
picture was reflected in every respect nationally, with BME representation 
absent from the boards of some national NHS bodies.

Ethnic discrimination was also highlighted by data and research on NHS 
recruitment and career progression, resulting in an "ethnic gradient" within 
the workforce, with BME staff being represented in larger numbers at lower pay 
grades and status roles. Racism and discrimination against staff take other 
forms too. A 65% increase in racist verbal and physical attacks against staff 
by patients was reported in the five years up to 2013 by one study we came 
across. Another report described how a hospital had acquiesced when parents 
requested that their child was to be treated by a white doctor.

Examinations and assessments may also be subject to bias as was shown by a 
study based on the Membership of the Royal College of General Practitioners 
examination from 2010 to 2012 <http://www.bmj.com/content/347/bmj.f5662>. A 
fourfold difference was found in the likelihood of failing the clinical skills 
test <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-24572522> between BME graduates trained 
in the UK and their white colleagues. BME graduates trained abroad were even 
more likely to fail this exam. "Subjective bias due to racial discrimination in 
the clinical skills assessment" was offered as the explanation. Particularly 
damning were the conclusions of two studies published in the British Medical 
Journal which concluded that, if a UK equivalent pass mark had been applied to 
the Professional and Linguistics Assessment Board (Plab) examinations which 
international medical graduates need to clear to be able to practise in the UK, 
most doctors who are serving the NHSwould not have been allowed to enter the 
workforce <http://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/publication/943650/2>. These conclusions 
have left overseas-trained BME doctors even more stigmatised. Our review 
highlights Prof Aneez Esmail's argument that dishonesty is at the heart of the 
decision not to achieve self-sufficiency in terms of training enough doctors to 
staff the NHS, but instead, to make up the shortfall with overseas graduates 
and then to ignore their need for greater support to be able to achieve their 
highest potential.

Research has demonstrated that BME wellbeing is a good barometer for quality 
of care, andstudies have shown a clear link between the wellbeing of BME staff 
and patients' perceptions of care 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/215455/dh_129656.pdf>
. If BME staff felt motivated and valued, patients were more likely to be 
satisfied with the service they received. Conversely, the greater the 
proportion of staff from a BME background who reported experiencing 
discrimination at work in the previous 12 months, the lower the levels of 
patient satisfaction in the study.

BME staff in the NHS endure these inequalities, against a background of daily 
struggles with racism and discrimination in many dimensions of life such as 
education, employment, law enforcement, across the criminal justice system and 
in the media. Yet, it is likely that their professionalism makes a significant 
contribution to the NHS's position as the best healthcare system in terms of 
quality, efficiency, and performance, a ranking which has been reaffirmed time 
and time again, most recently by theCommonwealth Fund study of 11 health systems
 
<http://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/fund-reports/2014/jun/mirror-mirror>
 in the developed world.

Such glaring inequalities are unacceptable. But, in considering strategies 
which could improve BME wellbeing in the NHS, we had difficulty in identifying 
specific actors, organisations and entities that could be recommended for 
actions, while others could be exempt from responsibility. The impact of ethnic 
inequalities appeared to be so pervasive and was evident across so many aspects 
of NHS activities that, in our view, a system-wide recognition of the issue and 
its damaging effects must be called for. Every organisation which makes up the 
NHS, including the GMC, the Royal Colleges, and the trusts, needs to contribute 
to a deep introspection on how social justice, fairness and equality may once 
again frame the NHS as it did in 1948. Only then can we be confident that 
practical solutions will emerge which will truly make a difference.

This article is part of the Beveridge Revisited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2014/jul/07/-sp-beveridge-report-revisited-where-now-for-the-welfare-state>
 series fromGuardian Society Professionals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals>, revising Sir William 
Beveridge's five great social evils for the 21st century.Click here to find out 
what the evils are and read more from the Beveridge Revisited series. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/series/beveridge-revisited-21st-century-evils>

Are you a member of our online community? Join the Healthcare Professionals 
Network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> to receive 
regular emails and exclusive offers.
 