
Five years ago the Guardian investigated Claire Fox and her Institute of 
Ideas. It found that she was linked to pro-gun American libertarian groups, was 
funded by unpleasant pharmaceutical corporations and had a shady past in the 
nastiest Trotskyist bunch who ever picketed a nurses' pay dispute. Then, two 
years ago, George Monbiot castigated Fox in this paper for being a member of a 
"bizarre and cultish network" that was poisoning scientific debate in Britain. 
He charged that she was in cahoots with her sister, Fiona, who ran a dubious PR 
firm that was in hock to GM companies and proselytised for pharmaceutical 
corporations. If his page had come in scratch 'n' sniff, it would have emitted 
a whiff of sulphur.

Claire Fox is, if not the devil, then someone who holds devilishly unsettling 
views. In her time, she has stood up for Gary Glitter's right to download child 
porn, libelled ITN journalists, backed GM technology and attacked 
multiculturalism. And she refuses to disparage the benighted views of Michael 
Buerk - who chairs Radio 4's The Moral Maze, on which she is a panellist - 
about uppity women. It seems a good idea to ask her to account for herself.

Fox lights a cigarette. We're having coffee in one of the few cafes near her 
London offices that has a libertarian philosophy like hers. It permits 
customers to choose the path of carcinogenic oblivion. "I have a reputation for 
infamy," she concedes. Why do they think you're infamous? "Because the point of 
the Institute of Ideas is to challenge established orthodoxies. And they don't 
like that." They? "The liberal left." Why wouldn't they like orthodoxies being 
challenged? "There was such a sense of relief on the left when New Labour came 
to power that certain orthodoxies could not be challenged. People became 
desperate to hang on to the ascendancy of left ideas without really questioning 
what they were about."

Fox offers multiculturalism as an example. "If you challenge multiculturalism 
you are seen to be a racist. But it's a political philosophy that needs to be 
looked at. If you don't, you're taking it on trust, which is intellectually 
dishonest."

The Institute of Ideas was born from adversity, namely from the collapse of 
the Revolutionary Communist party (RCP) magazine she used to co-publish, Living 
Marxism. It closed in 2000 after being sued for libel by ITN for falsely 
claiming its journalists had fabricated evidence of Serb atrocities against 
Bosnian muslims.

Two things emerged from these ashes - Spiked, a web magazine, and the 
institute, which Fox directs. Both teem with former members of the RCP, an 
iconoclastic Trotskyist splinter group that regularly engaged in 
non-metaphorical fisticuffs. Often with other Trotskyist splinter groups, but 
still. "If there was still an RCP I would be a member," she says. "There are 
revolutionary principles I adhere to. I'm interested in improving the world."

This unfashionable faith in progress leads her into controversial areas. "It's 
part of being a progressive person that I consider agriculture should be as 
efficient as possible. I support modern farming methods because I'm a 
modernist, not a sentimentalist. My parents were from a farming family and I 
know there's there's nothing to be sentimental about. GM offers great 
potential. It's not a panacea for the third world and companies will make lots 
of money out of it - but it's ever thus."

Fox's belief in human ingenuity's capacity to make lives better is untimely 
and, to some, exasperating. "We've stopped believing in progress. When New 
Orleans flooded no one thought, how marvellous that humans managed to build a 
city on a swamp. Nobody thought about Holland, which hasn't drowned, but 
through human ingenuity produced a solution to its problem. Our pessimism about 
the future and our view that everything is a threat is" - she pauses and 
silently smokes most of a cigarette. What, decadent? Weak-willed? "Both of 
those things."

You'd find it hard to accuse Claire Fox of being either. She was born in north 
Wales to "archetypal Irish Catholic parents" in 1960, educated at "a 
bog-standard comp in a pretty rough area". "One thing I got from my parents was 
that they talked about politics all the time. They weren't educated or academic 
but they were interesting about and interested in the world. They made us watch 
Panorama," she says grimly. The brutes!

Fox arrived at Warwick University a Tory-supporting member of the Society for 
the Unborn Child and a sentimental devotee of Catholic liberation theology in 
South America. She left three years later a libertarian Marxist with a 2:2 in 
literature and a summa cum laude in selling lefty papers and going on demos.

It was abortion debates that awoke her from dogmatic slumbers. "Some on the 
left called me names, which had no impact on me, but others opposed to my 
anti-abortion stance would talk to me and suggest things I could read and argue 
with me. My position changed as a result of that. It gave me a revelation that 
politics really mattered, as did ideas." She dallied with the SWP but it was 
the Revolutionary Communist Tendency's Next Step magazine that turned the 
historical materialist's head. She stayed with them as they mutated into the 
Revolutionary Communist party. She trained as a teacher and worked in mental 
health, but the RCP remained her spiritual home.

"If there's a consistency between my views then and now, it is in the 
libertarian views on free speech I hold. That was always unpopular on the 
British left, though the American Civil Liberties Union tapped me into another 
left tradition. The 'no platform' view is what I oppose. It's very important to 
hear the arguments. We're not idiots - we can make our own minds up."

This position has led her to defend Beenie Man's sung invocation to murder gay 
men. She argued thus once against Michael Mansfield QC when she was a witness 
on The Moral Maze. She was so successfully combative that she was invited to 
become a panellist. A similar distinction led her to defend Gary Glitter's 
right to download child porn on a Radio 5 Live phone-in. The switchboard was 
jammed with people who, to put it mildly, disagreed.

Monbiot cast Fox and her RCP intimates as people who had moved from "the most 
distant fringes of the left to the extremities of the pro-corporate, 
libertarian right". The only constant was their entryist tactics. Her sister, 
Fiona, had colonised a crucial part of the scientific establishment while 
Claire was keen to take money from dodgy companies.

Do you recognise yourself in these descriptions? "Entryism is clandestine, and 
that's something you can't accuse us of being." She argues that the Institute 
of Ideas' funding is an open book. "We have received money from Pfizer, and 
they have never interfered. We have received money from Syngenta, which is 
involved in GM technology."

But surely they back you because you support their aims? "I think they back us 
because we have really interesting debates that they want to be associated 
with. But you're right. I'm not opposed to developing drugs. I would rather 
medicine was being state-funded to the absolute hilt."

Shouldn't you be ideologically opposed to taking money from big corporations? 
Fox gives me the "ever thus" defence again. "There is no such thing as clean 
money. So we're not selling out ... My peers who do take money from the 
government tell me there are always conditions. Whereas with Pfizer, say, they 
have never tried to influence what we do."

She finishes another cigarette and makes to leave. She has to bone up for this 
week's Moral Maze. Was Michael Buerk right to say that women are taking over in 
a frightening way? "Michael can speak for himself," she says. "What I will say, 
though, is when I got involved in politics one of things that was important for 
me was that a lot of the values associated with masculinity were ideas I would 
embrace - rationality, leadership, bravery. Why would I want to be a soft 
carer? What's interesting now is that society gives more value to feminine 
characteristics I have little regard for. Emotion more important than reason? 
Come off it."

Later our photographer takes her picture. He's found some posters printed with 
suggestive words that he wants to use as a backdrop. She readily agrees to be 
snapped in front of Rigour, Accessibility, Originality, Experience, but 
declines Pragmatism. Given her remarks on dirty money and using human ingenuity 
to improve our sorry lot, this seems an odd stance, morally speaking.

Â· The Moral Maze is broadcast on Radio 4 at 8pm on Wednesdays and repeated on 
Saturdays at 10.15pm. For more information on the Institute of Ideas, see
www.instituteofideas.com <http://www.instituteofideas.com>
 