
Daniel Jones had always been friendly with the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> personnel who stood outside his door.


When he needed to take something out of the secured room where he read 
mountains of their classified material, they typically obliged. An informal 
understanding had taken hold after years of working together, usually during 
off-peak hours, so closely that Jones had parking privileges at an agency 
satellite office not far from its McLean, Virginia, headquarters. They would 
ask Jones if anything he wanted to remove contained real names or cover names 
of any agency officials, assets or partners, or anything that could compromise 
an operation. He would say no. They would nod, he would wish them a good night, 
and they would go their separate ways.

After midnight in the summer of 2013, Jones deliberately violated that accord. 

Jones, a counter-terrorism staffer, had become the chief investigator for the 
Senate intelligence committee, the CIA’s congressional overseer, on its biggest 
inquiry. For five years, he had been methodically sifting through internal CIA 
accounts of its infamous torture program, a process that had begun after the 
committee learned – thanks to a New York Times article, not the agency – that a 
senior official had destroyed videotapes that recorded infamously brutal 
interrogations. The subsequent committee inquiry had deeply strained a 
relationship with Langley that both sides badly wanted to maintain. The source 
of that strain was simple: having read millions of internal emails, cables and 
accounts of agency torture, Jones had come to believe everything the CIA had 
told Congress, the Bush and Obama White Houses and the public was a lie.

Senate investigator breaks silence about CIA's 'failed coverup' of torture 
report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/09/dan-jones-cia-torture-cover-report-senate>
There was one document in particular that proved it. Jones and his team had 
found it years before, placed mysteriously onto a shared computer network drive 
the Senate intelligence committee investigators were using in northern 
Virginia, not far from CIA headquarters. But they hadn’t appreciated its full 
significance until the agency, in an attempt at refuting a report that was 
still far from publication, told Barack Obama’s staff that the committee was 
pushing a hysterical interpretation of the agency’s fateful post-9/11 embrace 
of torture. The document, prepared for Leon Panetta when he was CIA director, 
had reached the same conclusions about the torture program that Jones had. As 
long as Jones had it, he would be able to show that the agency knew full well 
how brutal the torture was; how ineffective its torturers considered it to be; 
and how thoroughly the CIA had covered all of that up.

As long as Jones had the document, that is. Lurking in the back of his mind 
was the event that had led him to devote five years of ceaseless work, through 
nights and weekends: the CIA had already destroyed evidence of torture. It did 
that before the Senate had launched an investigation, and long before that 
investigation had turned acrimonious.

Inside the small room in Virginia the CIA had set up for the Senate 
investigators, Jones reached for his canvas messenger bag. He slipped crucial 
printed-out passages of what he called the Panetta Review into the bag and 
secured its lock. Sometime after 1am, Jones walked out, carrying his bag as he 
always did, and neglecting to tell the agency security personnel what it 
contained. After years of working together, no one asked him to open the bag.

Outside the CIA satellite office in Virginia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd6c9ed82f59e3ff35077ad63534ef26283125ac%2F0_0_1300_500%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA's%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA%27s%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd6c9ed82f59e3ff35077ad63534ef26283125ac%2F0_0_1300_500%2F1300.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Jones walked to the parking lot until he found his black Porsche Boxster. He 
tossed the bag onto the passenger seat and drove across the Potomac river, not 
stopping until he reached the Hart Senate office building on Capitol Hill. It 
was hours before dawn, but Jones walked into the building, sped to the second 
floor where the committee did its work, and placed the locked bag into a 
committee safe.

We had crossed a bridge. For the first time we had knowingly violated a CIA 
agreement
Daniel Jones 
Jones, by accord, had significant access to classified agency material. He 
would not be leaking the Panetta Review to the public. He was ensuring its 
preservation so Congress could exercise its constitutionally mandated oversight 
on an agency with a vivid recent history of document destruction on precisely 
this issue. But Jones, in his first-ever interview, acknowledged to the 
Guardian: “We had crossed a bridge. For the first time we had knowingly 
violated a CIA agreement.”

It was an unfathomable turn of events, and it would have severe repercussions. 
Jones had years of training and experience handling classified material: before 
joining the Senate committee staff, he was an FBI counter-terrorism analyst. 
The Senate committee was not favorably inclined toward absconding with 
intelligence documents: its leadership was spending summer 2013 excoriating NSA 
whistleblower Edward Snowden as a traitor. But, Jones said: “I was afraid [the 
document] would be destroyed … I was the one saying, ‘We have to do this.’”

Jones takes “full responsibility” for taking the document, but will not 
clarify who actually made the decision. Senators on the committee say they 
learned about it after the fact rather than directing him to take the document, 
and support the decision to this day.

“I don’t disagree with it. I mean, look, Director [John] Brennan tried very 
hard to cover up the Panetta Review,” said Senator Ron Wyden, an Oregon 
Democrat and longtime intelligence committee member.

The Panetta Review saga would spur a furious CIA to take an extraordinary 
step: it would spy on its own legislative overseers – especially Jones. The 
episode would spill out publicly the following March, when top committee 
Democrat Dianne Feinstein, who had already taken a huge political risk in 
pushing the torture inquiry, accused the CIA on the Senate floor of triggering 
what she called a constitutional crisis. Both sides requested the justice 
department pursue a criminal investigation on the other. The bitterness would 
nearly overshadow a landmark report, a fraction of which wasreleased to the 
public in December 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/09/cia-torture-report-released>, 
that documented in chilling detail the depravations CIA inflicted on terrorism 
suspects after 9/11.

The CIA has stopped defending its torture program but not its personnel. While 
it has reknit its relationship to the committee, thanks to a GOP leadership 
that has all but disavowed the torture investigation, it continues to maintain 
that the torture report is inaccurate. Obama, whose trusted aide John Brennan 
runs the CIA, kept the report at arm’s length, with his administration 
declining even to read it.

But the CIA has gone beyond successfully suppressing the report. In a grim 
echo of Jones’s fears, the agency’s inspector general, Langley recently 
revealed, destroyed its copy – allegedly an accident. Accountability for 
torture has been the exclusive province of a committee investigation greeted 
with antipathy by Obama. While Obama prides himself on ending CIA torture, the 
Republican presidential nominee, Donald Trump, has vowed if elected to “bring 
backa hell of a lot worse than waterboarding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/06/donald-trump-waterboarding-republican-debate-torture>
”. Key CIA leaders defending the agency against the committee, including 
Brennan and former director Michael Morrell, are reportedly seeking to run 
Langley under Hillary Clinton.

This is the inside story of the Senate investigation into torture and the 
crisis with the CIA it spurred. It is formed from interviews with critical 
players in the drama, supported by voluminous internal reports and publicly 
available documents. Jones agreed to provide new details but would not discuss 
classified information with the Guardian.

When it came time for Brennan to talk publicly about the Senate inquiry, long 
after Jones’s predawn drive, he spent five minutes fitting the CIA’s torturers 
into the context of 9/11. But 9/11 changed Jones’s life as well.

A native of central Pennsylvania, Jones, now 41 years old, taught in Baltimore 
in his early 20s as part of the Teach for America program encouraging service 
in inner-city schools. After 9/11, he recalled, he wanted to influence public 
policy over the emerging war on terrorism, and sought work on Capitol Hill. An 
aide to Tom Daschle, then the Senate Democratic leader, advised Jones to 
instead spend several years at a counter-terrorism agency, like the CIA or FBI. 
The aide would eventually cross paths with Jones in a different capacity – he 
was Denis McDonough, the Obama confidant who would become White House chief of 
staff.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdaniel-jones-senate-staffer-cia-spying-interview-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Jones%3A%20the%20Senate%20staffer%20spied%20on%20by%20the%20CIA%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdaniel-jones-senate-staffer-cia-spying-interview-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Jones%3A%20the%20Senate%20staffer%20spied%20on%20by%20the%20CIA%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdaniel-jones-senate-staffer-cia-spying-interview-video&media=>
Daniel Jones: the Senate staffer spied on by the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/09/daniel-jones-senate-staffer-cia-spying-interview-video>
Jones arrived at the FBI in 2003 and spent the next four years there. The 
bureau was in the midst of a transformation: a generation after Congress had 
drastically reduced its domestic intelligence-gathering functions, following 
Nixon-era scandals, 9/11 had compelled its re-entry into the business of 
pre-empting homegrown terrorists. Jones set up shop in the counter-terrorism 
division as an analyst, primarily focused on al-Qaida and Sunni extremist 
groups and occasionally traveling overseas for his work. At one point, he was 
even detailed to the CIA.

But his future in the bureau was always limited, as he wasn’t a special agent, 
the field operatives who form the heart of the FBI. Sticking to his plan, Jones 
arrived on the Hill in January 2007, where his intelligence credentials helped 
find him a place working for Jay Rockefeller, a West Virginia Democrat and the 
chairman of the Senate intelligence committee.

Rockefeller told the Guardian that while Jones’s FBI experience qualified him 
to work on counter-terrorism issues on the committee, Jones’s time as a 
Baltimore teacher attracted Rockefeller’s interest.

“His decision to make this contribution before he began his career in national 
security told me something about his character and it was something to which I 
could relate. He impressed me then and I have only come to admire him more in 
the years since,” Rockefeller, who retired from the Senate in 2015, said.

The intelligence committee is a culture all to itself. Unlike most 
congressional panels, the vast majority of its work occurs in secret. The 
byzantine rules of classification restrict staffers who might bolster 
legislators’ knowledge from accessing significant relevant information. 
Membership, particularly on committee leadership, instantly boosts the profile 
of ambitious legislators, who become de facto surrogates for intelligence 
officials on cable news. All of this means that a committee tasked as the 
primary avenue for imposing accountability on secret agencies faces the 
ever-present risk of becoming captive to the agencies they oversee.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90e4805e4a21be2f1af37a851c0357ddeb49ce7a%2F549_255_1435_861%2F1435.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA's%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA%27s%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90e4805e4a21be2f1af37a851c0357ddeb49ce7a%2F549_255_1435_861%2F1435.png>
 Photograph: Laurence Mathieu-Léger for the Guardian 
Each element of the 16-agency intelligence community responds to the committee 
differently. As every intelligence service carries an inherent risk of scandal, 
they all have an abiding interest in keeping the panel on its side. The 
National Security Agency, the most powerful and technically sophisticated 
aspect of US intelligence, tends to send briefers to the Hill who wax 
loquaciously about the complicated details of its digital surveillance – which 
lends them an advantage over legislators afraid to admit what they don’t 
understand. The CIA, however, tends to duck uncomfortable questions by telling 
senators they’ll send responses later, the better to ensure accurate answers, 
and secure in the knowledge that busy legislators won’t often follow up. Yet 
its high-handed style tends not to provoke legislators who would prefer a close 
relationship with an agency many are inclined to see as performing unsavory 
tasks for the greater national good.

The committee’s internal politics also operate outside the partisan 
straightjackets that the broader Congress eagerly wears. Aside from the 
vanishingly few public hearings it holds – an annual threat briefing, a budget 
briefing, nominations for senior intelligence appointees – its work occurs in 
secret. That secrecy prevents the public from knowing the overwhelming amount 
of activity about its intelligence services. It also affords committee members 
the leeway to take positions in tensions with party leadership or to ask 
questions of intelligence briefers that don’t track conveniently with what 
their more ideological constituents would prefer. While there is a limit to how 
bipartisan or cross-ideological the committee will behave – former staffers are 
quick to point out that their work still occurs on the hyper-partisan Hill – 
both senators and staff describe the closed-door committee work as a venue 
where unity concerning national security can occur.

“It’s absolutely what people hope Congress is,” Jones recalled. 

The torture report began in such a manner. 

In November 2005, a senior CIA official named Jose Rodriguez destroyed 92 
videotapes depicting the brutal 2002 interrogations of two detainees, Abu 
Zubaydah and Abdel Rahim Nashiri. Rodriguez’s tapes destruction remained a 
secret to his congressional overseers for two years, until a 6 December 2007 
New York Times articlerevealed it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/06/washington/06cnd-intel.html>; they barely 
even knew the CIA taped interrogations at all. Outrage was swift and, while 
tilted toward the Democrats, bipartisan, to include the éminences grises of the
9/11 commission <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/22/washington/22intel.html>. 
Even the US justice department began anultimately fruitless inquiry 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/11/09/AR2010110904106_2.html?sid=ST2010110904198>
. The Senate committee, then controlled by the Democrat Rockefeller, demanded 
an explanation.
 Abu Zubaydah. Photograph: AP 
Michael Hayden, the CIA director, provided an assurance. The CIA did not 
destroy evidence, Hayden told them, because the agency had extensive records of 
the interrogations, from field cables, memoranda and internal emails. It was 
the first time the committee had learned about the documentation of one of the 
agency’s major operations. Jones, a committee lawyer named Alissa Starzak and 
two Republican staffers were tasked with combing through Langley archives and 
documenting what would have been on the destroyed tapes.

Both Jones and Starzak – who declined comment to the Guardian – knew they 
would be looking through a soda straw. (The GOP staffers stopped coming to 
Langley after two or three visits, Jones recalls.) The material they reviewed 
covered only April to December of 2002. It occurred around only one black site, 
in Thailand, and concerned just two detainees. The heavily redacted material 
went only one way: cables back to headquarters, containing nothing about what 
agency leaders instructed their field operatives to do. Yet the material was 
extensive: the paper documents the agency permitted the staffers to see looked 
to Jones like an Encyclopedia Britannica.

What they found, over a half a year’s work examining just two detainees’ 
interrogations from the first year of the torture program, shocked them. It was 
widely known by 2008 that Abu Zubaydah was tortured. But Jones and Starzak did 
not expect to see internal accounts detailing, by the minute, what the CIA did 
to him. They didn’t know, for instance, that interrogators had tortured him to 
the point that he would obey, like a dog, when they would snap their fingers, 
nor that they left a man suspected of knowing al-Qaida’s secrets alone for 47 
days. The cables describe Abu Zubaydah as kept naked, filthy, stinking, shaking 
with fear, shoved inside a filth-riddled wooden box, defecating on himself. 
Agency personnel, in the official communications, get emotional and request 
transfers rather than continue torturing men they come to believe lack relevant 
information on terrorism. It immediately raised the question of what the CIA 
was really doing to dozens of other detainees at its black sites.

“I don’t think the CIA even knew what they were giving us, to be honest,” 
Jones said.

“These cables were the most graphic of all the cables to exist. Later on, as 
you go through the program, the cables get less and less detailed. To the 
credit of the agency personnel who were working on it, they were very detailed. 
… Everything that we were told was basically the opposite of what happened.”

That detail gave Jones his first recognition of the gulf between what the CIA 
actually did and what it told everyone outside of Langley that it did. Jones 
ended up creating a 29-page Microsoft Excel spreadsheet of the early days of 
CIA torture.

Behind closed doors in the Hart building, Jones presented his findings to the 
committee on 11 February 2009. Both Republicans and Democrats were shocked by 
“the incredible brutality of the program at a level beyond which anybody 
imagined,” Jones said.

The Hart Senate office building. 11 February 2009
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b39305333e39d182f916668ed1757f46439ea6b%2F0_0_1300_500%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA's%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA%27s%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b39305333e39d182f916668ed1757f46439ea6b%2F0_0_1300_500%2F1300.jpg>
 senate-building Photograph: Sam Morris/This is a test 
“At the back of the report, for what we called the ‘tapes investigation’, the 
staff created a chart that depicted the most torturous 17 days of Abu 
Zubaydah’s interrogation. It was almost a minute-by-minute chronology of what 
the CIA was doing to Abu Zubaydah, and how Abu Zubaydah reacted,” recalled 
Rockefeller.

“I think everyone on the committee – Democrat and Republican alike – was quite 
taken by this section of the report. It was hard to deny the ineffectiveness of 
the CIA interrogations, the brutality, or the fact that the committee had been 
deeply misled by the CIA.”

Some senators, particularly Republicans, were taken aback at the idea that the 
CIA would perform such acts. But Jones’s presentations that CIA interrogators 
knew the torture was useless – contradicting years of agency spin – did not 
attract significant interest from the senators.

“To me, I thought that’s what people would be taken with – holy shit, we’ve 
been sold a bill of goods,” he said. “But what they were really taken with was 
the brutality. … There was a bipartisan consensus that this can’t be the end, 
there’s got to be a final product, there’s got to be more here.”

I don’t think the CIA even knew what they were giving us
Daniel Jones 
Less than a month later, on 5 March 2009 
<http://www.intelligence.senate.gov/press/feinstein-bond-announce-intelligence-committee-review-cia-detention-and-interrogation-program>
, the committee voted 14-1 to expand the investigation, the dissenting vote 
being Georgia Republican Saxby Chambliss. Instead of examining Rodriguez’s 
destruction of the videotapes, now the Senate committee would investigate the 
entire torture program. Part of Jones’s new mandate was to assess whether the 
CIA “accurately described” its torture program within the Bush administration 
and to Congress. Still, some of the Republican members imposed limits on the 
investigation’s scope: Jones couldn’t look at the Bush White House, just the 
CIA.

The announced inquiry came at an uncomfortable time for the CIA and the White 
House. Since Obama won the presidency in November, human rights groups had 
spent four months pressing for a reckoning with torture.

While Obama shut down the torture program on his second day in office, he also 
said that his focus as president would be to “look forward as opposed to 
looking backwards <http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/12/us/politics/12inquire.html>
”. A senior campaign aide and former senior CIA official, John Brennan, became 
his chief White House adviser for counter-terrorism, a signal that Obama did 
not wish to have antagonistic relations with Langley. His choice for CIA 
director, after Brennan’s equivocations on torture raised red flags for 
liberals, was Leon Panetta, a longtime Democratic congressman and consummate 
insider.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0K27oIJlAlA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0K27oIJlAlA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0K27oIJlAlA&media=>
 President-elect Barack Obama in January 2009. 
Obama’s eagerness to turn the page on torture alarmed some of his allies. The 
Democratic chairmen of the House and Senate judiciary committees, Patrick Leahy 
and John Conyers, were pushing for broad investigations into both torture and 
mass surveillance.

In February 2009, Antonio Taguba, the army major general who blew the whistle 
on Abu Ghraib, joined a coalition of 18 human rights groups pressing Obama and 
the Democratic Congress for anindependent truth commission 
<http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/2009/feb/18/detainee-commission-021809/>
 on torture. They had support from verysenior Democratic legislators 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB124052866000950327>, including House speaker 
Nancy Pelosi 
<http://www.mcclatchydc.com/news/politics-government/article24535555.html>, 
Senate judiciary chairman Patrick Leahy and House judiciary chairman John 
Conyers. Activists petitioned attorney general Eric Holder toappoint a special 
prosecutor 
<https://www.aclu.org/news/quarter-million-americans-demand-torture-prosecutions>
 for the agency.

If the White House and the CIA didn’t like the intelligence committee looking 
into the CIA’s recent past, they would like an unpredictable 9/11 
Commission-style panel and an independent prosecutor far less. The secretive 
panel, with its longstanding ties to Langley and its Democratic leadership, 
seemed like a safer option. An added political benefit was the committee’s new 
chair: Dianne Feinstein of California, who had a long history ofdisappointing 
liberals over national security <http://www.salon.com/2007/09/23/feinstein/>.

Still, the CIA had some caveats. 

Usually, when the Senate committee investigates the intelligence agencies, it 
does so on its home territory. The business of the committee, to include 
investigations, occurs in secure, locked rooms at the Hart building. Members 
and staff leave their phones outside; staff who lack the appropriate security 
clearances do not enter. The entire premise of the intelligence committees, 
established in the 1970s, was their unique fitness within Congress to handle 
classified material in order to provide accountability on secret agencies.

Panetta wanted a different arrangement. The CIA was forecasting the provision 
of between three and six million pages of relevant documents. Panetta’s aides 
voiced concern that they could not abide names of operatives, locations of 
black sites and countries cooperating in the torture program transiting to 
Capitol Hill. Either the committee would have to wait on the delivery of the 
documents until after the agency painstakingly redacted its material – a 
process with no defined endpoint and likely to last months, if not years – or 
it could set up shop in a satellite CIA facility in northern Virginia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46fc098d88879eb7f50244ed2d055df3c3c92e59%2F0_279_5160_3096%2F5160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA's%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA%27s%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46fc098d88879eb7f50244ed2d055df3c3c92e59%2F0_279_5160_3096%2F5160.jpg>
 At CIA headquarters in Langley in February 2009. Photograph: J Scott 
Applewhite/AP 
“Every other investigation the committee conducted when I was chairman was 
done from the intelligence committee’s offices – offices that are fully secured 
and certified to hold the most sensitive and classified information that 
exists,” said Rockefeller.

“The CIA’s detention and interrogation program was the exception.” 

The proposed arrangement discomfited the committee. Both Jones and Louis 
Tucker, the GOP staff director, agreed that the investigation should unfold in 
the Hart building, the same as any the panel would conduct.

Feinstein was giving their concerns teeth. Her meetings with Panetta, whose “
intelligence and integrity 
<https://www.congress.gov/111/chrg/shrg52741/CHRG-111shrg52741.htm>” she 
praised in his confirmation hearing that February, showed a hard edge. Behind 
closed doors, in early June, Feinstein pressed Panetta for access to documents. 
Panetta, a salty politician, raised his voice, referenced their long history 
together, and said she was asking for unprecedented access. Feinstein raised 
hers back, and threatened to send subpoenas to the CIA. Here were two fixtures 
of decades of California Democratic politics, sizing each other up to determine 
who would dominate whom.

But the committee had to consider the reality of the task it was confronting. 
It had taken over a year to investigate just two interrogations related to the 
tapes, and in truth, primarily one, as Nashiri did not come into CIA custody at 
the Thai black site until December 2002, the tail end of the period Jones and 
Starzak investigated. The CIA did not produce any documents until the middle of 
2008. How much time would they lose if they waited for the agency to redact at 
least 3m documents concerning more than 100 detainees?

Everything that we were told was basically the opposite of what happened
Dan Jones 
The CIA offer came to look acceptable. Jones and his team would drive out to 
the satellite location. They would have an office, lit bright white and 
windowless, in its basement. While there, Jones believed, they would receive 
access to a computer network, known as RDINet – for “Rendition, Detention and 
Interrogation” – hived off from the internet, accessible to them alone, onto 
which the CIA would place the documents. It was unusual, but they found, 
compared to the alternatives, they could live with it. Jones’s team set to work 
at the site on 18 May.

Days later, Panetta and Feinstein came to a final agreement on access. Several 
letters document their accord, with a final one from Panetta on 12 June saying 
“an agreement was reached between CIA and SSCI staff personnel regarding 
operating procedures for the SSCI review of material related to the CIA’s 
detention and interrogation programs.” The letter said the CIA would establish 
“a walled-off network share-drive” that only the Senate staff would access for 
work, and that “CIA access to the walled off network shared drive will be 
limited to CIA information technology staff, except as authorized by the 
committee or its staff.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd33d29227fdae8db471876524973ef8dce177ff4%2F0_0_1275_1650%2F1275.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA's%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA%27s%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd33d29227fdae8db471876524973ef8dce177ff4%2F0_0_1275_1650%2F1275.jpg>
 Letter dated 12 June 2009 from CIA director Panetta to Dianne Feinstein. 
Photograph: CIA 
An earlier accord, dated 28 May, also referred to establishing a “share-drive 
[that] can be segregated with only SSCI access and walled-off CIA IT 
administrators, except as otherwise authorized by SSCI.” That document was 
titled Memorandum of Understanding Senate Select Committee on Intelligence’s 
Review of CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program – something agency reviews 
would later claim, as controversy over the inquiry reached a crisis point, did 
not exist.

Ironically for an agency whose concerns were premised on security breaches, 
now it had to hire IT contractors to set up the network for the committee 
staff. Documents did not actually arrive until 22 June, and then, they were 
maddeningly difficult to search through, as the agency insisted on using an 
obscure and not terribly functional search tool. The staff the CIA posted to 
liaise with the investigators were “openly hostile”, Jones said, and dragged 
their feet on responding to Jones’s concerns.

Then the CIA was hit by what seemed like a bombshell. In August 2009, US 
attorney general Eric Holder expanded the remit of the prosecutor looking at 
the tapes destruction, John Durham, to include the torture program, much as the 
Senate committee had. The justice department’s new mandate was not as broad as 
the Senate’s. It would only concern itself with torture that exceeded the 
boundaries set for the CIA by the Bush-era justice department. Still, for all 
of Obama’s emphasis on looking forward and not backward, now the CIA had to 
face its greatest fear since launching the torture program: possible 
prosecution.

Holder’s decision, ironically, would ultimately hinder the committee more than 
the CIA, and lead to a criticism that the agency would later use as a cudgel 
against the Senate.

Typically, when the justice department and congressional inquiries coincide, 
the two will communicate in order to deconflict their tasks and their access. 
In the case of the dual torture investigations, it should have been easy: 
Durham’s team accessed CIA documents in the exact same building that Jones’s 
team did.

But every effort Jones made to talk with Durham failed. “Even later, he 
refused to meet with us,” Jones said.

Through a spokesman, Durham, an assistant US attorney in Connecticut, declined 
to be interviewed for this story.

The lack of communication had serious consequences. Without Durham specifying 
who at CIA he did and did not need to interview, Jones could interview no one, 
as the CIA would not make available for congressional interview people 
potentially subject to criminal penalty. Jones could not even get Durham to 
confirm which agency officials prosecutors had no interest in interviewing. 
“Regrettably, that made it difficult for our committee to do interviews. So the 
judgment was, use the record,” said Wyden, the Oregon Democrat on the panel.


But when the Senate investigators discovered discrepancies between what the 
cables they read indicated and what CIA leaders represented internally or 
publicly, they would be unable to solicit answers from the people in question.

Durham’s investigation led to the first partisan break on the committee. The 
committee’s vice-chairman and top Republican, Kit Bond of Missouri, informed 
Feinstein that GOP members and staff were withdrawing. The special prosecutor 
had put the committee – and CIA officials – in an untenable position, Bond said 
publicly on 25 September: “What current or former CIA employee would be willing 
to gamble his freedom by answering the committee’s questions?”

By then, the Republican staff had largely withdrawn from the investigation 
already, with many not bothering to show up to the Virginia facility. Feinstein 
had already complained about that to Bond in early April. And other strains 
were evident in the committee’s bipartisanship: a top Republican aide, Kathleen 
Rice, maintained it would be too onerous to require the CIA to list for the 
investigators all its black-site detainees.

Bond did not stop at withholding Republican support for the investigation.

In early April 2010, Feinstein, frustrated with the lack of access to agency 
personnel, wrote to Panetta requesting interviews. It was a preliminary step: 
at that point, she sought little more than Panetta’s assurance to begin 
processing interviews on the committee’s behalf.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2de5bcc88d7f713c2139b633847a00fd7169d78c%2F0_208_4416_2649%2F4416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA's%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA%27s%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2de5bcc88d7f713c2139b633847a00fd7169d78c%2F0_208_4416_2649%2F4416.jpg>
 Photograph: Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP 
Bond rejected Feinstein’s request – not only in a letter to her two weeks 
later, but in a letter to Panetta a few days after that, urging him not to make 
CIA officials available to the committee. His stated rationale was the same: 
steering agency employees out of criminal danger. But as Bond also objected to 
document requests of the sort Panetta had already agreed to provide, Jones 
suspected other motives.

Jones had lost the support of the committee Republicans. “At this point, 
they’re working on behalf of CIA,” he said. Bond did not reply to a request for 
an interview.

Panetta, and his successors, never approved any interviews the committee 
sought with agency personnel. It wasn’t only officials involved in the program 
who were constrained in speaking with Jones. In October 2009, during a visit to 
Langley, Jones sought to interview staff from the inspector general’s office, 
which had investigated interrogations in 2004. Stephen Preston, the CIA’s lead 
attorney, stood in the hallway outside his office and insisted he be able to 
attend the meeting, explicitly to monitor what they discussed on behalf of 
Panetta. Voices were raised, and Jones’s team marched out of Langley rather 
than hold the meeting on those terms. Preston – who declined comment to the 
Guardian – finally relented, and an unmonitored meeting occurred the following 
month.

“When Director Panetta agreed to provide [the committee] with unprecedented 
access to CIA documents to pursue its review, the Office of General Counsel was 
established as the sole conduit for requests and responses to the committee,” 
said CIA spokesman Ryan Trapani.

“There was a meeting with [committee] staff and OIG where the General Counsel 
participated in that role. It is our understanding that when topics moved to 
issues unrelated to the review, the General Counsel left and the meeting 
between [committee] staff and the OIG proceeded.”

Jones’s fight with the CIA was just beginning. 

It turned out that those contractors the committee thought the CIA hired to 
aid in collecting responsive documents were also acting as gatekeepers. They 
would review torture documents three times before disseminating them to the 
investigators to determine not only relevance, but whether higher-ups ought to 
make the call to turn them over. In some cases, the chain went up to the White 
House, to review for executive privilege – advisory conversations with White 
House staff, a broad category that typically keeps a record within the hands of 
an administration.

White House counsel Greg Craig, his successor Bob Bauer, and Don Verilli were 
involved in the review, with their colleague Kate Shaw trekking to the off-site 
location. The attorneys would describe the documents flagged for them to Jones 
and Starzak, case by case, and ask if they were interested in them. In several 
cases, the volume of documents meant the CIA had already unwittingly turned 
over copies of documents flagged for executive privilege review – and, once 
informed of that, the White House attorneys would roll their eyes and move on.

The White House involvement helped Feinstein navigate the first outright 
crisis in CIA-committee relations over the torture inquiry. In March 2010 Jones 
and his colleagues started noticing that they had difficulty accessing 
documents they knew they already had. Simple search terms weren’t retrieving 
certain records anymore.

“We noticed they were gone right away,” Jones said. 

It would have been easy to disappear documents, even in substantial amounts. 
The agency had provided millions of pages. The only way it could have happened 
was for the agency to have removed the information from a computer network the 
CIA set up for the Senate that Jones did not know the agency could access.

Confronted, the CIA pointed to the tech consultants. Then they pointed the 
finger at the White House, suggesting that Obama’s attorneys ordered them to 
remove the documents – a much bigger accusation, with serious implications. 
Feinstein, alarmed, turned to the White House, and on 12 March, Jones met with 
White House lawyers, who denied ordering the removal of anything.

In a process that remains opaque to Jones, the CIA investigated internally 
and, months later, determined they had removedover 900 documents 
<https://www.cia.gov/library/reports/Redacted-December-2014-Agency-Accountability-Board-Report.pdf>
 from the committee. It happened twice – with another, smaller wave of removals 
occurring in May, months after Feinstein first brought the issue to the White 
House. And it was a violation of the agreements the agency had reached with the 
committee about the conduct of the inquiry.


“This really upset us early on, because it would never have happened if we had 
conducted this investigation like we conducted every other CIA and intelligence 
community investigation, which is that it happens at our location, on our 
computers,” Jones said.

Ultimately, new White House counsel Bauer conveyed verbally to the chairwoman 
that the CIA would not remove any more documents. On 17 May, the CIA apologized 
to Feinstein as well. The committee never got the removed documents back, but 
at least had alternate copies of some .

“It wasn’t like, we thought, they would enter into our computers and search 
them, or go through them,” Jones said, with a wry laugh.

Around then, the CIA’s contractor staff largely turned over. The new crew were 
“more cordial, open, informal”, Jones remembered. (“Those working relationships 
were professional and I am unaware of any need for bolstering,” the CIA’s 
Trapani said.) They dragged their feet on document requests less. Some would 
even complain, in shared frustration with Jones’s team, that their superiors 
were taking too long to release material.

Jones attempted to accommodate his CIA counterparts. Agency officials would 
occasionally come to him, expressing concern that some documents they provided 
were marginally related to interrogations, but they contained information about 
ongoing and unrelated operations. Some of them contained material that was 
especially sensitive, particularly for contemporary agency activities, but 
didn’t shed significant light on torture. He let them “pull the documents … 
This happened throughout, even up until the very end.”

The agency made other changes that eased the committee’s task. Later in 2010, 
CIA got rid of the clunky old search tool, following longstanding complaints 
from both Jones and Durham’s investigators, and replaced the network search 
function with a Google interface. Easier sifting was “hugely important”, Jones 
said, as the agency kept piling material on.

This would never have happened if we had conducted this investigation … at our 
location, our computers
Daniel Jones 
The year 2010 gave way to 2011 and 2012. Panetta left to run the Pentagon and 
David Petraeus, the retired general, took his place. Petraeus seemed 
“supportive” of the inquiry, recalled Jones. Yet as the committee staff worked 
nights and weekends at the satellite CIA office, some wondered if the deluge of 
documentation was a tactic to ensure the investigation collapsed under the 
weight of accumulated material.

Even with the glut of documentation, the Senate team did not have sufficient 
evidence to give an account of a major aspect of the CIA’s post-9/11 apparatus: 
rendition.

Renditions, used before 9/11, were extrajudicial transfers of captured people; 
after 9/11, a variant, called “extraordinary rendition”, sent captives to the 
custody of allied intelligence services, neither American nor the country of a 
detainee’s origin. Some of the CIA’s closest rendition partners worked for the 
world’s most brutal dictators: Syria’s Bashar al-Assad, Libya’s Muammar 
Gaddafi, Pakistan’s Pervez Musharraf, Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak.


The rendition infrastructure was even bigger than that of the black sites, 
which the CIA itself ran. More detainees ran through it than the at least 119 
held at the black sites. But once detainees moved into a different intelligence 
service’s custody, the records the CIA retained of them were scant, or 
secondhand, or both. It posed a problem for an investigation that sought 
rigorous internal documentation for every claim it would make. The more time 
the Senate spent attempting to run down rendition leads, the more it would 
delay its investigation of the CIA’s interrogations and detentions. And after 
all, the mandate for the inquiry set by the committee was to determine what the 
CIA did to men it detained, not what its partners did.


“It was a killer not to cover it, but you’ve got to draw a line,” Jones said. 
Much CIA documentation the committee had referring to rendition amounted to 
“hearsay”, not enough to responsibly present.


“Those rendition records don’t involve people who were technically detained by 
the CIA. These are transients. The records are just not there.”

But the consequence of that decision was profound. While ultimately the 
classified version of Jones’s report would contain information on CIA 
renditions, the vast majority of the CIA’s renditions operations – operations 
that left still-untold numbers of people disappeared, severely wounded, and 
likely worse – have been lost to history.

Among legislators, the inquiry became background noise. Bond had relinquished 
the vice-chairmanship to Saxby Chambliss of Georgia, who in 2009 had been the 
only dissenting vote against launching the investigation. Feinstein, on five 
different occasions, asked the GOP to rejoin the inquiry, to no avail.

It took until August 2012 for the CIA to cease the bulk document production. 
(The CIA disputes this, and Trapani said it continued to “facilitate and 
support” Senate document access until December 2014.) By then, the staff 
estimated they had the equivalent of two urban libraries. Jones had been 
writing the classified report incrementally. Starting in October 2011, 
Feinstein had him send pieces of the report to the committee, Democrats and 
Republicans, so no one was taken by surprise.

In December 2012, Jones finished the report. It was at that point 6,200 pages 
long and entirely secret. In a sign of the diminished partisan consensus around 
torture, the vote to adopt the report was 9-6, with Maine moderate Olympia 
Snowe the only Republican to assent. Now would come the next fight: to 
declassify the report.

But since the committee had a more immediate task, Feinstein and the Democrats 
decided to leverage it. On 7 February 2013, Obama confidant John Brennan had 
his confirmation hearing with the panel to run his beloved CIA. By now, the CIA 
had overcome its major fear over torture accountability: Durham’s investigation 
had concluded in summer 2012 and had prosecuted no one. There would be no 
criminal accountability for torture, and it was an open question whether the 
public would ever read Jones’s report. The committee sought Brennan’s attitude 
toward the inquiry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2edb1b0d04a3d852bd679fdb2e6cc2e7219a15e4%2F0_100_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA's%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA%27s%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2edb1b0d04a3d852bd679fdb2e6cc2e7219a15e4%2F0_100_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Brennan is sworn in to testify at his confirmation hearing on 7 February 2013. 
Photograph: Jason Reed/Reuters 
Brennan equivocated on torture throughout the hearing. Although he was the 
agency’s deputy executive director when the program began, he minimized his 
knowledge of it. (A former CIA officer who has long known Brennan and who has 
since criticized torture, Glenn Carle, told the Guardian: “He has never been a 
proponent of this stuff.”) Brennan called waterboarding “reprehensible” but 
would not, under repeated questioning, call it torture. He promised outright to 
provide the committee with his “full and honest views” after reading the 
torture report, but when pressed on declassifying it, said: “I would have to 
take that declassification request under serious consideration, obviously.”

No response was forthcoming to the declassification request. But on 27 June 
2013, the CIA sent a 100-plus page response to the committee raising a host of 
objections to the Senate’s conclusions.

The agency dissented from the conclusion that torture “did not produce unique 
intelligence that led terrorist plots to be disrupted, terrorists to be 
captured, or lives to be saved.” That “flawed conclusion” led to another, the 
agency claimed: that the CIA “resisted internal and external oversight and 
deliberately misrepresented to Congress, the executive branch, the media, and 
the American people” the truth about its torture.

Rejecting an assessment that the agency “misrepresented” the program – lied 
about torture, less euphemistically – the agency said: “The factual record 
maintained by the agency does not support such conclusions.”

Jones was stunned, and for a very particular reason. For years, he had been in 
possession of a specific agency document that not only supported those 
conclusions, it reached them itself – what a senator on the committee, Mark 
Udall of Colorado, would later call a “smoking gun”.

The document was the Panetta Review. Much of it remains a mystery to Jones 
even today: whether he or another staffer found it on the network, whether the 
agency meant them to receive it, or if an agency whistleblower slipped it onto 
the Senate drive. Nor does the CIA have an answer to the puzzle: “CIA does not 
know how [Senate] staff acquired the unauthorized documents,” Trapani said. But 
Jones recalls discovering it around 2010 and “pretty immediately” understanding 
its significance.

“When we saw this document, we weren’t like, ‘Oh, great, we got the CIA.’ It 
was: ‘Oh, Jesus Christ, thank God – we’re not crazy,’” he said. “This was high 
stakes. A lot was riding on it. It was a relief.”

They called it the Panetta Review because the agency prepared a summary of its 
renditions, detentions and interrogations work for Director Panetta, who had 
come to Langley after Obama shut the program down. One version was a Microsoft 
Word document, clearly a draft, with the function allowing users to see each 
others’ changes enabled. Another version, apparently more final, was a PDF. 
Iterations by CIA were clear on view: “You could see the attorneys looking at 
it and saying, ‘Well, let’s make sure we can back this up, can you add more 
citations?’”

The final version of the Panetta Review, Jones said, was more than 1,000 pages 
long. The CIA has represented it as “summaries of documents being provided to 
the [committee] … highlighting the most noteworthy information contained in the 
millions of pages of documents being made available,” as agency attorney Martha 
Lutz would tell a court after Vice reporter Jason Leopold sought to acquire the 
still-classified document. Jones said that description is incorrect.

“It’s a narrative, plain and simple. ‘This is Abu Zubaydah’s interrogation.’ 
‘This is KSM [Khalid Shaikh Mohammed].’ They’re topic oriented: ‘These are the 
inaccurate things we told the president.’ It’s a final findings document. It 
has 13 findings. And one is, basically, they provided inaccurate information to 
support the use of EITs,” or enhanced interrogation techniques, the agency’s 
preferred euphemism for torture.


Lutz would later tell a federal court that “even the post polished versions 
remained drafts and were subject to change”. The CIA stopped compiling the 
Panetta Review in 2010 after Durham told Preston that CIA risked complicating 
any prosecution if it “made different judgments than the prosecutors had 
reached”, Charlie Savage reported in his 2015 book Power Wars.

What’s so shocking about that is that we thought this problem … was limited to 
the Bush administration
Dan Jones 
Useful as the document was, it took on brand new significance now that the CIA 
was denying the conclusions that it had endorsed in the Panetta Review.

“I did not think they were going to say: ‘None of this is right, you’re all 
wrong.’ I expected to receive the Panetta Review,” Jones said.

“What’s so shocking about that is that we thought this problem – the CIA 
providing inaccurate information to the president – was limited to the Bush 
administration, to [ex-directors] Tenet, Goss and Hayden. This is John 
Brennan’s CIA, Obama’s CIA. There’s a famous picture of Brennan briefing the 
president with their response in May of 2013, before we received their 
response. They’re providing inaccurate information to the president of the 
United States in the present day.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d19832b52b48a8986a96163ae75e21839094cbe%2F0_167_4096_2564%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA's%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20fight%20to%20reveal%20the%20CIA%27s%20torture%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcia-insider-daniel-jones-senate-torture-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d19832b52b48a8986a96163ae75e21839094cbe%2F0_167_4096_2564%2F4096.jpg>
 Barack Obama talks with John Brennan, center, and chief of staff Denis 
McDonough in the West Wing of the White House, May 2013. Photograph: Pete 
Souza/The White House 
And the CIA, Jones knew, had a very recent history of destroying videotapes 
recording torture. It was the reason he had spent five and a half years sifting 
through the agency’s darkest secrets. Even more recently, the CIA had removed 
hundreds of documents, surreptitiously and in violation of the understanding 
the committee thought it reached with the agency, from the Senate files.

Jones walked to his car and drove to the satellite CIA office. His life would 
never be the same.

Next: ‘A constitutional crisis.’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/cia-senate-investigation-constitutional-crisis-daniel-jones>
 An incensed CIA spies on Jones. Accusations fly between the CIA and the Senate.

 * This article was amended on 10 September 2016. The original version said 
tenure on the Senate intelligence committee is term limited. A 2005 lawrepealed 
<https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/intel/RS21908.pdf> those limitations. 
 * Support the Guardian’s fearless, independent journalism by making a 
contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/home?INTCMP=co_us_editorial_footer_spencercia1>
 orbecoming a member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/us/supporter?INTCMP=co_us_article_spencer_standfirst> 