
Khadija is cradling her 12-hour-old baby in her arms. All she wants, she tells 
photographerGazi Nafis Ahmed <http://gazinafis.com/about.php>, is for her 
daughter to have a better life than she has had: which means enough food, 
shelter, education and healthcare.

The garment factory worker is just one of countless men and women whose lives 
Ahmed has documented in the past four years for his poignant series of 
pictures, entitled Made in Bangladesh.

Although the fashion they create fills our high-street shops, Bangladeshi 
workers are among the lowest-paid in the industry anywhere in the world, and 
they often have to toil in terrifying conditions.

This week the country is reeling from the collapse of the Rana plaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/28/bangladesh-garment-factory-collapse-owner-held>
 – an eight-storey building in which garment workers were apparently forced to 
work despite warnings it was unsafe, had large cracks in its walls and the 
police had ordered that it should be evacuated. So far at least 377 people are 
thought to have died.

But the latest tragedy is just one in a long line of disasters that have 
claimed the lives of Bangladeshi clothing workers. In November last year112 
workers burned alive in a factory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/25/bangladesh-textile-factory-fire> 
with no fire exits. In 2010 27 people died and more than 100 were injured ina 
fire in a factory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/14/bangladesh-clothes-factory-workers-jump-to-death>
 that made clothes for high-street retailer Gap.

Yet Ahmed's work highlights the less eye-catching dangers, too. One picture 
shows the aftermath of a boiler explosion that injured six people, and another 
the grinding poverty that keeps six members of one family living in a bamboo 
hut. One woman, pictured staring bleakly at the camera, explains how she was 
forced to hide in the toilet for two days by her employers in case buyers who 
had come to inspect the factory she works in discovered she was pregnant. Later 
she was sacked instead of being given maternity pay.
 