
Book Culture’s first location opened as Labyrinth Books in 1997, run by Chris 
Doeblin and his partner at the time, Cliff Simms. Chris began his career in the 
early 1980s with a brief stint selling books for Papyrus bookstore at 114th and 
Broadway, and then as the receiving clerk in the basement of the old Book 
Forum, which was located across from the main gate of Columbia on Broadway. In 
those days you could eat Chinese at Moon Palace or and get egg creams and comic 
books at the Mill Luncheonette. People did not want to walk over to Columbus 
Ave, and nobody wanted to park on Riverside Drive. In the summers, the 
neighbourhood was a ghost town, and bikers, “the Harley kind,” ruled the West 
End.

When the Book Forum operation began to falter, Doeblin set out with his 
partner and founded Great Jones Books, a scholarly book wholesaler located in 
Yonkers. At the same time, beginning in 1995, a project was set upon to open an 
academic bookstore to serve the community. Jonathan Cole, Columbia’s Provost at 
the time, shared this vision and with his help, by 1997, Chris and Cliff had 
opened their doors as a bookstore in a Columbia-owned space on 112th Street, in 
a building built for the Post Office.

In the summer of 2007, Chris bought out Cliff and renamed the store Book 
Culture. In the fall of 2009, Book Culture opened a second shop on Broadway at 
114th Street, a corner which has consistently housed an independent bookstore 
for over 50 years. In 2010, Annie Hedrick joined Chris as co-owner of the two 
stores. Book Culture opened its newest location on 82nd and Columbus, in years 
past home to Endicott Books, in the fall of 2014, and is thrilled to be a part 
of the neighbourhood.

What’s your favourite section of the store?

Chris (co-owner): I like the whole new releases section, I still love browsing 
the new books.

Ryan (manager): Probably literature. It’s by far our biggest section, wrapping 
pretty much all the way around our second floor. We do a great job of 
representing some of the authors who are tough to find at a smaller shop, often 
books in translation (Mahfouz has an entire shelf and a half to himself), and 
we also get a bunch of great used books in over the buy counter like old NDP 
paperbacks, Borzoi editions, that kind of thing. Our Marxist section though is 
a close runner up; it’s always fun to tell a customer that, no, Gramsci is not 
in our Political Philosophy section, he’s over here in these bays devoted just 
to Marxist thought.

Anna (manager): Picture books and comics!

Annie (co-owner): I’ve always loved the Children’s Room. A part of me is still 
really a little girl, so to be able to help create a store I would have loved 
to visit as a child is extremely satisfying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-book-culture-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc6c10df0f6d675d4b1971988d3c38c820172450%2F0_47_700_420%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Book%20Culture%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-book-culture-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Book%20Culture%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-book-culture-in-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc6c10df0f6d675d4b1971988d3c38c820172450%2F0_47_700_420%2F700.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you had infinite space what would you add?

Chris: An outdoor space, with a cafe and garden, a place where we could have a 
glass of wine or beer, cafe food and talk life; a complete children’s space 
with toys and loads of learning and play space, windows and skylights—a couch 
for naps, a private office. I could go on…

Ryan: I would just enlarge every section so that we wouldn’t have to do the 
heartbreaking work of “purging” our older used books that haven’t been picked 
up. Also a rooftop garden.

Adam (bookseller): I keep telling everybody we need to start an occult 
section. We have a back corner that’s used for storage, mostly, but it has a 
spooky vibe. We could put all the books on ghosts, demons, witches, etc. back 
there. And some of the best artists and writers (Andre Breton, W.B. Yeats, 
Jessa Crispin…) were/are interested in the occult, so it’s not completely 
outside our current focus.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Adam: A professor once told me we were the last good bookstore in the city 
(her words, not mine). We provide a service that I think is really important 
for a vibrant intellectual community like that at Columbia andNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City as a whole. It’s not just a 
place you can buy books, but a place where you can find new ideas, and meet new 
thinkers (at events or not).

Anna: We are the best place for last minute gifts. People come en route to 
birthday parties because they know they can find something, get it wrapped, and 
leave.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-book-culture-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5a1869cd6cf00318d67195db7ad0c289ad37c54%2F0_47_700_420%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Book%20Culture%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-book-culture-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Book%20Culture%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-book-culture-in-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5a1869cd6cf00318d67195db7ad0c289ad37c54%2F0_47_700_420%2F700.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
Who’s your favourite regular?

Chris: Chris Grabenstein, the author, and his wife, JJ. They come in a lot, 
they are exceedingly generous and support the store in several ways.

Ryan: I wouldn’t say I have a favourite regular, but I do love helping the 
Columbia MFA students—they’re always reading great stuff.

Adam: Pretty much anyone who brings a dog into the store can keep coming.

Anna: A man who comes in and asks for fun picture books for his son, he trusts 
my picks and asks for the books to be wrapped because his son likes ripping 
through the wrapping paper. I like that I can help him make his son happy with 
a few silly books and coloured paper.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Chris: I once came into the stationery side of our store and saw the guy 
behind the counter was covered with blood, all over his face, his head. He and 
the other guy were in shock but managed to explained that we had just been 
robbed and they had hit our guy in the face with the gun. The robber had just 
left and I took off after him. I saw him immediately and yelled, STOP STOP, but 
he managed to jump in a cab and make a u-turn. I ran down the middle of 
Broadway for a block and half and caught the cab at the light, pounding on the 
trunk, but he took off. Later we dealt with the hospital and the police.

Ryan: I once had a pretty overweight guy come in at night wearing just a gold 
vest and sweatpants. He was browsing the remainders and I had to tell him that 
he wasn’t appropriately dressed to be in the store. He was very offended and 
asked, “Do you know who I am?” I said that I didn’t, and he told me: “I own 
$50,000 worth of real estate in Yonkers!” I had to tell him that that, in spite 
of this, he still had to put on a shirt or leave the store.

Adam: I heard that Ryan caught the store on fire when I wasn’t there. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-book-culture-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9b4faa77ffebcb4e99d812edccd7de04fb134b0%2F0_47_700_420%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Book%20Culture%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-book-culture-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Book%20Culture%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-book-culture-in-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9b4faa77ffebcb4e99d812edccd7de04fb134b0%2F0_47_700_420%2F700.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Chris: Who the hell knows, life is so determined by little chances. I almost 
started a career in food though and loved France and cooking and wine so 
something in there might have happened. I had a good early job at the original 
Dean and Deluca and almost stuck with them.

Ryan: I think I would be back on the West Coast — doing what, who knows!

Annie: After college I started down the path to become a literature professor. 
In bookselling I get to read books and talk about them, but I never have to 
write about them.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Chris: Even though it’s little shop in a big world, you can blow the roof off 
and think without limit if you choose to.

Ryan: There’s this myth that exists about curated retail stores—especially 
record shops and bookstores—that it’s just a bunch of hanging around, shooting 
the shit, and feeling holier than the customers. But it turns out that kind of 
place doesn’t really exist any more, if it ever did in the first place. We’ve 
got a mountain load of work to do each day, and the next day, while also making 
sure that we’re providing top notch customer service. It’s a hustle, but it’s 
an immensely gratifying one.

Annie: I’m amazed that we’re still here and thriving! I’ve heard so much about 
the imminent demise of bookstores that I’m always surprised at how many people 
do come in and buy books.

The staff shelf

What are the booksellers at Book Culture reading?

 * Milk and Honey by Rupi Kaur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/13/poet-rupi-kaurs-milk-and-honey-sells-more-than-half-a-million-copies>
 (2015).Tanwaporn recommends: “A collection of raw, resilient poetry that deals 
with the trauma of sexual abuse and the process of survival. Rupi Kaur’s voice 
demands to be heard. While it’s a fast read, the poems stay with you long after 
the book is closed.” 
 * Slightly Out of Focus by Robert Capa 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/slightly-out-of-focus.html> (2001). Danya 
recommends: “A memoir of Robert Capa is not only important for its description 
of historic events, but also amazingly funny. Robert Capa started as a war 
photojournalist in the Spanish Civil War and continued through the second world 
war. He died in 1954 during the Indochina War when he stepped on a land mine.” 
 * The Seamstress and the Wind by César Aira 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/seamstress-and-the-wind.html> (2016). Adam 
recommends: “When I first sat down with this book, I didn’t plan to read it in 
one sitting. But I did. This is Aira at his best. I would recommend all of his 
novels, but I think this short book condenses everything I love about his work. 
In this whirlwind of characters, monsters, and a writer (Aira himself?) working 
on a novel in Paris, Aira produces a beautiful work of art.” 
 * The Wonderful Fluffy Little Squishy by Beatrice Alemagna (2015). Anna 
recommends: “This is a picture book about a little girl who goes around town 
trying to find the perfect thing to get her mom for her birthday. You meet 
people in her town, and see her figure out what she’s good at. Alemagna is one 
of the best artists making books for kids right now, and her books are 
beautiful and clever.”
 