
Bookmark It <http://bookmarkitorlando.com/> officially opened its doors on 
March 1, 2014 in a small, second-floor space. At that time, Orlando had no 
independent bookstores selling new books; Kimberly Britt, Bookmark It’s owner 
and founder, saw an opportunity to shine a spotlight on Orlando’s vibrant book 
culture. Kim had no prior experience in the book industry, but as an avid 
reader with 30 years of experience in sales and event planning, she launched 
Bookmark It after testing the market with a popup book fair. The event,Locally 
Grown Words Book Fair 
<https://www.eastendmkt.com/events/locally-grown-words-book-fair/>, featured 
over 40 local authors and drew over 400 attendees. Bookmark It resides in the
East End Market <https://www.eastendmkt.com/our-merchants/>, a new shopping 
concept that specialises in local food and entrepreneurial economy.

While Bookmark It initially opened with the intent of following a more 
traditional bookstore trajectory, in the past two years its mission has also 
included traveling to many off-site locations through relationships with our 
literary partners, schools, and of course, responding to the needs of the 
authors the bookstore represents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20e5b6acd34199a307c92d00c4c16572aba383c0%2F0_0_960_720%2Fmaster%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando's%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando%27s%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20e5b6acd34199a307c92d00c4c16572aba383c0%2F0_0_960_720%2Fmaster%2F960.jpg>
 ‘Bringing readers and writers together’: events at Bookmark It. Photograph: 
Literary Hub 
What’s your favourite section of the store?

Kimberly Britt (owner): As we are only a whopping 205 square feet, there is 
only ONE section! If I had to pick a favourite shelf, it would be our local 
author/short fiction offerings. Each book on this shelf spotlights work that is 
not only professional and representative of some of central Florida’s best 
authors, but most of the writers and publishers have been ardent supporters of 
our shop since its inception and have become like family. Selling these titles 
always feels a little less like book-slinging and more like I’m letting someone 
in on a really cool secret.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Kim: This is an easy question. Along with ample storage and shelves and 
shelves of books (both new and used), I would add a theatre for readings and 
performances, a mixed-use space for writing workshops and book art classes, a 
children’s playhouse complete with story-time and juice-box bar, offices to 
house others working toward promoting central Florida’s literary arts, a cafe 
and wine bar, an apartment space to house visiting authors or writing 
residencies and a silent-reading room complete with cushy sofas, ottomans, and 
the occasional well-behaved cat.

“We believe the end of the book is just the start of the story.”
Kimberley Britt, owner 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Kim: We connect. Our mission statement – “We believe the end of the book is 
just the start of the story” – really speaks to our goal of creating a 
relationship-based business that is dedicated to bringing readers and writers 
together. Our staff is made up of long-time residents, active members in the 
arts community, published authors and indie press editors, students, and 
grassroots organisers. We take pride in being able to not only send a customer 
home with a great book, but be able to open their eyes (and the doors) to any 
number of local offerings from volunteer opportunities to the best place to get 
a vegan sandwich. Our programming extends that same message and always includes 
opportunities for socialising, Q&As and more often than not, a fun after-party.

One of my favourite examples is Liesl Swogger, who discovered our space on a 
business trip to Orlando a year ago. Liesl ended up relocating to Orlando, and 
from that one meeting, she not only became an active volunteer at two of our 
community partners,TheKerouacProject.org <http://thekerouacproject.org/> (a 
writer’s residency) andPage15.org <http://page15.org/> (a children’s literacy 
nonprofit), but went back to school for an MFA in Creative Writing. She now 
works part-time at the store to help us create event posters and introduces 
other Orlando newbies to some of the area’s best kept secrets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1dcf34a89453660b255d56d119222d344dd522e6%2F0_223_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando's%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando%27s%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1dcf34a89453660b255d56d119222d344dd522e6%2F0_223_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 A children’s event at Bookmark It. Photograph: Literary Hub 
Who’s your favourite regular?

Kim: Ann Mixon, Media Specialist extraordinaire at Apopka High School. She is 
not only a cheerleader and customer of our small shop, but her enthusiasm and 
love of all things literary is infectious. She has the power to turn surly, 
brooding teenagers into excited readers, writers and poets… a superpower indeed!

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Kim: Bookmark It is located in a popular shared-space market, so every week 
brings any number of unexpected surprises. We’ve had our store taken over by 
news crews filming Emeril Lagasse for a Food Network Segment, been surprise 
hosts to 50 (inebriated) wedding guests driven inside from a courtyard wedding 
due to one of Florida’s infamous downpours, and (perhaps most unexpected) had 
former US Poet Laureate Billy Collins walk into the shop on our very first day 
with a signed broadsheet wishing us well (he has continued to support us ever 
since).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec212727f253531e6ec26e092807580cfe0e9572%2F0_55_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando's%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando%27s%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec212727f253531e6ec26e092807580cfe0e9572%2F0_55_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Billy Collins visits Bookmark It. Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Kim: Although I come from a family of readers, we were big library goers (in 
fact my first job at 15 was at our local public library), so my childhood book 
memories are bittersweet. I remember very clearly getting the library’s summer 
reading passport where we had to log all the books we read each summer (my 
sister and I would often go through more than one). But I also remember wanting 
to keep the books and not give them back! So I’m guessing that trauma probably 
seeped into my psyche and made the concept of owning a bookstore even more 
appealing.

Interview with a Bookstore: Harvard Book Store, Massachusetts' books maze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/04/interview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze>
If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Kim: I’d be working in a philanthropic position that championed the creative 
community. Orlando is home to a wonderful, diverse population of talented 
artisans whose value is often overshadowed by our tourism and tech industries. 
The longer I live here, the more I come to realise that connecting people 
through the arts is the best way to ensure a happy, accepting and ‘rooted-in’ 
residential base.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Kim: The level of complexity in the book publishing and distribution process 
is astounding. Having prior experience in merchandise sales on both a wholesale 
and retail level, I thought I’d be able to ramp up to speed fairly quickly. But 
my learning curve is no match for the constantly-evolving process of bringing 
an author’s work to fruition and then having it delivered into the marketplace. 
Add to that a store mission that is very event-driven, and we can spend hours 
each day just tracking/ordering and returning books to a wide variety of 
suppliers. I often joke that when asked what I’m reading right now, my honest 
answer would be “spreadsheets!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5385585e64985d6ec15f1fbbcb12a5000b1ef17a%2F0_0_1280_854%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando's%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando%27s%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5385585e64985d6ec15f1fbbcb12a5000b1ef17a%2F0_0_1280_854%2F1280.jpg>
 ‘we are only a whopping 205 square feet’: Bookmark It. Photograph: Literary Hub
The staff shelf

What are Bookmark It’s booksellers reading?

 * Forty Martyrs by Philip F. Deaver (2016). Kim (owner) recommends: “In 
addition to being an award-winning author of short stories (Flannery O’Connor 
Award) and poet (having been featured on The Writer’s Almanac with Garrison 
Keillor), Phil is a local, beloved Professor of English at Rollins College 
(Winter Park, FL) and has been a long-time champion of the Central Florida 
literary community. Forty Martyrs follows the overlapping and quirky lives of 
the people of Tuscola, Illinois, a small Midwestern town, and will leave the 
reader looking at their seemingly normal neighbors with a raised eyebrow and 
just a hint of suspicion.” 
 * Carrying Albert Home by Homer Hickam (2015). Vanessa (bookslinger) 
recommends: “Loved this quirky, funny book. It’s a love story, a travel tale 
and a family “history” set in the 1930’s, all about a couple on a mission to 
return their pet alligator to its home in Orlando. The story has a very Forrest 
Gump-like quality to it, and made me (briefly) want to buy an alligator.” 
 * Rosalie Lightning: A Graphic Memoir by Tom Hart (2016). Karen (manager) 
recommends: “Midway through this graphic memoir, a counsellor suggests Tom Hart 
externalise his anger. Hart responds, “I write and I draw-it–serves the same 
purpose.” Hart draws through all the stages as he grieves the death of his 
daughter. What he gives us is a beautiful expression of love and hope, as he 
tries to make sense of the tragedy. One of the best books I’ve ever read.”  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F333bc0711b9d686258d4b253e7b305343a28b5c2%2F0_0_1400_2074%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando's%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bookmark%20It%2C%20guide%20to%20Orlando%27s%20best%20kept%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bookmark-it-guide-to-orlandos-best-kept-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F333bc0711b9d686258d4b253e7b305343a28b5c2%2F0_0_1400_2074%2F1400.jpg>
 * The Heaven of Animals by David James Poissant (2014). Lisel (bookslinger) 
recommends: “‘Refund’, a favourite in this gorgeously rendered collection of 
stories, is by turns heartbreaking and unexpectedly hilarious. As a young 
couple struggles for power in the midst of their crumbling relationship, they 
use their son as currency. Poissant shies away from easy answers and his 
complex characters demand our empathy and that we examine our own heart.”  