
The Wild Detectives is the result of the enthusiastic talk over the years — 
and around the beers — of two Spanish civil engineers, Paco Vique and Javier 
García del Moral: long time friends, who were crazy enough to make that 
conversation a reality. In February 2014 they opened a bookstore-bar-venue that 
has since invigorated the local cultural landscape and it’s perceived by many 
as the catalyst of what some are starting to call the Dallas Literary Scene.

In a TEDx talk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=boaZV-0EXdE> they gave this 
year at the University of Texas in Arlington they highlight the need for spaces 
to encourage conversations in these smartphone times. “Conversations and human 
interaction, those are the raw materials stories are made” they say. If books 
can be the perfect icebreaker, this bookstore bar may as well feed some great 
literature coming from Dallas in the following years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-wild-detectives-uniting-books-and-beer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0a69667dbe4590ece92809c81962159cbde2e39%2F0_0_700_467%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Wild%20Detectives%2C%20uniting%20books%20and%20beer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-wild-detectives-uniting-books-and-beer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Wild%20Detectives%2C%20uniting%20books%20and%20beer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-wild-detectives-uniting-books-and-beer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0a69667dbe4590ece92809c81962159cbde2e39%2F0_0_700_467%2F700.jpg>
 The Wild Detectives Photograph: Joseph Haubert 
What’s your favorite section of the store?

Andrés de la Casa-Huertas (Brand Director): Local authors. Well, it’s not 
really a section per se; all the authors are mingled on our shelves, Ben 
Fountain is preceded by F. Scott Fitzgerald, Louisa Hall is followed by Jim 
Harrison and so on. But these guys are people we know, authors who’ve been 
presenting their books in the bookstore, books we’ve read and enjoyed. We feel 
very proud of our writers and it’s great to see when their books are selling 
well.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Andrés: That would be nice—our space isn’t very big and curation is key. It 
would be great to have more translations because there is so much great 
international Literature out there. We’d also like to have more non-fiction.
 Photograph: Katy Tran 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Andrés: Cocktails!

Who’s your favourite regular?

Andrés: It’s not just a person. We’re very lucky to be part of an amazing 
community that is deeply involved in promoting culture and in making it 
accessible for everyone. Some of our regulars, like John Bradley or Kelsey 
Capps, have become collaborators, sharing their articles on our website. Our 
friend Vicky Sanz helps us by moderating our Spanish language events and also 
writes on our website. Another friend, Lauren Smart, joined us last May to 
program a month of events to bring visibility to women in Literature and the 
Arts. Will Evans, the man behind Deep Vellum, has brought some of his book 
presentations to the shop. There are also people like Katherine Bourne from 
Shakespeare in the Bar, Fatima-Ayan Malika Hirsi from Dark Moon Poetry, 
Courtney Marie, Leah Tieger, organizations like WordSpace, collectives like 
Bonehouse or House Party Theatre, Josh Kummler from Bar Politics — and we’re 
sure we’re missing some — they bring their projects to our space. They are the 
real reason why we have become a cultural landmark in Dallas. We couldn’t be 
more grateful for that.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Andrés: When we had to hire security because Merritt Tierce was doing a 
reading in the shop. In 2014, a local newspaper ran the story of how she got a 
$2000 tip from conservative talk show mogul Rush Limbaugh when she was a waiter 
at a high-end Dallas steakhouse and gave the entire thing to an abortion rights 
fund. The story didn’t sit well among pro-life supporters, who felt the need to 
threaten Tierce’s own life. Quite a paradox, don’t you think?

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Andrés: The more vivid memory I have about books is actually from my hometown 
library back in Spain. Probably because I’m in essence a lazy person, I used to 
think about how cool it would be if my brain could vaccuum all the content in 
those books at once. I’d become the smartest person alive! I guess I’m also a 
bit megalomaniac.

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Andrés: I’d be reading more for sure.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Andrés: Definitely it’s been people’s reaction to our initiative, how they’ve 
embraced it and become part of it. We’ve been very lucky with the local media 
who’s written great pieces about us and helped us promote our events. Dallas 
has treated us well. We’re nothing but grateful.

The staff shelf

What are The Wild Detectives’s booksellers reading?

 * Blackout: Remembering the Things I Drank to Forget 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/blackout-413512.html> by Sarah Hepola (2015). 
Andrés recommends: “Sarah Hepola’s drunk stories are dark-humored, quite 
enjoyable and endearing (it’s impossible not to root for her), bittersweet 
sometimes, but it’s the second half of the book, in which she shares her 
experience after quitting and coming to terms with herself, that becomes an 
insightful and poignant manual to fight bare hands the “complete inability to 
tolerate the moment.” 
 * Stoner <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/stoner.html> by John Williams 
(1965).Paco recommends: “In addition to a profound display of knowledge about 
the human condition, Stoner is an irresistible exhibition of command of the Art 
of Literature resulting into one of last Century’s top masterpieces. In this 
time and age it is really hard to think what interest if any could be found in 
looking into your inner self, that part of your person of which you cannot take 
any selfies; this novel clears the matter up.”  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-wild-detectives-uniting-books-and-beer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1dc847308938816e2b9580cdb377a93375dd4beb%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Wild%20Detectives%2C%20uniting%20books%20and%20beer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-wild-detectives-uniting-books-and-beer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Wild%20Detectives%2C%20uniting%20books%20and%20beer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-wild-detectives-uniting-books-and-beer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1dc847308938816e2b9580cdb377a93375dd4beb%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
 * The Story of my Teeth  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-story-of-my-teeth-387164.html>by Valerie 
Luiselli (2015). Carlos recommends: “Those who have been following the young 
Mexican author’s writings will find this a departure from her almost 
avant-garde cosmopolitanism to a warmer and evocative style, much in the 
tradition of Borges’ and Marquez’ magical realism. But, the “magic” is in the 
characters and scenarios she creates and how “real” she can make the 
preposterous and outlandish seem. Unique, funny, a little off, but will 
definitely leave a lasting impression.  