
Riverbend Books was opened in 1998 by Suzy Wilson, and has since become one of 
Australia’s leading independent bookstores. Suzy had “a conviction that 
bookstores and all the ideas, imagination and thinking that they contain within 
their walls make them a necessary part of the civilised world.” The name 
Riverbend harkens back to the early days in Bulimba when Indigenous Australians 
called the area Tugulawah, which translates as Riverbend.

The store is on the corner of Oxford Street, a de facto hub of its micro 
village in south-east Brisbane, heavily involved with the local community, 
particularly with the schools in the area. “Fostering a culture of reading in 
the area is essential to our philosophy,” Suzy says.

In 2004, Suzy began a local fundraising campaign to support literacy in remote 
Indigenous communities where literacy levels are very low; it has since 
developed into theIndigenous Literacy Foundation 
<http://www.indigenousliteracyfoundation.org.au/>. The ILF is a national 
project of the Australian Book Industry that aims to develop literacy skills in 
remote communities and provide the resources for sustainable education. In 
2014, Suzy was nominated for Australian of the Year in the Local Hero category 
for her work with the ILF.

What is your favorite section of the store?

Suzy (owner): Our ‘Essays and Culture’ section always has fascinating reads in 
it, and our short stories section has given us the opportunity to showcase some 
really amazing work, particularly by Australian writers.

What would you do if you had infinite space in the store?

Suzy: Honestly, a lot. Our kids section is usually way overstocked, we could 
definitely use more space for literary fiction, and we barely have enough space 
for science and history. Also, we could probably use some bunk beds, as one of 
our staff members lives about two hours away, and maybe a beer garden for good 
measure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dac77307f189a12e33a7d33cde94ee9a2625ae2%2F0_0_1024_683%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Riverbend%20Books%2C%20a%20leading%20Australian%20indie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Riverbend%20Books%2C%20a%20leading%20Australian%20indie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dac77307f189a12e33a7d33cde94ee9a2625ae2%2F0_0_1024_683%2F1024.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Suzy: One of the things we’re proudest of is our engagement with the 
community. We’re the home of the Indigenous Literacy Foundation, which began 
here in 2004. We run 17 book clubs, work closely with schools onour standing 
orders program <http://riverbendbooks.com.au/pages/534-Schools>, and this year 
launched the Riverbend Readers Boot Camp, a fundraising initiative and reading 
challenge for our local community. Essentially, we encourage people to engage 
with high quality literature in a way that’s accessible and friendly.

Biggest surprise about working in a bookshop? I keep forgetting we can’t give 
books away for free.
Suzy Wilson 
Who is your favorite regular?

Suzy: I think every staff member has a different one. One customer, Pauline 
Crowe, has been coming here since we’ve opened and is just lovely. There are 
even a few people who came here when they were kids who bring kids of their own 
now! And we love our younger readers, like six-year-old Charlotte, who wrote us 
an amazing note about how she wanted to work here. We’ve been getting those 
kids to do online reviews and they’re fantastic.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve encountered?

Suzy: One time when I was reading to a group of kids I had one of the staff 
dress up as Maisy the Mouse. We get really into our re-enactments. At some 
point in the story I had to cover Maisy’s mouth, not realizing that I was 
cutting off the flow of oxygen inside Nick’s mask. I just kept laughing and 
reading this story and then eventually he passed out. We’ve had excellent 
occupational health and safety coverage since.

What’s your earliest/best memory of visiting a bookstore as a child?

Suzy: Oddly enough, my earliest memories of being in a bookstore aren’t until 
much later, when I was 19 and traveling in Greece. There weren’t many 
bookstores in Brisbane growing up and I always borrowed from the library. I 
remember buying so many books there that were formative to my reading—Quentin 
Crisp, Simone de Beauvoir, Cavafy—and realizing how much I loved those places.

Myles (media manager): I’m sure it wasn’t my first, but I very clearly 
remember faking an injury to get out of cricket so I could buy the fifth Harry 
Potter book when it came out. I don’t think I convinced anyone, but I’m an 
appalling cricketer so they let me go.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe97c9737cdae1146b6171b874c70e951c4c59f81%2F0_0_1240_826%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Riverbend%20Books%2C%20a%20leading%20Australian%20indie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Riverbend%20Books%2C%20a%20leading%20Australian%20indie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe97c9737cdae1146b6171b874c70e951c4c59f81%2F0_0_1240_826%2F1240.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you weren’t running a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Suzy: I think there are a few other things we’re interested in as a 
collective. I’d probably be more involved with the day-to-day of the Indigenous 
Literacy Foundation or work in remote communities. Some of the others, like 
Vicky and Jen, have separate craft business of their own.

Interview with a Bookstore: Melbourne's Readings, the best bookshop in the 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/02/interview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world>
Myles: I used to work as a Spiderman impersonator at children’s birthday 
parties, and seeing as my other source of income is writing I’d probably be 
back to doing that. Alex and I sing a lot in the shop, so I could suggest 
starting an off key Fleetwood Mac covers band, but he’s actually very talented 
so I feel he’d very quickly end up going solo.

What’s been your biggest surprise about working in a bookstore?

Suzy: As counterintuitive as it sounds, it’s expecting people to pay money for 
books. I keep forgetting we can’t give them away for free.

The staff shelf

What are Riverbend’s booksellers reading?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F128979debe8bb38bed479ebf6104289d9dbbbcf4%2F0_0_1807_2456%2F1807.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Riverbend%20Books%2C%20a%20leading%20Australian%20indie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Riverbend%20Books%2C%20a%20leading%20Australian%20indie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F128979debe8bb38bed479ebf6104289d9dbbbcf4%2F0_0_1807_2456%2F1807.jpg>
 * The Natural Way of Things by Charlotte Wood (2015). Julie (bookclub 
coordinator) recommends: “Charlotte Wood is criminally unknown, and her 
upcoming novel is an Atwoodian nightmare that succeeds in commenting on our 
society without being didactic. If you’re looking to discover a new Australian 
writer, Wood is one of our finest.”

 * Brother of the More Famous Jack by Barbara Trapido (1982). Vicky (events 
manager) recommends: “Whenever customers ask for something “upbeat,” most of us 
are usually stuck, but this has to be one of the funniest, cleverest books I’ve 
read. Imagine a raunchy, modern Jane Austen novel, or being invited to party 
where everyone is smarter and sexier than you, but still really fun to hang out 
with.”  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe4aea7547267ce4602efbed7268f1c911fc7e16%2F0_0_660_1000%2F660.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Riverbend%20Books%2C%20a%20leading%20Australian%20indie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Riverbend%20Books%2C%20a%20leading%20Australian%20indie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe4aea7547267ce4602efbed7268f1c911fc7e16%2F0_0_660_1000%2F660.jpg>
 * Navigatio by Patrick Holland (2014). Myles recommends: “This unusual 
novella is a stellar example of the challenging and unique work coming out of 
our local literary scene. Following St Brendan, a Sixth Century Monk, as he 
searches for Paradise on earth, it is a strangely beautiful fable that 
elegantly traverses time and space.  