
In 1979, Richard and Lisa Howorth thought William Faulkner’s town should have 
a bookstore, so they opened Square Books on the second floor of a small 
building facing the square. Oxford was a small town, but they thought that if 
at least 11 families shopped at the store, they could make it. Many more 
families came to the store, as well as many writers who visited for readings 
and signings, including Ellen Douglas, Willie Morris, Bill Ferris and William 
Styron. After a few years they bought the building that housed a drugstore 
across the square and in 1986 moved into what has become the iconic Square 
Books.

Square Books is a general independent bookstore in three separate buildings 
(about 100 feet apart) on the historic town square of Oxford, Mississippi, home 
of the University of Mississippi and many great writers, includingWilliam 
Faulkner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamfaulkner>, Barry Hannah, 
Larry Brown, and, for a time, both Willie Morris and John Grisham. The main 
store, Square Books, is in a two-story building with a cafe and balcony on the 
second floor; Off Square Books is a few doors down from the main store and has 
lifestyle sections such as gardening and cookbooks; and Square Books Jr, the 
children’s bookstore, is in a building on the east side of the square. Square 
Books is known for its strong selection of literary fiction, books on the 
American South and by Southern writers, a large inventory of reduced-price 
remainders, and its emphasis on books for children. The store hosts the popular 
Thacker Mountain radio show and over 150 author events a year.

What’s your favorite section in the store?

Beckett (bookseller): Staff picks.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Lyn (general manager): Put in more books.

Richard (co-owner): Fugitaboutit.

Karen (bookseller): If I had infinite space in the bookstore I would hand 
write/paint the first and last chapter of every book I have loved on all the 
walls and ceilings and tables.

Adam (bookseller): A bar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-square-books-in-william-faulkners-hometown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea9fa59cccb7f11ef7bfabe94d0ceec6032cbecb%2F0_0_1240_1002%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Square%20Books%2C%20in%20William%20Faulkner's%20hometown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-square-books-in-william-faulkners-hometown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Square%20Books%2C%20in%20William%20Faulkner%27s%20hometown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-square-books-in-william-faulkners-hometown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea9fa59cccb7f11ef7bfabe94d0ceec6032cbecb%2F0_0_1240_1002%2F1240.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
Who’s your weirdest regular?

Richard: For years a guy would come in and browse and when he left, we would 
find a china figurine or tchotchke on top of the bookshelves — unicorns, 
praying hands, angels, birds, you name it. We never saw him, but he left more 
than 50 over the years.

Beckett: The co-owner, Lisa Howorth.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Adam: I don’t think we are necessarily better at anything, but we welcome 
people not only to our bookstore, but to our town. When you walk in Square 
Books, not only are you going to get help finding a book, but you are going, 
more than likely, to be talking to someone who can help you with things to do, 
where to stay, where to eat, etc. Almost like travel agents, or ambassadors of 
the town.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Richard: The main store has a balcony with potted plants. One day some kids 
were horsing around out there, knocked over a plant and some dirt fell on a 
lady’s car below. There was no damage, but she was irate and came storming into 
the store demanding reparation. I went with her to the local carwash, only to 
find it out of order. So instead, I had her drive to my house where I pulled 
out a hose, bucket and soap and washed her car for her.

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Norma (bookseller): My favorite memory of visiting a bookstore as a child took 
place when I think I was ten. The owners’ daughter was babysitting me and we 
were running errands and she told me that we needed to stop by somewhere on the 
square. We got out of the car and went up to a storefront whose windows were 
covered in brown paper and there were no signs out front to tell me where we 
were. She unlocked the door and we walked in, and she told me that this store 
was going to be Square Books, Jr. A few weeks later, at 6 a.m., Square Books 
was having a party for the release ofHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix 
and a crowd of pajama-clad children followed signs posted around the square to 
the previously unmarked storefront; now there was a sign out front with 
“Flourish and Blott’s” painted on it, and all of us children were told that we 
were getting a bookstore for our own books. We didn’t have to share with the 
adults anymore! Most of us spent the next hours parked in different spots 
around the store reading the new Harry Potter. That was the only book in the 
store at that point, and it was displayed on all of the newly painted shelves. 
Of course, that was the only book that any of us cared about that day, so we 
didn’t mind the limited selection at all.

Paul (bookseller): My honest to goodness, first memory of Square Books is 
attending a signing at Off Square Books with my father. I couldn’t have been 
more than 10-years-old. We get to the signing and I’m expecting to see a bunch 
of people sitting around quietly (like a library). Instead, what I find is a 
crowd of rowdy people who seem to all know each other. It was the first time in 
my life I’d seen a crowd of “grown-ups” laughing and goofing off the way these 
folks were. Having since attended a signing in my adult life, I know now that 
the likely culprit was wine and spirits. In a way, it was my first indication 
that if you wanted to have a good time, Square Books was the place to be.
 Square Books Jr, the children’s bookstore. Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you weren’t running at a bookstore what would you be doing?

Jill: Restaurateur.

Richard: Writing a book.

Lyn: I can’t imagine!

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Jill: The dedication of the staff and the customers to each other, the written 
word, and the store.

Richard: There is never nothing to do, and it never gets old.

The staff shelf

What are Square Books’ booksellers reading?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-square-books-in-william-faulkners-hometown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d1890d7b60f4b308633f1d61e4835d1307fe798%2F0_0_3018_4696%2F3018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Square%20Books%2C%20in%20William%20Faulkner's%20hometown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-square-books-in-william-faulkners-hometown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Square%20Books%2C%20in%20William%20Faulkner%27s%20hometown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-square-books-in-william-faulkners-hometown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d1890d7b60f4b308633f1d61e4835d1307fe798%2F0_0_3018_4696%2F3018.jpg>
 * Gould’s Book of Fish by Richard Flanagan 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gould-s-book-of-fish-385325.html> (2001). “A 
powerful story as much about the beauty of the world as the struggle of 
existence; it emanates a slow-burn kind of energy. I cannot emphasize enough 
how essential a read this is.”

 * Butcher’s Crossing by John Williams 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/butcher-s-crossing.html> (1960). “Williams 
may be best known for Stone and Augustus, the latter of which he won the 
National Book Award in 1972, but this gorgeously horrific book is his best and 
a must. Without Williams, there would be no Cormac McCarthy.” 
 * The Atocha Station by Ben Lerner 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/leaving-the-atocha-station.html> (2011). “An 
American poet on fellowship in Madrid neglects his work while “contemplating 
the profundity of Art,” and smoking hash. A J.P. Donleavy or Joyce Cary of what 
Franzen calls “our late modern moment.” Clever, funny, fresh, this book is 
admired by great writers but remains undiscovered. Discover!”  