
Magers and Quinn was opened in the summer of 1994, by Denny Magers, who has 
been the sole owner for 21 years. Before Magers and Quinn, he’d purchased a 
small antiquarian bookstore near the University of Minnesota that was not 
infrequently compared to the bookstore inThe Neverending Story. Looking for 
more bookselling opportunities, Magers saw the space in the Uptown neighborhood 
and decided to open another store, Magers and Quinn Booksellers (his paternal 
and maternal family names). Magers and QuinnBooksellers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksellers> has been Uptown’s favorite 
destination for reading material ever since.

What’s your favorite section in the store?


Jessi (retail manager) Heraldry & Chivalry, because once you know where the 
section is in the store then you are officially an expert browser or employee 
in the know.

Ann (events coordinator) Firefighting. Usually the smallest section in the 
store—sometimes nonexistent—but arguably the most important.

Emily F (bookseller): Women’s Studies!

Dave G (bookseller): The basement! It’s quiet.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Annie (assistant manager): There’s a new luxury apartment building nearby that 
has a pool/hot tub on the second-floor patio that juts out over the sidewalk. 
It’s very exhibitionist and un-Minnesotan, but if we installed one of those I’m 
pretty sure it would be the first hot tub reading room in the nation.

Emily B (bookseller): The Mitford Sisters section. It’d only take up a foot of 
shelf space, for sure, but it would be a foot of shelf space catered 
exclusively to my politically discomfiting and sort of shameful special 
interest.

The majority of the staff agrees that a bar stocked with Minneapolis craft 
brews would be an enhancement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-magers-and-quinn-in-minnesota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2e18badfd244c6d44a9f9b07ce461c0b43ec73c%2F0_0_1000_353%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Magers%20and%20Quinn%20in%20Minnesota&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-magers-and-quinn-in-minnesota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Magers%20and%20Quinn%20in%20Minnesota&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-magers-and-quinn-in-minnesota%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2e18badfd244c6d44a9f9b07ce461c0b43ec73c%2F0_0_1000_353%2F1000.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Gary (community outreach and B2B sales director): New books, used books, rare 
and collectable books, our events, our outreach and bulk sales, etc… we do it 
all and we do it well!

Beth (assistant manager): Make recommendations, of course! I don’t think 
people realize how fun this is and how happy it makes us.

Emily F: I like to think that our bookstore has a charming, romantic quality 
that projects from the “Beauty and the Beast” ladders, the wide front windows 
and the rare books nestled upstairs. We put on some great events, too. I was 
extremely proud to be a part of the Nick Offerman event we pulled off 
midsummer. There was a lot of sweating involved, but it was totally worth it.

Who’s your favorite regular?


Emily B: Arm surgery girl. I don’t know her name. She must have broken her arm 
badly in the winter because she’s had a number of surgeries since… and she’s 
only ever been in the store after a surgery. Whatever they pump into her to 
dull the pain, it inspires an insatiable urge for books. She usually gets a 
foot-high stack of picture books from the sale cart and makes the guy who 
drives her to and from the hospital carry it. I love her.

Ann: This guy comes in every couple of weeks and asks for a recommendation—of 
anything. He will read literally anything you recommend. He holds a special 
place in my heart because he actually bought, read, and (supposedly) likedThe 
Monkby Matthew Lewis.

Emily B: I also love that guy. He makes me feel IMMENSELY POWERFUL.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Jessi: The time Jordan Matter (the photographer behind Dancers Among Us) 
visited the store and had a professional dancer pose on our VERY precarious art 
wall ladder, upside down. It was terrifying but thephotos are great 
<http://blog.jordanmatter.com/2012/10/i-cant-believe-this-all-happened-in.html>.

Beth: Guy came in looking for a book, which was about WWII, main character was 
a Nazi—but you don’t find that out until the end. He was adamant about these 
details and said we should know this right awaybecause it was a classic! An 
hour later (and after asking for help from three other employees), we figured 
out it wasAll Quiet On the Western Front, which is set during WWI and the main 
character is a German which you know throughout the whole book.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-magers-and-quinn-in-minnesota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6df47edb35c999404251fe20dbed237f13b3150d%2F0_0_1240_930%2Fmaster%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Magers%20and%20Quinn%20in%20Minnesota&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-magers-and-quinn-in-minnesota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Magers%20and%20Quinn%20in%20Minnesota&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-magers-and-quinn-in-minnesota%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6df47edb35c999404251fe20dbed237f13b3150d%2F0_0_1240_930%2Fmaster%2F1240.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s your earliest memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Gary: My first bookstore memory is with my grandma. I must have been five 
years old. She bought me a Lassie book! I can still remember like it was 
yesterday, and I am old.

Beth: My small town didn’t have a bookstore, but I lived for the Scholastic 
Book Fairs!

If you weren’t running/working at a bookstore what would you be doing?

Aaron (bookseller, buyer): Driving a bus.

Annie: As an English major, I’m told I have few marketable skills. So, yeah, 
maybe driving a bus. Or attempting to brew beer and raise sheep in northern 
England.

Ann: Lying on the beach.

Emily F: Wallowing away in a hole somewhere.

Interview with a Bookstore: The Wild Detectives, uniting books and beer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/15/interview-with-a-bookstore-the-wild-detectives-uniting-books-and-beer>
What’s been the biggest surprise about running/working in a bookstore?

Beth: The times we are asked: There was this book, it was red (or blue or 
green), it had a picture of a girl (or flower or mountain) on the front, and it 
was right here (or there or on the front table) when I came in about six weeks 
(or three months or a year) ago? And we FIND IT!!! We always underestimate the 
amount of information we’ve retained.

Annie: I don’t know about working at bookstores in general, but I am 
constantly surprised by the strength of the reading community in Minneapolis. 
There are readers and shoppers to support 28 independent bookstores (and some 
great indie comic shops as well) in the Twin Cities, which give us all a strong 
sense of security and purpose despite the challenges of the business.

The staff shelf

What are Magers and Quinn’s booksellers reading?

 * Trouble in Paradise by Slavoj Žižek 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/trouble-in-paradise-344830.html> (2014). Dave 
(bookseller) recommends: “The first philosopher to take on the topic of Gangnam 
Style.” 
 * M Train by Patti Smith 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/m-train-424873.html> (2015). Aaron 
(bookseller and buyer) recommends: “In this follow-up to Just Kids, Patti Smith 
channels WG Sebald as she wanders through the world writing and taking pictures 
and looking back upon her life.” 
 * The Sympathiser by Viet Thanh Nguyen 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sympathizer-412914.html> (2015). Annie 
(assistant manager) recommends: “Besides being the best novel of 2015 so far 
(in my opinion), this book has the most exquisitely crafted, comedically 
genius, hilariously grotesque masturbation scene ever written. Mild spoiler: 
there’s a squid.”  