
Brattle Book Shop’s origins date back to 1825 when it was built in the 
Cornhill section ofBoston <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/boston>, later 
called Scollay Square. By 1949, it was set to go out of business. George and 
Dorrit Gloss, newly married and deeply passionate about books, pooled their 
resources to buy half interest in the shop for $500. A year later, they were 
full owners and parents to a son, Ken, who currently owns the shop with his 
wife Joyce Kosofsky. During Ken’s tenure, he has seen the store through fires, 
crane mishaps, and seven locations, as well as hundreds of thousands of used 
and collectible books.

What’s your favourite section in the store?

Ken (owner): We are constantly getting new books of all varieties. There are 
certain books that are remarkable to have possessed—for instance, a first 
edition ofThe Great Gatsby inscribed by Fitzgerald, “to the greatest living 
poet, T.S. Eliot” and annotated by Eliot—but the point is to sell them. If a 
rare and collectible book stays in our inventory for a while, you start to 
wonder why no one is buying it. With that said, there isn’t one type of book I 
particularly like. We are always looking for what’s new and different. Within 
any subject area, there are things that are really interesting and exciting to 
handle and things that are more calm and boring. The variation is part of the 
fun.

Interview with a Bookstore: London's Lutyens and Rubinstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/mar/28/interview-with-a-bookstore-londons-lutyens-and-rubinstein>
If you had infinite space what would you add?

Ken: More books! We currently have two floors of general used books; one floor 
of rare, signed, and collectible books; and $1, $3, and $5 sale carts that are 
outside year-round, weather dependent. We usually go to one or two estate sales 
a week with an average purchase of 5,000 books. At some sales, however, we will 
buy up to 30,000. We purchased the estate of a professor who owned between 
20,000 and 30,000 volumes. Emptying his apartment, it was clear he never had 
company over.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Ken: We are able to sell general used books very cheaply, as well as very 
expensive, rare books. We also work with estates, museums, lawyers, and moving 
organisers. I do a lot of lecturing and am frequently featured as an appraiser 
on PBS’sAntiques Roadshow, which is always a great experience. I spend summers 
traveling to the roadshows and have gotten to see a great deal of America 
through that. Usually, I’ll find at least one item of great value per event. 
Funnily, a lot of people are more grateful to find out that their book is 
valueless, as it relieves them of the pressure of owning it. On the opposite 
end of the spectrum, our outdoor sale lot makes us unique, as well as the fact 
that we are a used book store in the inner city, which is now a dying breed.

Who’s your favorite regular?

Ken: We have a regular who has been coming in every day for over 50 years. He 
is a very passionate book buyer—he has an entire house on his property just for 
books. On the days he can’t make it in, he calls in sick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fbrattle-book-shop-boston-rare-collectibles-salinger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c55549629fcdc5f6cba844d833ed75ca0166dc%2F49_0_1723_2152%2F1723.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Brattle%20Book%20Shop%2C%20Boston's%20home%20for%20rare%20collectibles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fbrattle-book-shop-boston-rare-collectibles-salinger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Brattle%20Book%20Shop%2C%20Boston%27s%20home%20for%20rare%20collectibles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fbrattle-book-shop-boston-rare-collectibles-salinger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c55549629fcdc5f6cba844d833ed75ca0166dc%2F49_0_1723_2152%2F1723.jpg>
 JD Salinger, author of The Catcher In The Rye. Photograph: KPA/Zuma/REX 
What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Ken: We’ve dealt with a fire in 1980 that burnt the shop down, and about 10 
years ago a crane fell over through our outdoor sale lot. We also have a 
customer who eats Bibles. She’s very nice, but she will walk up to a section, 
rip out a page, and eat it. She much prefers Catholic versions—she won’t touch 
King James Bibles.

Another time, an older man came in and asked for an obscure author, who I was 
familiar with. I spoke with him briefly and looked through our inventory but 
was unable to find anything. After he had left, one of my employees asked if I 
knew who that was; I had no idea. It turns out it was JD Salinger. My employee 
had dated his daughter, so he recognised him.

What’s your earliest memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Ken: I grew up in a bookstore. My parents say my first word was “book.”

If you weren’t running a bookstore what would you be doing?

Ken: I would be a chemist. When I started running the store in 1973, I 
initially thought I was simply taking a year off before beginning my doctorate. 
I’ve been here ever since.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Ken: That the business keeps on going. Seeing how many young people are still 
buying and reading books is a pleasant surprise. I always say, the most 
interesting part about collecting books isn’t the books themselves; it’s 
collecting the stories about the people who bring them in.

Some rare books currently at Brattle Book Shop:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fbrattle-book-shop-boston-rare-collectibles-salinger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1b7cb97dd42844249ccbd44cdf094c2cd0983d1%2F0_0_630_1024%2F630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Brattle%20Book%20Shop%2C%20Boston's%20home%20for%20rare%20collectibles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fbrattle-book-shop-boston-rare-collectibles-salinger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Brattle%20Book%20Shop%2C%20Boston%27s%20home%20for%20rare%20collectibles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fbrattle-book-shop-boston-rare-collectibles-salinger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1b7cb97dd42844249ccbd44cdf094c2cd0983d1%2F0_0_630_1024%2F630.jpg>
 * The Scarlet Letter by Nathaniel Hawthorne, published by Ticknor, Reed, and 
Fields in Boston, 1850. Second edition, first state, $500. “A friend of mine 
was moving to California and lightening his load. He loved New England authors, 
but he decided to only bring Thoreau with him.” 
 * Have Faith in Massachusetts by Calvin Coolidge, published by Houghton 
Mifflin/Riverside Press in Boston, 1919. First edition, signed and inscribed by 
Coolidge, $600. “When you’re in Massachusetts, this one shows up. This came out 
of the house of a recent governor, 10-15 years ago. When he got elected, people 
gave him a lot of books, and this was one of which he received multiple copies.”

 * The Orchard Keeper by Cormac McCarthy, published by Random House, NY, 1965. 
First edition, $2,500. “This one came from a charity organization in the Boston 
area. They invited four or five dealers in to bid on their books.”  