
Literati Bookstore was opened on March 31, 2013 by Hilary and Mike Gustafson. 
Hilary grew up in Ann Arbor and later began a career in publishing, working as 
a sales rep for Simon and Schuster in New York. In 2009, Ann Arbor lost long 
time favourite independent bookstore Shaman Drum. Two years later, Borders 
announced their nationwide closing, including the flagship store in downtown 
Ann Arbor. Hilary and Mike, who also grew up inMichigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michigan>, decided to follow their dream 
of opening an independent bookstore in Ann Arbor — with re-purposed Borders 
Store No. 1 bookshelves and fixtures — a few blocks from the University of 
Michigan’s campus in the heart of downtown.

What’s your favourite section of the store?

Atticus Solomon (bookseller): Our poetry section is expansive for such a small 
space. It’s always refreshing to see a large poetry section in any bookstore, 
even if you don’t enjoy the art form, you know your booksellers value the 
written word if they know a thing or two about poetry.

Lillian Li (bookseller): Right now, Psychology. The books in that section make 
a lot of big promises. When I shelve there, I feel like the answers to life are 
at my fingertips.

Claire Tobin (marketing assistant): Always fiction. Our frontlist book 
buyer/co-owner/lady boss Hilary has such amazing taste and curates the best 
titles across the board. We have an incredibly diverse array of books from the 
big seven to small presses. I’m always learning about new publishers and new 
names.
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you had infinite space what would you add?

John Ganiard (events coordinator): Zines, a literary journal selection to 
rival the historic Hopwood Room at the University of Michigan, and, uh, a deli? 
Books and coffee is already amazing, we’re spoiled! But books and a turkey 
reuben? Oh, also the deli is a full-service bar.

Sharon Gambin (bookseller): At the top of my wish list would be an inviting 
multipurpose event/performance space with great acoustics, some natural light 
and comfortable chairs. When not used for store events it could be used for 
book, discussion groups, poetry slams, etc. Then I would create an expanded art 
section with great display areas, a university press section and a dedicated 
area for interesting greeting cards, pens and journals.

Claire: Storage space. All the storage space. And a wine bar.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Jeanne Joesten (inventory manager): I don’t like to use superlatives, but we 
do a number of things well — like social media, and we have staff members who 
write thoughtful, pithy book blurbs, that customers seem to appreciate... I 
also think that our willingness to special order from publishers, no matter how 
small or obscure and no matter what the discount, is becoming rare in the book 
world.

Claire: I’ve found that customers have really come to appreciate the 
recommendations we give them. We write some pretty top-notch shelf-talkers and 
every day I get someone asking me what John or Mairead or Jeanne or Mike (etc.) 
is reading right now. We have the best staff picks in the game.

Who’s your favourite regular?

John: I’m going to go with some great canine regulars: Finn, Dot, Barry 
Sanders, and Winston to name just a few. Claire and I met a miniature 
Australian Shepherd at the Kerrytown Book Festival recently (I want to say his 
name was Pixel? He had heterochromia), and I think it’s safe to say we called 
way too much attention to ourselves fawning over him. But, comeon, a miniature 
Australian Shepherd? They exist?

Ok, also poet Ray McDaniel.

Claire: We have an amazing array of puppy regulars who know exactly where our 
treats are and walk immediately to the front counter where I get to snuggle 
them and (shh!) accidentally forget about human customers. Among my many 
favorites are Leto the Husky who likes to jump up and put his front paws on the 
counter; Finn the very chill Bernese Mountain Dog; Barry Sanders the handsome 
French Bulldog (and his new little brother Indiana Jones); and Otis the easily 
excitable black lab. They light up my life. They’ve never bought a book, but 
their sweet owners do every time they come in.

As far as human favorites, I agree with John about Ray McDaniel. He brings a 
smile to every bookseller’s face and has incredible taste in books. Also — if 
you’re here frequently enough, you may find yourself in the presence of Anne 
Carson, who always seems to make every bookseller stand up a bit straighter.
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Shannon Alden (bookseller): Once, a customer came into the store streaked from 
their hair down in red paint and paid for their over $100 total entirely in 
rolls of one-dollar coins.

Claire: Every Halloween, the same guy dresses to the nines in zombie garb and 
comes into the store. I just happened to have worked the past three Halloweens 
and let me tell you, it is the most stressful shift of my life wondering when 
the zombie will walk in.

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

John: I grew up partially in Ann Arbor. Back when Nicola’s was called Little 
Professor’s, my mom would always take me there after grocery shopping, or on 
weekends before getting bagels and muffins next door at Barry’s. I can’t smell 
our bookstore (people always ask us “don’t you love that smell” and I’m always 
like “what smell?”), but every time I stop in Nicola’s I smell that book glue, 
and then a little bit of the bagels being made next door—there’s nothing like 
it! It was, still is, and always will be, an incredibly calming sensation.

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Jeanne: If I had it to do all over again, I would be either a therapist or a 
physical therapist, as these are the two professions that have had the most 
positive impact on my life, besides that of writers who I love. But soon, I 
look forward to retirement, during which I hope to travel and read all of the 
books I’ve accumulated in nearly 30 years of working in the book business.

Shannon: If I weren’t working a bookstore, I would travel the world while 
visiting every bookshop, whiskey library, knitting store, and bakery along the 
way.

The staff shelf

What are Literati’s booksellers reading?

 * Children of the New World 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/children-of-the-new-world-435958.html> by 
Alexander Weinstein (2016).Kelsey recommends: “Weinstein’s stories are driven 
by a longing for deeper answers: What defines us as human? How will we maintain 
this humanity as our lives become increasingly interwoven with the digital? I 
am haunted these characters and their search for human connection in worlds 
where technology appears to supersede it, but I am comforted by Weinstein’s 
implication that such connection will still be essential.” 
 * Misbehaving: the Making of Behavioural Economics 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/misbehaving-466639.html> by Richard H Thaler 
(2015). Carla recommends: “This is as good an explanation as any of the 
neurological and psychological biases that cause people to act against their 
own economic interest. Incidentally, Thaler advised both the Redskins and David 
Cameron. You can lead a horse to water...”  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-literati-in-michigan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab500677a6b1e6f8b4d47ee7f80cb3fafc59d2d%2F0_0_678_1024%2F678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Literati%20in%20Michigan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-literati-in-michigan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Literati%20in%20Michigan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-literati-in-michigan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab500677a6b1e6f8b4d47ee7f80cb3fafc59d2d%2F0_0_678_1024%2F678.jpg>
 * The Fortunes <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fortunes.html> by Peter Ho 
Davies (2016).Lillian recommends: “Rarely has a book so impressed me with its 
ambition and scope, on both a large and small scale, asThe Fortunes. Davies 
precisely paints his Chinese-American characters with real and human desires, 
tragedies, and idiosyncrasies. This book proves that the Chinese-American story 
is one we not only need, but also really, really want.”  