
Harvard Book Store was founded in 1932 by Mark S. Kramer, a native of Boston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/boston>. With $300 borrowed from his 
parents, he opened a small shop selling used and bargain general interest books 
in Cambridge. Frank Kramer, Mark and Pauline’s son, entered the business in 
1962 and directed the company for over 40 years before selling it to local book 
lovers Jeff Mayersohn and Linda Seamonson.

Harvard Book Store has been locally owned and independently run—and, has 
spelled “book store” as two words—since 1932. As Harvard Square’s landmark 
independent bookstore, the store is renowned for its selection (of used, 
remaindered, and new titles), award­-winning events series, and its history of 
innovation.

What is your favorite section of the store?

Liz (children’s buyer, bookseller): Our bountiful staff recs wall! It’s the 
first thing you see when you walk in.

Mark (store manager): Although I love reading history/biography/politics, at a 
given moment a particular title/topic on our shelves might not grab me. Essays, 
though, are the seed catalog of books; I can open almost anything there and 
find a new idea (or new expression of a familiar one) that makes things look 
different. It’s easily my favorite section. And most of the best writing I’ve 
ever read has been in essays.

Katherine (supervisor, bookseller): My favorite section is our brand new 
romance section. It’s tiny, but it didn’t exist for the first 83 years of the 
store. There’s a lot of great, smart, funny, feminist romance out there that 
gets overlooked by a large section of the book community. It’s been a lot of 
fun spending this summer reading books to choose some that match our 
bookstore’s personality.

There’s a customer who comes in all the time who doesn’t give us her last name 
and I think it’s because she’s a witch

Jeff (owner): Academic new arrivals. I’m intrigued by the way academics think, 
simultaneously focusing on both very big questions and what would appear to the 
rest of the world to be minutiae.

Melissa (supervisor, bookseller): Fiction, because it’s quiet and in the back 
and I like eavesdropping on people on first dates.

Serena (marketing coordinator): Always changing, but I have a special place in 
my heart for science fiction / fantasy and our epic staff recommendations 
display.

Alex (events and marketing manager): New Paperbacks. It’s such an exciting 
cross section of the entire store’s selection, and you never know what you 
might unexpectedly pick up. Plus there’s the opportunity to be extremely 
judgmental or intrigued by familiar titles that have unveiled a fresh look for 
the paperback design.

What would you do if you had infinite space in the store?

Carole (general manager): Lots of seats, a wine bar, expanded sections, a 
special room for kid’s books.

Melissa: A dance floor. Just kidding, booksellers are the most introverted 
people in the world.

Alex: I want the bookstore equivalent of the pool that is built into the gym 
floor inIt’s a Wonderful Life. What would the Harvard Book Store floor open up 
to reveal? Perhaps a 200­-seat dedicated event space. And/or a huge storage 
space with meticulous shelf labeling for us to store overstock. And a lounge we 
could use for visiting authors, instead of the staff break room. And apartments 
for booksellers. And a staff break room foosball table with literary figures as 
the little players. Ahab would be a goalie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0a3f55fdb3806e7f021dac9513c626b512fb499%2F0_0_1240_930%2Fmaster%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Harvard%20Book%20Store%2C%20Massachusetts'%20books%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Harvard%20Book%20Store%2C%20Massachusetts%27%20books%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0a3f55fdb3806e7f021dac9513c626b512fb499%2F0_0_1240_930%2Fmaster%2F1240.jpg>
 Inside Harvard Book Store. Photograph: Literary Hub 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Liz: Shimmying up wooden ladders holding armfuls of books.

Mark: Put it this way: no bookstore is better than we are at breaking the ice 
between a customer and an unfamiliar title or even whole genre. At our best and 
loudest and busiest there’s a constant interchange among staff and 
customers—and they feel invited to be full participants.

Jeff: Since I respect and admire our fellow indies, I don’t want to compare. 
Particular strengths of our store are curation, combining a strong mix of 
academic and popular titles; events; and support for self-­published authors 
with our Espresso Book Machine.

Alex: At Harvard Book Store there are books everywhere. The shelves tower 
above you, extending to the tall ceilings, with ladders making the overstock 
areas accessible to staff. Every wall, surface, window, and shelf is packed 
with books.

Interview with a Bookstore: Albertine, a little Paris in New York
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/may/09/interview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york>
Who is your favorite regular?

Serena: Kristin Cashore!

Melissa: There’s a customer who comes in all the time who doesn’t give us her 
last name and I think it’s because she’s a witch and has been alive for 500 
years. I want to be a little like her.

Jeff: We have one regular customer who is a professor; he acted in his youth 
and was “killed” by Lee Majors in an episode ofBig Valley.

Katherine: Favorite regular is Chloe, a black lab with an extreme addiction to 
treats. The moment she comes in the store she tries to make eye contact with 
the people behind the desk. The second she catches you, she sits and waits for 
a treat. One time, she dragged a dog­sitter from two blocks away to the store. 
The dog­sitter was laughing that she had no idea why the dog was so desperate 
to get to the bookstore.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve encountered?

Alex: I was running a reading in the bookstore for the book Fire and Forget, 
an anthology of short stories on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. We were in 
the middle of the talk when the VERY LOUD building fire alarms went off. It 
wasn’t a drill. My recollection is that one or two people in the room screamed 
in surprise. Several firetrucks pulled up as we evacuated the store. As it 
turns out, a tenant in one of the apartments above the store had burned dinner. 
After 20 minutes, we filed back into the store and picked up where we left off. 
I had grabbed some pens on the way out so the authors could at least sign 
copies of their book outside (which they did!),lit by the red flashing lights 
<https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.10151395726603692.1073741825.120246213%20691&type=3&__fns&hash=Ac2FTd%C2%ADU8p0015WE>
 of the Cambridge Fire Department.

Jeff: A internationally known philosopher came in one night and demanded all 
of our Perry Mason books.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde0e96769c1013fe83fda03598ec6190902b2a0a%2F0_0_1000_750%2Fmaster%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Harvard%20Book%20Store%2C%20Massachusetts'%20books%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Harvard%20Book%20Store%2C%20Massachusetts%27%20books%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde0e96769c1013fe83fda03598ec6190902b2a0a%2F0_0_1000_750%2Fmaster%2F1000.jpg>
 Employees only... Harvard Book Store Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you weren’t running a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Melissa: Climbing ladders somewhere else.

Jeff: Thinking about working in a bookstore.

Katherine: If I wasn’t working at this bookstore, I’d work at another one. I 
don’t really function anywhere else.

The staff shelf

What are Harvard Book Store’s booksellers reading?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004cb50ea4b72a1d08a27f2c4a53733bd52c317c%2F174_219_2202_3283%2F2202.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Harvard%20Book%20Store%2C%20Massachusetts'%20books%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Harvard%20Book%20Store%2C%20Massachusetts%27%20books%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004cb50ea4b72a1d08a27f2c4a53733bd52c317c%2F174_219_2202_3283%2F2202.jpg>
 * A Fraction of the Whole by Steve Toltz (2008). Brad (assistant 
store-manager) recommends: “It will start as a chuckle, grow into a cackle, and 
finally you’ll be laughing so hard you’re crying. People on the bus will look 
at you funny, your girlfriend will ask you if you’re okay, and still you won’t 
want to stop reading. This book is an absurd father/son story, a 500 page rant 
against the absurdity of existence, and a one helluva gut buster.”

 * The BreakBeat Poets: New American Poetry in the Age of Hip-Hop (2015). 
Melissa (bookseller) recommends: “ Here’s what you’re going to do: You’re gonna 
learn to time travel and sneak into your high school poetry class. You’re gonna 
leave this book on your desk with a note that says, ‘Hey! Poetry can be fun and 
cool and accessible and like this. Also, wipe the drool off your face.’”  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50741ef75fe60744bb43fa217847e0baf256514c%2F0_0_1317_2048%2F1317.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Harvard%20Book%20Store%2C%20Massachusetts'%20books%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Harvard%20Book%20Store%2C%20Massachusetts%27%20books%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-harvard-book-store-massachusetts-books-maze%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50741ef75fe60744bb43fa217847e0baf256514c%2F0_0_1317_2048%2F1317.jpg>
 * Suspended Sentences: Three Novellas by Patrick Modiano (2008). Annie 
(bookseller) recommends: “Modiano’s brilliance is in telling stories that 
aren’t in order—stories that are, instead, structured around places and 
characters. This English translation (and the translator’s insightful 
commentary) captures the beauty of imagination, nostalgia, and uncertainty that 
makes Modiano’s writing absolutely spellbinding.”  