
Husband and wife team Lee Trentadue and Jim Schmidt opened Galiano Island Books
 <http://www.galianoislandbooks.com/> in 1997, the first ever bookstore on the 
island. The venture was inspired by one of their daughters, who had decided to 
open a bookstore of her own and brought them along to the Canadian Booksellers 
Convention and trade show in Vancouver where they found themselves bitten by 
the “bookstore bug.” Shortly thereafter, the bookstore their daughter had been 
in the process of buying fell through when its owner decided to keep it. Lee 
and James proposed a solution: they would start a store on Galiano Island that 
she could run for a few years until they were ready to take it over. After they 
had begun this process, however, the original bookstore owner decided again to 
sell, and their daughter decided to buy. Lee and James went forward with their 
plan regardless, and the rest is history: Galiano Island Books has been open 
seven days a week ever since, with the exception of Christmas and New Year’s.

What’s your favorite section of the store?

Lee Trentadue (co-owner and booksller): Oh my, this is a hard one. I’d to say 
fiction, although history, cooking, and mystery are right up there too.

Jim Schmidt (co-owner): It’s not exactly a section but I’d have to say special 
orders. I do all the special orders and find that they’re the ultimate source 
of great reader recommendations. It’s fascinating to see what people are 
interested in! The only downside is it’s hard to make money on them because I 
keep ordering so many second copies of the special orders so I can read them 
myself.

Elizabeth Olsen (bookseller): Definitely local interest and natural history; I 
love helping customers in these areas.

Jessica Brudner (bookseller): My favourite section at Galiano Island Books is 
our huge mystery section. I find myself getting lost in the options of the next 
great mystery novel to put on my to-read list!

Hanna Kaczerowska (bookseller): I like regional books and local stories. It 
really introduces me as a foreigner to the west coast of British Columbia and 
the people here.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Lee: A wine bar! Oh, you mean books? I would expand the art book section and 
have large tables for people to peruse them.

Elizabeth: I’d add add a sitting area with cappuccinos, lattes, and teas for 
patrons. And a larger children’s area so children can sprawl out while their 
parents purchase piles of books for them.

Jessica: I would definitely add an upper level to the store with couches, a 
cafe and a place to relax and enjoy your recently purchased book. Maybe even 
add a grand piano for visual effect!

Hanna: I’d love people to spend more time in the bookstore, so I’d add area 
where they can sit down, maybe even some corner with some nice cozy couch and 
pillows, or benches outside (in the garden). Maybe we could even serve coffee 
and cookies. And also in the garden area for kids and adults, I’d build a yurt: 
a round tent where you can sit or lay down and read.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-galiano-island-books-on-a-tiny-canadian-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f6f249ed1b4a6d8c0ab407ed7889c402624c55%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Galiano%20Island%20Books%2C%20on%20a%20tiny%20Canadian%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-galiano-island-books-on-a-tiny-canadian-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Galiano%20Island%20Books%2C%20on%20a%20tiny%20Canadian%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-galiano-island-books-on-a-tiny-canadian-island%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f6f249ed1b4a6d8c0ab407ed7889c402624c55%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 ‘I would definitely add couches, a cafe and a place to relax and enjoy your 
recently purchased book. Maybe even add a grand piano for visual effect!’ 
Photograph: Courtesy of Galiano Island Books 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Lee: We don’t base our selection only on the books that we know are going to 
sell. We take a chance on the many wonderful books that might find that certain 
person who will be delighted to find them.

Jim: I think three things: We put service to our customers above monetary 
considerations; if we didn’t like a book we’ll tell them so and why. We think 
of the store as our second home and our customers as welcome guests. We love 
books and Lee goes to great lengths to bring in the best (as opposed to 
best-selling) books available in every field.

Elizabeth: Greeting customers and offering suggestions; our staff is 
knowledgeable. New arrivals are always highlighted, and we play music and offer 
gift-wrapping. There’s a laid-back attitude, island style. We’re tremendously 
friendly and all-inclusive.

Jessica: Our selection and catalogue is known to be quite extensive and our 
patrons notice how we’ve utilized our small space well enough to make our store 
is very inviting as well as offer a plethora of choices!

Who’s your favorite regular?

Jim: It’s not exactly a direct answer, but I’d have to say the kids. Anyone 
who thinks there is no magic in books should spend a while in the kids’ 
section. Their love of books is truly amazing!

Elizabeth: So far, PJ. She’s so pleased with my assistance and attention and 
is always happy to see me there.

Elizabeth: My favourite regular customer is one of the island’s teachers. She 
is always so friendly when she comes in, we have great conversation about 
children’s and youth titles, and she has been a wonderful source of support to 
the local bookstore.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Jim: A customer wanted to special-order a book. We located a copy and quoted 
him a price. He then called back and said that he’d found a bookstore in the 
lower mainland that had it at a slightly lower price (a dollar or two) and 
asked us to drop by there, buy the book for him, and then sell it to him at 
that price.

Jessica: A customer who was unaware of the title or the author’s name of a 
book she was hoping to purchase was becoming slightly frustrated that I wasn’t 
able to figure out what book she was referring to. I did my best at researching 
the keywords she provided but no luck: I couldn’t find anything related to what 
she wanted. After a lengthy attempt at helping her and to suggest other 
interesting titles that I thought she might enjoy, her response was to ask me 
if I would check the Chapters-Indigo website and see if they had the book she 
was looking for so she could then go home and order it online! Ah, the joys and 
wonders of working as an independent bookseller!

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Lee: My earliest memories of being introduced to books are through libraries. 
I really do not recall going to bookstores until in my teens, but then you 
could not get me out of them!

Jim: There was no bookstore where I grew up. The only books you could get were 
the standard mass market romance, mysteries and westerns at a newsstand my 
parents ran, so I guess I got into bookselling pretty young. I do remember 
getting catalogs from Barnes & Noble back when they were a single store in New 
York. It was wonderful ordering books and then waiting eagerly for them to 
arrive at the post office.

Elizabeth: Choosing Ladybird book from the shop assistant in our village on 
the Mersey. We’d go every week on Saturday morning with Nana.

Jessica: I remember my grandmother taking me to a local children’s bookstore 
back in Toronto for what seemed like hours at a time. I also remember being 
introduced to classic novels from a very young age. My Dad bought me my first 
copy of Catcher in the Rye at the age of eight or nine with the hopes that I 
would be so fascinated with such a classic title and that my love of reading 
would flourish…which I can proudly say, it has!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-galiano-island-books-on-a-tiny-canadian-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff7851fb8a65b0a6231d6cf9ffbd1f4b33f2ff66%2F125_0_3735_2241%2F3735.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Galiano%20Island%20Books%2C%20on%20a%20tiny%20Canadian%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-galiano-island-books-on-a-tiny-canadian-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Galiano%20Island%20Books%2C%20on%20a%20tiny%20Canadian%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-galiano-island-books-on-a-tiny-canadian-island%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff7851fb8a65b0a6231d6cf9ffbd1f4b33f2ff66%2F125_0_3735_2241%2F3735.jpg>
 ‘If I weren’t running a bookshop, I’d be sitting in my back yard reading all 
the books on my nightstand and piled elsewhere around the house. That should 
take me about 73 years.’ Photograph: Courtesy of Galiano Island Books 
If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Lee: Reading and traveling.

Jim: Sitting in my back yard reading all the books on my nightstand and piled 
elsewhere around the house. That should take me about 73 years.

Elizabeth: Reading, kayaking, and trying to write, a fictitious pursuit at 
best.

Jessica: My lifelong goal is to operate a not for profit animal sanctuary for 
rescued factory animals which would provide them with a peaceful and safe 
environment. I have very strong ethics when it comes to animal rights and the 
protection of endangered species. We as the species on top of the chain have a 
responsibility to take care of our fellow earthly friends.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Jim: Two, really. First, I’ve discovered many areas where I’ve never read 
before and now love, like travel writing and history. Second, I’ve been 
surprised and impressed with the wide variety of reading that our customers of 
all ages and backgrounds do.

The staff shelf

What are Galiano Island Books’s booksellers reading?

 * An Instance of the Fingerpost 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/instance-of-the-fingerpost.html> by Iain Pears
 (1997). James (co-owner) recommends: “A murder has occurred, but why and by 
whom? The same story is told four times by four of the characters involved, and 
each time you think you’ve got a handle on it everything flips around. This is 
of course an old literary device, but Pears pulls it off flawlessly and teaches 
us a lot about a pivotal point in English history in the bargain.”

 * Hopscotch <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400718/>
 by Julio Cortázar (1963). Hanna (bookseller) recommends: “I love his surreal 
short stories, but his novel which is sometimes called an anti-novel,Hopscotch, 
is a great piece. It’s an open-ended novel we readers are invited and 
encouraged to read as we like, treating reading it as a game, a game of 
recreating the book over and over again. It can be read many times in many 
ways.”

 * The House of Wives 
<http://penguinrandomhouse.ca/books/417550/house-wives#9780670069477> by Simon 
Choa-Johnston(2016). Lee (co-owner) recommends: “Simon Choa-Johnston digs into 
his family’s ancestry to come up with a fascinating story about opium trade 
around 1860, and about rivalry in love and place. The novel grips you from the 
start and doesn’t let go.”

 * Where My heart Used to Beat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/06/where-my-heart-used-to-beat-sebastian-faulks-review-uneven>
 by Sebastian Faulks (2015). Elizabeth (bookseller) recommends: “It grabs from 
page one–a rollicking adventure story set on a small island off France’s south 
coast. Presented in first person and charmingly self-effacing. Faulk’s best 
yet. I Loved it.”

 * A Whole Life 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/309934/> by Robert 
Seethaler(2015). Elizabeth (bookseller) recommends: “A richly allegorical read 
about an honorable Austrian and his life’s journey in and around the second 
world war. Exquisitely haunting.”
 