
Green Apple Books opened in 1967. From what the current co-owners know, 
Richard Savoy opened the 750-square-foot shop because he loved books and was 
sick of his job as a radio technician for United Airlines. For 47 years, Savoy 
stocked used books, comics, and National Geographic magazines, becoming a 
staple neighborhood gem in theSan Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> Bay area. Now 10 times its 
original size, with new and used books, LPs, and 750-plus magazines and 
journals in stock, the store has gone through another big, behind-the-scenes 
change. After years of hunting for a successor, Mr Savoy assembled a team of 
three long-time employees to buy the business. Their gradual buy-out, which 
started in 1999, enabled Mr Savoy to monitor the store’s success and allowed 
the new owners plenty of time to learn from their mentor. The “new” owners are 
Kevin Hunsanger, Kevin Ryan, and Pete Mulvihill. We spoke with co-owner Pete 
Mulvihill about what makes Green Apple Books the kind of store where you not 
only want to work, but that you want to buy.

What’s your favorite section in the store?

My favorite section, conceptually, is the “Circus, Magic, and Hobos” section. 
But I spend the most time and money on the cookbooks.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

On Clement, a space for events. That store is so crammed with books that 
there’s no space for more than, say, 25 folks to gather at once. The events at 
the new store, which does have such space, have been so vibrant that I realize 
how much Clement misses out on literary happenings within our walls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-green-apple-books-in-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34fd003992f24129832a91e7ba9e4355188d18d4%2F0_0_787_541%2F787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Green%20Apple%20Books%20in%20San%20Francisco&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-green-apple-books-in-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20Green%20Apple%20Books%20in%20San%20Francisco&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-green-apple-books-in-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34fd003992f24129832a91e7ba9e4355188d18d4%2F0_0_787_541%2F787.jpg>
 Green Apple Books in 1960. Photograph: Literary Hub 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

That’s hard to say, as there’s not a single store we can’t learn something 
from, but I think the used book selection differentiates us from other 
stores—we see thousands of used books every day from 50-75 folks, and we buy as 
widely as we can within reason. That’s reflected in the reliable and sometimes 
unusual used book selection on our sagging shelves.

Who’s your weirdest regular?

Oh, there are too many! Can boy was an old favorite. Nice Mary was the 
best—she befriended every Green Appler who worked there over the last 48 years, 
as she lived alone catty-corner from the store.Free box regular Abby cracks me 
up with her scooter (she’s in her late 60s but rides around the ‘hood on a 
Razor scooter). And you best avoid conversation with Ricardo: Who knows what’s 
going on behind those dark glasses?

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

The 1989 earthquake was a doozy—shelves and books everywhere. The unionization 
and picketing in the early 1990s was a dramatic time, too. Painful, really. 
We’ve had a death in the store and one out front. All of humanity has happened 
here, from marriage proposals to incontinent homeless folks having “accidents.” 
We’re open 87.5 hours a week, 363 days a year, for 48 years (218,000+ hours!), 
so the store has seen it all.
 Photograph: Robin Allen 
What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Perhaps strangely for a bookstore owner, I was a library kid—my parents are 
flinty, and the library where I grew up was pretty vibrant. I’m not sure I knew 
there were places you couldbuy books until I was in college. I do remember 
sneaking into the human sexuality section of the library as 4th grader in 
search of some insight.

Interview with a Bookstore: Riverbend Books, a leading Australian indie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/19/interview-with-a-bookstore-riverbend-books-a-leading-australian-indie>
If you weren’t running a bookstore, what would you be doing?

I’m blessed not to know. I went to grad school for writing and taught 
expository writing at the University of San Francisco part-time for a few years 
while working at Green Apple, so that’s possible. Given the economy here, I 
might have been, like many of my peers, another English major riding dot com 
bubbles up and down. Again, I’m happy that I have not yet had to figure that 
out.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

I guess how “businessy” it is, by necessity. We’re all here for the love of 
books, but days are often spent analyzing sales per linear foot, negotiating 
credit card processing fees, updating insurance policies, marketing our 
“products,” managing cash flow, dealing with human resources, etc. I mean,most 
folks get to shelve books and ring up customers and order fun stuff, but my 
role is pretty behind-the-scenes. So I guess it’s that there’s more to running 
a (successful) bookstore than buying and selling books.

The staff shelf

What are Green Apple Books’s booksellers reading?

 * Tampa by Alissa Nutting <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tampa.html> 
(2013).Sammy recommends: “Raunchy and smart, Alissa Nutting’s Tampa leaves no 
perverse stone unturned. Yet Celeste Price is a highly likable – if not 
chilling–protagonist who will make you both laugh and gasp. This book is about 
as irreverent as it gets. A darkly entertaining read that explores the complex 
relationship between our sexuality and our morality.” 
 * McGlue by Ottessa Moshfegh (2014). Linne recommends: “Do you like your 
sailor stories booze-soaked, murderous, and whittled to a sharp, graceful 
point? Do you like novellas so compelling you stay up late despite yourself, 
knowing that you’re riding a beautiful train bound for certain doom? Do you 
like writers who have published in The Paris Review? I like all of those 
things, and this brutal, gorgeous tome made me feel empathy, anxiety, 
resilience, and despair in equal measure. For such a dastardly dude, McGlue 
stole my wary heart within a few short pages, and Moshfegh’s prose had me 
sending out the literary bat-signal to all of my reader friends. Treat 
yourself, finish it in a day, then pass it on.” 
 * The Book of Disquiet by Fernando Pessoa 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-of-disquiet-2.html> (1984). Max 
recommends: “This book haunts and harrows, hunts and hypnotizes. There is no 
other like it. Pessoa wrote entire volumes of prose, poetry, philosophy, and 
literary criticism under several different names (heteronyms) over the course 
of his life, but this book of “fiction” is undoubtedly his magnum opus. Every 
sentence in here is one I could read over and over. I can’t tell if I read this 
book or if it read me.”  