
The King’s English Bookshop opened its door (there was only one, to start) in 
1977. Betsy Burton and Ann Berman, booklovers and aspiring writers, thought 
they had it all figured out. They rented an old building with several rooms, 
thinking they’d write their Great American Novels in the back, emerging to sell 
a book or two whenever the bells on the front door jangled to announce the 
arrival of a customer. The women soon realised the jingling bells were not a 
distraction from their writing life but a welcome sound, signalling the 
opportunity to meet new friends and talk books. The bookshop became a full-time 
labor of love.

What is your favourite section of the store?

Rob (marketing manager and storyteller extraordinaire): The kids’ room. We 
were fortunate to receive a grant from James Patterson. We’ve used the money to 
literally raise the roof on our children’s room, put in windows and build more 
shelving. Raising the roof meant exposing the furnace so we’ve turned it into a 
treehouse; it’s AMAZING!

What would you do if you had infinite space in the store?

Whitney (children’s marketing manager): An auditorium with built-in seats so 
we wouldn’t have to haul chairs EVER AGAIN!

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Rosie (bookseller): We do what every indie bookstore does; match books to 
readersand remember them and their reading preferences next time they visit the 
store.

Who is your favourite regular?

Sue (bookseller): Lou Borgenicht, pediatrician (and father of David Borgenicht 
of Quirk Books). He comes in on Mondays and Saturdays, tells us a naughty joke, 
and makes sure our local bulletin board is up-to-date.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Margaret (children’s buyer): When a reincarnated John D Lee showed up at our 
Jon Krakauer signing forUnder the Banner of Heaven: A Story of Violent Faith.

What’s your earliest memory of visiting a bookstore as a child?

Betsy (co-owner): Having a complete temper tantrum in the kids’ room at Sam 
Weller’s Zion Bookstore because my mom wouldn’t let me buy 10 books. When we 
went to the library I was allowed 10 books and I didn’t understand the 
difference.

If you weren’t running a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Ann (co-owner): Gardening, writing, eating bacon, watching baseball, telling 
the dogs to get off the couch.

What’s been your biggest surprise about working in a bookstore?

Anne (general manager): How much it makes me part of our community. I run into 
people all over Salt Lake who say hello and “How’s the bookstore?” or “I’ll see 
you next week at the reading” or “Look Mom, it’s the book lady!”

The staff shelf

What are the booksellers at The King’s English reading?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-kings-english-in-salt-lake-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2cde4b4c80f63301817919086db1999d65a5a8f%2F0_0_1269_2068%2F1269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20King's%20English%20in%20Salt%20Lake%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-kings-english-in-salt-lake-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20King%27s%20English%20in%20Salt%20Lake%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-kings-english-in-salt-lake-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2cde4b4c80f63301817919086db1999d65a5a8f%2F0_0_1269_2068%2F1269.jpg>
 * Wind/Pinball by Haruki Murakami 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wind-pinball-483402.html> (2015). Noble 
(bookseller) recommends: “These two novellas are the first that Murakami ever 
published in Japan. A somewhat belated coming-of-age tale about two men coming 
to terms with issues of love, loneliness, and mortality. In true Murakami form, 
they also delve further than most authors would dare into the depths of human 
emotion in a way that is at times uncomfortable but enlightening throughout. An 
absolute must-read for Murakami fans.” 
 * The Wake by Paul Kingsnorth 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wake-375731.html> (2014). Kenneth (social 
media guru) recommends: “You will never read another book quite like The Wake. 
It’s written in a ‘shadow tongue’ of Old English, which may seem like a stroke 
of unnecessary artifice but it is in fact a brilliant feat of literary 
time-travel. Narrated by Buccmaster of Holland, it tells the story of one man’s 
confrontation with himself, his people, his history and his enemies in the face 
of the Norman Conquest. It’s perfect for fans of Anglo-Saxon epics.”  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-kings-english-in-salt-lake-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe6c912f5f20f2961ff1baf46e466f3cb38f99ef%2F54_41_644_956%2F644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20King's%20English%20in%20Salt%20Lake%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-kings-english-in-salt-lake-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20King%27s%20English%20in%20Salt%20Lake%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-kings-english-in-salt-lake-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe6c912f5f20f2961ff1baf46e466f3cb38f99ef%2F54_41_644_956%2F644.jpg>
 * The Lost Landscape by Joyce Carol Oates 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lost-landscape-419242.html> (2015). Barbara 
(bookseller) recommends: “Growing up in a small town in western New York State, 
Joyce Carol Oates was far from the acclaimed literary giant that she is today. 
A shy girl with a vivid imagination and an endless fascination with 
storytelling, she grew into one of the literary world’s most prolific writers. 
Her memoir frankly explores her family history and the fragility of her, and 
thus our, childhood memories. This is a deeply felt and deftly told memoir of 
an extraordinary individual.”  