
Heffers opened in 1876 and is celebrating 140 years of bookselling this year. 
Heffers has been in its current location, directly opposite the entrance to 
Trinity College, Cambridge since 1970. The business was owned and run by the 
Heffer family until 1999 when it was sold to Blackwell’s. William Heffer, 
reportedly the son of illiterate agricultural workers, was born in a village 15 
miles from Cambridge. Initially, Heffers was a stationery shop but books were 
soon added.

Manager David Robinson guesses that this was a logical progression with the 
large numbers of students and academics in Cambridge. A history of Heffers is 
just being written and due for publication in October. David is hoping to learn 
a lot more then.

What’s your favorite section of the store?

David Robinson (manager): That’s like being asked to choose my favourite 
child! The sections I’m most proud of are our beautiful children’s department 
and our amazing crime fiction section which is run by Richard Reynolds—in our 
humble opinion, the most knowledgeable crime fiction bookseller in the world! 
But the joy of Heffers, and all great bookshops, is stumbling across books in 
unexpected places that you just have to pick up (and own).

If you had infinite space what would you add?

David: We used to have a coffee shop (that we replaced with the children’s 
department) and that seems an obvious addition that would help customers relax 
and spend more time in the shop. But, if space was infinite, I’d love a reading 
room, with cosy armchairs, a real fire and a small bar. Better space for author 
events would be great too!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fheffers-cambridge-booksellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29306f5683c56952552babcc9d25ee1d8abf60cf%2F35_0_658_395%2F658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Heffers%20in%20Cambridge%2C%20celebrating%20140%20years%20of%20bookselling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fheffers-cambridge-booksellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Heffers%20in%20Cambridge%2C%20celebrating%20140%20years%20of%20bookselling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fheffers-cambridge-booksellers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29306f5683c56952552babcc9d25ee1d8abf60cf%2F35_0_658_395%2F658.jpg>
 Inside Heffers bookstore in Cambridge, UK Photograph: Literary Hub 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

David: Apart from the sections already mentioned, I think we offer a really 
warm, welcoming environment and first-time visitors love to see the scale of 
the shop as soon as they step through the front door. But we also pride 
ourselves on identifying what is a “Heffers book”—slightly under the radar, 
well written, usually non-fiction, that we recommend to our customers, really 
get behind and sell in huge quantities.

The biggest surprise about working a bookstore? The lack of rocking chairs, 
cats and time to read poetry

Another of my favorite sections is called Heffers Choice. It’s simply the very 
best non-fiction writing available in paperback. We arrange it by author 
surname and leave our super-bright customers to work out that, regardless of 
subject, these books are all about the quality of the writing. They love it!

Who’s your favourite regular?

David: There’s only one answer to that: Mr. Doggett. He has been coming into 
the shop forever. It used to be Thursdays and Saturdays but is now just 
Saturday mornings. He has his own chair and always wants the same questions 
answering—have we got any books on pigs, traction engines or the First World 
War? He wishes everybody who comes near him a Happy New Year, regardless of the 
date, and then happily shuffles out of the shop for another week. He can be a 
distraction but Saturdays wouldn’t be the same without him.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

David: Cambridge is full of, shall we say, eccentric people so we have our 
fair share of odd goings on. More prosaically, one of my most memorable days 
was the first Saturday after we opened the Children’s department in 2010. We 
were fortunate enough to have the great illustrator Axel Scheffler along to 
launch the shop and we hired a Gruffalo costume to make it even more exciting.

Allegedly, I was the only person who fit into the costume. It was a really hot 
July day, there were hundreds of excited children and I was wearing this huge, 
really heavy outfit. The first time I took the head of the costume off, huge 
plumes of steam came out—it was reminiscent of a laundry. I must have lost 
several pounds during the day. The smell probably wasn’t the best either.

I also posed for countless photographs with children and adults during the 
day. At the end of it my jaw was absolutely numb and I could hardly speak. For 
reasons I can’t explain, I’d smiled broadly for every single photograph, even 
though my face was covered by a huge monster head. I like to think the 
customers noticed how friendly I was being but I think I’m kidding myself. It 
didn’t stop me doing it again a couple of years later, though!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fheffers-cambridge-booksellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed883dc2ec584b16b4d539e36ef549f30088682c%2F0_0_700_420%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Heffers%20in%20Cambridge%2C%20celebrating%20140%20years%20of%20bookselling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fheffers-cambridge-booksellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Heffers%20in%20Cambridge%2C%20celebrating%20140%20years%20of%20bookselling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fheffers-cambridge-booksellers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed883dc2ec584b16b4d539e36ef549f30088682c%2F0_0_700_420%2F700.jpg>
 Inside Heffers bookstore in Cambridge, UK Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

David: I’m sure like a lot of English people of my age, the first author I 
loved was Enid Blyton. I can distinctly remember buying Secret Seven books and 
reading them from cover to cover, lying on my bed, eating a bag of toffees. I 
thought I’d died and gone to heaven. The only issue was that they ended too 
quickly—the books and the toffees. Seeing the whole collection of Secret Seven 
books on the shelf of the bookshop was just too thrilling.

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Interview with a Bookstore: The Mysterious Bookshop in New York
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/apr/18/interview-with-a-bookstore-the-mysterious-bookshop-in-new-york>
David: I’ve worked in bookshops for 26 years. At university, everybody said 
I’d end up running a bookshop (although I think they envisaged a small 
secondhand bookshop, with me sitting in a rocking chair, reading poetry with a 
cat sitting on my knee.) So, it’s quite difficult to imagine doing anything 
else. My other great interest is sport and I did dream of being a sports 
journalist when I was young, so maybe that. Or maybe, seeing if it’s possible 
to make a living from pottering around in a shed on my vegetable patch.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

David: Mainly, the lack of rocking chairs, cats and, indeed, time to read 
poetry. I think most of us came into bookselling because we love books. The 
surprise is the amount of work that has to be done that, on the face of it, has 
very little to do with books at all—repairing property, dealing with staff 
issues, etc.—but it’s all part of what makes the job fascinating and incredibly 
varied.

The autonomy that I, and my team, have means that we’re effectively running a 
big bookshop, in the very heart of a beautiful city, using somebody else’s 
money. I’m still surprised that that is the case but what a privilege and a 
great position to be in!

The staff shelf

What are the booksellers at Heffers reading?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fheffers-cambridge-booksellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae9e2b8906e891b1c26de43aa4ab803f51bcc59b%2F0_0_2048_2406%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Heffers%20in%20Cambridge%2C%20celebrating%20140%20years%20of%20bookselling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fheffers-cambridge-booksellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Heffers%20in%20Cambridge%2C%20celebrating%20140%20years%20of%20bookselling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fheffers-cambridge-booksellers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae9e2b8906e891b1c26de43aa4ab803f51bcc59b%2F0_0_2048_2406%2F2048.jpg>
 * Tough Guys (Have Feelings Too) by Keith Negley (2015). Matt recommends: “A 
superb children’s picture book that challenges the notion of the tough male 
stereotype by showing that even the likes of superheroes, cowboys and ninjas 
can steel feel lonely, sad or afraid. Bold and colourful illustrations help to 
convey the book’s important message.” 
 * American Gods by Neil Gaiman (2001). Charlotte recommends: “This darkly 
brilliant fantasy epic from Gaiman combines memorable characters and a 
compelling and imaginative story.” 
 * Bodies in the Bookshop, edited by LC Tyler and Ayo Onatade (2014). Richard 
recommends: “A clutch of Biblio-mysteries and first degree Cambridge murder 
with three stories partly set in Heffers bookshop. Published in honour of 
Heffers and independent bookshops everywhere. Chase down the criminals in new 
stories by Simon Brett, Alison Bruce, Chris Ewan and Ruth Dudley Edwards.” 
 * 1971 by David Hepworth (2016). Caroline recommends: “A brilliantly 
conceived book about the classic year of music, through an amazing variety of 
rock and pop albums. Hepworth maintains that young people now are still 
listening to great songs from 1971, which haven’t lost their raw appeal... A 
book to read in one sitting, and then dip into time and time again.”  