
Kramerbooks & Afterwords <http://kramers.com/bookstore> first opened its doors 
amid the bicentennial celebrations of 1976, and at the time was the first 
bookstore/cafe in Washington D.C. Over the years, through expansions, 
subpoenas, and innumerable neighborhood changes, business has remained 
constant, thanks largely to an ongoing commitment to two fundamental joys in 
life: books and food. In addition to a lively, convivial atmosphere, and a 
full-service bar, Kramerbooks & Afterwords stages hundreds of book-related 
events each year, both in the store and elsewhere.

What’s your favorite section in the store?

Sarah Baline (events director): I love our fiction section. It takes up a 
whole wall in the main room of the store and no matter how often I go to 
shelve, or to find a book for a customer, I always see something new to add to 
the ever-growing TBR pile.

Scott Abel (general manager): Middle East History is my favorite. I studied 
abroad in Morocco and I continue to find the region endlessly fascinating.

Stephanie Hess (assistant buyer): Kids’ books! I have twelve (12!) nieces and 
nephews so I shop that section a lot.

Jake Cumsky-Whitlock (head buyer): Our Cookbook sections. They are full of 
big, beautiful, functional books.

David Tenney (owner): The doors.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Stephanie: An infinity pool.

Sarah: A dedicated event space!

Jake: More space for children’s books.

Scott: A napping couch or, better yet, a napping hammock.

David: Fewer doors.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Jake: We have a full-service bar and restaurant. Not too many bookstores can 
say that.

Sarah: Our long hours (7:30-1AM Sunday to Thursday, 7:30-4:00AM Friday and 
Saturday) really set us apart.

David: Attitude.
 Photograph: Courtesy of Kramerbooks & Afterwords 
Who’s your favorite regular?

Sarah: A young woman who stops in while she’s waiting for the bus after 
school. She’s a voracious reader of YA and it’s always a fun challenge to find 
something new for her.

Jake: One of our many engaged and intelligent customers is a quiet guy who 
comes in most days. He works for an art gallery near the store, and is always 
interested in the latest nonfiction releases.

Scott: The President of the Dominican Republic. No joke!

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Scott: In an effort to retrieve a stolen James Patterson book, I may have 
inadvertently broken the guy’s nose with it.

David: A man’s colostomy bag broke in the store.

Jake: The President coming to shop with his daughters and the Secret Service 
securing the premises was pretty unforgettable.

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Sarah: I have very fond memories of visiting Bunch of Grapes on Martha’s 
Vineyard with my family.

Jake: I shopped at the New England Mobile Book Fair in Newton, Massachusetts 
growing up. It was (and still is) a labyrinthine warehouse stuffed with long, 
dimly lit aisles full of books. Incongruously, it was (and no longer is) 
organized by publisher, so in order to find a particular book, you had to first 
look it up in a large phone book-like directory at the front of the store, and 
then determine where in the massive store that publisher’s books were stocked. 
Needless to say, it was always easier to simply dive in without purpose.

David: Bookstores didn’t exist when I was a child.

Interview with a Bookstore: Albertine, a little Paris in New York
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/may/09/interview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york>
If you weren’t running/working at a bookstore what would you be doing?

Sarah: Reading all day? Am I a kept woman in this scenario? Right now I can’t 
imagine doing anything else.

Scott: Loving the doughnuts too much.

Stephanie: Running my letterpress printing company, Typecase Industries 
<http://www.typecaseindustries.com/>!

Jake: Probably playing shortstop for a Major League Baseball club.

David: Drugs!

Bonus: Answers to questions we didn’t ask.

If your bookstore were an animal, what animal would it be? 

Hyena.

What color would it be?

Carol’s Gold.

Store theme song? 

Jane <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXmrMMYpQL4> by Starship or Shake it Off 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nfWlot6h_JM> by Tay-Tay, depending on the day.

Your store is a cocktail. Which one? 

Just make it brown.

Which neighborhood stores do you miss?

Melody Records, Olsson’s Books and Music, Lambda Rising.

The staff shelf

What are Kramerbooks & Afterwords’s booksellers reading?

 * Here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/21/here-richard-mcguire-review-exquisitely-drawn-ecological-warning>
 by Richard McGuire (2014): “The book as object: an exquisite thing. These 
stories float around the room even when the room doesn’t exist.”

 * Old Filth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/nov/20/featuresreviews.guardianreview13>
 by Jane Gardam(2004): “Funny and touching, a very British portrait of a 
widower and his frenemy-turned-neighbor. Sir Edward Feathers, aka ‘Old Filth,’ 
Retired Solicitor and former ‘Raj Orphan,’ is an utterly original creation. 
This is the first book in a trilogy. Lucky you.”

 * The Hunting Gun <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hunting-gun.html> by 
Yasushi Inoue(1961): “A tragic love affair and its aftermath are charted in 
this emotional but completely unsentimental masterpiece.”

 * All the Birds, Singing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/30/evie-wyld-birds-singing-review> 
by Evie Wyld (2013): “Reminiscent of a 19th century Gothic novel (moors, 
wolves, mysterious strangers appearing at the door in the middle of the night), 
Wyld creates an eerie landscape where everyone is suspect. Who knew a sheep 
farm could be so creepy?”

 * 1914 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/1914.html> by Jean Echenoz (2014): 
“Any interest in the Great War? Here is a lovely little novel which puts us 
fully in the trench, but we escape it here too. Echenoz is truly gifted.”
 