
White Square Fine Books & Art is nestled in the town of Easthampton, Mass., 
deep in the heart of the Pioneer Valley. Eileen Corbeil and her husband 
purchased a beautiful old building at 86 Cottage Street in April 2010, and 
spent nine months renovating the space, opening the store in December 2010. The 
name White Square is borrowed from La Place Blanche, one of the small plazas 
along the Boulevard de Clichy in Paris, where, in the early 1900s, clouds of 
chalky dust were churned up by carts carrying plaster of Paris and where Degas, 
Picasso and other artists lived and worked.

Why did you open a bookstore in the Pioneer Valley? 

Eileen: We needed a place to shelve and organize the thousands of books that 
filled our home and were making the floor joists sag! Though we also hoped to 
encourage reading and a love for books, and add a literary dimension to our 
artistic and musical hometown.

What’s your favorite section in the store?

No easy answer since I love stocking the shelves and working the counter, 
greeting regulars or meeting new people, especially children. Perhaps because 
it happens too infrequently, I love working quietly in the basement where our 
rare and collectible books are housed and where I can (without interruption) do 
research on inscriptions, signatures, first editions, etc.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

I would expand in three areas: (1) more and better space to display rare books 
and host interesting exhibitions; (2) more and better space for children, 
including a welcoming and fun event space; and (3) space to offer the 
occasional high tea like you might find in Cornwall and Devon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-white-square-a-little-paris-in-the-pioneer-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5283a0d60810bcf54df7450e4ea58c0503a50d2d%2F53_0_1133_680%2F1133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20White%20Square%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20the%20Pioneer%20Valley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-white-square-a-little-paris-in-the-pioneer-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20White%20Square%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20the%20Pioneer%20Valley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-white-square-a-little-paris-in-the-pioneer-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5283a0d60810bcf54df7450e4ea58c0503a50d2d%2F53_0_1133_680%2F1133.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?

We do great events with authors and artists. At our annual Bloomsday lunch 
we’ll read and discuss a portion ofUlysses and enjoy a light Leopold Bloom-type 
lunch. We sponsored Easthampton’s first Book Festival in April on a shoestring 
budget and attracted more than 1,000 people to the 20 or so events. Plus, I 
have a knack for finding cool and collectible items of interest to bibliophiles 
(see theAmericana catalog <http://www.whitesquarebooks.com/#!catalog/c1bl1>).

What’s the oddest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Customers (and their dogs) have always been great!

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

I grew up in rural Vermont where there were no bookstores. We relied on the 
regional lending library, which deposited books in our neighbor Stella’s dining 
room once a month. I adored choosing and checking out books, especially because 
Stella was a great cook and usually offered me a homemade donut.

If you weren’t running/working at a bookstore what would you be doing?

I’d still be working in a senior management position in higher education. And 
wishing I were running a bookstore…

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

I opened the bookstore because it seemed like it would be fun for me (and it 
is). But I’ve learned that bookstores are integral to the intellectual life of 
a community, and filling this need (and being able to sustain the effort) has 
been incredibly rewarding.

The staff shelf

What is Eileen reading?

 * The Hill Bachelors by William Trevor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/oct/28/fiction.reviews> (2000). “My 
favorite piece of writing by William Trevor is The Hill Bachelors, one of a 
dozen stories in the collection of the same name. Paulie, the unmarried son of 
an Irish farmer, returns home to take care of his mother and the dying farm 
after his father’s death. Over the course of this 22-page story he loses his 
fiancé (“Jeez! What would I do on a farm?”) and becomes on of the many bachelor 
hidden among the hills of western Ireland: ‘Enduring, unchanging, the hills had 
waited for him, claiming one of their own.’ Each time I read this story I 
discover new subtleties and feel more empathy. It’s masterful.”

 * Daughter of the East by Benazir Bhutto 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/daughter-of-the-east.html> (1988). “Benazir 
Bhutto inscribed her 1988 autobiography to Senator Claiborne Pell, who had 
worked to secure Bhutto’s release from prison in the early 1980’s. Given that 
she spent so much time in detention and under tight security, books signed by 
Bhutto are quite rare. Her lovely inscription to the intrepid, eccentric, and 
long-serving Rhode Island senator makes this a very special book.”  <> Facebook 
 
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-white-square-a-little-paris-in-the-pioneer-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b9ce08fe2071bc1c402eb6e9655f95c51f4c72e%2F0_0_987_1500%2F987.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20White%20Square%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20the%20Pioneer%20Valley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-white-square-a-little-paris-in-the-pioneer-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20bookstore%3A%20White%20Square%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20the%20Pioneer%20Valley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-white-square-a-little-paris-in-the-pioneer-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b9ce08fe2071bc1c402eb6e9655f95c51f4c72e%2F0_0_987_1500%2F987.jpg>
 * The Most Dangerous Book: The Battle for James Joyce’s Ulysses 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/most-dangerous-book-258580.html> by Kevin 
Birmingham (2014). “Sylvia Beach has been my idol for many years, so it meant a 
great deal that when The Most Dangerous Book was published last summer, Kevin 
agreed to travel nearly 200 round-trip miles from Cambridge for an author event 
at White Square. This mix of literary biography and cultural history offers 
still-relevant cautions about the peril of censorship and the hypocrisy of 
moral bullies.”
 