
Bunch of Grapes Bookstore opened in its original location in 1964 with the 
help of the mysterious Hugo family (no one seems to know much about them) and 
was purchased by the Nelson family in 1975. After a fire destroyed the store in 
2008, the Nelsons put the business up for sale. Dawn Braasch, the store’s 
dedicated owner, felt strongly that the island needed a year-round bookstore. 
She bought the burnt store, opened a tiny, temporary bookstore around the 
corner, and rebuilt and restored the original store, which re-opened the 
following year. In 2012, Bunch of Grapes moved across the street and has been 
humming along ever since.

What’s your favourite section of the store?

Molly Coogan (manager and events coordinator): When I need a good visual fix, 
I park myself in the Graphic Fiction section or with the kids’ picture books. 
If I’m hungry, you’ll definitely find me in the cookbook section. Ultimately, 
though, I’m partial to the receiving area in the basement, where I greedily 
pounce on all the new books before they hit the shelves.

Interview with a Bookstore: Itinerant Literate, a bookstore on wheels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jun/20/interview-with-a-bookstore-itinerant-literate-a-bookstore-on-wheels>
If you had infinite space what would you add?

Molly: We’d love to add a cafe. There’s a great patio space out front that’s 
just begging for cafe tables.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Molly: I think we do a good job handling the challenges of operating a 
year-round bookstore in a seasonal location. The year-round population of 
15,000 balloons to something like 100,000 in July and August, so we have to be 
agile in our buying and staffing. Whether it’s a dead-quiet day in February or 
a complete zoo in August, I think that our customers are happy to be here and 
can always find just what they’re looking for. All of that, I think, is largely 
attributable to Dawn’s generosity and loyalty to her community, her employees, 
and the book business.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bunch-of-grapes-in-marthas-vineyard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64bb0837aac9cf2019fd561a412fb50ba22e421f%2F0_0_700_484%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bunch%20of%20Grapes%20in%20Martha's%20Vineyard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bunch-of-grapes-in-marthas-vineyard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Bunch%20of%20Grapes%20in%20Martha%27s%20Vineyard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-bunch-of-grapes-in-marthas-vineyard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64bb0837aac9cf2019fd561a412fb50ba22e421f%2F0_0_700_484%2F700.jpg>
 Inside Bunch of Grapes bookstore. Photograph: Literary Hub 
Who’s your favourite regular?

Molly: We have so many! Ward Just and Sarah Catchpole are great customers and 
tremendous readers – they’ve been good friends to the store for years. There’s 
Mary who visits a few times a week with her well-dressed dog; there’s the big, 
burly, dusty mason who comes in weekly and buys new hardcover (often romantic) 
fiction with strong female characters; there’s the grandmother who comes once 
or twice a year with her entire family in tow (a dozen or more!) and buys 
everyone a book or two …

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Molly: This was a few years before my time, but one evening as they were 
closing the store, the booksellers found a woman hiding crouched behind the 
sofa. She was hoping to get locked in because she’d always wanted to spend the 
night in a bookstore. I think many of us can relate, but c’mon.

What surprised me as a bookseller is just how HARD it is! It’s not the cozy 
job that many imagine.

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Molly: My earliest and best memories are of coming to Bunch of Grapes and 
sitting upstairs in the kids section picking out my vacation reads. Buying a 
stack of books was one of those treats reserved for vacation and I truly 
relished it. Now my kids have some of those books that I picked out at BOG 
decades ago!

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Molly: Some other wordy endeavor, I’d hope. I’ve worked in publishing, at a 
museum as an editor of signage and wall texts, and as an assistant to a 
conceptual artist who deals primarily with text, so I can’t escape words. If 
they escaped me, though? I guess I’d stay home and bake bread.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Molly: What surprised me as a bookseller – and I think comes as a surprise to 
many – is just how HARD it is! It’s not the cozy job that many imagine. Being 
well-informed, gracious, patient, tech-savvy, good at detective work, a whiz 
with wrapping paper, and limber – that is a tall order!

The staff shelf

What are Bunch of Grapes’s booksellers reading?

 * The Red Parts by Maggie Nelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/02/books-interview-maggie-nelson-genders>
 (2007). Molly Coogan recommends: “Gorgeous and riveting, Maggie Nelson’s 
stunning memoir is as intimate as it is sprawling. Her voice is honest and 
true, especially has she questions her own intentions in this true crime 
account that wrenchingly lays bare the universal themes of grief, guilt, loss, 
and love.”

 * Ilium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/13/featuresreviews.guardianreview25>
 by Dan Simmons (2003). Leroy Hazleton (bookseller) recommends: “This book 
mixes time travel, Homer’s ILIAD, and machines that discuss Shakespeare and 
Proust. Thoughtful, humorous, but also brutal, ILIUM follows Professor Thomas 
Hackenberry as he carefully winds his way through the politics and love affairs 
of the gods at Troy. 
 * A Month in the Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/08/jl-carr-month-in-country> by JL 
Carr (1980). Lizzy Schule (bookseller) recommends: “Still shaken by his 
experiences in WWI, Tom Birkin finds work restoring a mural in rural Northern 
England. During one month, Tom manages to revive a forgotten medieval painter’s 
vision of the Apocalypse. A Month in the Country details an artist’s 
relationship to his craft and how forming connections can help ease a troubling 
past.” 
 * Everybody’s Fool by Richard Russo (2016). Karen Harris (bookseller) 
recommends: “Russo takes us back to New Bath, New York, a former mill town 
that’s seen better days. Sully Sullivan, jack-of-all trades, is aging rapidly. 
The wife of the police chief has died tragically, perhaps in the process of 
leaving him. Rub Squeers and Rub the Dog, plus a sophisticated OCD yuppie round 
out this motley crew – and that’s only the men of New Bath!”  