
Dylans Mobile Bookstore was dreamt up three years ago by Jeff Towns and his 
son Joe in a bar in Laugharne, Wales during a literary festival. Jeff, an 
antiquarian bookseller for 40 years, had closedhis old shop 
<http://www.dylans.com/> in Swansea, Wales ten years prior, but he still had 
about 10,000 books in storage and was missing the buzz of the book trade. He 
had been considering starting a pop-up bookshop that would travel to various 
festivals when Joe suggested that he buy an old library bus instead. Before 
long, they’d dubbed it Dylans Mobile Bookstore and were on the road with a 
merry brand of pranksters; Joe handles the bus’s bookings and social media, 
their friend Huwie drives, and Joe’s wife Gwar keeps everyone in line.

What’s your favourite section of the store?

Jeff: My favourite section has to be our Beat section. We stock classic titles 
by Burroughs, Ginsberg, Kerouac… We loosely based Dylans Mobile Bookstore on 
Ken Kesey’s Magic bus, and we also have a big cardboard cut out of Neal Cassady 
behind the wheel. On the side of the bus is our motto: “Find an event, immerse 
yourself, become the story.” It’s one of Hunter S Thompson’s.

Joe: I look after the vintage stuff, so that’s my favourite bit: retro 
ladybird originals, rare music magazines, curious Victoriana, political 
pamphlets, old medical prints and postcards, hilarious educational and 
etiquette books from the ’30s, ’40s, and ’50s about how we used to live. Even 
things like magic lanterns and all the erotica! Any of the weird stuff.

Gwawr: I run a section on the Bus called Blind Date Book Club, where I wrap up 
books in brown paper and put a few cheeky clues on the cover and then people 
pick a book based on the clue—basically a blind date with a book. It’s one 
pound a go. A pretty cheap date, I reckon! And these books are always the first 
to sell out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-dylans-mobile-bookstore-in-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b52a46a05d3b629e3efa20de2a34a8cd84108d5%2F0_6_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Dylans%20Mobile%20Bookstore%20in%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-dylans-mobile-bookstore-in-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Dylans%20Mobile%20Bookstore%20in%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-dylans-mobile-bookstore-in-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b52a46a05d3b629e3efa20de2a34a8cd84108d5%2F0_6_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Jeff, pictured inside Dylans Mobile Bookstore. Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you had infinite space what would you add?

Jeff: We have a graffiti artist in residence; his name is Simon Dark. He does 
spray can stencil pictures of all our literary heroes—Richard Brautigan, Tom 
Wolfe, Hemingway, and Hunter. And shot gun art of all our least favourite 
politicians. It would be cool to have some spare wall space for his pictures. 
Oh, and personally I’d like An Art Deco Art Nouveau absinthe dispenser on the 
counter…

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Jeff: Thomases! We specialise in Dylan Thomas, R.S. Thomas, Edward Thomas, and 
Gwyn Thomas. We are based inWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, and 
those are four of our finest literary legends. So we have Thomas covered. And 
Poetry! No one does poetry like us. Not only do we stock a lot of poetry, but 
we also hold pop up poetry sessions on the bus for people to come and perform. 
Amateurs and professionals both.

Who’s your favorite regular?

Jeff: There’s a guy called Gruff Rhys who sings with a band called the Super 
Furry Animals; he has an amazing aura whenever he comes on board. He’s very 
calm and wise, talks slowly, and asks for extremely obscure books about Welsh 
heroes: myths and legends like Iolo Morgannwg.

If I wasn't a bookseller? I'd probably be some sort of itinerant tramp

Musicians always make great customers. Thurston Moore from Sonic Youth came on 
once and bought some really interesting Welsh poetry from a publication called 
Second Aeon; that was cool.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Joe: Wow, where to start? Going to music festivals, it gets pretty surreal and 
strange at night, but we have another old Hunter S Thompson saying we like: 
“When the going gets weird, the weird turn pro.” People at festivals are often 
in fancy dress so we’ve had bears, zulu warriors, spacemen, and guys on stilts 
all buying books of us. Once the artist Gavin Turk came on the bus dressed as a 
tree. The thing with festivals is no one ever has any cash. People always want 
to trade books for alcohol or sunglasses or even hash cakes!

At the Good Life Festival we had a lovely lady buy an old copy of Private Eye 
magazine with Robert Maxwell on the cover. We asked why she wanted an edition 
with such an evil guy on the cover and the girl said: “Robert Maxwell was my 
granddad.” And at the Green Man Festival last year, a guy arrived on a raft, 
attached to a barge, on which he was delivering a piano to London. He asked for 
some books on pianos. See what I mean? It’s weird.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-dylans-mobile-bookstore-in-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa51fca1470c1b509925406c9e5d2b64eb9a22e58%2F0_0_650_451%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Dylans%20Mobile%20Bookstore%20in%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-dylans-mobile-bookstore-in-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Dylans%20Mobile%20Bookstore%20in%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-dylans-mobile-bookstore-in-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa51fca1470c1b509925406c9e5d2b64eb9a22e58%2F0_0_650_451%2F650.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Jeff: I remember Better Books and Compendium Bookstores in London when I was 
young. I could get my hands on early Beat stuff, drug literature, and counter 
culture books. I won a prize at school on sports day when I was 16, and the 
prize was a book token. I could have any book I wanted. I went to a bookshop in 
East London and boughtHowl, and the head teacher had to present it to me. I 
don’t think he read it!

I went to my first ever antiquarian book fair in Bath in 1971. It was in an 
ancient eight-sided building called the octagon, and I remember seeing all 
these men with beards surrounded by incredible books. I was intrigued and 
hooked for life!

Festival goers seem to find the Bus a place of tranquility, a break from the 
madness

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Jeff: Probably some sort of itinerant tramp. I’ve never had a proper job, 
never had a boss; life on the road suits me. I really can’t imagine being 
anything else other than a bookseller. I did want to be a pro basketball player 
back in the day. I once sponsored a local team in Swansea, and we were called 
the Dylans Bookmen.

Joe: I guess if we didn’t have the BookBus we’d still go to the festivals, but 
having the bus makes it easier, it justifies it. We take the BookBus to the 
sort of festivals we always wanted to go to anyway—the sort of bespoke rock and 
roll festivals which also cater for the arts. It’s amazing how these festivals 
now get in touch with us, invite us along with the bus, and treat us like 
performers with backstage passes. Some of us have normal jobs, so it’s just a 
joy to come and work on the bus. I sleep on it too, which is magical.
 ‘We’ve had bears, zulu warriors, spacemen, and guys on stilts all buying 
books of us...’ Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Jeff: The constant synchronicity that seems to occur in the book world. The 
amount of times I’m sat reading a book and then someone comes in and asks for 
that very book — it’s spooky. There are always amazing moments of serendipity 
and destiny in the book trade. I feel it when I’m in other bookshops, too; I 
find myself instinctively drawn towards a certain shelf. I can sense where a 
bookshop will be in cities I’ve never been to.

Interview with a Bookstore: Melbourne's Readings, the best bookshop in the 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/02/interview-with-a-bookstore-melbournes-readings-the-best-bookshop-in-the-world>
Joe: I’m always pleasantly surprised how much the people at music festivals 
want to actually buy books. They seem to find the Bus a place of tranquility, a 
break from the madness—we have music playing but we keep it mellow. Coming on 
the BookBus, because it’s an authentic old library bus, people get all 
nostalgic about their school days and remember the day the library bus would 
visit: the way it wobbles when you step on, like it’s boat on the sea, and the 
cantilevered shelves. People have a sort of epiphany. It’s a genuine madeleine 
moment for them.

The staff shelf

What are Dylans Mobile Bookstore’s booksellers reading?

 * On the Black Hill by Bruce Chatwin (1982). Gwawr recommends: “I’m from a 
farming background in Wales, and the way Chatwin describes how life can be on a 
farm is perfect.” 
 * Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas by Hunter S. Thompson (1971). Simon 
recommends: “Hunter. Every time. Or anything by Hemingway.” 
 * Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog by Dylan Thomas (1940). Jeff 
recommends: “A stunning collection of short stories by Dylan Thomas. People 
forget what an amazing prose writer Dylan was, and how funny he could be.” 
If you’d like to follow where Dylans Mobile Bookstore is, you can check their 
Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/Dylansmobilebookstore>.
 