
The Mysterious Bookshop <http://www.mysteriousbookshop.com/> opened its doors 
on Friday the 13th, April 1979. Founded by Otto Penzler, the space also 
contained the Mysterious Press offices. The bookshop was one of the first 
bookstores – mystery-themed or otherwise – to make a practice of featuring 
signed first editions of new titles. In 2005, the store (and its publishing 
activities) moved from West 56th Street to its current home on Warren Street in 
Tribeca. Today, it is the largest and oldest mystery-specific bookstore in the 
world.

What’s your favorite section of the store?

Charles Perry (marketing coordinator): Being a mystery-only bookstore, we 
don’t have too many sections – our stock is basically divided into a new 
paperback section and a new and collectable hardcover section. There is a giant 
wall dedicated to Sherlock Holmes, and some small shelves focused on espionage 
and Scandinavian writing. My favorite section, though, is below one of the 
display tables: a shelf full of newly reissued titles from small publishers 
like Stark House, Poisoned Pen, and Hard Case Crime. These newly rediscovered 
classics feature some of the best writing in our store, and they seem somehow 
more exciting for their having once been forgotten.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Charles: Personally, I’d like to expand the space devoted to our UK imports. 
We make a point of carrying signed imports when the true first edition of a 
book is overseas, and I think that a larger space for such books would make 
them more recognizable to our customers. Also, it would be great to have a 
specific space just for events! We host two to three readings and/or launch 
parties a week, so putting out chairs and moving books every time can be a bit 
of a burden. Then again, not having them take place in the middle of the store 
might detract from the coziness of the events, which is really a beautiful 
thing sometimes…

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Charles: Of course, we are mystery experts – but I wouldn’t want to diss other 
mystery-specific bookstores by saying we’rethe best. That being said, our 
Manhattan location makes us very accessible for writers, meaning that nobody 
else has so many mystery authors dropping in to sign. We are also distinguished 
by our enormous Sherlock Holmes collection – the biggest in the world, 
comprised of titles from the canon as well as pastiches (a genre unto itself) 
and memorabilia like records, posters, and magazine articles – and by a sizable 
stock of bibliomysteries (mysteries in which the crime involves a rare book or 
manuscript) that I would assume is unrivaled, since, for the most part, only 
specialists even know it as a category.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-mysterious-bookshop-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e72961368cef4b98efe28921a08e2edd90d508f%2F0_333_4032_2691%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Mysterious%20Bookshop%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-mysterious-bookshop-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Mysterious%20Bookshop%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-mysterious-bookshop-in-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e72961368cef4b98efe28921a08e2edd90d508f%2F0_333_4032_2691%2F4032.jpg>
 From floor to ceiling... The inside of the store. Photograph: Courtesy of The 
Mysterious Bookshop 
Who’s your favorite regular?

Charles: It seems unfair to pick a single favorite, but we love any customer 
that comes in (or calls in) often, likes to talk books, and gives us feedback 
about what they’re reading and have read. Some of our best customers tend to be 
mystery authors, who, when signing or visiting other authors’ events, often end 
up browsing and buying a couple of books themselves. The support and solidarity 
that exists in the mystery community is a pretty great thing to witness. Lucky 
for us, our store is often the center of such activity.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Charles: Multiple signings. Every year, before the Edgar Awards ceremony, we 
host a party for the Mystery Writers of America, usually to launch the newest 
incarnation of their yearly anthology. The parties are a lot of fun; we move 
all the tables and shelves out of the middle of the store, which fills to the 
brim with all kinds of mingling people. Last year they released the Mystery 
Writers of America Cookbook, and we had over 20 authors in attendance. That 
meant trying to compel over 20 partiers to stop hanging out and come sign a 
huge pile of books. It was like herding cats, and we hardly had enough table 
space for all of them. Needless to say, chaos ensued, but we managed to get 
everything signed in the end.

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Charles: My earliest remembered bookstore visit was to the now-closed Nice 
Price Books in my hometown, Carrboro, NC. Visits to Nice Price were usually 
prompted by a special occasion of some sort, as my family would often go browse 
the used books there after a nice dinner at the Crook’s Corner restaurant 
across the street. Since they didn’t carry too many kids books, and since I was 
too young to understand what they did carry, I mostly just browsed the 
extensive CD and VHS walls. Still, perhaps those early memories have 
contributed to the warmth that I now feel whenever I enter bookstores, in spite 
of the fact that, after over a decade working in them, it seems like such 
spaces would remind me more of labor than celebration.

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Charles: Days before I started at the Mysterious Bookshop I was offered a job 
at a bar in Brooklyn, so I guess, realistically, I’d probably be working there. 
Ideally, though, I’d be reading, writing, watching movies, traveling, and just 
generally indulging in a life of leisure. But I’m pretty happy working at the 
bookshop.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Charles: The biggest surprise about working at the Mysterious Bookshop has 
been the role of passion in its success. So much of what we create here – 
including our limited collector’s editions, our series of bibliomystery 
novellas, and the two publishing companies (Mysterious Press and 
MysteriousPress.com) that are run out of the basement—is the result of Otto’s 
and the rest of the staff’s dedication to and love of mystery fiction. 
Questions of marketability and consumption are definitely important, but they 
always take second place to this passion. So this would be the biggest 
surprise: within the limitation and restriction of genre, there is a powerful 
sense of freedom.

The Staff Shelf

What are The Mysterious Bookshop booksellers reading?

 * Sandrine’s Case 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/16129297-sandrine-s-case> by Thomas H Cook 
(2013). Otto (owner) recommends: “The author is truly a poet and this novel, 
about a man on trial for murdering his wife who falls in love with her again as 
secrets come to light, is unbearably poignant and suspenseful.”

 * She Who Was No More 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/349631/> by Boileau 
and Narcejac (1952). Charles (marketing coordinator) recommends: “When the body 
of Ferdinand Ravinel’s murdered wife goes missing, he–her murderer–faces an 
earth-shattering guilt. Confronted by the impossibility of her disappearance, 
and by incomprehensible reports from those who have seen her, quite alive, 
wandering about the town, Ravinel descends into madness. A high-point for 
psychological suspense.”

 * All the Birds, Singing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/30/evie-wyld-birds-singing-review> 
by Evie Wyld(2013). Ian (manager) recommends: “In this, her second novel, Wyld 
weaves gothic horror, crime, and literary fiction into a tale so darkly sublime 
it will raise hairs on the back of your neck. If you’re looking for a new 
author to rock your literary world, Wyld is it.”

 * Marvel and a Wonder 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/335558/> by Joe Meno 
(2015). Ian (manager) recommends: “I’ve always been impressed by Meno’s ability 
to create true-to-life characters packaged with a high or sly humor. His latest 
novel, though, enters new territory with a much more serious tone, delivering a 
crime story with some very dark deeds, callousness, a little heart, and a 
bounty of beautiful writing.”

 * The Long and Faraway Gone 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/long-and-faraway-gone.html> by Lou Berney 
(2015). Ian (manager) recommends: “It’s really tough to write a PI novel these 
days without giving into the temptation of parroting the old masters, but 
Berney does it with aplomb. Not only does his latest book reimagine the PI 
genre for the 21st century, it’s also an emotionally devastating read.”
 