
A bug in Apple’s iOS means that anyone can crash an iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> by simply sending it a certain 
string of characters in a message.


The bug – discovered by several 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/apple/comments/37enow/about_the_latest_iphone_security_vulnerability/>
 Redditusers 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/37edde/eli5_how_that_text_you_can_send_to_friends_turns/>
 – means that when the message is received it instantly crashes the iPhone and 
causes it to reboot, as long as the recipient is not viewing their message 
history at the time.

The attack appears to be caused by a glitch in the way Apple’s iOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> mobile operating system, which 
runs on the iPhone, iPad and iPod touch, renders Arabic text.

When the text message is displayed by a banner alert or notification on the 
lockscreen, the system attempts to abbreviate the text with an ellipsis. If the 
ellipsis is placed in the middle of a set of non-Latin script characters, 
including Arabic,Marathi <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marathi_language> and 
Chinese, it causes the system to crash and the phone to reboot.

The bug requires a very specific string of text to be sent within an iMessage 
or SMS. In attempting to confirm the bug, the Guardian went through 50 
variations of the text string before replicating the crash.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Fp%2F3LuZT-pMGW%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Fp%2F3LuZT-pMGW%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Fp%2F3LuZT-pMGW%2F&media=>
 A video showing the crash in action. 
The text string is very specific and is therefore highly unlikely to be 
replicated by accident. Those worried about being attacked can protect their 
iPhone from the bug by disabling notification banners. Getting notifications on 
anApple Watch <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch> also 
protects the iPhone from the bug.

Some users falling victim to the attack have reported that they can no longer 
access messages.

Others have reported that sending a photo to the contact via the Photos app 
can allow them to access the message history and delete the conversation, 
clearing the source of the crash.

The bug is being used as a prank, with users taking to Twitter to vent their 
frustration after crashes. As with any glitch like this, it is that possible 
hackers could turn the bug into a method of attack beyond simple pranks.

This is not the first bug causing similar issues on Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> devices, including apps on Macs, 
to be exposed.

Bugs within third-party apps have also caused similar problems for iPhone 
users,including Snapchat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/10/snapchat-flaw-crash-iphone-messaging-app-security>
, which allowed attackers to flood devices with information causing them to 
crash.

“We are aware of an iMessage issue caused by a specific series of unicode 
characters and we will make a fix available in a software update,” said an 
Apple spokesman.

• Apple finally fixes iMessage bug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/11/apple-finally-fixes-imessage-bug>

• Wi-Fi hack creates ‘no iOS zone’ that cripples iPhones and iPads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/22/wi-fi-hack-ios-iphone-ipad-apple>
 