
Apple’s iPhone 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/iphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones>
 has gone on pre-order around the world, but customers in the UK have woken up 
to a very real-world impact of the Brexit referendum: the iPhone 7 as well as 
the iPad line is more expensive than ever.


Pre-orders for Apple’s latest smartphone, which is now waterproof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/how-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches>
 andno longer has a headphone socket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/apple-faces-tough-sell-after-scrapping-iphone-7-headphones-jack>
, went live across the world at 8.01am UK time, meaning that many eager buyers 
in countries to the west of the Prime Meridian stayed up late into the night.

While the base-level 4.7in iPhone 7 now has twice the storage, at 32GB, of the 
starting iPhone 6S from 2015, it also rose in price by £40, costing buyers £599 
without a mobile phone contract. The US price of theiPhone 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-7> remained steady at $649.

The starting price of the larger 5.5in iPhone 7 Plus was also more expensive 
than 2015’s iPhone 6S Plus. The cheapestiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 7 model with 32GB of storage 
was hiked up by £100, with a cost of £719 in the UK. It also saw a $20 increase 
in the US, costing from $769.
Samuel Tombs (@samueltombs) 
The standard iPhone 7 will cost £60 more than its predecessor. The $ price 
didn't rise. Consumers now starting to feel adverse impact of ↓£
 <https://twitter.com/samueltombs/status/773778378549760000> September 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/samueltombs/status/773778378549760000> 
Some of the company’s other products, including the Apple Pencil and the 
company’s sports bands for theApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> Watch, also increased in price 
by £20 and £10 respectively in the UK with no new revisions. The iPad Pro, 
despite having its storage doubled and all but the cheapest versions gaining a 
price cut in the US of between $50 and $100 depending on model, increased in 
price by £50.

Apple has not stated why it has increased prices, other than that it adjust 
prices based on currency fluctuations and other factors, but it is not the 
first technology company to do so in recent weeks. Chinese smartphone company 
OnePlus raised the price of its latest smartphone, theOnePlus 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
, by £20 – a 6.5% rise in the price of the phone – in July.

“The sharp drop witnessed in the currency markets following the Brexit 
decision has forced us to re-evaluate the OnePlus 3’s pricing in the UK at a 
time of significant demand,” a spokesperson for OnePlus said at the time.

Dell also put in place a blanket 10% rise in prices for the UK, while HP 
increased prices as the pound sunk against the dollar.

The issue being seen by shoppers in the UK is caused by the fall of the pound 
against the US dollar after the Brexit referendum. US technology firms, 
including Apple, Dell, and HP, account in US dollars, which means their pricing 
of products, services and costs associated with their supply are all relative 
to the US dollar.

After a sharp plummet immediately after the referendum result, the pound has 
stayed more steady against the US dollar, but still has potential to fall 
further and is unlikely to rebound in the near future. Even if it does rebound 
against the US dollar, it is unlikely the price of goods such as smartphones 
sold by US companies will decrease dramatically, meaning UK consumers are stuck 
paying more for technology products than a year ago.

 * Want to listen to an iPhone 7 and charge it simultaneously? That’ll be £35 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/iphone-7-listen-music-charge-adapter-headphones>
 * Apple reveals waterproof iPhone 7 with new camera ... and no headphone jack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/iphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones> 