
A link to a video, which when watched slows down any iPhone until it crashes, 
is being used as the latestiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> crash prank.


The video from the Sina Weibo-backed video-sharing app Miaopai plays normally 
in the iPhone’s video player, but once the video is finished it can take up to 
a minute for the iPhone to lock up, requiring a forced reboot to recover it.

Most people are unaware anything has happened, continuing to use their 
smartphone until it either won’t turn back on or locks up in an app, the home 
screen or with a spinning loading logo on a black screen.

The bug, which appears to involve the media handling functions of iOS, affects 
versions of the operating system as far back as iOS 5 and devices from the 
iPhone 4 to theiPhone 7 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-7>. The 
older the smartphone, the faster the lockup occurs.

The lockup is not permanent, but requires a soft reset or forced reboot to 
recover the functionality of the iPhone.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB15nBZ7pjLs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB15nBZ7pjLs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB15nBZ7pjLs&media=>
 Video demonstrating the bug with various versions of the iPhone and iOS. 
On an iPhone 7 or 7 Plus users will need to hold down the power and down 
volume buttons until they see the Apple logo. On theiPhone 6S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-6s>, 6S Plus or older Apple 
smartphones, users need to hold down the power and home buttons until they see 
the Apple logo.

Once the iPhones reboot, everything appears to function as normal.

Apple’s iPhone has a history of strange links and bugs crashing the device as 
a prank. In January, a link sent to an iPhone user andopening in Safari would 
crash the browser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/25/sending-link-to-website-lets-you-crash-safari-and-anyones-iphone>
 and force the smartphone to reboot. The bug also affected Android devices and 
computers, although to a lesser extent.

Perhaps the most prolific crash bug prank for the iPhone used the “effective 
power” text message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/27/iphone-crash-bug-text-imessage-ios>
 that caused the recipients’ smartphone to crash without needing to be opened.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has not replied to a 
request for comment.

 * Wi-Fi hack creates ‘no iOS zone’ that cripples iPhones and iPads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/22/wi-fi-hack-ios-iphone-ipad-apple>
 