
When the iPhone 6S hit the shops, we called it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/06/apple-iphone-6s-review-camera-3d-touch-screen-faster-processor-fingerprint-sensor-rubbish-battery-life>
 “a very good phone, ruined by rubbish battery life”. A year on, with the 
iPhone 7 on the shelves and iOS 10 on devices, the 6S is now the budget option 
in Apple’s line-up. But how has the phone aged? Is it still very good? Does the 
battery life still suck? Will the 6S be remembered as a high point in the 
iPhone’s history, or an era to be slightly buried?

I’ve been using an iPhone 6S <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-6s>
 – in rose gold, naturally, and I’m not even sure if I’m doing this out of 
irony anymore – for the past year. Some of what I hated, I’ve come to love, and 
some of what I loved, I’ve come to hate. And some bad stuff is just still bad.

The good

Apple’s marketing is usually true: each new iPhone is the best it has ever 
made. Even a “bad” newiPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 
will see enough incremental updates in areas like the camera, processor and 
wireless connectivity that it’s hard to recommend its predecessor over it – for 
the same price, anyway.

In those areas, the 6S continues the trend, even after a year of wear, tear, 
and lust over other devices pushing the envelope with rival operating systems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fiphone-6s-debrief-one-year-on-battery-life-live-photos-a9-processor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8de31347c9b1572f85d4a3e3046181c9cf3f0700%2F0_28_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=iPhone%206S%20debrief%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20how%20did%20it%20do%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fiphone-6s-debrief-one-year-on-battery-life-live-photos-a9-processor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=iPhone%206S%20debrief%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20how%20did%20it%20do%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fiphone-6s-debrief-one-year-on-battery-life-live-photos-a9-processor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8de31347c9b1572f85d4a3e3046181c9cf3f0700%2F0_28_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 People walk past stores promoting the Apple iPhone 6S in the southern Chinese 
city of Shenzhen. Photograph: Bobby Yip/Reuters 
Take the processor. The A9 which sits at the core of the iPhone 6S still feels 
snappy, a year on, whether you’re running iOS 10 or sticking with the older 
version until the bugs are ironed out. It’s a blessing and a curse for Apple: 
the A10 is faster still, but the phones are reaching the point where it’s 
increasingly tricky to argue that faster processors really improve anything. 
That helps explain why the company focused instead on the battery life 
improvements when showing off the new silicon.

And the camera also holds its own. The “Shot on iPhone 6S” campaign makes the 
case better than words can: it’s possible to take really good pictures with the 
6S. But the better the camera gets, the more the intrinsic flaws of the form 
factor are highlighted. The tiny focal length means that all iPhone pictures 
are ultra-wide angle. It’s perfect for portraits taken from very close up, and 
snaps of large things which you can’t get some distance from, but it’s 
generally quite hard to frame a nice picture.

But that’s a good problem to have. The 6S is a good enough camera that you 
start noticing the ways in which it falls short of actual cameras, rather than 
comparing it just to phones. It helps explain whyApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> decided to shove a “telephoto” 
lens in the 7 Plus, however.

One surprise positive is 3D touch. For my first few months with the 6S, I was 
scathing about the feature, which largely existed to provide a few shortcuts to 
apps developed by trendy devs with a desire to support every new aspect of the 
hardware at launch. But as time went on, the cohort of apps that support 3D 
touch swelled, and the shortcuts became a regular part of my routine.

The launch of iOS 10 has only improved things further: 3D touch now feels 
perfectly analogous to the right click button on a Mac. Do you need it? No. 
Will it make things easier if you’re any sort of power user? Yes.

The bad

Where 3D touch grew on me, one of its flagship uses has not. Live Photos felt 
cool and new when the 6S launched: a nice flourish on top of the already-strong 
camera, which gave me something to interact with when showing pics to friends 
and family. “Here’s the beautiful waterfall we saw on holiday, look at it move!”

But a year on, the downsides are outweighing the fun flourish. The extra 
storage space required for the pictures is starting to bite – not only on my 
phone, but also on my iCloud storage and on the Mac the whole thing syncs to. 
The requirement to 3D touch the screen to activate the live photos is 
irritating and surprisingly difficult to pull off, requiring me to shift the 
position I’m holding my phone in. And worst of all, beautiful moments are stuck 
in a format I can do nothing with.

Back when I got the 6S, Live Photos felt like a best of both worlds thing: if 
I didn’t know whether I wanted a picture or video, I could take a Live Photo 
and get both. But a year on, I look back at moments that I would previously 
have shot a Vine of, and regret that I took the Live Photo instead, leaving me 
with a video that can’t be shared to social media, played by default, or easily 
edit or remix.

That’s a mere irritation, though. The battery life of the 6S is a fatal flaw.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fiphone-6s-debrief-one-year-on-battery-life-live-photos-a9-processor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52c8f2c7019b91931a19d540ae1d29eddb81ca06%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=iPhone%206S%20debrief%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20how%20did%20it%20do%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fiphone-6s-debrief-one-year-on-battery-life-live-photos-a9-processor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=iPhone%206S%20debrief%3A%20one%20year%20on%2C%20how%20did%20it%20do%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fiphone-6s-debrief-one-year-on-battery-life-live-photos-a9-processor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52c8f2c7019b91931a19d540ae1d29eddb81ca06%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 ‘At its worst, my phone has managed to completely discharge by 9:30am.’ 
Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
There was unease when it was revealed that the phone would have a lower 
capacity battery than its predecessor, but Apple assured users that it wouldn’t 
affect the battery life over all, thanks to the power efficiency of the A9 
processor.

Well, it doesn’t feel that way. At its worst, my phone has managed to 
completely discharge by 9:30am, from a full charge overnight. It’s easy to look 
for explanations for that abysmal performance: I had bluetooth headphones 
running; I was on the tube, forcing my phone to expend battery vainly seeking 
signal; my phone was glued to my hand for the entire time. But it’s just as 
easy for me to counter it:I don’t have the Facebook app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/08/uninstalling-facebook-app-saves-iphone-battery-life>
, I didn’t play any power-hungry games in that period, I didn’t watch video, I 
didn’t make a call. The battery life is just rubbish, and it’s relieving to see 
that Apple knows it: the launch of the iPhone 7 was big on battery life 
improvements. But then, so was iOS 9, introducing a battery saver mode that, as 
far as I can tell, does absolutely nothing.

One year on, though, and there’s an even worse aspect of the battery life: the 
iPhone 6S seems to have problems with cold weather. Last winter, when the 
temperature in the UK hovered around 2˚C, my phone got in the habit of shutting 
off when its battery dropped to about 30%. It would turn on again, only to 
close a few seconds after booting, until you went inside and it warmed up. I 
even managed to replace the device at the Apple Store, but the problem was only 
fixed when summer came.

While we’re on problems which Apple doesn’t seem to think exist, the 6S seems 
to have a poor bluetooth antenna. My Bose QuietComfort 35 headphones connect 
just fine, but if you put the 6S in tight jeans and then head to a place with 
some bluetooth interference – in most cities, that just means “outside” – the 
audio stutters. At least one other phone (the Nexus 5X) has this problem too, 
but it’s something that bodes ill for a company that just released a phone with 
no headphone jack at all. Hopefully the problem doesn’t re-occur in the iPhone 
7.

The ugly

The camera nubbin is exactly as irritating as it was when it was introduced 
with theiPhone 6 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-6>, two years 
ago. Objectively: it prevents the iPhone lying flat on surfaces, or sliding 
smoothly over ledges. Subjectively: it’s an absolutely awful design choice, a 
nasty compromise between two unasked-for poles. Apple decided the phone had to 
be the slimmest ever, and the camera the best ever, and the nubbin was the only 
way to achieve that goal. It is, at heart, the sort of compromise which used to 
define the difference between Apple hardware and its competitors. No longer.

It’s been said before, but: an iPhone 6S which was a couple of millimetres 
thicker, had no nubbin, and used that extra width to fit more battery capacity 
would have been a substantially better phone.

It would still have been too big, though, just not in that particular 
dimension. It’s the flip-side of what we wrote in our iPhone SE review: that 
phone,Samuel Gibbs argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/13/apple-iphone-se-review-too-small-for-most-people>
, is too small for people used to larger phones. Well, a year on (two if we 
count my time with the iPhone 6), I can confirm that the 6S is still too large 
for people used to smaller phones. I’ve started to appreciate the extra size 
for text content, I will admit, and it makes watching video almost bearable. 
But the permanent cramp in my little finger is always there reminding me that 
it’s uncomfortable to hold and use one-handed, and the bodge that is the 
iPhone’s ‘reachability’ mode reminds me that Apple knows it too.

My little finger will have to suffer a bit longer, though. While the iPhone 7 
looks like it improves the battery life, and capitalises on the strengths of 
the 6S when it comes to the camera, a full hardware redesign is at least 
another year off. The size issue, and the nubbin, are here to stay.
 