
The iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 7’s new solid-state 
home “button” does not work without skin contact, rendering the phone 
unaccessible when placed inside a sports armband, a waterproof case or when the 
user is wearing touchscreen gloves.


The new home button, which is pressure sensitive and does not move, is an 
essential part of the the new iPhone. A change made for iOS 10 means that you 
cannot move past the lockscreen without activating the home button, even if you 
are attempting to enter a pin code to unlock the device.

The Guardian tested capacitive gloves and a see-through case that covers 
screen. It was not possible to activate theiPhone 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-7> or 7 Plus’s Home button using 
either, but it was possible to fully manipulate the touchscreen.

Workarounds include using the nose, chin, elbow, knee or any other piece of 
skin to activate the home button to bring up the prompt for a passcode. Users 
attempting to activate the iPhone 7 within a see-through bag or sports armband 
will have to remove the smartphone to do so.

The home button also functions as an integral part of the mechanics of iOS 
returning users to the homescreen. Without use of the home button, users can 
use the 3D touch press and drag from the left-hand side of the phone to access 
the recently used apps and select the homescreen, which works perfectly fine 
with touchscreen gloves, but is difficult to perform within a see through case 
that covers the screen.

Some users have reported 
<https://twitter.com/carlhancock/status/776937439306846209> that some 
touchscreen-capable gloves were able to activate the home button, but the 
majority appear not to work.

 * iPhone 7 review roundup: how big a problem is the absent headphone jack? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/13/iphone-7-review-roundup-headphone-jack> 