
Germany's Chaos Computer Club says it has cracked the protection around 
Apple's fingerprint sensor on its newiPhone 5S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-5s>, just two days after the 
device went on sale worldwide.

In a post on their site 
<http://www.ccc.de/en/updates/2013/ccc-breaks-apple-touchid>, the group says 
that their biometric hacking team took a fingerprint of the user, photographed 
from a glass surface, and then created a "fake fingerprint" which could be put 
onto a thin film and used with a real finger to unlock the phone.

The claim, which is backed up with a video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HM8b8d8kSNQ>, will create concerns for 
businesses which see users intending to use the phone to access corporate 
accounts. While it requires physical access to the phone, and a clean print of 
one finger which is one of those used to unlock the phone, it raises the risk 
of a security breach.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHM8b8d8kSNQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHM8b8d8kSNQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHM8b8d8kSNQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

"This demonstrates – again – that fingerprint biometrics is unsuitable as 
access control method and should be avoided," said the Chaos Club's blogpost 
author, "Starbug". "In reality, Apple's sensor has just a higher resolution 
compared to the sensors so far. So we only needed to ramp up the resolution of 
our fake. As we have said now for more than years, fingerprints should not be 
used to secure anything. You leave them everywhere, and it is far too easy to 
make fake fingers out of lifted prints."

The group does not claim to have extracted the fingerprint representation from 
the phone itself, whereApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> 
says it is held on a secure chip. Instead it relies on capturing a high-quality 
fingerprint elsewhere, and having access to the phone.

"Relying on your fingerprints to secure a device may be okay for casual 
security – but you shouldn't depend upon it if you have sensitive data you wish 
to protect,"commented 
<http://grahamcluley.com/2013/09/hackers-bypass-iphones-touch-id-fingerprint-scanner/>
 security specialist Graham Cluley.

Apple did not respond to a request for comment on the hack.

The revelation is the third security failing discovered since the phone and 
its iOS 7 software were released last week. First, a hacker found that they 
could use a flaw in iOS 7's Control Centre feature on theiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 4S and 5 to access photos and 
send emails. Another found that the Emergency Call screen can be used to place 
a call to any number.

The Chaos Club details its methods for the fingerprint hack 
<http://dasalte.ccc.de/biometrie/fingerabdruck_kopieren?language=en>, which 
begins with a high-quality fingerprint lifted from a glass, doorknob or glossy 
surface. The print, which essentially consists of fat and sweat, is made 
visible using graphite powder or a component of superglue, and then 
photographed at high resolution to create a 2400 pixel-per-inch scan. That is 
then printed onto an overhead projector plastic slide using a laser print, 
forming a relief. That is then covered with wood glue, cut and attached to a 
real finger.

Apple introduced Touch ID, as it calls the fingerprint system, on its top-end 
iPhone 5S, unveiled earlier in the month. The technology uses a scanner built 
into the home button of the phone to take a high-resolution image from small 
sections of the fingerprint from the sub-epidermal layers of the skin. Apple 
says "Touch ID then intelligently analyses this information with a remarkable 
degree of detail and precision."

Users can choose to use up to five fingerprints - which can be changed - to 
unlock the phone and optionally pay for iTunes Store purchases. They have first 
to create a passcode of at least four digits, and then "enrol" fingerprints 
separately. Apple says that the process creates a mathematical representation 
of the fingerprint representation, and that it is only stored on the phone.

Apple's own notes about its Touch ID system 
<http://support.apple.com/kb/HT5949> on its site say that Touch ID will 
incrementally add new sections of your fingerprint to your enrolled fingerprint 
data to improve matching accuracy over time. Touch ID uses all of this to 
provide an accurate match and a very high level of security."

The company says that "Every fingerprint is unique, so it is rare that even a 
small section of two separate fingerprints are alike enough to register as a 
match for Touch ID. The probability of this happening is 1 in 50,000 for one 
enrolled finger. This is much better than the 1 in 10,000 odds of guessing a 
typical 4-digit passcode. Although some passcodes, like "1234", may be more 
easily guessed, there is no such thing as an easily guessable fingerprint 
pattern."

It notes that after five unsuccessful attempts to match the fingerprint, the 
user has to enter their passcode, and the fingerprint unlock will not work.

Speaking to BusinessWeek just after the iPhone 5S was unveiled, Craig 
Federighi, Apple's head of software, emphasised that the fingerprints would not 
leave the phone. He said that making a finger unlocking and purchasing system 
"sounds like a simple idea, but how many places could that become a bad idea 
because you failed to execute on it? We thought, 'Well, one place where that 
could be a bad idea is somebody who writes a malicious app, somebody who breaks 
into your phone, starts capturing your fingerprint. What are they doing with 
that? Can they reuse that in some other location? Can they use it to spoof 
their way into other people's phones?'"

He said that Apple's focus had been to make sure that "no matter if you took 
ownership of the whole device and ran whatever code you wanted on the main 
processor [you]could not get that fingerprint out of there. Literally, the 
physical lines of communication in and out of the chip would not permit that 
ever to escape."
 