
While the limited-overs tour of India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/eoin-morgan-returns-england-india-one-day-series>
 that gets under way in Pune on Sunday will give England’s cricketers the 
chance to showcase their talents before next month’s Indian Premier League 
auction, their availability for the tournament remains a thorny topic.

Eoin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan>, Ben Stokes, Jason 
Roy and Alex Hales are among the current squad members planning to put 
themselves forward for an IPL deal but, with two home one-day internationals 
against Ireland at the start of May, their attractiveness to potential bidders 
on 4 February could hinge on whether they are given permission to skip their 
international duties.

Related: What English cricket can learn from Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-nightwatchman/2016/dec/01/english-cricket-game-of-thrones-twenty20>

As things stand, players selected to face Ireland would need to return to the 
country by 1 May, meaning that, with theIPL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> starting on 3 April, they would only be 
able to feature in the first four weeks. If not, the next return date would be 
14 May before an England training camp that, while seeing them miss the back 
end of the tournament, would still grant them an extra fortnight and could 
prove the difference between securing a contract or not.

There is talk among the current England squad, of whom Jos Buttler and Sam 
Billingsalready have deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/jos-buttler-england-test-royal-london-cup-lancashire>
 with Mumbai and Delhi respectively, that those picked up by IPL teams will 
indeed be allowed to sit out the Ireland series, however the official line from 
Andrew Strauss, the director of cricket, is that it cannot be guaranteed that 
they will not be selected.

With even the outside possibility of them being withdrawn two weeks early a 
sticking point for potential IPL suitors, the players are seeking greater 
clarity. But, having received specialist limited‑overs contracts by England for 
the first time last year – a scheme that was devised by Strauss – they would 
also do well not to jostle too much.

Strauss, who was in talks with Alastair Cook on Friday over his continuation 
as Test captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/england-captain-alastair-cook-to-meet-andrew-strauss-on-friday-cricket>
, has a delicate line to tread in terms of perception too. While during his two 
years in the job he has encouraged white-ball players to seek overseas Twenty20 
deals, he will be wary of how it looks to allow players to miss two 50-over 
matches at the start of a summer in which England will host the Champions 
Trophy.

And even though past encounters with the associate nation have seen England 
leave out first-team players – Morgan, for example, was allowed to remain in 
the IPL while James Taylor captained the side in Malahide two years ago – these 
are the first matches between the two teams on English soil, with supporters 
having already bought tickets for the games at Bristol on 5 May and Lord’s two 
days later.

Related: Eoin Morgan’s family ‘offended’ by criticism over his Bangladesh 
decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/eoin-morgan-family-offended-england-bangladesh-cricket>

Stokes, who is entering the auction for the first time and at the highest 
reserve price of £240,000, said: “I’m an England player and the decision will 
be made and I will go with it. If they want us to come back and represent 
England, which is what our job is to do, then we will come back and there will 
be no complaints either way.

“If you look at the guys who’ve gone away and played in the franchise cricket 
in Australia and India, they’ve all come back and said that it massively helped 
their cricket. It’s not just the players they have worked with but the coaches 
too. They’ve all come away with really good experiences and said they’ve come 
back better players for doing it.”

Morgan, as captain, may yet consider it more prudent to put country first even 
if he is given the all-clear to miss the Ireland series, both in terms of 
preparation for the Champions Trophy and in light of his decision last year to 
go against security advice from the England and Wales Cricket Board andmiss the 
tour of Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/eoin-morgan-england-bangladesh-india-tour>
.

The 30-year-old goes into the series with India, which begins with three 
one-day internationals followed by three Twenty20s, in need of runs, not least 
since both Billings and Jonny Bairstow are expected to miss out on selection 
despiteregistering half-centuries in the warm-up matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/sam-billings-england-odi-series-warm-up-india-a-match-report>
.

During the two fixtures in Mumbai, the first of which saw England chase down 
305 under lights before they were humbled by six wickets in the second, Morgan 
made three and a golden duck and has just two half-centuries in his past 28 
white-ball international innings.

“Everyone goes through bad patches,” said Stokes. “He’d probably admit himself 
he’s not done as well as he’d like to but he’s the captain. He’s the driving 
point of what we want this one-day team to be about and even if he’s not 
scoring runs, he’s leading the team very well. Morgy is a class player in his 
own right so I’m sure he’ll come good.”
 