 There can be no better way to mourn the passing of the novelist and playwright 
Ira Levin, at the age of 78, than late in the evening to pour a glass of 
bourbon, start reading his first novel, A Kiss Before Dying - and wonder what 
that knocking in the pipes might really be. For, at his best, Levin plumbed the 
depths.
He wrote only seven novels, but they included one that prompted the gothic 
revival,Rosemary's Baby <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rosemary-s-baby>, as 
well as The Stepford Wives, The Boys from Brazil and Sliver, all of which were 
made into films - and made their author a great deal of money. Along with these 
was a real stage stunner, the long-running Broadway comic thriller Deathtrap.

In writing about Levin's ending, one must not give away his endings. He was 
sedulous in managing his plots, something he attributed to a treat that took 
place when he was 15. "My parents took me to see the New York production of Ten 
Little Indians. As those figurines vanished one by one from the mantelpiece and 
the actors vanished one by one from the stage, I fell in love with theatre that 
grips and dazzles and surprises. I was already a would-be novelist. Now I was a 
would-be playwright too."

Levin's family were Russian immigrants who had arrived in the US in the 19th 
century, some settling in Vermont, others on the lower east side in Manhattan, 
where he was born. His father, Charles, was a toy importer. If Levin was given 
to angst, he did not let on, but maintained the coolness that is the chilling 
mark of his work. After attending Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa 
(1946-48), he returned to New York University, graduating in English and 
philosophy in 1950.

After this, he set about writing, boosted by work for television in what has 
come to be regarded as a golden age - or at any rate one in which there was a 
ready outlet for new, live work and adaptations. As a student, Levin had been a 
runner-up in a CBS screenwriting contest, and the contacts thus established 
helped get his Leda's Portrait shown in 1951 on the network suspense series, 
Lights Out.

There is a palpable sense of honour to the evil that pervades A Kiss Before 
Dying (1953), the novel that television drama enabled Levin to write. It does 
not shortchange the reader. Even to say there are surprises is to risk spoiling 
them. The title is every bit as brilliant as the contents, which begin with a 
reference to wartime service and entail plotting as callous as any battle plan, 
each locale touched with sufficient detail to be plausible. As the British 
crime fiction writer Julian Symons has said, it "showed clearly that if there 
are no brand new tricks to be played on the reader, the old ones can be made to 
look new in sufficiently cunning hands".

Levin then spent two years in the US army signal corps (1953-55), but returned 
to New York without any fresh ideas. As he would note in Deathtrap, "nothing 
recedes like success".

He was determined not to supply more of the same, thereby risking the oblivion 
of changing tastes. Instead, he found success on Broadway with an adaptation in 
1956 of Mac Hyman's novel No Time For Sergeants, in which Andy Griffith made 
his name as a hillbilly drafted into the US airforce. If A Kiss Before Dying 
highlighted Levin's ability to put construction skills to a sinister purpose, 
this play showed a relish of farce. It ran for 796 performances and was 
followed in 1960 by Critic's Choice, a play about a reviewer who finds himself 
at a work written by his wife.

But the success of these two productions was not matched by those that came 
afterwards. In particular, there was a celebrated flop, Drat! the Cat!, which 
took Levin 10 years to write and lasted for only eight perfomances in 1965. A 
spirited take on the stock musical notion of unlikely romance, it was set in 
and around New York at the end of the 19th century, when a female cat burglar 
(Lesley Ann Warren) allures the cop set on her trail. Levin wrote the book and 
the lyrics for music composed by Milton Schafer. But despite the ignominy of a 
week's run, the play survived as a cult by means of pirated discs and, notably, 
because the cop was played by Elliot Gould, who was then married to Barbra 
Striesand. She changed the title of his song She Touched Me, and came up with 
He Touched Me, a rendition of shimmering eroticism - and a hit.

Levin decided to return to novels. He was in the habit of filling notebooks 
with ideas - one of which was spawned by the fact that in his New York 
apartment was a laundry room which he would never let his wife enter alone. And 
so was born Rosemary's Baby, Satan's child, a work Levin would not let his wife 
read during her third pregnancy. Indeed, their marriage collapsed a year later.

Studded with contemporary events - the "conception" took place during the 
Pope's visit to New York - Rosemary's Baby certainly grips, but the spirit is 
more mechanical than in A Kiss Before Dying. And yet it also became close to a 
masterpiece in the 1968 Roman Polanksi movie, with a well-cast, vulnerable Mia 
Farrow along with Ruth Gordon and John Cassavetes. Set in the Dakota building 
in New York, it builds an atmosphere of coldly reasonable manipulation that the 
novel does not.

Similarly, The Stepford Wives (1972), in which suburban housewives become 
robots, made two effective movies, while the novel itself is as lacklustre as 
the computer-controlled future world of This Perfect Day (1970).

The Boys From Brazil (1976) had more brio, inspired by Levin's reading of the 
possibility of cloning Hitler or Mozart. He chose the former, yoking it with 
contemporary accounts of Nazi refugees in south America and aspirations for a 
new Reich. Yet again, there was a more accomplished movie, with Gregory Peck 
and Laurence Olivier, released in 1978, the year of Deathtrap's Broadway 
success.

Deathtrap's twists and turns had been anticipated in Veronica's Room (1974). 
Its run of 75 performances belies its wit and horror, and merges ingenuity with 
something gothic as a young couple are brought home to a Victorian pile, one 
room of which has been kept in the state in which it was left since the death 
in 1935 of its young occupant, whose mother thinks that she is still alive. It 
all appears to be part of scam - but this being Levin, it palpably seethes. 
Deathtrap's protagonist (played by John Wood in the first production) has 
another scam going, the purloining of a younger playwright's work.

To say any more is unnecessary, other than to remark that Levin's comic sense 
is sometimes overlooked and that this is a work meant for the theatre. Much was 
lost in the 1982 movie with Michael Caine.

Break a Leg (1979) opened and closed on the same night, a sorry fate for so 
wittily ingenious a play, set in an early 20th-century city, perhaps Berlin or 
Vienna, and starring Julie Harris.

After the lacklustre play Cantorial (1984), about a haunted 
synagogue-turned-apartment, Levin had a fallow period, from which came his 
first novel in 15 years, Sliver (1991). His knack for a sense of time and place 
was again canny in setting a tale of murder in an adroitly depicted, slender 
Manhattan building in which every move is subject to surveillance. On the page, 
it is genuinely sinister, but the 1993 movie, starring Sharon Stone, lumbered 
along under the weight of Joe Eszterhas's sleazy script.

Levin wrote slowly and became skilful in exploiting the commercial 
possibilities in each work. But he did not exploit readers, and always 
attempted something fresh. He is survived by the children of his first 
marriage, to Gabrielle Aronsohn, which like the second, to Phyllis Finkel, 
ended in divorce.

Â· Ira Marvin Levin, novelist and playwright, born August 27 1929; died 
November 12 2007
 