
A villa in northern Tehran designed by Gio Ponti is to be demolished and 
replaced by a five-star hotel, prompting outrage over the fate of the only 
intact building by the Italian architect in the Middle East.

Built in the early 1960s in the wealthy Niavaran district, the Villa Namazee 
was previously listed as a national treasure. But a court decision has given 
its current owner permission to delist it, paving the way for the construction 
of a 20-storey hotel.

The prospect has touched a nerve among the country’s architects, prompting 
them to fight to save the building. Namazee was the last to be built of Ponti’s 
three famous villas, which greatly inspired a number of architects, including 
the late Iraqi-born British architect Zaha Hadid. The other two, Villa 
Planchart and Villa Arreaza, are in Caracas, Venezuela.


Mohammad-Hassan Talebian, the deputy head of Iran’s cultural heritage, 
handcrafts and tourism organisation, told the Ilna news agency: “The building 
has been legally taken off the list, so the only way to save it is for the 
municipality to bring it under public ownership or exchange it for other 
properties.”

Anonymous activists, named “the people’s committee to protect Tehran’s public 
houses”, have distributed an online leaflet underlying the significance of the 
villa and raising concerns about its imminent demolition.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7648a772e590c6d7f3c9330f095ffd5c1ace2541%2F0_13_670_402%2F670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iranian%20architects%20fight%20to%20save%20Gio%20Ponti%20villa%20from%20bulldozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iranian%20architects%20fight%20to%20save%20Gio%20Ponti%20villa%20from%20bulldozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7648a772e590c6d7f3c9330f095ffd5c1ace2541%2F0_13_670_402%2F670.jpg>
 There are many old trees with in Villa Namazee’s compound. Photograph: Hamed 
Khosravi/Tehran Projects 
Nashid Nabian, a Harvard graduate and Iranian scholar, said there was not 
enough sensitivity among Iranians to save the country’s contemporary heritage.

“To go beyond our identity crisis, we always look back to our old history but 
our contemporary history is as significant,” she said. “The recent history 
creates a sense of belonging to the city and if you lose that, it would unravel 
and you would struggle to define yourself to the future or to define who you 
are now. If you lose your embedded history, you lose your contemporariness.”

Nabian said the proposed hotel threatened the environment because the villa, 
which was commissioned by the businessman Shafi Namazee during the last shah’s 
rule, has many old trees within the compound’s walls.

“It is a rare breathing space in the city with a lot of old trees and any 
construction will exacerbate the ecosystem crisis the area is facing, create 
huge traffic and lead to more pollution in the city,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787bce976d83256a7428c91d489fbb4065cdf07c%2F0_0_670_678%2F670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iranian%20architects%20fight%20to%20save%20Gio%20Ponti%20villa%20from%20bulldozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iranian%20architects%20fight%20to%20save%20Gio%20Ponti%20villa%20from%20bulldozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787bce976d83256a7428c91d489fbb4065cdf07c%2F0_0_670_678%2F670.jpg>
 The original interior of the villa. Photograph: Hamed Khosravi/Tehran Projects 
The Iranian architect Parshia Qaregozloo, who was the curator of Iran’s 
pavilion at the 2016 Venice biennale, said there had been significant efforts 
to save Tehran’s landmarks in recent years, including the Panahi House, which 
was designed by the French architect Roland Dubrulle, but more attention was 
needed.

 “More than 300 works have been registered in Tehran and its vicinity in 
recent years but there are a lot of works that no one knows about and suddenly 
they are at the risk of being destroyed,” she said.


An old house in Tehran’s Zaferanieh neighbourhood used by Queen Turan, the 
third wife of Reza Shah, the father of Iran’s last shah, was demolished this 
year to people’s dismay. Another house, frequented by the Iranian poet and film 
director Forough Farrokhzad, was reported to have been destroyed in November.


Among other notable buildings neglected in the past decade are the Sabet Pasal 
house in Tehran, known as Iran’s palace of Versailles, and a house in Karaj 
which belonged to the last shah’s sister, Princess Shams Pahlavi, and was 
designed by American architect Frank Lloyd Wright.


Ponti’s other work in the Middle East is the ministry of planning building in 
Baghdad which was partly damaged during the Iraq war. Unesco, along with the 
Polytechnic University of Milan, is involved in the conservation of the 
building which was constructed in 1958.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac1691bafc7d18ea61c43a64f613324a6205d9d%2F0_313_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iranian%20architects%20fight%20to%20save%20Gio%20Ponti%20villa%20from%20bulldozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iranian%20architects%20fight%20to%20save%20Gio%20Ponti%20villa%20from%20bulldozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac1691bafc7d18ea61c43a64f613324a6205d9d%2F0_313_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Gio Ponti’s son takes a picture of the villa from a house across the street. 
Photograph: Leila Araghian 
Leila Araghian, the architect of Tehran’s new high-tech Tabiat bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/20/bridge-tehran-architect-iran-leila-araghian-tabiat-sanctions-iranian-designers>
, said she attempted to visit Villa Namazee in January along with Ponti’s son. 
“We went there and buzzed the door, a caretaker came out and said the owner 
wasn’t there, so we went to the house opposite and took pictures from there,” 
she said.

“This is a building designed by such an important architect. If it was 
anywhere else, it would have been protected.”

Born in 1891, Ponti became an epitome of Italian fashion and design at its 
best in the 20th century. As well as being an architect, he also became 
well-known for designing ceramics and furniture in a career that spanned more 
than half a century. He died in 1979.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F255c8ecc6f7a6b7d5f160df5d29e825edaf8e680%2F0_825_3725_2235%2F3725.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iranian%20architects%20fight%20to%20save%20Gio%20Ponti%20villa%20from%20bulldozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iranian%20architects%20fight%20to%20save%20Gio%20Ponti%20villa%20from%20bulldozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Firanian-architects-fight-to-save-gio-ponti-villa-from-bulldozers-villa-namazee-tehran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F255c8ecc6f7a6b7d5f160df5d29e825edaf8e680%2F0_825_3725_2235%2F3725.jpg>
 Italian architect and designer Gio Ponti pictured in the 1950s. Photograph: 
Mondadori/Mondadori via Getty Images 
Araghian said support for the Tehran villa had been heart-warming. “The fact 
that the Iranian society and Iranian architects are sensitive about this is 
positive by itself, it shows they are not indifferent. If it was 15 years ago, 
it would have been destroyed without much resistance,” she said.

Ponti’s villa is among the most prominent buildings by a foreign architect. 
Last year, there were demonstrations in Tehran in protest at plans to change 
the facade of a bank designed by Jørn Utzon, the architect behind the Sydney 
Opera House.


After the 1979 Islamic revolution, the Ponti villa, which was built for what 
the architect called “joie d’y vivre”, was first possessed by the government 
and used as a local registry office before being sold to Ahmad Abrishami, a 
representative of Nokia inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, who 
registered it as a national heritage building. It was sold to its present owner 
four years ago.

 Faryar Javaherian, an Iranian architect, documented the Villa Namazee after 
the revolution. “It is a master’s house,” she said. “It is one of the first 
projects of its kind featuring open plan with a suspended roof which also has a 
flooring that appears to be floating in the air. The ceramic used [by the 
artist Fausto Melotti] is very, very beautiful.”

Javaherian pleaded for it to be saved. “If they want to build a hotel, they 
still can preserve the villa, it’s an added value, it’s not a distraction,” she 
said. “You have something good, why destroy it and replace it by something so 
awful?”
 