
Negotiating an international agreement to curb Iran’s nuclear programme in 
exchange for sanctions relief has been a high-stakes preoccupation for leaders 
around the world. The Guardian ranks the main winners and losers in one of the 
most significant diplomatic deals of modern times.

Winners

Hassan Rouhani

Iran’s president is by a long way the biggest winner to emerge from the 
nuclear agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-expected-to-be-announced-in-vienna>
 between his country and six world powers. Rouhani highlighted the way in which 
Iran’s right to develop peaceful nuclear energy has been recognised, as has its 
status in the region. Ending Iran’s international isolation is a historic 
achievement that looks likely to win him a second term in 2017. But he faces 
resistance from suspicious hardliners who fear that even limited rapprochement 
with the US and the west will promote demands for domestic change that could 
undermine a regime dominated by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.

Barack Obama


The US president’s achievement has to be measured against the position of 
George Bush, who declared in 2002 that Iran was a member of an “axis of evil” 
that included Saddam Hussein’s Iraq and North Korea. “This deal demonstrates 
that American diplomacy can bring about real and meaningful change,” he said. 
“Let us never negotiate out of fear. But let us never fear to negotiate.” Obama 
hasvowed to veto opposition in Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/obama-veto-republican-iran-nuclear-deal>
. If all goes well, the agreement will likely be the centrepiece of his foreign 
policy legacy and vindicate what many considered to be the premature award of a 
Nobel peace prize.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Firan-nuclear-deal-the-winners-and-losers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436893683436%2Fb2e38b9f-9e2e-4664-ab2a-c4b1ad951c67-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20nuclear%20deal%3A%20the%20winners%20and%20losers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Firan-nuclear-deal-the-winners-and-losers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20nuclear%20deal%3A%20the%20winners%20and%20losers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Firan-nuclear-deal-the-winners-and-losers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436893683436%2Fb2e38b9f-9e2e-4664-ab2a-c4b1ad951c67-1020x612.jpeg>
 Assad is set to benefit from deal. Photograph: Syrian Arab News Agency/EPA 
Bashar al-Assad


The Syrian president quickly hailed the agreement as a “major turning point” 
in the history of Iran, the region and the world, calling it a “great victory”. 
Assad has received military and financial support from Iran since the uprising 
against him erupted in 2011. Tehran’s enhanced regional position in the wake of 
the deal will strengthen its demands for recognition as a key player in the 
Middle East, including in any negotiations about the future of Syria. Assad’s 
Syrian and Arab enemies, contemplating a war that has already left 210,000 dead 
and made millions of people homeless, are horrified by the nuclear deal – for 
exactly these reasons. Opposition activists branded the agreement#Munich2Vienna 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Munich2Vienna?src=hash>.

Vladimir Putin


The Russian president said the world had “breathed a huge sigh of relief” when 
the deal was finalised. The lifting of sanctions against Iran could make the 
easing of westernsanctions against Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/08/putin-russia-risks-further-eu-sanctions-ukraine-says-philip-hammond>
 over its role in the Ukraine crisis more likely. An eventual end to the arms 
embargo against Iran would also be in the interest of the country’s $15bn arms 
industry. Moscow has argued that the embargo should be completely lifted so 
Iran can help fight Isis.

Losers

Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi


The self-proclaimed caliph of the Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/03/isis-and-affiliates-around-the-world>
 may fear a more coherent international effort against his forces in Iraq and 
Syria given the new possibilities for cooperation between the US and Iran. Iran 
has said in the past that the US is not serious about fighting terrorism, and 
complained that Washington’s close Arab allies – Saudi Arabia, Qatar and other 
Gulf states – as well as Turkey have promoted jihadi groups. It has already 
signalled that it may now be prepared to help.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Firan-nuclear-deal-the-winners-and-losers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436893548836%2F74c059af-3049-4bec-9e9d-59194beb5a22-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20nuclear%20deal%3A%20the%20winners%20and%20losers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Firan-nuclear-deal-the-winners-and-losers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20nuclear%20deal%3A%20the%20winners%20and%20losers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Firan-nuclear-deal-the-winners-and-losers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436893548836%2F74c059af-3049-4bec-9e9d-59194beb5a22-2060x1236.jpeg>
 King Salman. Photograph: SPA/AFP/Getty Images 
King Salman bin Abdulaziz


Saudi Arabia’s initial silence about the agreement suggests deep anxiety about 
a rapprochement between the US and Iran, its greatest rival in the region, and 
a pivot away from the Gulf. The view in Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and nearby capitals 
is that Washington is appeasing Tehran and ignoring their own security concerns 
– despite the Gulf states’ far greater expenditure on defence.Salman strongly 
dislikes Iran’s role in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/11/king-salman-saudi-arabia-pulls-out-us-talks-iran>
, Syria, Bahrain and Yemen, where the Saudis are attacking Houthi rebels they 
say are backed by Tehran. Sunni-Shia sectarianism is an alarming new element of 
a long-hostile relationship between Arabs and Persians.

Binyamin Netanyahu

Israel’s prime minister had vowed to stop a nuclear agreement between the US 
and Iran.Not only did he fail to do that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/netanyahu-denounces-iran-nuclear-dealcriticism-israel>
 but he caused serious damage to Israel’s prized strategic relationship with 
Washington. Critics at home say he exaggerated the extent of an Iranian threat, 
some calling for his resignation. Iran has been notoriously hostile to the 
Jewish state since the 1979 revolution, and Tehran highlights its support for 
the Palestinians, including Hamas, and Lebanon’s Hezbollah. Nothing in the 
Vienna agreement suggests that will change. Israel also fears Iran may be 
emboldened. Lifting sanctions gives “Iran a jackpot, a cash bonanza of hundreds 
of billions of dollars, which will enable it to continue to pursue its 
aggression and terror in the region and in the world”, Netanyahu claimed. The 
focus on Iran’s nuclear programme has also drawn attention to Israel’s 
undeclared nuclear arsenal – outside the nuclear non-proliferation treaty.

Iran nuclear deal reached in Vienna
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-expected-to-be-announced-in-vienna>
Additional reporting by Alec Luhn in Moscow and Peter Beaumont in Jerusalem
 