
Ireland finally has a new government after its inconclusive general election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/feb/27/ireland-general-election-exit-poll-coalition-fine-gael>
 in February.

The Republic’s two main parties, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil, struck a deal on 
Friday that will lead to a new coalition.

Fianna Fáil has agreed to facilitate a Fine Gael minority government in a 
“political ceasefire” between the two dominant political forces in the state. 
But Fianna Fáil will remain on the opposition benches in the Dáil, the Irish 
parliament.

Ireland still without government after third failure to pick taoiseach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/ireland-government-taoiseach-kenny-martin>
After an intense day of discussions at Trinity College Dublin, the two 
parties’ negotiating teams described the arrangement as “the first initiative 
of its kind”.

It is understood that Fianna Fáil will allow Fine Gael to govern until a 
review of the coalition’s performance in September 2018.

The 14 independent deputies in the Dáil have been summoned to government 
buildings in Dublin to be briefed about the deal.

They will play a key part in the formation of the new government and will 
extract a constituency-by-constituency price for supporting a Fine Gael 
minority administration as well as demanding major reforms over the way the 
Irish parliament is run.

Michael McGrath, one of Fianna Fáil’s negotiators, said he was “pleased and 
relieved” that the formal discussions were over.

“Our own parliamentary party members remain on standby for a special meeting 
of the party to be called at any time over the weekend if necessary to approve 
or not approve at their discretion the document,” he said.

Alluding to the original divide over the Anglo-Irish treaty in 1921 that 
partitionedIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> into two states, 
leading to a bitter civil war and the formation of the two parties, McGrath 
said: “When you consider the history of those parties, the near 100-year 
history of our state, this is the first initiative of its kind.”

In the February election, Fine Gael, led by taoiseach Enda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny>, lost 26 seats but it remains 
the largest party in the Dáil with 50 seats. Fianna Fáil made a stunning 
recovery from a historic low of 21 seats in the 2011 general election to 44 
seats this year.

Sinn Féin remains the third-biggest party with 21 seats and whose increased 
presence in the Dáil was the main reason why Fianna Fáil will not sit in 
government.

With a so-called “grand coalition” between Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael proving a 
step too far for rivals whose enmities were forged in the Irish civil war, a 
minority Fine Gael-led administration, with the support of a number of 
independents, has been the only realistic option for weeks.


If Fine Gael manages to finalise negotiations with the independents quickly , 
a new taoiseach could be elected next week.


Three previous attempts in the Dáil to elect a taoiseach  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/ireland-government-taoiseach-kenny-martin>
in the wake of the election ended in failure.


Sinn Féin’s president, Gerry Adams, accused Fianna Fáil of campaigning in the 
election to put Kenny out of office but striking a deal to keep him there. The 
Dáil member for Louth claimed Fianna Fáil had forfeited its right to lead the 
opposition.

“Whatever deal has been reached will, I have no doubt, fallen well short of 
delivering the change and investment required to tackle the housing and 
homelessness crises and fix our health service, and will not bring about a 
fairer, more equal society,” he said.



 