
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has entered new 
constitutional territory after its parliament failed to elect a prime minister 
and government following last month’s inconclusive general election.

The Dáil, the Irish parliament, sat on Thursday to try to elect a taoiseach 
and agree on the formation of a fresh coalition – but incumbentEnda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> fell far short of the votes 
needed to become prime minister and form an administration.

The outgoing Fine Gael-Labour coalition government, which imposed austerity 
measures in Ireland during the economic crisis, waspunished by voters in the 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/ireland-general-election-voters-go-polls-as-hung-parliament-predicted>
, losing its majority despite a now fast-growing economy and falling 
unemployment rate.

The Guardian view on the Irish election: economic pain for no political gain | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/28/the-guardian-view-on-the-irish-election-economic-pain-for-no-political-gain>
On Thursday, as Kenny failed to amass the 79 votes needed to be reappointed 
taoiseach, new figures revealed that Ireland’s growth rate for 2016 would be 
close to 8% – the highest in the European Union.

The figures were not so good for Kenny, who managed to scrape up only 57 votes 
from his party, Fine Gael, and Labour.Fine Gael lost 26 seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/irish-election-enda-kenny-plans-to-form-government-despite-losing-voters>
 in the 26 February election and now has 50.

Negotiations to break the deadlock and form a government are now likely to 
continue at least until Easter.

Kenny will remain as caretaker taoiseach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/fianna-fail-ceasefire-will-allow-kenny-to-continue-as-taoiseach>
 for St Patrick’s Day on 17 March, and is expected to take the salute during 
commemorations at the end of the month for the centenary of the Easter Rising 
against British rule.

Irish election results show Fine Gael misread public mood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/irish-election-results-show-fine-gael-misread-public-mood>
Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil, the two main parties in Irish politics, are still 
ruling out creating a historic “grand coalition” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/fianna-fail-rules-out-fine-gael-coalition-irish-election>
. The Sinn Féin MP Pearse Doherty challenged them both on Thursday to “end the 
charade” and form a government together, but Fianna Fáil sources are adamant 
the party will not walk into a coalition that would leave Sinn Féin as the main 
opposition force in Ireland.

The FF leader, Micheál Martin, said: “We didn’t get a mandate to go into 
government with Fine Gael and we certainly didn’t get a mandate to put Fine 
Gael back into government.”

FF sources have said they want a “political ceasefire” that would allow Fine 
Gael to cobble together a minority administration propped up by independent 
Dáil deputies.

One of the many non-party independents recently elected, Danny Healy-Rae from 
Kerry, said the Dáil was “like a wedding but the bride and groom haven’t shown 
up”.
 