
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is going to the polls in a 
general election that could turn into Independents Day, with newly elected, 
unaligned deputies hoping to play a central role in forming a new government.

More than 3 million people are eligible to vote, and there are 552 candidates 
contesting 157 seats in the Dáil, the Irish parliament. Polls close at 10pm on 
Friday night, and counting begins on Saturday.

Opinion polls in the run-up to the vote suggest that the existing Fine 
Gael-Labour coalition will fall short of the required 79 seats needed for 
another working majority.

All polls throughout the three-week campaign forecast that Enda Kenny’s Fine 
Gael party would retain its No 1 spot, but Labour faces savage losses to 
opposition candidates critical of the government’s austerity programme. Some 
polls suggest up to 20 independents could be elected, including single-issue 
candidates.

Among them is Shane Ross, an outspoken newspaper columnist who has flown high 
in the polls and could take on the role of kingmaker in post-election coalition 
talks.

Ross had a spring in his step on the campaign trail this week, fired up by the 
possibility that his non-party parliamentary bloc will be critical in 
determining who will be the next taoiseach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F026022d8a7d4be86e548f0984e7d1aa0b67b0391%2F0_0_3912_2348%2F3912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ireland%20general%20election%3A%20polls%20open%20as%20Alliance%20hopes%20for%20Independents%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ireland%20general%20election%3A%20polls%20open%20as%20Alliance%20hopes%20for%20Independents%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F026022d8a7d4be86e548f0984e7d1aa0b67b0391%2F0_0_3912_2348%2F3912.jpg>
 Independent candidate and journalist Shane Ross. Photograph: Niall Carson/PA 
Canvassing in Dublin Rathdown, one of the most affluent constituencies in 
Ireland, he told the Guardian his Independent Alliance of five Dáil deputies 
(TDs) will only support a coalition that agrees to major political reforms.

Ireland's general election – the Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/feb/18/irelands-general-election-the-guardian-briefing>
The Alliance has drawn up a charter of its main conditions for backing either 
Kenny to return as taoiseach or to elect an alternative premier after the votes 
are counted this weekend.

“We are calling for legislation to be introduced in the next Dáil that would 
outlaw political cronyism, corruption and jobs for the boys,” Ross said. “It 
won’t cost anything, we are not demanding anything else but reform. It must 
mean legislation that bars ministers in government from nominating their 
political allies to the boards of semi-state bodies, appointing their pals to 
the judiciary and promoting people they favour in the Garda Síochána [police 
force].

“We only support a new government that agrees to our charter on political 
reform because cronyism and one party coming in and looking after their chums 
isn’t on any more. It was corruption like this that got our political system 
into such trouble and ruined its reputation,” he said.


Ross, a Sunday Independent newspaper columnist who has lambasted the current 
government’s policies over the past five years, said he remained open to 
supporting Kenny as taoiseach so long as a charter of reform was accepted.


Ross is a clear frontrunner in Dublin Rathdown, having won 17,000 first 
preference votes in the general election five years ago. His performance was 
the second best in Ireland, only a few hundred votes behind Kenny.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4d802c0f0591b9558948940880d42233d872295%2F0_133_4716_2830%2F4716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ireland%20general%20election%3A%20polls%20open%20as%20Alliance%20hopes%20for%20Independents%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ireland%20general%20election%3A%20polls%20open%20as%20Alliance%20hopes%20for%20Independents%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4d802c0f0591b9558948940880d42233d872295%2F0_133_4716_2830%2F4716.jpg>
 Irish prime minister and Fine Gael leader Enda Kenny and the Labour party 
leader, Joan Burton, warn against voting for independent candidates. 
Photograph: Leon Neal/AFP/Getty 
In the constituency’s Mount Merrion area – regarded as a traditional Fine Gael 
redoubt – all but one of about a dozen voters who stopped to talk to Ross 
outside a supermarket earlier this week expressed their support, and the owner 
of a nearby cafe even offered to distribute his campaign leaflets inside her 
premises.

“He will certainly be getting our vote,” Anna Sweeney said, before adding that 
this was as much down to his campaigning on local issues as his promises to 
reform the national political system.

Sweeney mentioned the closure of the local swimming pool by the county 
council, which angered her and her daughter Natalie, who used it regularly.


“I promise that we will force the local council to get that pool back for the 
people,” Ross thundered as he shook hands with Natalie, a first-time voter.

The only dissenting voice in the street outside was from a woman who 
questioned whether voting for independents could lead to stable government. 
Fine Gael’s line of attack against Ross and the other independents is that a 
vote for them is a recipe for the kind of instability in the Dáil that led to 
two elections in one year during the 1980s.

In response, Ross said his group’s support for any government would be 
“responsible”.


“While we would vote against individual pieces of legislation any new 
government brings in that we don’t like, I want to make it clear that on votes 
of confidence in that government we will be responsible – so long, that is, 
that the coalition we are supporting agrees to our reform programme and outlaws 
political patronage in this state once and for all.”


Speaking on Thursday, the prime minister and deputy prime minister warned 
against a scenario where independents hold the balance of power.


Deputy prime minister Joan Burton, who is also the Labour party leader, said a 
small shift in voting patterns could still give her party and Fine Gael the 
numbers needed to form a government.

Speaking at the same venue in Dublin’s hi-tech “Google Quarter” hours before 
the imposition of a broadcasting moratorium at 2pm, Kenny urged voters to back 
the existing coalition parties to create a stable administration.

IRISH ELECTION GUIDE




Parties



Fine Gael: A party born out of loyalty to Irish independence military leader 
Michael Collins, who was assassinated by republican diehards for accepting the 
1921 Anglo Irish Treaty that partitioned Ireland. Now centre-right in economic 
policy, strongly pro-European and increasingly socially liberal. Won 76 seats 
in the 2011 general election – an all-time high.


Fianna Fáil: Founded by Michael Collins’ great civil war rival Éamon de 
Valera, the party ultimately accepted the Anglo Irish settlement and became the 
most successful political force in post-independence Irish history. 
Economically centrist, often populist, it was blamed for the collapse of the 
Celtic Tiger amid allegations that the party was too close to property 
speculators and bankers. In the last election it crashed to just 20 seats.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8a85037a9cf5b39a05c0d6533696efe978650b3%2F0_291_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ireland%20general%20election%3A%20polls%20open%20as%20Alliance%20hopes%20for%20Independents%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ireland%20general%20election%3A%20polls%20open%20as%20Alliance%20hopes%20for%20Independents%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8a85037a9cf5b39a05c0d6533696efe978650b3%2F0_291_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams, taoiseach Enda Kenny, Fianna Fáil leader Micheál 
Martin and Labour’s Joan Burton line up for their last TV debate on RTE Prime 
Time on Tuesday. Photograph: Tony Maxwell/PA 
Sinn Féin: The party once known around the world as the political wing of the 
Provisional IRA has benefited enormously from the Northern Ireland peace 
process. Led byGerry Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, 
it had 14 seats in the last Dáil and is expected to return with at least 20 in 
this election, positioning itself as a party of protest against austerity cuts.

Labour: The oldest party in the state and rooted in the trade unions, Labour 
faces the possibility of electoral meltdown akin to the Liberal Democrat 
wipeout in the UK last year. Labour was at the vanguard of social change as 
junior partner in the current government, championingthe gay marriage referendum
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/23/gay-marriage-ireland-yes-vote>, 
but it also took flak over the coalition’s unpopular tax rises and public 
spending cuts.


Anti Austerity Alliance/People Before Profit: Both parties are rooted in the 
far-left Socialist party (former Militant Tendency) and the Socialist Workers 
party. They draw support, likeSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, from urban working-class 
areas where there is widespread discontent over austerity.


Independents: The probable kingmakers in the new Dáil, they range from 
maverick centre-right radicals to former Marxists defending individual 
electoral redoubts.


Main issues


The recovery: Fine Gael emphasises the Irish economic recovery from the 2008 
crash and the loss of economic sovereignty whenthe IMF took over fiscal policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/22/imf-eu-bailout-ireland-eurozone>
 in 2010. The party stresses that the recovery is fragile and needs another 
stable government. Critics say the measures taken to plug the gap in national 
finances – tax rises, public spending cuts, wage freezes, etc –were too extreme 
and hit those on low-to-middle incomes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/may/26/ireland-economic-collapse>. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2878a6b812afd1cf385c65ce594b2d10ce63b843%2F0_0_3262_4604%2F3262.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ireland%20general%20election%3A%20polls%20open%20as%20Alliance%20hopes%20for%20Independents%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ireland%20general%20election%3A%20polls%20open%20as%20Alliance%20hopes%20for%20Independents%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firish-general-election-alliance-independents-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2878a6b812afd1cf385c65ce594b2d10ce63b843%2F0_0_3262_4604%2F3262.jpg>
 A demonstration against water charges last week. Photograph: Caroline 
Quinn/AFP/Getty 
Water charges: One condition of the IMF bailout, which prevented national 
bankruptcy, was that Ireland needed to fund its own water system. The 
introduction of water chargesprompted mass protests across the republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/31/water-charges-ireland-cause-protests>
.


Crime: The audacious, televised attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/05/man-shot-dead-at-dublin-boxing-bout-weigh-in>
 on a boxing bout weigh-in in Dublin this month refocused the public’s mind on 
crime, gangsters and the drug crisis ravaging certain urban areas of Ireland, 
particularly in its capital. It has proved to be a problem for Sinn Féin, as 
the party supports the abolition of the non-jury special criminal court, an 
institution set up in the 1970s to convict terrorists. The other parties argue 
that the court is still needed to prosecute organised crime.


Possible outcomes


Uncertainty is the dominant mood. Opinion polls suggest the Fine Gael-Labour 
coalition will fall at least 10 seats short of the 79-plus needed for a working 
majority in the Dáil. The most likely option in that scenario is that the two 
parties seek to do deals with independent deputies, who are expected to be 
elected in greater numbers than ever before. A second possibility is that the 
biggest opposition party, Fianna Fáil, will lend support to the government for 
a fixed period but not enter coalition or seek cabinet seats. A third option – 
the coming together of old rivals Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil – has been ruled 
out by both parties. Another election later this year is not out of the 
question.
 