
There is a general election in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> tomorrow, although it is very 
doubtful that many people in Britain know that. UK newspaper coverage has not 
so much been muted as virtually non-existent.

I was phoned last evening by an Irish radio station and asked to take part in 
a discussion on Sunday, when the majority of counts will have taken place.

The researcher asked if I would talk about how the election result would be 
regarded here. The answer is clear: no impact of any kind.

Yet, in so many ways, it is a fascinating election that could well have a 
far-reaching impact in Britain. The polls suggest that no party will obtain a 
sufficient majority to govern alone. There is nothing new in that after a 
succession of coalition governments.


But, as the Independent’s David McKittrick reported on Thursday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/ireland-election-fine-gael-and-fianna-fail-face-being-forced-into-coalition-after-a-century-of-a6893831.html>
, it is possible that Ireland’s two largest rival parties “may have to come 
together to bring stable government.”

Fine Gael, now led by the current prime minister Enda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny>, and the opposition Fianna Fail 
were founded in the aftermath of Ireland’s bloody civil war almost a century 
ago.

They have dominated Irish politics ever since, although both have generally 
depended on minor parties to form governments.

Gradually, however, their hold on the electorate has weakened to the point 
where as much as a third of the population is now expected to vote for “the 
others”, meaningSinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> and 
a number of independents, plus a couple of Greens and a Labour rump.

Sinn Féin will not go into coalition as a minor partner. The (mostly leftish, 
anti-establishment) independents are too disparate to join a coalition. Labour, 
harmed by being the bit player in the current government (think Lib-Dems in the 
last election here), will get too few seats to get back into power.

So the most likely outcome is that Fine Gael and Fianna Fail, parties who 
broadly share an economic stance, will together have the majority share of the 
seats.

Can they then reject pressure to form a coalition? According to one of Fine 
Gael’s senior members, and current health minister, Leo Varadkar,there is no 
chance of it happening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/irish-general-election-fianna-fail-leo-varadkar-fine-gael>
.


One of his major objections to the notion is that it would end up being a 
“shotgun marriage with Sinn Féin holding the shotgun.”

He said: “It would suit Sinn Féin as potentially it would allow them to become 
the major opposition party. I can’t say that would be good for the country.”

But McKittrick appears to think there is little alternative to what would be a 
truly landmark event. Fianna Fail’s leader, Micheál Martin, has performed well 
in the campaign and his party’s ratings have revived.A report in The Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/irishnews/article4698048.ece> appeared to agree.

By contrast, Sinn Fein’s ratings have faltered, not least because its leader, 
Gerry Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, has been found 
wanting when being questioned about economics.

Even so, there is an acceptance - as Fintan O’Toole also noted in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/23/deep-cuts-ireland-voters-economy-austerity-public-services-society>
 - that SF will gain a lot of seats by getting, possibly, 17% of the overall 
vote. If so, that would amount to its best election performance in the Republic.

And that’s the point about the Irish election’s impact in the UK because Sinn 
Féin is already sharing power inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. A growing vote in the 
Republic adds to its status as an all-Ireland party and reinforces its call for 
a united Ireland.

*I have written previously for the Sinn Fein newspaper, An Phoblacht
 