
Ireland’s government has confirmed that discussions are under way with Britain 
to try to reach an agreement on how to secure the two countries’ borders after 
Brexit, control immigration and counter terrorist threats.

Irish and British immigration officials are already sharing intelligence about 
foreign visitors passing through airports and ferry ports by measures such as 
the personal information from biometric passports, the Department of Justice in 
Dublin said on Monday. It said the sharing of information from points of entry 
into both states was also part of a strategy to counter terrorism and organised 
crime.

A spokesman for the department said: “Clearly it is in the best interests of 
both Ireland and the UK to cooperate as fully as possible on these matters and 
that has been the approach adopted by both jurisdictions going back many years, 
including the introduction earlier this year of new arrangements to allow for 
the sharing of advanced passenger information betweenIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> and the UK in order to further 
enhance the integrity of the common travel area (CTA).

“The development of the British-Irish visa system was facilitated by this 
arrangement and indeed could not have happened without the electronic sharing 
of information such as biometrics.”

As well as protecting the Anglo-Irish CTA, the Irish justice spokesman said 
there were mutual security concerns that prompted more cooperation in areas 
such as immigration control. “Negotiations on the UK’s exit from the EU have 
not yet begun and this process will of course involve a negotiation between the 
UK and all EU member states,” he said. “Any commentary now on what may emerge 
from those negotiations is speculative.

“However, it should be noted that it is vital, not just for Ireland but for 
all EU member states, that we are in a position to combat terrorism and serious 
crime through the sharing of relevant information in an appropriate manner. 
There are a number of ongoing EU initiatives in this area in which Ireland is 
committed to playing a full part.”

Earlier on Monday, two Irish government ministers said the republic would be 
prepared to allow for extra monitoring at its airports and ferry terminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/idea-of-uk-border-controls-in-ireland-is-ridiculous-says-irish-mep-matt-carty>
 to help the UK control post-Brexit immigration.

The finance minister, Michael Noonan, said there could be the usual “normal 
checks” at points of entry into Ireland which would keep tabs on any illegal 
immigration using the Irish border to enter the UK.

Even though Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
voted 54% in favour of staying in the EU, the overall outcome of the 23 June 
referendum means the region will be outside the EU when Britain leaves.


This Brexit plan will divide Britain and Ireland once more | Diarmaid Ferriter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/10/brexit-plan-divide-britain-ireland-uk-border>
In response to the proposal by the Northern Ireland secretary, James 
Brokenshire, for a new ramped-up intelligence system between the republic and 
the UK to clamp down on illegal migrants, Noonan said: “So, if you do not have 
a border, going from Newry going across, dividing Sligo and Donegal from the 
northern counties, the next step is to have your controls at the ports.

“So that would mean Rosslare, and Larne [sea ports], and the airports, but 
that wouldn’t be much more than the normal checks we have at airports already, 
where you show your passport.”

Noonan and his cabinet colleague, the Irish justice minister, Frances 
Fitzgerald, welcomed Brokenshire’s opposition to any “hard border” arrangements 
on the UK’s only land frontier with an EU state as well as his promise that the 
CTA would continue after Brexit.

Fitzgerald said there was “not anything surprising” in Brokenshire’s views and 
that such a move would avoid the re-establishment of a hard border between 
Northern Ireland and the Republic. He said: “The whole question of security in 
the ports as well as our interests is going to be an area where there is more 
focus on in relation to the risks of terrorism and security cooperation.

“I envisage the security co-operation continuing and developing if anything 
over the next number of years. There is not anything surprising in what he has 
said.”

Brokenshire had earlier told the Guardian that London and Dublin would work to 
strengthen Ireland’s external borders in order to combat illegal migration into 
the UK once it left the EU.

Brokenshire said there was now a “high level of collaboration on a joint 
programme of work” between the two states to control immigration.

“We have put in place a range of measures to further combat illegal migration 
working closely with the Irish government,” Brokenshire said. “Our focus is to 
strengthen the external border of the common travel area, building on the 
strong collaboration with our Irish partners.”

The Northern Ireland secretary added: “We are already working closely with the 
Irish government and other members of the common travel area to prevent people 
from seeking to evade UK immigration controls from entering via another part of 
the CTA. There is a high level of collaboration on a joint programme of work. 
This includes investment in border procedures; increased data sharing to inform 
immigration and border security decisions; passenger data systems enabling the 
collection and processing of advance passenger information; and harmonised visa 
processes.”

The Fine Gael-led coalition government has stressed, however, that any new 
intelligence gathering and data sharing system on people entering Ireland who 
may also travel into Northern Ireland must first win support among all of the 
republic’s EU partners.

Any system designed to enable the UK to control and monitor immigration via 
Ireland is bound to be politically controversial. One Sinn Féin MEP whose 
constituency includes the border region described Brokenshire’s suggestion as 
ridiculous.

Matt Carty, who represents the Midlands/Northwest constituency in the European 
parliament, said: “The Irish government and a succession of its representatives 
have been deferential to the British government from time to time. What we are 
saying is that this is not an occasion for this.

“We need to be pointing out the needs of this island and making demands for 
the Irish people. It is not their job to be pushing for the wishes of the 
British government.”
 