
Living in the UK a few miles from the Irish border, I am very relaxed about 
Brexit. I note the concerns in your report (Irish leaders fear Brexit will 
bring disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/irish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis>
, 17 October) by nationalists such as John Bruton and Charlie Flanagan in 
Dublin and Martin McGuinness of Sinn Féin – they all want a united Ireland – 
but there was no comment from anyone representing the unionist majority in 
Northern Ireland.

In fact, so far the EU referendum has been good news for Northern Ireland. The 
depreciation of sterling has meant a substantial increase in CAP payments to 
the large agriculture industry and each day thousands of southern Irish are 
queueing to enterNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> to shop. Northern Irish border 
towns are booming – not with IRA bombs – but with euros from southern shoppers. 
It is the Republic that is suffering from Brexit and I foresee this problem 
remaining for the next three years until the UK finally exits the EU. Irish 
exports of beef, mushrooms etc to the UK are collapsing; hundreds have already 
become redundant; and tourism from the UK will be in decline due to the 
sterling depreciation.

There are two possible solutions for the Republic: (1) rejoin sterling, but it 
cannot as it is no longer a sovereign independent country in this respect, or 
(2) exit the EU. After all, Ireland joined the EEC on the same day as the UK 
and it would be logical for it to exit the same day.
John Taylor
House of Lords; MEP for Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, 1979-89; MP for Strangford, 
1983-2001

• Irish foreign minister Charlie Flanagan’s claim that “One in four people in 
Britain can claim Irish heritage” (Britain outside the EU can still be a friend 
to Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/16/brexit-hard-borders-ireland-trade-peace-agreement-brexit>
, 17 October) is based on a2001 survey sponsored by Guinness for St Patrick’s 
Day <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-37246769>.

The survey reported that 77% of Londoners and 42% in the 18-34 age group 
claimed Irish roots. The authors of the report concluded that most respondents 
were probably exaggerating or lying.

In the 2011 census only about one person in 100 in England, Wales and Scotland 
ticked the “White Irish” box in choosing their ethnicity.

There are about 6.7 million people in the UK who don’t already have an Irish 
passport who could be entitled to one through a parent or grandparent. That’s 
only 10% of the population, but it’s a lot more than the current population of 
the Republic of Ireland, which is 4.8 million.
Dr John Doherty
Gaoth Dobhair, Co Dhún na nGall (Donegal), Ireland 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 