
The EU would have to construct a new boundary between Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and Ireland if the UK votes 
for Brexit, symbolising a return to “division, isolation and difference,” the 
Irish prime minister has said.
Brexit explained: Changes agreed by Cameron 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=cameron_changes>
Enda Kenny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> says a vote to leave 
would result in a harder border running from Derry to Dundalk, which would 
“present an opportunity for others with malign agendas to exploit”.

“There is no version of this development [Brexit] that would avoid extra costs 
to governments, businesses, consumers and anyone seeking to travel between 
north and south,” Kenny writes in anarticle for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/ireland-fearful-neighbour-leaving-eu-northern-ireland>
.

The taoiseach claims that although new administrative arrangements would be 
possible, the psychological effect of a harder border would be hugely damaging 
after decades of work to promote peace and reconciliation.

“My fear is that it would play into an old narrative – one of division, 
isolation and difference,” he writes. “Many thousands of UK visitors to Ireland 
in recent years know that the border between both parts ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is barely visible. There is a 
seamless flow of people crossing.”

EU leaders including the president of the European council, Donald Tusk, have 
been lobbying British voters to remain in the 28-member bloc. During a visit to 
Portugal, Tusk said: “I would like to appeal to the British citizens, on behalf 
– I know that for a fact – of almost all Europeans and European leaders: stay 
with us.

Why Ireland is so fearful of our closest neighbour leaving the EU | Enda Kenny
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/ireland-fearful-neighbour-leaving-eu-northern-ireland>
“Without you, not only Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
but the whole western community will become weaker. Together we will be able to 
cope with increasingly difficult challenges of the future.”

Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, went as far as to take out a full-page 
ad in the Daily Mail on Monday, telling the UK: “The decision is yours, but I 
would like you to know that Hungary is proud to stand with you as a member of 
theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.”

EU diplomats have been reassured by signs in recent days that the remain vote 
is recovering, but they have been warned that postal votes in southern England 
and some old Labour heartlands in northern England show strong support for 
Brexit.

Fearful that their interventions could prove counterproductive, EU leaders 
have oscillated between emotional appeals for the UK to remain in a reformed EU 
and dire warnings about the harsh terms the UK would face outside the single 
market.
John Stevens (@johnestevens) 
Hungarian PM Viktor Orban has taken out a full page ad in tomorrow's Daily Mail
#EUref <https://twitter.com/hashtag/EUref?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/pIJBUJJadC 
<https://t.co/pIJBUJJadC>
 <https://twitter.com/johnestevens/status/744641814926360576> June 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/johnestevens/status/744641814926360576> 
The issue raised by Kenny of a new EU border on the island of Ireland has 
remained on the sidelines of the debate on the UK mainland but is viewed with 
deep alarm in Dublin and Belfast.


Theresa Villiers, the Northern Ireland secretary and a prominent Brexit 
advocate, has said there would be no need for border controls with Ireland if 
the UK leaves the EU, citing the “common travel area” that has existed between 
the two countries since 1923.

But concern about a restored hard border is shared by the Sinn Féin leader, 
Martin McGuinness, who fears that a restoration of borders and customs tariffs 
would be a disaster for the Northern Ireland economy and could lead to a 
reversal for the still-incomplete peace process.

Support for Brexit is lowest amongst the Catholic community in Northern 
Ireland, but Sinn Féin is concerned that disillusionment with politics may 
dampen turnout. The party has also warned that Brexit would lead to stronger 
calls for independence in Scotland, as well as calls for a referendum in 
Northern Ireland on reunification with the south.

Kenny says in his Guardian piece: “In stating the Irish government’s position, 
we do so as a close neighbour of the UK, a European partner and a co-guarantor 
of peace in Northern Ireland. And as a friend. Our common membership of the EU 
provided an important external context to the Irish and UK governments working 
together for peace. It should not be discounted lightly.”

Why Northern Irish and Irish voters want to remain in the EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/why-northern-irish-and-irish-voters-want-to-remain-in-the-eu>
He has been so alarmed by the prospect of Brexit that he has been campaigning 
in the UK to try to persuade the Irish community to vote this week. He visited 
the north-west of England last week to urge people to vote to remain, but there 
is concern that younger Irish voters feel less affinity to the UK while older 
Irish voters share the general antipathy towards the EU.


Kenny argues that the EU’s role in the underpinning of peace has been vital 
but often underestimated. “Our common membership of the EU provided an 
important backdrop to the Irish and UK governments working together to secure 
peace in Northern Ireland,” he writes.

“When the Good Friday agreement was concluded 18 years ago, the detail of the 
negotiations and the agreement itself were brought about as a result of 
intensive engagement by the British and Irish governments in conjunction with 
the northern parties.

“But often underestimated was the international support for the process, not 
least that of the European Union. The EU has directly provided much-needed 
funding to Northern Ireland – almost €3bn in the six years to 2020 – helping 
the Northern Ireland economy and supporting new sustainable jobs.”
 