
Ireland’s prime minister has warned that Brexit negotiations between Britain 
and the rest of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> could 
turn vicious.

Enda Kenny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> also predicted that 
Theresa May might respond to pressure from within the Tory party and trigger 
article 50 to eject the UK from the EU before next spring.


Kenny told an audience of politicians, business leaders, trade unionists and 
community organisations in Dublin on Wednesday that May has agreed with him 
that there would be “no return to the borders of the past” after Brexit.


Irish leaders fear Brexit will bring economic disaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/irish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis>
Speaking at an all-island conference on Brexit’s impact on Ireland, north and 
south, Kenny said he had an assurance from the British prime minister that 
there would be “no hard border” between the Irish Republic andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, and that the retention of an 
open border was a critical element of negotiations.

“Neither I nor the prime minister desire to limit the freedom of people on 
both sides of the Irish sea to trade, live, work and travel freely across these 
islands,” he said. “Therefore we have agreed that the benefits of the common 
travel area be preserved.”

Kenny said Brexit was the greatest challenge facing his country since the 
creation of the Irish state after gaining independence from Britain.

On the subject of hostility towards the UK, he said: “The other side of this 
argument may well get quite vicious after a while, because there are those 
around the European table who take a very poor view of the fact that Britain 
decided to leave.”

Sounding a sombre note as he wrapped up the first session of the conference, 
he urged the leaders of his fellow EU countries not to become “obsessed” over 
what Britain may or may not get in the discussions.


Kenny said that otherwise “Europe itself could lose the plot” over where it 
wants to go over the next 50 years.

All leaders of the nationalist political parties on the island, including Sinn 
Féin’s Gerry Adams, are attending the Dublin conference. However, there is no 
significant representation from the unionist community. Both the Democratic 
Unionists – the largest party in NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> – and the Ulster Unionists are 
boycotting the event. The DUP, under Northern Ireland’s first minister, Arlene 
Foster, backed a Brexit vote in the June referendum, while the UUP urged its 
support base to back the remain side.

A majority of votes – 56% – cast in Northern Ireland in the EU referendum were 
in favour of remaining.

Ireland’s foreign minister, Charlie Flanagan, stressed that Dublin would press 
the British for a fully open, “invisible” border on the island even after the 
UK left the EU.


The re-emergence of border controls, security checks, closed secondary roads 
and customs posts would enrage nationalist opinion on either side of the Irish 
frontier. The peace process over the past 25 years has resulted in the Irish 
border becoming virtually invisible with few restrictions.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fbands-of-brothers-could-brexit-bring-the-troubles-back-to-northern-ireland-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bands%20of%20brothers%3A%20could%20Brexit%20bring%20the%20Troubles%20back%20to%20Northern%20Ireland%3F%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fbands-of-brothers-could-brexit-bring-the-troubles-back-to-northern-ireland-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bands%20of%20brothers%3A%20could%20Brexit%20bring%20the%20Troubles%20back%20to%20Northern%20Ireland%3F%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fbands-of-brothers-could-brexit-bring-the-troubles-back-to-northern-ireland-video&media=>
Bands of brothers: could Brexit bring the Troubles back to Northern Ireland? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/oct/20/bands-of-brothers-could-brexit-bring-the-troubles-back-to-northern-ireland-video>
Referring to an open border, Flanagan said: “I am looking primarily to the 
views of business leaders, particularly in the border area, in a border that 
sees in excess of 30,000 people every day cross to work, to go to college, to 
go to school or indeed for family relations.

“It is vitally important in the context of the [Brexit] negotiations next year 
that the matter of the invisibility of the border between Northern Ireland and 
Ireland is not only featured but is both preserved and maintained.”


Flanagan said it was a “missed opportunity” on the part of unionists for 
refusing to attend the conference.


Flanagan and Kenny will be in Belfast on Thursday to meet all the party 
leaders in Northern Ireland. Flanagan said this was in preparation for a 
crucial north-south ministerial council meeting in Armagh on 18 November.

The north-south ministerial council is one of the key strands of the 1998 Good 
Friday agreement, which deals with all-island relations between the Irish 
Republic and Northern Ireland. Unlike Wednesday’s conference in Dublin, DUP 
ministers will attend the event in Armagh.

Dave Anderson, Labour’s shadow Northern Ireland secretary, said Kenny’s 
comments “show the huge level of concern in both the north and south of 
Ireland”.

“Any hardening of the border will hurt the Northern Ireland economy but it 
will also disrupt the lives of the many people who live and work in border 
area,” he said.

“That is why it is so vital that parliament has to get a grip over this 
process. We look forward to seeing the plans that the government has now 
committed to bringing before the House as soon as possible.”

A Downing Street spokesman said May had been clear the UK did not want to see 
a return to borders of the past. “The arrangement that currently exists has 
served both sides of that border extremely well and we have no desire, and 
neither does the Irish government, to change that. We want to have constructive 
dialogue with all member states, a mature debate about the key areas as we 
negotiate an exit from the EU. What’s important is that it’s as smooth a 
transition as possible.”

The spokesman said nothing had changed on the timing of Article 50, and that 
it would not be triggered any later than March next year, though May’s previous 
statement, that it would not be triggered before the end of 2016, still stood 
as well.

 