
Vote counting is underway in Ireland’s general election, as two exit polls 
indicated the ruling Fine Gael-Labour coalition has fallen well short of a 
majority, opening up the possibility of a second vote later this year.


The polls suggest the coalition has been punished over its austerity 
programme, which caused widespread anger, particularly over the imposition of 
water rates. Early indications are that turnout was about 66%.


Ireland general election: exit polls show coalition losing majority – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/feb/27/ireland-general-election-exit-poll-coalition-fine-gael>
The findings also open up the possibility of Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil burying 
their historic differences, which date back to the Irish civil war, and forming 
a “grand coalition” as the Christian Democrats and Social Democrats have done 
in Germany. They have never worked together in government, and bothEnda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny>, the prime minister, and Fianna 
Fáil leader Micheál Martin ruled out the prospect of partnership during the 
campaign. The two parties also dismissed cooperation with Sinn Féin, who are 
expected to finish third.

An Irish Times/MRBI exit poll released late on Friday put Fine Gael on 26.1%, 
less than four percentage points ahead of its main opposition, Fianna Fáil, on 
22.9%.


Kenny is hoping to make history by becoming the first Fine Gael leader to be 
returned as PM for a second consecutive term.
Irish Times exit poll 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/irish-electionexitpoll/giv-27167jREnXbFtS7XE/>
The exit poll showed considerable gains for Fianna Fáil and Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>.Fine Gael’s coalition 
partners, Labour, were on 7.8%, down from 19.4% in the 2011 election.

Based on those results, Fine Gael and Labour would not have enough seats to 
form a majority in the Dáil, the Irish parliament.

An RTE exit poll on Saturday morning predicted broadly similar results, with 
Fine Gael on 24.8% of first preference votes – two points down from the Irish 
Times survey – and their Labour coalition partners on 7%. RTE puts Fianna Fáil 
on about 23% and Sinn Féin on 16%.


In the runup to the vote, Fine Gael emphasised the Irish economic recovery 
from the 2008 crash was fragile, and that Ireland needed another stable 
government. Critics said the measures taken to plug the gap in national 
finances – tax rises, public spending cuts, wage freezes, etc –were too extreme 
and hit those on low-to-middle incomes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/may/26/ireland-economic-collapse>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Firish-election-counting-begins-as-exit-polls-point-to-coalition-losses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74ff50cd38df12973b32131176485b9910b13e7b%2F0_68_4819_2891%2F4819.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20election%3A%20counting%20begins%20as%20exit%20polls%20show%20coalition%20punished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Firish-election-counting-begins-as-exit-polls-point-to-coalition-losses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20election%3A%20counting%20begins%20as%20exit%20polls%20show%20coalition%20punished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Firish-election-counting-begins-as-exit-polls-point-to-coalition-losses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74ff50cd38df12973b32131176485b9910b13e7b%2F0_68_4819_2891%2F4819.jpg>
 Enda Kenny and his wife Fionnuala casting their votes in Castlebar, western 
Ireland, on Friday. Photograph: Paul Faith/AFP/Getty Images 
If the exit polls are accurate, they signal a remarkable turnaround for Fianna 
Fáil, which sufferedits worst electoral showing in the republic’s history in 
2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/26/fianna-fail-irish-general-election>
 after 14 years of continuous rule. They would also suggest a good showing for
Sinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, which campaigned on 
an anti-austerity campaign, and for independent candidates, who could play the 
role of kingmakers in any new coalition, although such a government would be 
politically unstable.

On Saturday morning, one of Ireland’s veteran election number crunchers, 
Trinity College Dublin political scientist Michael Marsh, gave the following 
seat projection based on the RTE exit poll: Fine Gael, 46, Labour 9, Fianna 
Fáil 37, Sinn Féin 27, the Social Democrats on 7, People Before Profit 6, Green 
Party 4, Independent Alliance 4, Renua 3, independents 13 and others 2. A total 
of 79 seats are needed to form a majority.


“Either we can have another election now, and do away with the count, or we’ll 
let them muddle around for a month or so and maybe they can think the 
unthinkable,” said Marsh. “It’s hard to see any sort of government without Fine 
Gael and Fianna Fáil getting together.”

If no coalition is formed before the Dáil sits again in March, it will be 
unable to elect a new prime minister, raising the prospect of a second election.


“It’s a very disappointing day from the government’s point of view,” Tom 
Curran, Fine Gael’s general secretary, told RTE. “If the exit polls are right … 
we will fall far short of being able to form a government.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Firish-election-counting-begins-as-exit-polls-point-to-coalition-losses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd260a4ddcb337c9183a493f3546c538131f6de33%2F0_0_5137_3086%2F5137.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20election%3A%20counting%20begins%20as%20exit%20polls%20show%20coalition%20punished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Firish-election-counting-begins-as-exit-polls-point-to-coalition-losses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20election%3A%20counting%20begins%20as%20exit%20polls%20show%20coalition%20punished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Firish-election-counting-begins-as-exit-polls-point-to-coalition-losses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd260a4ddcb337c9183a493f3546c538131f6de33%2F0_0_5137_3086%2F5137.jpg>
 Presiding officer Carmel McBride and police sergeant Paul McGee on the island 
of Inishbofin on Thursday. The island, situated off the coast of County Galway, 
went to the polls a day before the mainland. Photograph: Darren Staples/Reuters 
Former government minister Michael McDowell warned on Saturday morning that 
the exit poll results, if translated into real votes in the count, raise 
serious issues for Enda Kenny and Joan Burton, the head of the Labour party.

“I was a leader myself, so I’m not saying this from a smug point of view,” the 
former justice minister said.


McDowell, who served in government during the critical years of the Northern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> peace process, described 
the Fine Gael campaign as a “flat tyre”.


Leftwing Dáil deputy Paul Murphy, from the Anti-Austerity Alliance, said 
Labour’s poor performance in the exit polls would be a “political earthquake” 
if reflected in the vote count. He also said that Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil 
might be forced into a coalition together.

Who’s who in the Irish general election

Fine Gael: A party born out of loyalty to Irish independence military leader 
Michael Collins, who was assassinated by republican diehards for accepting the 
1921 Anglo Irish Treaty that partitioned Ireland. Now centre-right in economic 
policy, strongly pro-European and increasingly socially liberal. Won 76 seats 
in the 2011 general election – an all-time high.

Fianna Fáil: Founded by Michael Collins’ great civil war rival Éamon de 
Valera, the party ultimately accepted the Anglo Irish settlement and became the 
most successful political force in post-independence Irish history. 
Economically centrist, often populist, it was blamed for the collapse of the 
Celtic Tiger amid allegations that the party was too close to property 
speculators and bankers. In the last election it crashed to just 20 seats.

Sinn Féin: The party once known around the world as the political wing of the 
Provisional IRA has benefited enormously from the Northern Ireland peace 
process. Led byGerry Adams <http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/politics/gerryadams>, 
it had 14 seats in the last Dáil and is expected to build on that number this 
time around, positioning itself as a party of protest against austerity cuts.

Labour: The oldest party in the state and rooted in the trade unions, Labour 
faces the possibility of electoral meltdown akin to the Liberal Democrat 
wipeout in the UK last year. Labour was at the vanguard of social change as 
junior partner in the current government, championingthe gay marriage referendum
 <http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/2015/may/23/gay-marriage-ireland-yes-vote>, 
but it also took flak over the coalition’s unpopular tax rises and public 
spending cuts.

Anti Austerity Alliance/People Before Profit: Both parties are rooted in the 
far-left Socialist party (former Militant Tendency) and the Socialist Workers 
party. They draw support, likeSinn Féin 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/politics/sinn-fein>, from urban working-class 
areas where there is widespread discontent over austerity.

Independents: Possible kingmakers in the new Dáil, they range from maverick 
centre-right radicals to former Marxists defending individual electoral 
redoubts.
 