
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> may be facing a second 
general election as an exit poll from one of the country’s most reputed media 
organisations has found that the Fine Gael-Labour coalition has fallen far 
short of a working majority.

An Irish Times/MRBI exit poll released on Friday night found that the ruling 
Fine Gael party is less than 4% ahead of the main opposition force, Fianna Fáil.

According to the results of the poll, taken among a sample of more than 5,000 
voters outside 200 polling stations across the Republic on Friday, Fine Gael 
has 26.1% of first preference votes.


The exit poll shows a considerable gain for Fianna Fáil with 22.9%. Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, meanwhile, has gained four 
points from its 10% performance in the 2011 general election.

Labour, who have been Fine Gael’s partners in government for the last five 
years, are on 7.8% according to the exit poll.


The seat projections from the poll indicate that Fine Gael would return with 
roughly 56 seats, while Labour will come back to the Dáil, the Irish 
parliament, with between eight to 12 seats. Even at its highest estimate, a 
combined Fine Gael/Labour vote of 68 would be 12 short of an overall majority.


The exit poll does indicate that an amalgam of independents are on more than 
16%. They could play the role of kingmakers in any new coalition although such 
a government would be politically unstable.


For Fianna Fáil the result is a remarkable turnaround in fortunes from a party 
that suffered a historic defeat in 2011 and only returned 21 TDs to the last 
Dáil. This time, according to the exit poll figures, Fianna Fáil could return 
with 40 seats.

A second exit poll will be published early on Saturday from RTE and will be a 
further indicator if this election has produced a hung parliament in Dublin. 
Ballot boxes are opened at 9am for counting across the Republic.


The overall result may not be clear until Sunday or even Monday..


More than 3 million people have been eligible to vote in 40 constituencies, 
and there are 552 candidates contesting 157 seats in the Dáil..

Some commentators have called on Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil to create a “grand 
coalition”, on the same lines as the Christian Democrats and Social Democrats 
when they came together to govern Germany.

However, leading figures in ruling party Fine Gael, including health minister 
Leo Varadkar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/irish-general-election-fianna-fail-leo-varadkar-fine-gael>
, have described such a coalition as a “nightmare”. Fine Gael and its Labour 
coalition partners instead appealed to voters to return them to power in the 
name of stable government.


The taoiseach, Enda Kenny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny>, 
returned to his native County Mayo on Friday and cast his vote at a polling 
station in Castlebar. He would make history if he is re-elected, as since the 
state was created in 1921 no Fine Gael taoiseach has been returned for a second 
term of office.

Speaking after casting his vote, Kenny said: “I just hope that everybody 
around the country accepts their responsibility today and that people go out 
and vote and do their constitutional duty.”


The Fianna Fáil leader, Micheál Martin, cast his vote with his family in 
Ballinlough, Cork, refusing to talk about any potential electoral outcomes but 
predicting a good result for his party.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fireland-general-election-voters-go-polls-as-hung-parliament-predicted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91005f9279df619fae111e51bd9623c96f22ab6b%2F0_0_3500_2451%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20election%3A%20exit%20poll%20shows%20no%20overall%20majority%20for%20ruling%20coalition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fireland-general-election-voters-go-polls-as-hung-parliament-predicted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20election%3A%20exit%20poll%20shows%20no%20overall%20majority%20for%20ruling%20coalition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fireland-general-election-voters-go-polls-as-hung-parliament-predicted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91005f9279df619fae111e51bd9623c96f22ab6b%2F0_0_3500_2451%2F3500.jpg>
 Sister Anastasia of the Franciscan order casts her vote at Knock national 
school, Mayo. Photograph: Brian Lawless/PA 
Fourteen years of continuous Fianna Fáil rule came to an end when the party 
was trounced at the 2011 election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/26/fianna-fail-irish-general-election>
 – its worst electoral showing in the republic’s history. The party took a 
hammering from an electorate that blamed it for the collapse of the Celtic 
Tiger and the loss of fiscal sovereignty to the International Monetary Fund.

This time around, all opinion polls – now supported by the exit poll – have 
forecast that Fine Gael will retain its No 1 spot and that the electorate will 
punish Labour for the coalition’s austerity programme, which has caused 
widespread anger, particularly over the imposition of water rates for the first 
time in the country’s history.

Sinn Féin is expected to capitalise on much of this anger, as will a number of 
leftist parties and an amalgam of independents. The Labour leader and deputy 
prime minister, Joan Burton, is in danger of losing her Dublin West seat.

Any coalition needs at least 79 seats to form a government. A Fine Gael-Fianna 
Fáil link-up would produce a huge working majority.

Although Northern Ireland has not been a major issue in this election, the 
spectre of the Troubles raised its head again on Friday morning at a polling 
station in the village of Hackballscross in County Louth.


Photographers who had arrived from Dublin to take pictures of former IRA 
commander Thomas “Slab” Murphy after he voted were warned not to by a Murphy 
associate. Hours laterMurphy was sentenced in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/ex-ira-commander-thomas-slab-murphy-jailed-tax-evasion>
 to 18 months in jail over tax evasion.
 