
Irish leaders have warned of an economic “disaster” on both sides of the 
border without decisive action to confront the effects of Britain’s impending 
departure from the EU.

Amid warnings of “incalculable consequences” for the Irish Republic and 
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> as the Brexit 
process unfolds, Ireland’s prime minister Enda Kenny will convene an 
unprecedented cross-border summit of political leaders to consider what steps 
to take.

The prospect of Brexit has already raised intractable questions about the 
border that runs across the island 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/politics/2016/oct/09/britain-to-push-post-brexit-uk-immigration-controls-back-to-irish-border>
, and has vexed farmers who send half their beef to British dinner tables. The 
slump of sterling is squeezing Irish exporters and the future of Northern 
Ireland, which relies heavily on EU subsidies, is uncertain. Some forecasters 
fear that Ireland could be harder hit than Britain by the tumult.


Martin McGuinness calls for special EU status for Northern Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/martin-mcguinness-calls-for-special-eu-status-for-northern-ireland>


At this delicate moment, the Guardian and the Irish Times are collaborating on 
a week-long series exploring the predicament facingIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> and the UK.


Kenny told the Irish Times that he would summon all political players to an 
unprecedented All Island Civic Dialogue on 2 November. “It is really important 
that we have all of the voices reflective of Ireland over a series of 
meetings,” he said. “I am going to invite to that all of the political parties 
who wish to attend and I don’t mean that I expect a grandstanding performance 
from each of them.

“It is more of a listening exercise from political parties because we need to 
hear the voice of retail, the voice of trade, of commerce, of the construction 
sector, education and all of these areas, north and south.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Firish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63466819939fc6883e2355c34974b27ba3867a2b%2F0_467_5325_3195%2F5325.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20leaders%20fear%20Brexit%20will%20bring%20economic%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Firish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20leaders%20fear%20Brexit%20will%20bring%20economic%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Firish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63466819939fc6883e2355c34974b27ba3867a2b%2F0_467_5325_3195%2F5325.jpg>
 An Orange Order parade in Northern Ireland. Enda Kenny said all voices would 
be heard at the summit. Photograph: Charles McQuillan/Getty Images 
Such is the seriousness of the situation that the taoiseach and the Irish 
foreign minister, Charlie Flanagan, have assembled a team of almost 100 people 
to work on Brexit, with embassies acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> being beefed up to cope with 
the fallout.


“Brexit has been referred to as the biggest foreign policy issue facing the UK 
since EEC accession in 1973. In many ways, the same is true of Ireland,” 
Flanagan writesin a Guardian opinion piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/16/brexit-hard-borders-ireland-trade-peace-agreement-brexit>
.

Martin McGuinness, Northern Ireland’s deputy first minister and Sinn Féin 
leader said that Brexit threatened devastating consequences for the island.

“As things sit at the moment we are going to suffer big time,” McGuinness told 
the Guardian in an interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/martin-mcguinness-calls-for-special-eu-status-for-northern-ireland>
. “Theresa May says ‘Brexit means Brexit’, but so far as we are concerned 
Brexit means disaster for the people of Ireland.”

Britain’s departure from the EU will deprive Ireland of a crucial ally in 
Brussels. The two countries are often mutually reinforcing in the EU 
bureaucracy, siding with one another on matters of trade, regulation, financial 
services and tax.

Former taoiseach John Bruton says Ireland now has to “up its game 
substantially” in Brussels, lamenting what he says is the unravelling of 
centuries of common trade.


“We have been part of a common economic area for a very, very long time, only 
broken in the 18th century when Britain adopted anti-Irish trade practices and 
there was an episode in the 1930s,” he said. “The decision to leave is 
reversing 1,000 years of history between Britain and Ireland.”

For Ireland the Brexit question is not theoretical – Irish political and 
business leaders are already dealing with the strain brought on by the collapse 
in sterling following the 23 June referendum.
How will Brexit affect Ireland? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=7340c0a7-09a6-4627-b639-349724fb0559>
Britain is Ireland’s largest export partner, while Ireland is Britain’s fifth 
biggest trading partner, with €1.5bn (£1.35bn) in transactions each week. The 
London-Dublin route is Europe’s busiest airlink.

Bruton is among those warning of potential trade wars post-Brexit if Britain 
tries to increase market share through subsidies.

“If Britain avails of its exit from the single market to reintroduce subsidies 
to British food production, as was the case before the common market, this 
would cause serious damage to the Irish food industry and would probably 
necessitate retaliation by Europe,” he said. “Anti-dumping measures are part of 
the armoury of the EU and they have been used before and could be again.”

At the moment all Irish exporters, both north and south of the border, are 
grappling with short-term and long-term challenges. “There isn’t anybody in 
Ireland that has not been touched in some way by this. If you’re not an 
exporter, then you’re likely to be a supplier to an exporter. The effect of the 
currency slump is very serious,” said John McGrane, director general of the
British Irish Chamber of Commerce <http://www.britishirishchamber.com/>.

Large food exporters to Britain have been able to insure themselves against 
sterling’s decline because they hedge their currencies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Firish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faba74d41947b5e1506628b7e590a8df876dc5cb5%2F0_115_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20leaders%20fear%20Brexit%20will%20bring%20economic%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Firish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20leaders%20fear%20Brexit%20will%20bring%20economic%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Firish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faba74d41947b5e1506628b7e590a8df876dc5cb5%2F0_115_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Workers harvest mushrooms at Reilly mushroom farm in Athlone. Another factory, 
in Tipperary, recently closed down. Photograph: Clodagh Kilcoyne/Reuters 
McGrane predicted job losses after Christmas on both sides of the Irish Sea, 
saying it was not possible to “pent up price increases without being able to 
pass them on”.

A mushroom factory in the small rural town of Tipperary that closed in August 
was an early warning sign, a canary in the coalmine. An estimated 90% of 
mushrooms are exported to the UK, bringing in about €120m each year.

The Tipperary factory relied heavily on British sales and closed with the loss 
of 75 jobs as a direct result of Brexit, with the owner blaming the drop in 
sterling against the euro.

Even after Brexit, hard borders won’t be returning to Ireland | Charlie 
Flanagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/16/brexit-hard-borders-ireland-trade-peace-agreement-brexit>
“I did not expect when the British people went to the polls that it would have 
had any consequence for a small town like ours,” independent councillor Denis 
Leahy told the Guardian.

Last week the Irish government responded to desperate calls for help by 
announcing a €150m loan fund for farmers being crushed by the weakening of 
sterling.

“Food business works on extremely thin margins of around 2%. If you have to 
add 17% to your costs because of currency exchange, then you have a 15% 
straight loss. Irish industry is just looking on at this with great alarm,” 
said McGrane.
 