
Amid all the talk of separation between the UK and its EU neighbours there is 
an opportunity to build a solidarity movement, at least betweenpeople in 
Britain and Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/ireland-beyond-brexit>. Draconian 
laws that force women from both parts of Ireland to travel to Britain to access 
abortion have never received so much public attention as recently, and growing 
awareness in Britain is giving Irish women new hope.

The stories are heartbreaking: couples bringing the remains of foetuses with 
fatal abnormalities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/29/baby-irish-gp-trauma-uk-abortion-ireland>
 home through British airports in freezer bags because they couldn’t have a 
termination in an Irish hospital; the depravity of forcing a raped asylum 
seeker on hunger strike to continue a pregnancy she didn’t want; thebrain-dead 
woman kept alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/19/dead-irish-woman-body-incubator-abortion>
 because she was pregnant; the young Northern Irish woman given asuspended 
sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/04/northern-irish-woman-suspended-sentence-self-induced-abortion>
 because she took abortion pills to end a pregnancy and her housemates told the 
police. There is no abortion in Ireland for rape, for incest, for fatal foetal 
abnormalities. Let’s be clear though, thousands of Irish women have abortions 
every year – they just don’t have them in Ireland. An Irish problem washes up 
on Britain’s shores.

Abortion in Ireland: ‘Silence is breaking 12 hearts a day’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/29/abortion-in-ireland-two-women-travel>
Many things led to the ban on abortion in Ireland. But those factors – 
Catholicism, misogyny, an obsession with controlling women’s bodies – sound 
more archaic with each passing year. WithinIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, consistent polling shows there is 
now a desire for women not to be criminalised for abortions and for the 
constitutional ban on abortion to be repealed. The tangible obstacle is the 
eighth amendment to the constitution, which was inserted after a referendum in 
1983. This clause states: “The state acknowledges the right to life of the 
unborn and, with due regard to the equal right to life of the mother, 
guarantees in its laws to respect, and, as far as practicable, by its laws to 
defend and vindicate that right.”

Before any abortion legislation can be enacted, this amendment (which 
effectively puts the life of the unborn on a par with the life of the mother) 
needs to be overturned by referendum. But Irish women are no longer waiting for 
change to come. We are demanding it, and asking our allies to help.

The movement to repeal the 8th 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/repealthe8th?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Ehashtag>
 is growing, especially since theequal marriage referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/23/gay-marriage-ireland-yes-vote> 
last year inspired a generation of young Irish people. In the days after that 
referendum, the question that Irish people hear repeatedly from abroad was 
raised: how can Ireland have gay marriage and not abortion? It’s one that can 
only be answered by acknowledging that misogyny in Ireland runs even deeper 
than homophobia.

British people need to stomp on the streets and on the floors of parliament to 
help shame our government

What the equal marriage referendum taught us was that change comes from the 
bottom up. And we don’t just need one voice advocating for change, but many. 
The recentMarch for Choice 
<http://www.abortionrightscampaign.ie/event/march-for-choice-2016/> in Dublin 
was replicated in cities around the world, with tens of thousands of people 
turning out to demand reproductive rights.

Sweeping things under the carpet is a national sport in Ireland, but at last, 
women’s personal stories are informing a movement in a way that was impossible 
in the past because of social taboos. We have a torrid history of oppressing 
women, thanks to the power the Catholic church once wielded in collusion with 
the state.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are now 
telling their abortion stories in great numbers for the first time, and as we 
learned during the equal marriage referendum campaign, you can’t beat real-life 
experiences with abstract arguments.

Successive Irish governments haven’t listened to their female citizens. But 
what Irish governments really dislike is being embarrassed from abroad. As a 
nation, we are insecure, obsessed with our identity and what people think of 
us. So if politicians don’t have the guts to tackle this issue then they need 
to be shamed into action.

Solidarity matters because the extended hand often feels so much warmer than 
your own. The idea that people you don’t even know care about you is important. 
It bolsters you. And while solidarity from outside Ireland exists in pockets, 
we now need it from Britain en masse.

Spare us the sight of men discussing abortion – especially politicians | Emer 
O'Toole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/men-discussing-abortion-politicians-kaine-pence>
British people need to stomp on the streets and on the floors of parliament to 
help shame our government. British people should especially demand that women in
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> have the same 
reproductive rights as in England, Scotland, and Wales, and that those rights 
be extended to women on the Isle of Man too. A strip of sea separates us, but 
we are just like you. We watch EastEnders, shop in Topshop, cry at Bake Off and 
drink gin. Your football teams are our football teams. We don’t earn enough and 
are sick of the rain. We are not “other”.

Many women and groups in Britain are already helping. The Abortion Support 
Network 
<https://twitter.com/AbortionSupport?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, which was established in 2009, assists women financially and logistically to 
access abortion in Britain. In London, protesters have marched with wheelie 
suitcases, symbolising thedozen women  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/29/abortion-in-ireland-two-women-travel>
who travel each day from Ireland to access abortion in Britain. Volunteers give 
Irish women who are travelling for abortions a bed to sleep in. TheBritish 
Pregnancy Advisory Service <https://www.bpas.org/> clinics sometimes offer 
reduced fees for Irish women who can’t afford the price of an abortion.

But there is still no other medical procedure that has to be undergone in such 
a clandestine manner, and that is why we need Britain to do more. We are so 
intertwined; by language, by history, by culture, by geography. Our lives and 
lifestyles are to an outside eye so similar. So imagine if what we’re dealing 
with was your reality? It is as unfair and heartbreaking to us as it would be 
if it were you. We need your help.
 