
Giving talks about poisons often results in being asked some worrying 
questions. I’ve been asked a few times recently about the plot ofStrong Poison 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/56967a28e4b0f2d1f22cfd0b#v=onepage&q=strong%20poison&f=false>
 byDorothy L. Sayers <http://www.sayers.org.uk/> and if it is a plausible way 
of using arsenic to kill. What the questioners planned to do with the 
information in Sayers’s novel I didn’t dare ask.

In any case, I had to confess that I hadn’t actually read this classic work of 
crime fiction and had no idea about the feasibility of the plot. Recently, I 
decided to plug this embarrassing gap in my knowledge.

The Christmas poisoner who murdered by the book ...
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2015/dec/24/agatha-christie-christmas-poisoner-murdered-by-the-book>
Arsenic is almost a by-word for poisoning; its easy availability from the 19th 
century to well into the 20th century, and symptoms resembling gastric 
conditions or food poisoning, made it a popular choice with poisoners. It is 
the almosttoo obvious choice for the murder mystery writer and so it is 
surprising that Sayers, an inventive plotter, would pick something so 
commonplace. It certainly gave Sayers the opportunity to show off her 
comprehensive knowledge of the poison, from details of how to obtain it, 
administer it and detect it, to name dropping real-life arsenic poisoners. But 
much of this would have been known toher readers: Sayers’s new take on an old 
poison is what makes her novel a classic.

The central mystery of Strong Poison is how two people can sit down for a meal 
and eat exactly the same things but one of them dies of arsenic poisoning while 
the other is unaffected. Sayers has beencriticised for her detailed explanations
 
<https://pastoffences.wordpress.com/2012/10/15/edmund-wilson-on-the-nine-tailors/>
 of everything from advertising to campanology, and sometimes it might seem as 
if she is merely showing off her knowledge rather than advancing the plot, but 
it is the detail that makes Strong Poison a success. Every aspect of the deadly 
meal is gone into: who ate what, who drank what, who was present, and if any 
poison could have been surreptitiously slipped into one plate of food but not 
the other. But there are no chinks in the armour, no moment unaccounted for; if 
one person ate poison during the meal then so did the other person. How can 
arsenic kill one person but not another?

Tainted love: the poisoner who confused chemicals for romance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/feb/12/tainted-love-the-poisoner-who-confused-chemicals-for-romance>
The key to the whole mystery comes to Sayers’s amateur detective, Lord Peter 
Wimsey, when he readingA Shropshire Lad, by A. E. Houseman in conjunction with 
three other more technical tomes. Although Sayers does not explicitly tell the 
reader which poem Wimsey has been reading, a later reference to Mithridates 
seems to indicate that one poem in the collection had particularly caught the 
detective’s attention:Terence, This is Stupid Stuff 
<https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Terence,_This_Is_Stupid_Stuff>. The last verse 
tells ofKing Mithridates 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mithridates_VI_of_Pontus>, who was terrified of 
being poisoned. To protect himself, Mithridates devised a concoction of over 
fifty toxins which he sampled daily to develop a tolerance to all poisons.

They put arsenic in his meat
And stared aghast to watch him eat;
They poured strychnine in his cup
And shook to see him drink it up:
They shook, they stared as white’s their shirt:
Them it was their poison hurt.
—I tell the tale that I heard told.
Mithridates, he died old.

Had one of the two characters eating Sayers’s poisoned meal been inspired by 
the Persian king and been dosing himself with small amounts of arsenic to give 
him immunity? Much of Mithridates’s life is the stuff of legend but added to 
more contemporary accounts of ‘arsenic-eaters’ a credible hypothesis begins to 
take shape.

In the middle of the 19th century stories emerged of people in Styria eating 
arsenic for their health 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-arsenic-eaters-of-styria/>. They 
claimed small lumps of arsenic, crushed between their teeth and swallowed, 
improved their complexion, made their hair strong and glossy and helped them 
breathe easier at high altitude or when doing strenuous work. Witnesses 
testified to their flawless “peaches and cream” complexions and apparent 
excellent health of the arsenic-eaters and the fad spread throughout Europe and 
beyond.

One interesting side-effect of an arsenic habit appeared to be immunity to 
arsenic’s poisonous effects. Volunteers were wheeled out in front of large 
crowds to consume huge doses of arsenic, well above a lethal amount, with no 
ill effects. The trick was not to drink any liquids. In Sayers’s novel the 
scientific explanation for this miraculous resilience was attributed to the 
body dealing with dissolved and solid arsenic differently. Unfortunately, 
though credible by 1930s standards, this is not exactly how the science works.

Sex, lies and arsenic: how the 'king of poisons' lost its crown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2015/dec/22/sex-lies-and-arsenic-how-the-king-of-poisons-lost-its-crown>
The Styrian arsenic-eaters were swallowing relatively large lumps of arsenic 
that would be difficult for the body to break up and dissolve in a way that 
could be absorbed easily into the body. Much of what they ate would have been 
excreted intact. Their apparent tolerance was an illusion. Had they eaten 
powdered or dissolved arsenic in the same quantities they would have suffered 
the same effects as anyone else, violent vomiting and diarrhoea and intense 
pain followed by death approximately three days later.

The small quantities that were absorbed into the body gave only the appearance 
of health. Bugs and bacteria that would cause skin blemishes were poisoned by 
the arsenic, clearing up the complexion. Over time, however, the arsenic would 
accumulate in the body resulting in poisoning. The first signs might be a 
slight discolouration to the skin which can develop into scaly brown callouses. 
Later, the hair may begin to fall out. Skin, hair and nails contain large 
amounts of sulfur to which arsenic bonds extremely strongly.

Enzymes in the body also contain sulfur and if arsenic bonds at these atoms it 
can disrupt the function of the enzyme. The effect this produces on the body 
depends entirely on which enzymes are being disrupted. Long term health effects 
of an arsenic habit can include high blood pressure, pains in the legs and 
stomach and cancer. The long-term prognosis for arsenic-eaters is not good.

Sayers’s science was spot-on by 1930s standards but the science has 
progressed. Reassuringly, the plot of Strong Poison isn’t a practical way of 
poisoning someone, let alone getting away with it. There is no way of 
developing a tolerance to arsenic through eating small regular doses. Eating 
the same amount of arsenic added to the same meal is most likely to kill either
all or none of the people that eat it. It’s not a risk worth taking.
 