
Tourists have voted Brighton the country's worst holiday resort, accusing the 
town of being "too trendy" and too "full of bohemians and bad art",according to 
a dubiously credible poll by travel website Real Holiday Reports 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/10265120/Brighton-Its-just-full-of-bohemians-and-bad-art.html>
.

Naturally, the locals wear this sort of thing as a badge of honour. As long 
ago as 1988, a Sun editorial infamously opined that "Brighton has become a 
nasty town of drugs, gays, Aids and drunks ... with a left-dominated council 
whose mayoress once refused to curtsy for royalty", inadvertently touching upon 
several things that many of us living here find BN1-derful. Similarly, when the 
2001 censusdeclared Brighton & Hove to be Britain's most godless city 
<http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/959678.City_s_residents_are_the_least_likely_to_follow_a_major_religion/?ref=rl>
, in addition to us knowing it is the most vegetarian and gayest, inhabitants 
beamed with pride. There aren't many criticisms you could sling at the area 
that wouldn't receive the retort: "You say that like it's a bad thing."

To be fair, the parking really is awful and there really is a surfeit of 
tree-huggers and fire-jugglers. The beach barely has any sand, making the 
bucket-and-spade vendors guilty of abominable child cruelty, and the main drag 
turns into a stag/hen party hell on weekends.

But Brighton also boasts Britain's own mini San Francisco in the gay village 
of Kemp Town, its longest continually operating cinema in the venerable Duke Of 
York's (103 in September), and Volk's Electric Railway (130 this month), the 
oldest in the world. We have the inspired surrealism of the Argus newspaper 
billboards (sample: Builders Thwarted By Fish-Eating Spiders), the vintage 
heaven of the Penny Arcade Museum, enough nightlife and cultural activity to 
sustain six different listings mags and Britain's only Green MP â€“ recently 
arrested for telling Cuadrilla to frack off 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0CDYQFjAB&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2013%2Faug%2F20%2Fcaroline-lucas-fracking-arrest-balcombe&ei=KV0bUvntG-fm7AaHnYGQAw&usg=AFQjCNHqrARKnzLEX1LYXsndf93IYF7pFQ&sig2=79rhRdDoGTsv-qCdLqVTsw&bvm=bv.51156542,d.ZGU>
.

No wonder Brighton patriots think of the place in similar terms to the village 
in the Asterix comics: a last enclave, holding out against an engulfing tide of 
evil. If the only thingBrighton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton> is 
guilty of is smugness, we must be doing something right.
 