
In a speech in December 2012, Theresa May claimed that more than a third of 
all new housing demand in Britain was caused by immigration. “And there is 
evidence that without the demand caused by mass immigration, house prices could 
be 10% lower over a 20-year period,”she said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/home-secretary-speech-on-an-immigration-system-that-works-in-the-national-interest>
. The statement mirrors a common trope in any debate on the housing crisis: the 
idea that it is caused by mass migration, and that without migration, Britain 
would have no need for more housing.

The London School of Economics report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/257238/lse-housing.pdf>
 that May cited as the source for her claim also says: “In the early years even 
better off migrants tend to form fewer households as compared to the indigenous 
population; to live disproportionately in private renting; and to live at 
higher densities. However, the longer they stay, the more their housing 
consumption resembles that of similar indigenous households.”

This, in part, debunks the idea that immigration is the biggest strain on 
housing – new arrivals tend to live in denser households and take up less space.

Few migrants live in social housing

Migrants are more likely to rent in the private sector, as opposed to buying 
homes or living in social housing. According to theOxford Migration Observatory 
<http://www.migrationobservatory.ox.ac.uk/briefings/migrants-and-housing-uk-experiences-and-impacts>
, 74% of recent migrants (those who have been in the UK for five years or less) 
were in the private rented sector in the first quarter of 2015: they are twice 
as likely to be renters compared with the total migrant population; 39% of the 
total foreign-born population were in the private rented sector, and just 14% 
of the UK-born population.

Despite this, there is a high perception among white Britons that migrants 
receive positive discrimination when it comes to social housing. A2014 LSE 
discussion paper <http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/dp1264.pdf> points out: 
“The level of discrimination perceived by white Britons in social housing is 
higher than that perceived by any other group in social housing. And the only 
other ethnic groups reporting higher levels of perceived discrimination with 
any part of the state is the black community with the police, criminal justice 
and immigration authorities, a relationship that we know to be very troubled.”

One Daily Mail headline from 2012, which has now been amended 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2130095/Calls-British-people-given-priority-social-housing-queue-revealed-foreigners-HALF-properties.html>
, once read: “Revealed: How HALF of all social housing in England goes to 
people born abroad”. The actual figure at the time was 8.6%: it now stands at 
9%.Around 91% 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/465815/Social_housing_lettings_in_England_2014-15.pdf>
 [pdf] of all new social tenancies are taken up by UK-born citizens.

More migrants, lower house prices

Filipa Sá, a labour economist and academic, found that immigration actually 
lowers, rather than raises, house prices in some areas. In a 2014 Economic 
Journal article,Immigration and house prices in the UK 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ecoj.12158/abstract>, Sá wrote that 
an increase of immigrants equal to 1% of the initial local population leads to 
a 1.7% reduction in house prices, based on immigration data from the Labour 
Force Survey.

Construction industry in plea to retain migrant workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2015/mar/03/construction-industry-plea-retain-migrant-workers>
Crucially, new immigration to an area may lower the average local income, and 
decrease both housing demand and supply: immigration often leads to an outflow 
of natives, leading to a lower demand for housing, Sá wrote.

Overall, the impact of immigration on housing is mixed, and geographically 
specific. As the LSE report May cited points out, two thirds of housing demand 
is created not by net migration figures being higher than in previous years, 
but by a lack of social housing stock, an increase in life expectancy, and more 
households delaying marriage or forgoing cohabitation resulting in an increased 
number of smaller households.

There has been one area where immigration has been crucial in attempting to 
solve the housing crisis: building. TheChartered Institute of Building points 
out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2015/mar/03/construction-industry-plea-retain-migrant-workers>
 that any caps on immigration will harm housebuilding rates, as not enough 
British-born nationals are either trained or interested in construction 
careers, and migrants have been filling the gap.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you every 
Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 