
Anyone who doubts the transformative power of literature should have a look at 
the comments Franny and Zooey has inspired hereon the Reading group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/12/reading-group-jd-salinger-franny-and-zooey-july-book>
. This book has changed lives.

“I loved this book,” wrote one commenter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/12/reading-group-jd-salinger-franny-and-zooey-july-book#comment-78934191>
. “It spoke to me at a certain time in my life when, like Franny, I was a 
literature student struggling with disillusionment. The narrative inspired me 
to make the choices I subsequently took. This novel and Raise High the Roof 
Beam, Carpenters are seminal works, novels for our troubled times. And the 
quotation from Sappho still makes the hair rise on the back of my neck.”

Another wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/12/reading-group-jd-salinger-franny-and-zooey-july-book#comment-78874383>
 movingly of the book’s power to conjure a lost era:

I was a devotee of Salinger’s writing in the 1960s/70s and loved Franny and 
Zooey. Zooey in particular amazed me – dapper, hectoring, some amalgam of Zen 
and street smarts – as he bore a resemblance to my elder brother, not least in 
his behaviour around me. (Yes, I was subjected to erudite confessional 
onslaughts for years.)

There was also a more troubling reflection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/12/reading-group-jd-salinger-franny-and-zooey-july-book#comment-78906037>
 on the book’s influence:

I read Franny and Zooey as a teenager, 35 years ago, and it launched an 
existential crisis that took me a few years to pull myself out of.

I found it moving to read these reflections on the book – but also, I have to 
admit, confounding. Franny and Zooey didn’t get me in the same way. Possibly, 
this is because I’m at the wrong stage in life – like The Catcher in the Rye, 
this struck me as a book that has to catch you at a certain time to really 
work. But it’s equally possible that the book would never have struck home. 
This instalment of Salinger’s series about the Glass brothers and sisters is a 
strange, difficult thing. It isn’t just that it is, as Salinger notes in his 
dedication, a “pretty skimpy-looking book”. It’s odd in other ways. It’s 
unusual to have two novellas next to each other. It’s even more unusual for 
those books to contain so much dialogue – and yet so few quotation marks. There 
are great pages-long chunks of speech, especially in the Zooey section. It 
looks more like a Plato dialogue than a work of fiction. There are exhausting, 
unrelenting disquisitions on religion, the Glass family history and Zooey’s own 
deepest feelings.

Zooey is just too long; there are too many cigarettes, too many god-damns, too 
much verbal ado about not quite enough
John Updike 
To put the most negative spin on it, Franny and Zooey is a stagey, motionless, 
self-indulgent series of rants from two solipsistic characters whose high 
opinion of themselves is topped only by an author who can’t stop himself 
praising their intelligence and good looks.

“Few writers since Joyce would risk such a wealth of words upon events that 
are purely internal and deeds that are purely talk,” saidJohn Updike in a New 
York Times review 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1961/09/17/books/updike-by-salinger.html?_r=1&>. He 
also complained that in spite of its low word-count, “Zooey is just too long; 
there are too many cigarettes, too many god-damns, too much verbal ado about 
not quite enough.”

I can see where he’s coming from.

Updike wasn’t alone in harbouring doubts. Franny and Zooey’s detractors can be 
just as fervent as its admirers.Janet Malcolm in the New Yorker 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2001/06/21/justice-jd-salinger/> describes its 
original critical reception as “more like a public birching than an ordinary 
occasion of failure to please”. Joan Didion skewered Franny and Zooey as 
“self-help copy” and said “it emerges finally as Positive Thinking for the 
upper middle classes, as Double Your Energy and Live Without Fatigue forSarah 
Lawrence <https://www.sarahlawrence.edu/> girls”. The critic Maxwell Geismar 
said the Zooey novella was “an interminable, an appallingly bad story”. George 
Steiner labelled it “a piece of shapeless self-indulgence”.

A book for the beach: Franny and Zooey by JD Salinger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jul/23/book-for-the-beach-franny-and-zooey-jd-salinger>
If nothing else, such notices might provide some insight into Salinger’s long 
silence – even if he had already anticipated many of the complaints. One of 
Franny and Zooey’s parlour tricks is to point out its own faults – and mock 
them. Salinger has Buddy Glass describe his family in their early days as 
resident geniuses on a radio programme, “insufferably ‘superior’ little 
bastards that should have been drowned or gassed at birth”. In the knowingly 
meta preamble to Zooey, Salinger also says his lead character has asked him to 
“call off the production” because “he feels that the plot hinges on mysticism, 
or religious mystification … a too vividly apparent transcendent element of 
sorts, which he says he’s worried can only expedite, move up, the day and hour 
of my professional undoing”.

Is this pre-emptive self-criticism “cute” (as Alfred Kazin called Salinger 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2001/06/21/justice-jd-salinger/#fn-1>) or 
clever? I’d tend towards the latter.

In that same preamble, Salinger brings up the conceit of the novella being a 
“sort of prose home movie”, an idea he occasionally returns to awkwardly (as 
when he describes Franny’s hair having a centre-parting “most fortunately for 
the viewer”), but otherwise entirely forgets. Not least because the long, 
static conversations would be astonishingly boring, even by home-movie 
standards. As Updike also pointed out in that New York Times review, the 
juxtaposition of the two novellas is uncomfortable. Yes, they are connected, 
but they were also first published years apart in the New Yorker and contain 
contradictions in content and theme. Is the Franny character consistent? Is the 
chatty, catty college girl (who is quite possibly pregnant) in Franny the same 
as the defeated waif in Zooey (whose possible pregnancy is never mentioned)? It 
doesn’t hang together well.

But that’s enough grousing. Because, in spite of all such reservations, Franny 
and Zooey is still a fine work of prose craftsmanship. It also broke my heart. 
The more I read, the more it struck me that Franny is suffering from 
depression. Zooey is doing nothing less than trying to argue his beloved sister 
out of a mental illness. Initially, it is just about possible to say she’s 
suffering from an extreme case of undergraduate ennui and possible stress 
relating to her relationship and physical condition. As things progress in the 
second story, the worry grows that she’s on the same suicidal path as her 
brother Seymour. The fact that Zooey is trying to reason her back to normality 
just adds to the tragedy. His whirling circumlocutions and passionate 
investigations are an attempt to take on madness itself, an impossible 
last-ditch attempt to rescue someone he loves. And, as Salinger also slowly, 
skilfully reveals, it’s also an attempt to rescue himself. By the time we see 
him sweating, sitting in silence for 20 minutes in his lost brother’s abandoned 
bedroom, we know that he suffers just as much as poor Franny. All of his talk 
is a symptom of his own illness.

Reading group: JD Salinger's Franny and Zooey is July's book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/12/reading-group-jd-salinger-franny-and-zooey-july-book>
“It’s like being in a lunatic asylum and having another patient all dressed up 
as a doctor come over and start taking your pulse or something,” says poor 
suffering Franny. “It’s just awful. He talks and talks and talks.”

It’s a tender, sympathetic portrait and one that surely reflects back 
something of the author himself. Which makes it all the sadder. The fact that I 
couldn’t relate to it in the highly personal way of other readers comes as a 
relief rather than regret - and is no reason to condemn a brave work of art and 
empathy.
 