
President Barack Obama’s decision to hit back at Russia for its alleged 
interference in the US presidential election, by imposing new sanctions 
Thursday andexpelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/29/barack-obama-sanctions-russia-election-hack>
 35 suspected intelligence officers, comes at a delicate time. With just three 
weeks remaining in office, Obama is in what is traditionally regarded as a lame 
duck phase, as asnarky tweet 
<https://twitter.com/RussianEmbassy/status/814564127230271489?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 from the Russian embassy in the UK drove home.

But this is no ordinary transition. President-elect Donald Trump is urging 
Americans “to get on with our lives” rather than act on the intelligence 
community’s consensus that Russia hacked the Democratic National Committee with 
the intent of swaying the election in his favor. Obama therefore sees this as 
the last chance to holdRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> 
accountable and to limit Trump’s options for rapprochement with Vladimir Putin 
after 20 January.


On Friday morning, Putin announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
 he would not be expelling US intelligence officers in response, a clear sign 
of his optimism about the imminent Trump administration. However, Obama has 
suggested that additional covert actions may be taken against Russia in the 
near future. A true reciprocal response would involve the release of hacked 
information about top Russian officials. Russia is a highly centralized 
kleptocracy, and no one in power has clean hands. The Russian president himself 
remains stubbornly popular despite his own widely assumed corruption. But any 
official below him is vulnerable to exposure and disgrace, which the US 
probably has the capacity to inflict at will.

We're living through the first world cyberwar – but just haven’t called it 
that | Martin Belam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/first-world-cyberwar-historians>
This kind of weaponized transparency has a certain appeal, as the reactions 
across the political spectrum to the DNC hacks have demonstrated. But there’s 
also a dangerous potential for escalation, as neither the US nor Russia has 
clearly defined cyberwar laws. This danger is exacerbated by the maddening fact 
that an unstable ignoramus is about to assume control of the US national 
security apparatus, and no one knows how he might use it.

Trump has consistently indicated a desire to improve US-Russian relations, 
with the encouragement of several advisers and planned cabinet appointees who 
have close ties to Moscow. This puts him at odds with the longstanding position 
of the Republican party, which includes hawks such as Senators John McCain and 
Lindsey Graham, both of whom are now pressing for an investigation into 
Russia’s role in the election.

The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and House speaker, Paul Ryan, 
also support this, although CIA sourcestold 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/obama-orders-review-of-russian-hacking-during-presidential-campaign/2016/12/09/31d6b300-be2a-11e6-94ac-3d324840106c_story.html?utm_term=.90d2357f6c61>
 the Washington Post that McConnell blocked any investigation prior to the 
election, a breathtakingly cynical move that explains why Obama is only now 
retaliating.

Having compromised national security in order to defeat Hillary Clinton, the 
Republican leadership may now see Trump as expendable. After all, he chose a 
standard rightwing Republican, the Indiana governor, Mike Pence, as his running 
mate, which means McConnell and Ryan can always arrange to have Trump impeached 
if he becomes too much trouble.

For Obama, Russia is thus a uniquely effective wedge issue, with the potential 
to divide the president-elect from his party. If Trump tries to remove the new 
sanctions, he could face blowback from Congress; if he doesn’t, his friendly 
relationship with Putin could be damaged.

If, if, if. It’s dizzying trying to keep track of the conflicting agendas in 
Washington as Obama tries to salvage any kind of legacy, Trump scrambles to 
learn the basics of running the country, the GOP leadership moves to 
consolidate its Faustian victory, the intelligence community tries to 
compensate for its calamitous failure to prevent any of this and pundits left 
and right perpetuate confusion and despair. It’s increasingly unclear who’s in 
charge.

Meanwhile, in the Kremlin, Putin is as securely in power as ever and must be 
watching with amusement.Two months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/09/us-russia-discord-weight-on-the-next-president-hacking-dnc-election>
, it looked like Clinton, a staunch critic of Russia, would take control of the 
world’s most powerful country and enact more confrontational, and perhaps 
ill-advised, policies everywhere from Syria to Ukraine. Instead, Trump is 
poised to turn America into something much closer to Russia, except far more 
divided. And whatever consequences Obama hopes to inflict on Russia are likely 
to be brief and minor, in contrast to the substantial damage Putin has already 
inflicted on the United States.
 