
When Elon Musk isn’t outlining plans to use his massive rocket to leave a 
decaying Planet Earth and colonize Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/27/elon-musk-spacex-mars-exploration-space-science>
, he sometimes talks about his belief that Earth isn’t even real and we 
probably live in a computer simulation.

“There’s a billion to one chance we’re living in base reality,” he said at a 
conference in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/02/elon-musk-tesla-space-x-paypal-hyperloop-simulation>
.

The rise of robots: forget evil AI – the real risk is far more insidious
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/30/rise-of-robots-evil-artificial-intelligence-uc-berkeley>
Musk is just one of the people in Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> to take a keen interest 
in the “simulation hypothesis”, which argues that what we experience as reality 
is actually a giant computer simulation created by a more sophisticated 
intelligence. If it sounds a lot like The Matrix, that’s because it is.

According to this week’s New Yorker profile 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/10/sam-altmans-manifest-destiny> of 
Y Combinator venture capitalist Sam Altman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/22/silicon-valley-universal-basic-income-y-combinator>
, there are two tech billionaires secretly engaging scientists to work on 
breaking us out of the simulation. But what does this mean? And what evidence 
is there that we are, in fact, living in The Matrix?

One popular argument for the simulation hypothesis, outside of acid trips, 
came from Oxford University’s Nick Bostrom in 2003 (although the idea dates 
back as far as the 17th-century philosopher René Descartes). In apaper 
<http://www.simulation-argument.com/simulation.pdf> titled “Are You Living In a 
Simulation?”, Bostrom suggested that members of an advanced “posthuman” 
civilization with vast computing power might choose to run simulations of their 
ancestors in the universe.

This argument is extrapolated from observing current trends in technology, 
including the rise of virtual reality and efforts to map the human brain.

Quite frankly if we are not living in a simulation it is an extraordinarily 
unlikely circumstance
Rich Terrile, scientist at Nasa's Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
If we believe that there is nothing supernatural about what causes 
consciousness and it’s merely the product of a very complex architecture in the 
human brain, we’ll be able to reproduce it. “Soon there will be nothing 
technical standing in the way to making machines that have their own 
consciousness,” said Rich Terrile, a scientist at Nasa’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory.

At the same time, videogames are becoming more and more sophisticated and in 
the future we’ll be able to have simulations of conscious entities inside them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXVIlT-4xyrw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXVIlT-4xyrw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXVIlT-4xyrw&media=>
 Elon Musk on simulation: ‘The odds we’re in base reality is one in billions’ – 
video 
“Forty years ago we had Pong – two rectangles and a dot. That’s where we were. 
Now 40 years later, we have photorealistic, 3D simulations with millions of 
people playing simultaneously and it’s getting better every year. And soon 
we’ll have virtual reality, we’ll have augmented reality,” said Musk. “If you 
assume any rate of improvement at all, then the games will become 
indistinguishable from reality.”

It’s a view shared by Terrile. “If one progresses at the current rate of 
technology a few decades into the future, very quickly we will be a society 
where there are artificial entities living in simulations that are much more 
abundant than human beings.”

Recognizing we live in a simulation is game-changing, like Copernicus 
realizing Earth was not the center of the universe

If there are many more simulated minds than organic ones, then the chances of 
us being among the real minds starts to look more and more unlikely. As Terrile 
puts it: “If in the future there are more digital people living in simulated 
environments than there are today, then what is to say we are not part of that 
already?”

Reasons to believe that the universe is a simulation include the fact that it 
behaves mathematically and is broken up into pieces (subatomic particles) like 
a pixelated video game. “Even things that we think of as continuous – time, 
energy, space, volume – all have a finite limit to their size. If that’s the 
case, then our universe is both computable and finite. Those properties allow 
the universe to be simulated,” Terrile said.

“Quite frankly, if we are not living in a simulation, it is an extraordinarily 
unlikely circumstance,” he added.

So who has created this simulation? “Our future selves,” said Terrile.

Not everyone is so convinced by the hypothesis. “Is it logically possible that 
we are in a simulation? Yes. Are we probably in a simulation? I would say no,” 
said Max Tegmark, a professor of physics at MIT.

“In order to make the argument in the first place, we need to know what the 
fundamental laws of physics are where the simulations are being made. And if we 
are in a simulation then we have no clue what the laws of physics are. What I 
teach at MIT would be the simulated laws of physics,” he said.

Harvard theoretical physicist Lisa Randall is even more skeptical. “I don’t 
see that there’s really an argument for it,” she said. “There’s no real 
evidence.”

“It’s also a lot of hubris to think we would be what ended up being simulated.”

Terrile believes that recognizing that we are probably living in a simulation 
is as game-changing as Copernicus realizing that the Earth was not the center 
of the universe. “It was such a profound idea that it wasn’t even thought of as 
an assumption,” he said.

Before Copernicus, scientists had tried to explain the peculiar behaviour of 
the planets’ motion with complex mathematical models. “When they dropped the 
assumption, everything else became much simpler to understand.”

How much should we fear the rise of artificial intelligence? | Tom Chatfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/18/artificial-intelligence-humans-computers>
That we might be in a simulation is, Terrile argues, a simpler explanation for 
our existence than the idea that we are the first generation to rise up from 
primordial ooze and evolve into molecules, biology and eventually intelligence 
and self-awareness. The simulation hypothesis also accounts for peculiarities 
in quantum mechanics, particularly themeasurement problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/27/physics-philosophy-quantum-relativity-einstein>
, whereby things only become defined when they are observed.

“For decades it’s been a problem. Scientists have bent over backwards to 
eliminate the idea that we need a conscious observer. Maybe the real solution 
is you do need a conscious entity like a conscious player of a video game,” he 
said.

For Tegmark, this doesn’t make sense. “We have a lot of problems in physics 
and we can’t blame our failure to solve them on simulation.”

How can the hypothesis be put to the test? On one hand, neuroscientists and 
artificial intelligence researchers can check whether it’s possible to simulate 
the human mind. So far, machines have proven to be good at playing chess and Go 
and putting captions on images. But can a machine achieve consciousness? We 
don’t know.

The good, the bad and the cyborgs: Westworld's robot forebears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/oct/11/westworld-robots-on-film-robocop-blade-runner>
On the other hand, scientists can look for hallmarks of simulation. “Suppose 
someone is simulating our universe – it would be very tempting to cut corners 
in ways that makes the simulation cheaper to run. You could look for evidence 
of that in an experiment,” said Tegmark.

For Terrile, the simulation hypothesis has “beautiful and profound” 
implications.

First, it provides a scientific basis for some kind of afterlife or larger 
domain of reality above our world. “You don’t need a miracle, faith or anything 
special to believe it. It comes naturally out of the laws of physics,” he said.

Second, it means we will soon have the same ability to create our own 
simulations.

“We will have the power of mind and matter to be able to create whatever we 
want and occupy those worlds.”
 