
Last week I was at the launch of the University of Oxford’s Biological 
Anthropology Research Network andwebsite <http://www.bioanth.ox.ac.uk/> at a 
panel discussion calledBiological Anthropology: Possible Futures 
<http://www.bioanth.ox.ac.uk/2016/11/03/past-present-and-future-challenges-in-biological-anthropology/>
. The expert panel of academics not only speculated about the future of the 
discipline but reflected on the discipline’s difficult past too. Biological 
anthropology or physical anthropology is the scientific discipline that studies 
the biological and behavioural aspects of human beings. It may also be the 
inspiration for the Girls Aloud 2005 hit, Biology.

There have been definite periods of waxing and waning of the subject at 
universities, biological anthropology departments and degrees have come and 
gone and come back again. It’s an interesting subject but one that spans 
disciplines so sometimes struggles to build up a critical mass of pure 
biological anthropology academics to form a department. Consequently, it is 
also a subject that is oversubscribed, producing more students than can ever be 
employed in biological anthropology.

This got me thinking about palaeontology as a scientific discipline, which has 
many similarities with, and is one of the disciplines that feeds into, 
biological anthropology. Depending on who you talk to, palaeontology has always 
been a discipline on the fringes of earth sciences or as a part of geology. 
Along with geohazards, palaeontology may be the sexier side of geology. Even 
the prettiest of lenticular bedding doesn’t grab the headlines quite like 
dinosaurs, volcanoes or earthquakes do but it is a subject that has a 
relatively small community of people who can make a professional career out of 
it.

This raises another concern, as we’re deep into the age of stupid 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1300563/>, the carbondioxidiferous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/the-world-passes-400ppm-carbon-dioxide-threshold-permanently>
,the sixth mass extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
, and ashope becomes an endangered species itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2016/oct/05/conservation-optimism-hope-gloom-and-doom-environment-summit>
 why should we continue to study, fund and communicate palaeontology? In the 
first instance, wouldn’t it be better for biologically-inclined scientists 
pursuing a career in palaeontology to instead switch to the more pressing and 
equally lucrative field of biological conservation? Alternatively, why should 
palaeontology be funded at all when clearly all the funding should go to 
cancer, vaccine and antibiotics research?

Are extinction rates in rugose corals really as high impact to society as 
medical advances? Who cares where life came from if we know it’s here? Perhaps 
palaeontology the subject should stop trying to compete with other science 
funding altogether and become a humanities subject?

These aren’t just hypothetical concerns either. Others have felt the need to 
answer whypalaeontology is relevant 
<http://blogs.plos.org/paleo/2013/02/19/why-paleontology-is-relevant/>, respond 
to proposed cuts in American federal funding for supporting palaeontological 
research 
<http://vertpaleo.org/the-Society/Governance-Documents/SVP-response-to-NSF-on-the-Collections-in-the-Serv.aspx>
 orquestion if the subject itself is going extinct 
<http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/27588/title/Is-paleontology-going-extinct-/>
 (in thevinyl records sense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/14/vinyl-revival-music-here-to-stay>
, not the zoological one).

Fortunately, I’ve got the answers covered. From resolving fairly niche dinner 
party debates to finding the wording for justifying why you need the next 
research grant, here’s a comprehensive list of why palaeontology should be 
funded:

It can inform modern biological conservation, because studying the 
fragmentary, squashed and hard-to-identify fossilised remains of distant 
relatives that lived millions of years ago in a different climate are 
definitely the most reliable proxy for conserving modern species. 

It can inform modern human medicine, because studying the fragmentary, 
squashed and hard-to-identify fossilised remains of distant relatives that lived
millions of years ago in a different climate are definitely the most reliable 
proxy for understanding human health. 

Better value for money than the astronomer’s costly war. Last month saw yet 
another failed attempt in astronomers’ ongoing efforts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/19/esa-exomars-scientists-wait-and-hope-as-fate-of-mars-schiaparelli-lander-remains-uncertain>
 to incite interplanetary war. The latest planet-to-planet missile, called 
Schiaparelli, barely made a dent as it crashed into the surface of Mars. At 
tens to hundreds of millions of pounds a pop, these missiles seem to be very 
ineffective; if there is intelligent life out there, our occasional bombardment 
is more annoying more than threatening. That same cost could financeblastoidean 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blastoid> research for the next forever instead. 
I know which one I’d rather.

Curiosity is core to being human. Psychologists, philosophers and wellness 
book authors alike have noted that curiosity, the thirst for knowledge, is a 
key human trait. This is why all humans are endlessly curious about 
palaeontology. Okay, less thesedimentology 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sedimentology> or rostroconchian 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rostroconchia> anatomy bits of palaeontology and 
more the 19th century ideas of what Brontosaurus looked like bit but you could 
never hold back that curiosity!

Better value for money than most arty stuff. Remember back in September when 
that 120m long model of London was set on fire to unsatisfyingly burn to ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/sep/05/great-fire-of-london-replica-blazes-on-the-banks-of-the-thames-video>
 to commemorate the 350th anniversary of the Great Fire of London? You probably 
could have funded a PhD researchingarcritarchs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acritarch>, with field trips for what that cost, 
and it would have had a lower carbon footprint.

Oh the humanities! Dr Eurovision <http://dreurovision.com/>, living as a goat 
<http://www.thomasthwaites.com/a-holiday-from-being-human-goatman/> or being 
paid to stay in Glasgow for a year? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jan/05/artist-faces-outrage-over-15000-pound-grant-to-stay-in-glasgow>
 These are all things that have received research funding that aren’t 
palaeontology. That same funding could have been three new species of Mesozoic 
mammal, one newLagerstätte <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagerst%C3%A4tte> and 
at least four new perspectives* on Ordovician dendroidean graptolites.

Speculate to accumulate. Palaeontologists may make some amazing discoveries 
that may not seem to mean much now but may have some, as yet, unforeseen 
importance like polyoxybenzylmethylenglycolanhydride or Play-Doh .

Someone needs to suck the fun out. Can you imagine how deliriously happy we’d 
all be were it not for the background pedantry of palaeontologists complaining 
about inaccuracies in Jurassic World, or that pterosaurs aren’t dinosaurs, or 
that birds are dinosaurs, or that you shouldn’t use the termliving fossil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/06/why-its-time-to-make-living-fossils-extinct>
? It doesn’t even matter that palaeontologists told us most of those things in 
the first place. Without being kept in check we’d be so happily ignorant and 
confident without fear of being wrong all the time. It’d be horrible.

Inspiring future generations. It’s important to inspire the next generation of 
palaeontologists so that they too can pursue a rockstar (geddit?) career in 
palaeontology. We don’t want to be too inspiring though, because then there 
wouldn’t be enough people to tirelessly correct about arcane information (see 
above).

It’s important to understand where our species came from. So important that 
you need to be prepared to study three degrees to get a good grasp of the 
current array of overlapping and conflicting theories aboutwhere our “species” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/01/the-concept-of-species-is-flawed-so-why-is-it-so-important-to-us-neanderthal-human>
 came from.

Life is too short. You know what, we’ve got a limited number of heartbeats in 
this world so if you’re only truly happy researching fossils and can make it 
work for you, you go for it. If it doesn’t make you happy then find something 
that does and don’t worry what other people are doing between now and the heat 
death of the universe.

*Or shedding new light. These are the only two acceptable journal article 
titles in science.
 