
The Islamic State group has claimed responsibility for a suicide bombing at a 
Cairo church on Sunday that killed 25 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/egypt-bomb-blast-cairo-cathedral>
, mainly women. In a statement circulated online, it said the bomber had killed 
and injured 80 people, vowing “to continue war against apostates”. The Egyptian 
government earlier released footage showing images said to show the alleged 
suicide attacker.


President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi on Monday identified the bomber as 22-year-old 
Mahmoud Shafiq Mohammed Mustafa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/coptic-christians-criticise-security-failures-after-cairo-bombing>
. Isis named him by what appeared to be a nom de guerre, Abu Abdullah al-Masri.


CCTV footage from outside a chapel adjacent to St Mark’s Cathedral, the seat 
of Egypt’s ancient Coptic Orthodox church, shows a dark figure crossing the 
street and walking through the gates of the church. Moments later, the blast 
sends clouds of dust and debris through the windows.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Faftermath-of-bomb-blast-inside-cairos-coptic-church-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aftermath%20of%20bomb%20blast%20inside%20Cairo%E2%80%99s%20Coptic%20church%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Faftermath-of-bomb-blast-inside-cairos-coptic-church-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aftermath%20of%20bomb%20blast%20inside%20Cairo%E2%80%99s%20Coptic%20church%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Faftermath-of-bomb-blast-inside-cairos-coptic-church-video&media=>
Aftermath of bomb blast inside Cairo’s Coptic church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/11/aftermath-of-bomb-blast-inside-cairos-coptic-church-video>
It was among the deadliest attacks in recent memory to target Egypt’s Coptic 
minority, which makes up around 10% of the population and was largely 
supportive of the military overthrow of the freely elected Islamist president 
in 2013. El-Sissi led the ousting of President Mohammed Morsi, a senior figure 
in the now outlawed Muslim Brotherhood group.


Since then, Islamic militants have carried out scores of attacks, mainly 
targeting the security forces, while the government has waged a large-scale 
crackdown on dissent.


Under threat from terrorism, Coptic culture remains eternally powerful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/dec/12/coptic-christianity-artistic-tradition-pop-culture>
Small protests were held outside the church in the aftermath of the attack, as 
Christians accused the government of failing to protect them, a complaint that 
dates back many years.


Officials and government supporters have touted the quick identification of 
the suspected bomber as proof of the efficiency of the security bodies, but 
Christian activist Nader Shokry said more could have been done to prevent the 
attack. “How did all this planning take place without the security knowing 
about it?” he said. “You are saying that this person belongs to a terror group 
and has been previously arrested … so you should have kept a close eye on him.”

The interior ministry said on Monday that the attacker belonged to a terror 
cell founded by an Egyptian doctor and funded by Muslim Brotherhood leaders 
living in exile in Qatar. It said the cell was given the task of staging 
attacks that would stir sectarian divisions.


Three men and a woman were arrested in connection with Sunday’s attack and 
other suspects were on the run, el-Sissi said. The Brotherhood condemned the 
bombing.
 