
My kitchen is … quite long and narrow. On the right-hand side, when you walk 
in, there’s a big window, with a huge tree. The colours change with the seasons 
and it’s really beautiful. The kitchen is on the left, all stainless-steel 
counters with open shelving – also stainless steel. It’s just such a practical 
material – we can work directly on the surfaces, and it’s very easy to clean. 
We have lots of crockery and cookbooks displayed – it’s more aesthetic than 
practical, but that’s important for my flatmate Meg and I. We both spend a lot 
of time in there – we cook together more than we do apart, and we like that 
it’s a beautiful space. We love winter cooking – a bottle of red wine and a 
one-pot wonder is our favourite dinner.

My favourite kitchen tool is … a small Magimix hand-held blender. It saves you 
having to chop, which is lazy, but I like that. I also love my pestle and 
mortar.

My storecupboard staple is … lentils. Red ones, in particular, but we have 
many kinds – we tend to get through them quite quickly.

When I’m starving I … have very buttery scrambled eggs on Marmite toast. We 
usually have eggs and always have bread.

My culinary inspiration is … new cookbooks. We have a shelf full of them. 
Whenever we get a new book we always try and do a recipe from it. We’ve been 
teetering on the edge of cooking something fromOur Korean Kitchen, by Jordan 
Bourke and Rejina Pyo <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/our-korean-kitchen.html>
 – we just need to get the ingredients. And thenAlex Hely-Hutchinson’s 26 Grains
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/26-grains.html> – she does a plum tart that 
is really beautiful. I have always fancied myself as a baker. We also have some 
very batteredNigel Slater <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nigelslater> 
books, which we always go back to – he’s a failsafe.

Signe Johansen’s hygge kitchen: ‘Everything tastes better with butter’ | 
Kitchen encounters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/05/batch-cooking-home-made-butter-hygge-signe-johansen-kitchen-encounters>
My best-kept kitchen secret is … to make more than you think you’re going to 
have. It’s so nice to have leftovers for the next day. Also, with our kind of 
one-pot cooking, the flavours are always better the next day anyway.

When I’m invited to dinner I always bring … a bottle of wine. I’ve been on a 
few wine tours, in Italy and Texas. I don’t pretend to know more than I do, but 
I am curious. I’m also very happy to drink anything, as long as it’s not a 
Gallo family white.

Everything tastes better with … butter and salt. My heart would probably 
disagree, but it’s true.

When I go shopping I … am not very organised. I shop as and when I need 
ingredients. We shop together, and we also always bring stuff back after 
photoshoots too. We both really don’t like seeing anything thrown away.

For dinner tonight … we’re having puttanesca pasta – garlic and onions, 
anchovies, capers, olives and passata, all sweated down into a really rich 
sauce.

 * Issy Croker is a food and lifestyle photographer issycroker.com 
<http://www.issycroker.com/> @IssyCroker 
<https://twitter.com/issycroker?lang=en> 
 * Issy will be taking over Cook’s Instagram account this weekend. Follow us 
@guardian_cook <https://www.instagram.com/guardian_cook/> for updates.  