
Posh, twee and incredibly busy, Bath is not everyone's cup of tea. I know 
people who loathe it with real passion. Personally, however, I'm quite fond of 
the place. I've even enjoyed the occasional weekend away there. When you live 
in the industrial north, those Georgian crescents and immaculate parks make a 
pleasant change.

What I've enjoyed less, in Bath, is the food. Like any major tourist 
destination, you can't move for places to eat, and the vast majority of them 
are rubbish. And not just rubbish, but expensive rubbish, too. Which is why - 
with the sun now out, and this weekend'sBath Food & Drink Festival 
<http://www.garden-events.com/bath> making it particularly timely - the town 
was such a good candidate for this month's instalment in my'budget eats' series 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/series/britains-best-budget-eats> for the 
Travel site.
As ever, the point of this post is less to talk about the places I have covered
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2010/jul/02/bath-top-10-budget-restaurants> -
Best of British <http://www.bestofbritishdeli.co.uk/>, the Sausage Shop 
<http://www.sausage-shop.co.uk/>, Yak Yeti Yak <http://www.yakyetiyak.co.uk/>, 
Whole Bagel <http://www.thewholebagel.co.uk/>, the Raven 
<http://www.theravenofbath.co.uk/> and such - but, rather, to chew over the 
places I either missed or didn't have time to run the rule over.

I was particularly put out to have to skip the Hop Pole 
<http://www.bathales.com/pubs/hop-pole.html>, a Bath Ales 
<http://www.bathales.com/index.html> pub (whose brewery, confusingly, is in 
Bristol not Bath). Themenu 
<http://www.bathales.com/pubs/documents/HopPoleSampleSpringMenu100519.pdf> - 
smoky fish croquettes, corned beef pasties and HP sauce - is full of good 
things, but it's a 20 minute walk from the town centre, so it didn't really 
work for this piece. LikewiseBath Bakery's latest outlet 
<http://bathbakery.co.uk/BathBakery/OurShops.aspx>, formerly Del Sole 
<http://www.delsole.co.uk/>. Do you know either? Have I missed two crackers?

Back in town, is the Minibar <http://www.bathminibar.com/default.asp> lunch 
deal, a mixed platter of tapas for two (£9.95), anything to write home about? 
That cecina, 12 month cured smoked beef with manchego, certainly sounds 
appetising. And, next door, at fine cheesemongerPaxton & Whitfield 
<http://www.paxtonandwhitfield.co.uk/>, are the £2.95 sandwiches as good as you 
might expect? Meanwhile, at the other end of the food spectrum, are Schwartz 
Bros' burgers the post-pub treat it's reported, and where -Twerton 
<http://www.twertonchippy.co.uk/> was mentioned to me as a candidate - is 
Bath's best chippy? IsSally Lunn's <http://www.sallylunns.co.uk/> more than 
just a tourist trap? Is the food at theRiverside Cafe 
<http://www.riversidecafebath.co.uk/> as good as the view?

The rules, such as they are, are that I only include places where you can eat 
and drink something for under a £10-a-head in these cheap eats Top 10s, so the 
emphasis is very much on casual, snacky food, good lunch spots and cafes, not 
restaurants. But if you have anything to add, please do. If you're on a budget, 
where are the best places in Bath to eat?
 