
Phew! Made it. Sorry, I’m a bit out of breath. I’ve just rushed back from my 
morning pilates class to be with you. Even I can sometimes have trouble keeping 
things easy. My therapist says it’s to do with my Fomo. That’s fear of missing 
out to you. We live in a hectic world where it can be hard to keep up with all 
the latest yoga trends, source the best Vitamix blender, fit in a pedicure 
while still finding space for a little me time. And that’s where this book 
comes in. Try to think of it as less of a recipe book and more of a road map. A 
book that can help you navigate the healing journey from Youseless You to 
Glorious Gwynnie.

First things first. If you’re going to be Marvellous Me, then you’re going to 
have to stock up on a few basics. A kitchen that is without kuru shoots, sumac 
and za’atar and an Aquaovo Raspberry water filter – available at just $1,100 
from myGoop website <http://goop.com/> – is never going to be an easy kitchen. 
And if you want to go that extra mile and say “Today I really value myself”, 
then allow yourself some toilet paper made out of 24-carat gold. You’ll never 
let anything else near your botty again.

Breakfast is traditionally the first meal of the day, which is why I always 
like to eat it soon after I get up. As a busy mom trying to make healthy 
choices, the dish I get my staff to make for my kids before I rush out to my 
cardio class is a simple bowl of acai and goji berries, topped with chia seeds 
and some gluten-free granola. Here’s a photograph of me in the kitchen trying 
to look as if I know what all the different gadgets are for. Cute. Here’s 
another photo of me looking wistfully out the window. Please notice how my hair 
cascades over my baggy pastel sweater. The sweater is available fromGoop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/02/celebrity-lifestyles-for-sale-gwyneth-paltrow>
 at a very reasonable $41,999. The hair is all my own.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Fits-all-easy-by-gwyneth-paltrow-digested-read-goop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90608a4f295e39a0e6b5aa3bc0caf330ed863517%2F266_236_2336_1822%2F2336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20All%20Easy%20by%20Gwyneth%20Paltrow%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Fits-all-easy-by-gwyneth-paltrow-digested-read-goop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20All%20Easy%20by%20Gwyneth%20Paltrow%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Fits-all-easy-by-gwyneth-paltrow-digested-read-goop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90608a4f295e39a0e6b5aa3bc0caf330ed863517%2F266_236_2336_1822%2F2336.jpg>
 Gwyneth Paltrow at a Goop event in Chicago this week. Photograph: Startraks 
Photo/Rex/Shutterstock 
In a dream world – this book for example – I’d eat every meal at a table with 
a cloth napkin and silver cutlery; in reality, I’m often spreading almond 
butter on a rice cake while rushing from a mindfulness class to a soccer ball 
game. Here are some quick snacks that you can easily knock up in about 40 
minutes. My favourite is the bibimbap salad, which will make any fan of kimchi 
and furikake swoon. Here is a photo of me posing by my bicycle, which has a 
lettuce and a peony in the wicker basket. Peonies always seem to make my day 
just that bit easier.

Everybody has a tricky time of day. Mine comes in the afternoon in the lull 
between conscious uncoupling and unconscious coupling. It’s that time of the 
day when it’s hard to know if I’m actually stressed, hungry or simply 
under-caffeinated, but my body craves something salty and carby. But then I 
count to 10 and say to myself: “Gwynnie, do you really want to let yourself go 
and become a total lardo like so many of your readers? Or do you want to carry 
on being perfect?” Sometimes, the route map to easiness involves taking the 
road less travelled and here are some recipes that make the ideal antidote to a 
blood sugar dip or a momentary lapse in focus.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Fits-all-easy-by-gwyneth-paltrow-digested-read-goop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e3d9542297ff6491ead7017ffffee3513fd9c5f%2F0_0_2505_3077%2F2505.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20All%20Easy%20by%20Gwyneth%20Paltrow%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Fits-all-easy-by-gwyneth-paltrow-digested-read-goop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20All%20Easy%20by%20Gwyneth%20Paltrow%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Fits-all-easy-by-gwyneth-paltrow-digested-read-goop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e3d9542297ff6491ead7017ffffee3513fd9c5f%2F0_0_2505_3077%2F2505.jpg>
 Gwyneth Paltrow’s It’s All Easy 
Beet chips. Pre-heat the oven to 325F. Grease two baking sheets lightly with 
olive oil. Use a mandolin to slice the beets. Place one set of beets in the top 
third of the oven and the other set in the lower third. After 10 minutes, 
reverse the position of the two sets of beets in the oven and cook for a 
further 10 minutes while reciting several verses of The Prophet. Then change 
into your tracksuit (I have several on sale onmy Goop website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/08/robbers-make-off-with-173000-worth-of-jewellry>
 at a knockdown $7,000,001) and jog down to your local delicatessen to buy some 
cilantro hummus. By the time you get back, it will be time for dinner. In the 
meantime, here’s a picture of me next to a tin of sardines. Crazy.

At the end of another busy, busy day being a role model to stick insects the 
world over, I’m ready for a little downtime. Time to take things even easier 
than I already have earlier in the day. It’s that moment to settle down in 
front of the TV with a tablespoon of tamari, some Tokyo turnips and a 
gluten-free sprout soufflé.

Digested read, digested: It’s all about me.

 