
The four young men standing near the library in the centre of the dusty 
village of Gumbi have not seen each other for many months. It’s the school 
holidays inMalawi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi> and they’ve come 
back to see family and friends. They joke around, laugh about their work, the 
changes they can see in the village and each other. They look strong, confident 
and serious, happy to be home.

At 23, James Gomani is the second oldest. He is at university, studying 
accountancy. His friends Kennedy and Josephy Jimmy, and Yohane Lungu, have just 
qualified as teachers and are working 100 miles away in villages near LakeMalawi
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>. It’s the first time in a year the 
four have been together in their dirt-poor village of subsistence farmers, and 
they talk about first jobs and their hopes.

I first met them in 2002, when they were boys. They were unable to speak a 
word of English, Malawi’s official language, and used to walk miles barefoot to 
primary school, collect water from the village pump and work in their family’s 
maize fields. Those were bad times, they remember. Along with many thousands of 
other villages in one of the poorest countries on Earth, Gumbi was racked by 
famine when a long drought destroyed crops two years running.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85acae673a7433f02ddcc35e70f2ae493335cb03%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85acae673a7433f02ddcc35e70f2ae493335cb03%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 ‘No one had any hope for the future then’: James Gomani, now an accountancy 
student 
James was seven then, an only child after his brother and sister died. He and 
his three friends suffered badly when the food ran out and there was no 
prospect of another harvest for many months. They remember going hungry, being 
taught by rote in the shade of a tree and being taken out of school when their 
parents had no money and needed them in the fields. “No one had any hope for 
the future,” James says.

But many things have changed since then – and Guardian Weekend readers played 
a part in that. This is the story of how the village with just one book became 
a village of teachers.

***

I first visited Gumbi in March 2002, at the height of the Malawian food crisis 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/1985765.stm>, when 80% of the small 
southern African country of 12 million people were said to be hungry. I had 
been travelling with the Irish charityConcern <https://www.concern.net/en/>, 
reporting from health clinics, hospitals and feeding centres. It was 
distressing. Wherever we went, there was shocking destitution, malnutrition and 
death. In one hospital, at Nambuma, a small town about 50km west of the capital 
Lilongwe, many of the women and children said they were from a place called 
Gumbi. Why is it so bad there, I asked a government health official called 
Patrick Kamzitu.

“Let’s go and see,” he said.

When I first visited Gumbi, there was a single book in a village of 400 people 
– no water, no electricity, no school

From Nambuma, you get to Gumbi past a huge brick church built by the White 
Fathers missionaries and a football pitch, down a warren of unsigned narrow 
tracks through fields of maize. The village consisted then of about 70 
mud-built, straw-thatched houses. The place seemed deserted and many structures 
had no roofs. A few women sat under a tree, their infants listless. A 
tired-looking man introduced himself as “Mr Jamu, the chief”.

Gumbi had nothing, he apologised. No clean water, no shops and no assets 
beyond a few bicycles and ox carts. There was a single book in the village of 
about 400 people, there was no electricity or TV, no clinic, no school or shop, 
and everyone had run out of food. Gumbi had been hit particularly hard by the 
drought, he said, because everyone was desperately poor and no one had skills 
other than maize farming. The village was empty, because in times of hunger 
people leave to seek work elsewhere.

In those bad days, Gumbi’s “nkhokwe”, the traditional woven granaries in which 
families stored their maize, were all empty. Many children were being treated 
for malnutrition in the local hospital, and those who lived did what they 
always do in a major drought: they sold anything they could, to buy any food 
they could, at massively inflated prices.

Fit adults left the village to seek scarce day work on building sites or 
tobacco farms, children were taken out of school, and anyone left in the 
village ate maize stalks, leaves and berries, prayed for rains that they knew 
would not come for months, or for food aid to arrive. Some just waited for the 
end.

Two bad harvests in a row was very rare in Malawi, but in Lilongwe it became 
clear that this was a manmade famine. The IMF and donor countries, including 
the UK, had advised the government to sell off its grain reserves because they 
were expensive to maintain; the EU had said only a little food would be needed 
in the case of a local disaster. So rich traders had bought and hoarded food 
and were now selling it at excessive prices, while emergency supplies had been 
slow to reach landlocked Malawi.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940b13fe25127f5e4dbccdf80b110d5000570a7f%2F0_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940b13fe25127f5e4dbccdf80b110d5000570a7f%2F0_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Harvest time in Gumbi: the village is facing a second year of drought 
I returned to the village three times that year, with the idea of following 
life through the famine. I watched as food aid arrived, and then the rains. 
That year 17 villagers died from malnutrition-related diseases, and nearly all 
the children suffered from the lack of food.

In December 2002, on a fourth and, I imagined, last visit to the village, five 
women told me about the issues they were facing. “Hunger is awful,” said Joyce. 
“I had a child who died of hunger. I went to the hospital but it was too late. 
I had five children who were malnourished. How can you send children to school 
if they are malnourished and ill?”

“We have been on the edge of life for a long time,” said Lucy. “It’s the very 
poor who have suffered. Here there are no rich people, but there are many 
people with nothing. Maybe we live, maybe we die.” She was beginning to see the 
children needed access to education. “We do not have the skills to go forward 
and change our lives. We need to know about other sorts of farming, we need to 
learn about doing other things. We have no one to teach us.” The women reasoned 
that without schooling, language and new skills, they would not survive.

***

The great hope of Gumbi at that time was a 13-year-old girl, Margaradena 
Njewa. She had come top of her class in the nearby Nambuma girls’ primary 
school, and had passed a national exam giving her entry to one of Malawi’s 
better, boarding secondary schools. By any standards in rural Malawi, this was 
an achievement, but for a young Gumbi girl it was a triumph.

The reality, though, was that it would cost the family about £80 a year to 
send her to the school. There were no scholarships and no money. Instead, she 
had been helped by the extraordinary sacrifice of her elder brother, Kennedy. 
So important did he consider his baby sister’s education for the future of the 
family and the village that he had sold his ox cart, his only means of earning 
money. It raised about £35, enough to pay for Margaradena’s first two terms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F637c1f1dc23db2f133f379d461862de646521e7d%2F0_0_809_479%2F809.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F637c1f1dc23db2f133f379d461862de646521e7d%2F0_0_809_479%2F809.jpg>
 John Vidal’s 2003 article as it appeared in the Guardian’s Saturday magazine 
Kennedy had no idea how he would pay for the rest of her schooling, but he 
reasoned that even a few months’ secondary teaching would give her a chance. 
Some people thought him wrong, even stupid, but a couple of weeks before I 
visited Gumbi for the last time in 2002, he waved Margaradena off. Kennedy’s 
own dream, he said, was to learn English and expand his and the village’s 
horizons. He deeply regretted that he had never been to secondary school. He 
owned the only book in the village, a tatty English-Chichewa dictionary.

Margaradena was far too shy to speak to me then, but Kennedy told me, “She is 
very intelligent. She will learn. If this village is to change, then we need 
education. Without it we cannot survive. If we do not have education, then we 
will be like slaves.”

I wrote a piece for this magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2003/oct/25/weekend.johnvidal> about 
Margaradena and the village’s plight, and added a note asking readers if they 
would contribute to an education fund. Within days we had raised around 
£20,000. A fund was set up, to be overseen by Sister Modesta, a Teresian nun 
from the church in Nambuma, and Patrick Kamzitu, the government health worker 
who had taken me to the village. Any child from Gumbi (or nearby schools) who 
passed their government entry exams became eligible for a free secondary 
education. Orphans and girls were to be given priority.

It sounded easy enough. The families would be given the money, the children 
would be educated and everyone would prosper. Sadly, it proved much more 
complicated.

Malawi's solar power revolution starts by bringing schoolchildren out of the 
dark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/10/malawis-solar-power-revolution-starts-by-bringing-schoolchildren-out-of-the-dark>
There was immediate progress: in that first year, 30 children had their school 
fees paid and a local builder was employed to construct a smart new classroom 
block at the primary school, and an office for the teachers. But no one had 
foreseen just how derelict Malawi’s rural schools were. The roof of the boys’ 
primary school in Nambuma had fallen in five years previously, and the whole 
school in the nearby village of Mguwata was a pile of bricks. Classes of 100 or 
more were being taught under trees. There was no money for books, blackboards 
or materials, and no secondary school had light. It was impossible to attract 
professionals to live in derelict huts without windows or water, and few who 
came had any qualifications. We realised that it wasn’t just money holding 
children back, but cultural suspicion, deep necessity and ignorance.

The full disaster revealed itself slowly in the maths. In any group of 100 
children in rural Malawi, it emerged, fewer than 60 could expect more than a 
year’s primary education, and just 10 might qualify to go on to secondary 
education. Of those 10, nine could be expected to drop out within a year or 
two, because their parents could not afford the fees or uniforms. Primary 
education was free, but secondary schooling cost £20 or more a year. In Gumbi, 
that could be 30% of a family’s income.

Only a handful of Gumbi children had ever got into the local secondary school, 
St Martin’s, and no one had finished more than a year there. Effectively, the 
village children ended their school days at age 10, unable to read, write, 
speak English or do much more than hoe the fields and cook nsima, the national 
maize dish. Children and parents may have said they wanted education, but they 
were denied it by absolute poverty. And while parents wanted to give their 
children the best chance in life, the reality was that, even with an offer to 
pay the school fees, they needed their children in the fields or at home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab6db719d0cab20ab101d579b20b85535bef7ba%2F0_0_4500_2853%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab6db719d0cab20ab101d579b20b85535bef7ba%2F0_0_4500_2853%2F4500.jpg>
 Pupils prepare for exams at night, using solar lamps, in Gumbi library 
Nevertheless, with cash from Weekend readers, Margaradena had her education 
paid in an all-girls boarding school at Namitete, near the border with Zambia, 
and Kennedy was able to buy back his ox cart. Three other children who had 
qualified for secondary school that year were sent to other boarding schools; a 
village committee chose three children for boarding scholarships and others to 
go to day secondary schools.

The fund developed independently of the Guardian, and each year raised about 
£5,000, largely from a small group of readers, many of them ex-teachers. Every 
year, the Gumbi education committee was told how much money was available and 
someone from Britain visited, at their own expense. There were no 
administrative costs except a small stipend for Kamzitu. We made a commitment 
to Gumbi that we would stick with it for the long term; this was not just a 
quick fundraiser.

Rupert Murdoch paid for full-page newspaper apologies for phone-hacking, and 
the fund doubled. A library was built

By 2007, classroom blocks in several schools had been rebuilt and 55 children 
were having their fees paid at secondary level. In 2009, Kamzitu wrote: “Of the 
64 children who we put through secondary education last year, nine passed their 
exams – the best results achieved so far. But the biggest change has been the 
attitude of parents in Gumbi itself. This year, 29 children from the village 
will go to secondary school, more than twice as many as have ever been before.”

And then in 2011, thanks to Rupert Murdoch, the fund doubled in size. 
Following the Guardian’s long-running investigation into News International’s 
hacking of celebrities’ telephones, the Murdoch media empire was obliged to 
take out full-page advertisements in the UK national press to apologise. The 
Guardian decided to give this unexpected revenue to charity, and a chunk came 
to the Gumbi fund. A one-room village library, provisionally called the R 
Murdoch Education Facility, was built and an expedition was mounted to choose 
books in Lilongwe. The children returned chastened. In Malawi, £400 may buy a 
secondary education for dozens of children a year, but it covers only a handful 
of books.

Most of the Murdoch money went to Gumbi’s neighbouring village Mguwata. When I 
visited it for the first time in 2010, it had worse facilities than most 
refugee camps. The school, supposedly built for 300 children, consisted of one 
run-down classroom block, two semi-derelict, roofless blocks and a thatched 
shelter. The rest was a pile of bricks, the buildings having been demolished 
five years previously because they were in such a dangerous condition.

Small is beautiful when it comes to the Guardian supporting a village in Malawi
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/2> 
The six teachers had no chairs, desks, books, pencils, windows or chalkboards. 
Only two classes could be held indoors at the same time, so the children sat in 
the open and were sent home when it was too hot or it rained. Only a handful 
had ever gone on to secondary school and no one ever finished.

***

This year, more than 100 children are being educated to secondary level in the 
two villages Mguwata and Gumbi; there are feeding programmes when food is 
scarce; and all the local schools have solar lighting. The primary school in 
Mguwata has two brand new classroom blocks and 597 children. But government 
funding is pitiful. “We get 617,692 kwacha [£585] a year for pens and paper for 
597 pupils. That’s less than £1 per pupil per year. That must cover repairs to 
the buildings, too,” says headteacher Amos Kautsa, showing me the government 
receipts. “Lots and lots of children drop out, especially the girls.”

The villages are still desperately poor. Gumbi has many more houses than it 
had in 2002, more tin roofs and bicycles, three football teams, and more people 
finding work outside the fields. According to some of the parents, people have 
moved there from neighbouring villages because of the free secondary education.

Last year, solar lighting came to all the local schools, as well as 41 houses 
in Gumbi and more in Mguwata, after money was left to the fund by a British 
family. A plaque on the small three-room Mguwata library, its bricks made by 
the village, reads, “The Dr David Montefiore Memorial Library”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f836f67c7b050c02381b05f2f1040dcab932ee8%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f836f67c7b050c02381b05f2f1040dcab932ee8%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Teachers and parents outside the Dr David Montefiore Memorial Library in 
Mguwata 
Chatting in the library, James Gomani and the young Gumbi-born teachers tell 
me how much they value education. “It means everything,” says Gomani. “I was so 
happy when I got to university. It was my great hope and aim. But I know that 
education does not end there. I was the first in my family, the first in the 
village, to go. But others are working now just as hard as I did. Optimism is a 
great motivation.”

“Without education there can be no change. With it, everything can happen. 
People have different aims,” says Kennedy Jimmy.

“Our family was absolutely poor. No one had anything. We had no hope for the 
future, no sense that there was a future. I am a different person,” agrees his 
elder brother Josephy.

***

But education divides, too, and guarantees nothing. My visit coincides with 
the first time Margaradena Njewa has returned to Gumbi in six years. I had seen 
her only once since she went off to boarding school, when I visited her school 
in 2005. We had talked for 30 minutes, and I had pressed soap, pens and pencils 
and a bit of pocket money into her hand. She had told me that she wanted to be 
a television presenter.

Now a beautiful young woman speaking good English, she is as shy as ever but 
tells me that she did not pass her national exams and go to university as so 
many people had wanted her to. Instead, she changed school but was not happy 
and, after six years of a different boarding school, moved to Lilongwe, where 
she met a boy and had a child, Priscilla. She is now a kindergarten teacher at 
a private school in the capital.

She is still in touch with her family but she had not told anyone in the 
village where she was and what she was doing. Returning to Gumbi last month was 
clearly emotional. People were glad to see her but did not quite know how to 
approach this young urban woman with a baby in her arms. From talking to 
others, I understood that she now felt awkward with her old friends. Education 
had taught her to speak English, and how to read and write, but life had not 
miraculously changed for the better.

Margaradena came top of her class, and won a place at a good school. She is 
now a teacher, with a daughter of her own

“I think I may have disappointed people,” she tells me. “But I don’t want to 
come back now. What would I do? I would be bored. I want to work. I still want 
to be a TV presenter.”

“Perhaps she felt there was too much expectation put on her,” Kamzitu tells 
me. “Everyone wanted to see her succeed. What we have learned is that it’s not 
enough to give people schooling. They need [vocational] training, too.”

Her brother Kennedy is undaunted. “I still think education is the most 
important thing in life. I remember those bad days in 2002. Life is good again 
but my ox cart is broken. I have learned English and now I grow maize, have 
four cows, a pig and a goat, and I grow tobacco. I learned that we had to farm 
more crops, and not become dependent only on maize.”

***

While in Lilongwe, I go to the offices of John Makina, country director of 
Oxfam in Malawi. I want to put the scholastic achievements of the Gumbi 
children into perspective, and I have been sent a paper Makina wrote about 
education where he mentioned his parents were uneducated beyond primary school 
level.

“My mother did not go to school at all,” he says. “My father went to a 
government primary school up to grade five and understood the importance of 
education. He encouraged me to work extra hard. I was the first person in 
either my family or my clan to attend a government secondary school.”

Someone – he still doesn’t know who, but possibly a priest – paid for his 
education right through secondary school and then to university. “Had they not, 
I would be working the fields or possibly be a tailor. Coming from a village 
where families have not had anyone in the education system is triply 
disadvantageous. You have no opportunity, no role models, no idea even what 
it’s like to have an educated father or mother. I had to walk three miles every 
day to primary school. My father had the ambition for me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F937727dfd9b9b0b26a715bad51a784a6812c3fad%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20takes%20a%20village%3A%20the%20Malawi%20school%20Guardian%20readers%20helped%20build&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalawi-village-school-guardian-readers-fund-john-vidal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F937727dfd9b9b0b26a715bad51a784a6812c3fad%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Margaradena Njewa, whose brother sold his ox cart to pay for her to go to 
school 
Education in Malawi divides the rich and poor, boys and the girls, he says: 
“If you come from a poor family, you stay poor. The poor here have the highest 
number of children, they cannot feed themselves and they remain perpetually 
poor. I was picked out of the poverty cycle. Education is a life-saver. Without 
it, my world would have been small. University is way beyond the reach of the 
ordinary Malawian. I cannot be sure, but I fear that if I were born today into 
the same circumstances, I’d have remained a poor farmer in the village.”

Fewer than one in 2,000 children get to university, Makina says; he now pays 
for about 30 children to be educated.

***

On a cool winter’s night last month, 80 children from Gumbi, Mguwata and 
elsewhere prepared for their secondary school exams by solar lights in St 
Martin’s school. When the headteacher says that some will get to university 
like James Gomani, they cheer and applaud.

The next day the village school committee and others meet in the library. 
Young boys and girls stand up and read poems or make statements about how 
important education is, and how they want to be teachers or go to university. 
The parents say their children need books and pens. They all talk about how the 
village has changed for the better.

What has been the greatest failure of these years, I ask. There is a pause. 
“The boys have done well but not the girls. No one can explain why. We are 
resolved now to give them scholarships. Possibly they must go in a group. That 
way they will be together,” says Sofina Loyd, a school committee member and 
mother of four.

“The girls’ schools are not so good. Many families still think girls cannot do 
anything great. Parents need to be educated, too,” says another mother. “It 
must be a priority from now on to get the girls to good schools. They get 
easily discouraged.”

“Education is not enough,” says her friend. “There must be courses for people 
to learn carpentry, tinsmithing, tailoring. Not everyone who has finished 
school can get work. We need to add value to education.”

'It's a disaster': children bear brunt of southern Africa's devastating 
drought | Lucy Lamble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/21/drought-southern-africa-heavy-toll-students-fainting-malawi-zimbabwe>
Gumbi is facing renewed challenges, they tell me. Last month was harvest time, 
and most of Gumbi and Mguwata’s grain stores have something in them. But 
history is repeating itself, and all Malawi’s rural villages are in deep 
trouble again after a second year of drought. Just as in 2002, the government 
has declared a national disaster and president Peter Mutharika expects half the 
country to need food aid by Christmas. More than 500,000 tonnes of food may be 
required, says Coco Ushiyama, the UN’s World Food Programme director in Malawi.

The situation is already serious; parents in the two villages have started a 
programme to offer all 600 students free meals to encourage them to keep going 
to school. “There’s nothing in the fields,” says Johane Jaliface, a young 
father of five children who ran out of food in April. His is one of only 20 
families receiving food from the government.

Were the women right in 2002, to say that education would save Malawi? The 
consensus in the two villages is that the situation will not be as severe as 14 
years ago. “People have learned that they must grow vegetables and not just 
maize. In the past we depended completely on maize. That was why 2002 was so 
bad. We learned we must turn to beans and rice and vegetables. But we needed 
education to change people’s mentality,” says Kamzitu.

There are no statistics to prove that education increases resilience, but 
Kamzitu is sure. “There is definitely a big change in attitude,” he says. “A 
whole generation of children in Gumbi has a chance to survive on its own now. 
People think of starting their own businesses rather than just ploughing their 
fields. Parents have understood how important education is. They all now want 
to send their children to secondary school. It means that in three or four 
years’ time there will be people who are role models. It’s possible that a 
village like Gumbi will have 10 teachers by then.”

Gomani, the young accountancy student, adds that there is a much better 
understanding of the pressures of climate change. “People know that the rains 
can stop before the crops are mature, so they must be prepared,” he says. “They 
know that they must think ahead and not cut down trees. They know the last 
really good harvest was in 2011. And they know that they can do things other 
than be farmers, or that farming can be made profitable. Education has taught 
them to think differently.”

The plan, says Patrick Kamzitu, is to grow the fund, to build more libraries 
and to help educate more children to secondary education and beyond. “We never 
thought it was possible to change, but now we know that we can do it,” he says. 
“Village by village, little by little.”

 * The Gumbi education fund is at gumbieducationfund.org.uk 
<http://www.gumbieducationfund.org.uk>  