
Two Vincent van Gogh paintings that were stolen from a museum in Amsterdam 
more than a decade ago have been recovered by Italian law enforcement 
authorities in Naples after an investigation targeting a powerful organised 
crime syndicate involved in the cocaine trade.

The paintings, View of the Sea at Scheveningen, painted in 1882, and 
Congregation Leaving the Reformed Church in Nuenen, painted in 1884, were 
discovered after allegedly being hidden away in a house affiliated with an 
international drug trafficker based in Castellammare di Stabia, near Naples.

Officials hailed the discovery as a major victory in the fight against 
organised crime. It also provided an insight into the inner workings of the 
Italian underworld, where precious works of art are seen as valuable currency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fitalian-police-find-van-goghs-stolen-in-amsterdam-gallery-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9bc715e5b2639e85ab66e92b99bdc3e18377edd%2F0_0_2322_3000%2F2322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italian%20Camorra%20inquiry%20recovers%20Van%20Goghs%2014%20years%20after%20infamous%20heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fitalian-police-find-van-goghs-stolen-in-amsterdam-gallery-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italian%20Camorra%20inquiry%20recovers%20Van%20Goghs%2014%20years%20after%20infamous%20heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fitalian-police-find-van-goghs-stolen-in-amsterdam-gallery-heist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9bc715e5b2639e85ab66e92b99bdc3e18377edd%2F0_0_2322_3000%2F2322.jpg>
 Congregation Leaving the Reformed Church in Nuenen, 1884. Photograph: Getty 
Images 
The authenticity of the paintings has already been confirmed by an expert from 
theVan Gogh <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/van-gogh> museum in 
Amsterdam, from where they were stolen in 2002.

Axel Rüger, director of the Van Gogh museum, said he wasn’t sure when the 
paintings could be returned to the Netherlands, as they are likely to be needed 
as evidence in the ensuing trial.


“After so many years I didn’t dare to think they would ever return,” Rüger 
said. “We’ve waited 14 years for this moment and of course we’d like to take 
them straight home. We’ll need to exercise a bit of patience, but I am 
convinced we can count on the support of the Italian authorities.”

The frames have been removed and the seascape has a small patch of damage in 
the bottom left-hand corner, the museum said, but otherwise the paintings 
appeared to be in good condition.


The paintings were discovered thanks to a tipoff from Mario Cerrone, a 
suspected drug trafficker arrested in January who collaborated with the 
Camorra, a notorious Neapolitan crime syndicate made up of numerous clans.

The discovery was part of a broader investigation into the Camorra’s 
Amato-Pagano clan, which prosecutors said was one of the most dangerous and 
active gangs of drug traffickers operating in the region. Investigators came 
across the paintings in a building that they were searching after a judge last 
week ordered the seizure of the gang’s assets. They also seized a small plane.

“When we finally found them, we did not believe our eyes,” a local official 
told La Repubblica.

The FBI considered the 2002 heist one of the “top 10” art crimes, according to 
its website <https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/violent-crime/art-theft>. The 
thieves entered the Van Gogh museum from the roof of the building, which 
allowed them to get past security and cameras undetected, even though their 
entry did trigger alarms. They had used a ladder to climb up to a window and 
then smashed

Two men, Octave Durham, an art thief who earned the nickname The Monkey for 
his ability to evade police, and his accomplice Henk Bieslijn, were eventually 
convicted of the theft in 2004 afterpolice discovered their DNA at the scene of 
the crime <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/dec/18/arts.arttheft>. They 
were handed four year sentences, but authorities were never able to track down 
the stolen works.

View of the Sea at Scheveningen is one of Van Gogh’s early paintings and 
depicts the beach resort close to The Hague. It was the only work in the 
museum’s collection from Van Gogh’s two years in The Hague and one of just two 
Dutch seascapes the artist made.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fitalian-police-find-van-goghs-stolen-in-amsterdam-gallery-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6dcc30f8d320981a360e244334673f417f06bca%2F0_186_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italian%20Camorra%20inquiry%20recovers%20Van%20Goghs%2014%20years%20after%20infamous%20heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fitalian-police-find-van-goghs-stolen-in-amsterdam-gallery-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italian%20Camorra%20inquiry%20recovers%20Van%20Goghs%2014%20years%20after%20infamous%20heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fitalian-police-find-van-goghs-stolen-in-amsterdam-gallery-heist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6dcc30f8d320981a360e244334673f417f06bca%2F0_186_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Detail from Vincent van Gogh’s View of the Sea at Scheveningen. Photograph: 
Getty Images 
Congregation Leaving the Reformed Church in Nuenen is a smaller work that Van 
Gogh painted for his mother in 1884, and depicts a church in Brabant where his 
father Theodorus was attached as a preacher. After his father’s death in 1885 
Van Gogh revised the painting, adding figures of women wearing black shawls 
used in mourning.

Dario Franceschini, the Italian culture minister, said the discovery was 
extraordinary and “confirmed the strength of the Italian system in the fight 
against the illicit trafficking of works of art”.

John Dickie, a historian and expert in organised crime in Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, said the reason the country was 
known for its expertise in following the illicit trade of art was the extent to 
which that trade existed in the first place.

“Italy also has the best mafia police in the world, because it has the most 
powerful mafia networks,” he added.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fitalian-police-find-van-goghs-stolen-in-amsterdam-gallery-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e7f5d152519eb4264006cf4bc2cbf995d0c273c%2F0_105_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italian%20Camorra%20inquiry%20recovers%20Van%20Goghs%2014%20years%20after%20infamous%20heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fitalian-police-find-van-goghs-stolen-in-amsterdam-gallery-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italian%20Camorra%20inquiry%20recovers%20Van%20Goghs%2014%20years%20after%20infamous%20heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fitalian-police-find-van-goghs-stolen-in-amsterdam-gallery-heist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e7f5d152519eb4264006cf4bc2cbf995d0c273c%2F0_105_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 Axel Rüger (left), director of the Van Gogh museum in Amsterdam, and Naples 
prosecutor Giovanni Colangelo shake hands in front of the recovered Van Gogh 
painting Congregation Leaving the Reformed Church in Nuenen. Photograph: Ciro 
Fusco/EPA 
The town of Castellammare di Stabia, about 19 miles south-east of Naples, 
where the paintings were found, has long been known as a Camorra stronghold. It 
was the home of Assunta Maresca, known as Pupetta, who was a former beauty 
queen, convicted murderer, and Camorra boss described as a trailblazer and 
suffragette in the syndicate.

Unlike the highly organised Sicilian mafia, the Camorra is an “archipelago of 
gangs”, Dickie said, with some branches being more sophisticated than others.

 “It is easy to say the Camorra did it and then jump to the conclusion that 
the Camorra is moving into the art market,” Dickie said.

He said the discovery and the alleged involvement of the Camorra reflected the 
opportunistic nature of the Neapolitan syndicate. Its members spend a lot of 
time in prison and are part of a vast underworld network in which illegal goods 
are sold and traded.

“I don’t think we need to conclude that it’s the Camorra boss who is putting 
this art on his mantelpiece. A lot of times these people don’t have a lot of 
class [and] they wouldn’t necessarily be impressed by having this,” Dickie said.

Federico Varese, an expert in criminology from Oxford University, said it was 
unsurprising that the discovery exposed a link between Amsterdam and the 
Camorra, given the Dutch city’s reputation as a major drug hub. Cross-border 
investigations dating back to the 1980s had found the presence of the Camorra 
in Amsterdam.

“What I know for sure is that a lot of camorristi are in Amsterdam, not 
because they want to be rooted there or deal in racketeering of shops or that 
kind of thing, but because they are there to buy drugs. Amsterdam is a hub for 
the buying and selling of illegal goods,” Varese said.

The Italian prime minister, Matteo Renzi, informed his Dutch counterpart, Mark 
Rutte, about the police operation before the funeral in Jerusalem of the former 
Israeli leader Shimon Peres. Renzi also tweeted a message of thanks to Italian 
law enforcement, saying he was proud of their work.

 