
Ivory Coast’s government and rebel troops have reached a final deal at talks 
in Bouake, government sources said late on Friday at the close of a tense day 
which saw outbreaks of gunfire at barracks across the country.


Soldiers in Bouake mutinied earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/mutinous-ivory-coast-soldiers-seize-control-of-three-cities>
, firing rocket-launchers and terrifying residents of Ivory Coast’s second 
largest city, while demanding bonuses, better pay and housing.

Related: Ivory Coast’s Alassane Ouattara appoints former prime minister as 
vice-president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/10/ivory-coasts-alassane-ouattara-appoints-former-prime-minister-as-vice-president-daniel-kablan-duncan>

The protests then spread to other cities, including the economic capital 
Abidjan, stoking security fears in the world’s top cocoa producer.

The mutiny saw president Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/10/ivory-coasts-alassane-ouattara-appoints-former-prime-minister-as-vice-president-daniel-kablan-duncan>
 order major changes in the top security ranks – the armed forces’ chief of 
staff, the senior commander of the national gendarmerie and the 
director-general of the police.

“A deal has been reached in Bouake between the chief of staff, the defence 
minister and the (rebel) troops,” a source close to the presidency told AFP.

Several rebel soldiers confirmed that a deal had been struck, with one telling 
AFP: “We are pleased, we’ve reached an agreement”.

“The troops have agreed to return to their barracks, and for this reason 
gunfire has halted in Bouake,” a local official said. He said the mutineers had 
managed to obtain a bonus of about $US8,000 each.

While an initial deal had been reached almost a week ago, talks on 
implementing the agreement only began Friday and tensions were high with rebel 
troops taking up positions on the roads into Bouake and firing into the air.

Regular gunfire was heard throughout the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/mutinous-ivory-coast-soldiers-seize-control-of-three-cities>
, including at Akouedo, the biggest barracks in the capital Abidjan and at 
Odienne in the northwest and Bondoukou in the east.

There were fears before the deal was struck that the defence minister could be 
taken hostage and a general mutiny unleased. However, he left the talks 
unharmed.

One source said the soldiers had originally been demanding a raise of $16,000 
each, a significant amount given that many Ivorians earn about $160 a month.

It remains to be seen how the government will finance its promise of the 
agreed $8,000 bonus.

In more problems for the government, Ivorian state employees were also on 
strike this week protesting against pension cuts and a plan to raise the 
retirement age.

Bouake, which is home to 1.5 million people, was the cradle of a rebellion 
which erupted in 2002 in a failed attempt to oust then-president Laurent Gbagbo.

The revolt sliced the former French colony into the rebel-held north and the 
government-controlled south and triggered years of unrest.

Twelve years later, a similar dispute over pay by rebels-turned-soldiers 
erupted in Bouake which spread to Abidjan and briefly brought the country to a 
standstill. The government then agreed to a deal that provided amnesty for the 
mutineers and a financial settlement.

The Ivorian army, which consists of about 22,000 soldiers, includes many 
former rebels who were integrated into the armed forces after years of conflict.
 