
After Brexit, and now Trump’s election, we’ve heard a lot about how isolated 
we all are from opinions different to our own. Those of us left aghast and 
astonished by recent events have also heard plenty of words like these:


Each of you dwells in a cosmos of his own making, created out of his own 
fancies and desires. You do not know the real world in which you live, and your 
thinking has no place in the real world except in so far as it is phenomena of 
mental aberration.

If, as I have, you’ve suddenly been surprised to learn that you’re part of a 
“liberal elite”, you may also have been told:

You do not know the working class. But you are not to be blamed for this. How 
can you know anything about the working class? You do not live in the same 
locality with the working class. You herd with the capitalist class in another 
locality.

Also herding in with those capitalists are those most dread people, the 
experts.People are sick of them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/jun/08/experts-eu-referendum-michael-gove>
, we have been taught, and: “The metaphysicians have done nothing, absolutely 
nothing, for mankind.”

How technology disrupted the truth | Katharine Viner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth>
You may also have bitter friends who explained Trump and Brexit because “the 
average man is selfish”. Perhaps you have a bitter friend who has had thoughts 
along these lines:

He was appalled by the selfishness he encountered, and what had surprised him 
even more than that was the absence of intellectual life … he was shocked by 
the intellectual stupidity of the master class.

It’s depressing to know that few of these quotes will seem new to anyone from 
this vantage point, at the stinking fag-end of 2016. But it may at least 
surprise you to learn how old they are. All of them are lifted from Jack 
London’s 1908 novelThe Iron Heel 
<https://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2012/03/iron-m08.html>, and more than a 
century on, its contents feel alarmingly contemporary. London’s dystopian story 
of the American people crushed under the boots of super-rich oligarchs often 
feels like a contemporary documentary. There are passages that read as eerily 
prescient analysis, not only of our current situation but also of the attitudes 
and ideas that brought us here.

There are more shadows of calamities to come.

Back in 1937, Leon Trotsky was bowled over by the way London “not only 
absorbed creatively the impetus given by the first Russian revolution [of 1905] 
but also courageously thought over again in its light the fate of capitalist 
society as a whole … [He] felt with an intrepidity which forces one to ask 
himself again and again with astonishment: when was this written? Really before 
the war?”

A few years later, George Orwell was declaring the book a remarkable insight 
into fascism. And now here we are in another crisis of inequality, anger and 
cruelty – and London speaks clearly again. It’s chilling when his predictions 
strike home. It’s just as fascinating when history doesn’t align with his 
ideas. London had a notion that a looming international war could be averted 
because the workers would go on strike. This was disproved soon after the 
assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in 1914. But that doesn’t make it any 
less imaginative – or any less important as an insight into early 20th-century 
socialist thinking. Much of The Iron Heel is similarly intriguing.

Unfortunately, much of it is also tedious and absurd. Like plenty of the most 
effective prophets, Jack London can be a blowhard. His readers have to buffet 
through great windy passages about socialism, corporations, Standard Oil and 
economic trusts. The politics is fascinating; the presentation is dreadful. 
Most of the ideas are contained in prolix monologues from a character called 
Ernest, who is meant to be a muscular, blonde, Nietzschean sex lord, but ends 
up a simple bore. Reading group contributorJudgedamnationagain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/jack-london-white-fang-the-call-of-the-wild-reading-group#comment-87587983>
 observed with stinging accuracy that:

The first two thirds of the book are a bit like a socialist version of 
Sophie’s World <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sophie’s_World>, where the main 
character just spouts a load of theory at everyone, after which his girlfriend 
reminds us how brilliant he is.

Even worse accusations have been levelled at this novel. London was shamed as 
a plagiarist 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=i3KmAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA812&lpg=PA812&dq=harris+The+Bishop+of+London+and+Public+Morality&source=bl&ots=Ju0mJZguwD&sig=_1cnxM-HSM9oqvOrcjLptWHtO-A&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwib_KOB6rLQAhXHKcAKHT-GAV0Q6AEIODAG#v=onepage&q=harris%20The%20Bishop%20of%20London%20and%20Public%20Morality&f=false>
. Most of the seventh chapter of the book was lifted verbatim from an essay by 
the English journalist Frank Harris called The Bishop of London and Public 
Morality. London defended himself on the grounds that he thought it was a real 
speech by a real bishop and so fair game. It wasn’t a very convincing defence. 
Plenty of his other ideas also seem to have been borrowed froman Oakland 
newspaper called Socialist Voice 
<http://www.worldsocialism.org/spgb/socialist-standard/2000s/2008/no-1241-january-2008/jack-londons-iron-heel>
. Even the Iron Heel (which in turn inspired Orwell’s famous vision of the boot 
forever stomping on a human face) was a concept that others had got to first.

Reading group: let's tackle three Jack London stories this November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/nov/08/reading-group-jack-london-call-of-the-wild-white-fang-the-iron-heel>
Yet I still wouldn’t hesitate to recommend The Iron Heel. It isn’t just its 
depressing prescience that makes it interesting. When Everhard finally stops 
bloviating, London provides a vivid, bleak and bloody account of a losing 
campaign. Cleverly, the main story is told from the point of view of Everhard’s 
devoted wife, but it’s accompanied by a series of footnotes supposedly written 
centuries later that reveal early on that Everhard’s heroic struggle was 
doomed: he was going to be executed and his supporters crushed. We know we are 
plunging into darkness and the book has brutal, unstoppable momentum. It’s 
daring in its frank horror. And once again the absurdly high body count, made 
possible by new forms industrial and urban warfare, seems eerily prophetic.

There are other flourishes. Early on, we are told that the Everhard manuscript 
is unfinished. And so we brace, ready for the last page. Even so, when the 
story does stop dead, it’s shocking. Ending a novel in the thick of the action 
still seems unusual and daring, not to mention a very effective way of showing 
how war brings a premature full stop to so many things. It’s frustrating – but 
also provocative and strange. For all his faults, London remained an ingenious 
storyteller; one we would still do well to heed.
 