
The writing is on the wall for Jacob Zuma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma>, South Africa’s embattled president, 
but will he heed it? Rumblings of discontent over alleged high-level 
corruption, influence-peddling and economic mismanagement have been growing in 
vehemence and volume all year. They have now reached fever pitch amid 
impassioned calls for Zuma’s immediate resignation.

The intensifying furore follows Wednesday’s publication of a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/jacob-zuma-protest-pretoria-south-africa-report>
 by a respected independent watchdog demanding an urgent judicial inquiry into 
possible graft involving the president and his son. Zuma’s position looks 
precarious. The president’s term, his second, runs until 2019. As matters 
stand, few would bet on him going the full distance.



Report raises pressure on Jacob Zuma as thousands protest in Pretoria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/jacob-zuma-protest-pretoria-south-africa-report>
Zuma has been beset by intrigue and scandal since first taking office. 
Unbending support from the higher echelons of the ruling party, the African 
National Congress, has mostly protected him. But the ANC’s political firewall, 
like its grip on power, is weakening, as shown byunprecedented reverses  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/south-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc>
in August’s municipal elections.

His latest humiliating setback came when he was forced to drop his court bid 
to block publication of the official report, byThuli Madonsela, formerly South 
Africa’s most senior anti-corruption watchdog 
<http://www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/News/zumas-withdrawal-right-thing-to-do-madonsela-20161102>
, into alleged influence-peddling.

The report is not conclusive. But it expresses “serious concerns” about claims 
that Zuma conducted an improper relationship with the powerful Gupta business 
family and that government policy and cabinet appointments were influenced as a 
result. It calls for a judge-led inquiry.


 Both Zuma and the Guptas deny the allegations. 

 Earlier this year Zuma was also in hot water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/jacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa>
 over the Nkandla scandal. He was eventually forced to apologise after it 
emerged that the cost of taxpayer-funded luxury improvements to his rural 
residence had risen nearly tenfold. In 2014, Madonsela accused him of misuse of 
public money and unethical conduct.

 Her report, entitled Secure in Comfort, noted the estimated $23m (£19m) cost 
was eight times what was spent on securing two private homes for the former 
president Nelson Mandela, and more than 1,000 times what was spent on South 
Africa’s last apartheid-era president, FW de Klerk. Zuma was obliged to repay 
$500,000.

 Zuma came under additional fire this week over an attempt by the state 
prosecutor, Shaun Abrahams, to bring fraud charges against the finance 
minister, Pravin Gordhan. The charges were suddenly dropped on Monday in the 
face of fierce opposition. Critics suggested Zuma and his allies were 
attempting to discredit a minister who was blocking their access to lucrative 
government contracts and treasury funds. Zuma has denied any conflict with 
Gordhan.

 Public criticism of Zuma now reaches beyond his personal actions. Opponents 
are claiming South Africa’s sometimes tenuous post-apartheid grip on democracy 
is under threat and that the economy, and the common people’s welfare, are at 
risk, exemplified by high youth unemployment.

 The Gupta affair has rattled markets in Africa’s most industrialised economy, 
which is stagnating and faces possible ratings downgrades. Zuma and the ANC are 
meanwhile under attack from all sides, including the opposition Democratic 
Alliance, church leaders, party rebels, the media and online petitioners.

 The Nelson Mandela Foundation charity warned on Tuesday that the “wheels 
[are] coming off” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/nelson-mandela-foundation-jacob-zuma-south-africa>
 South Africa, while business groups and CEOs have called for new political 
leadership.

 At a rally in Pretoria on Wednesday 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/politics/2016/11/02/The-leading-figures-supporting-the-Save-South-Africa-protest?src=ilaw>
, speakers from the Save South Africa coalition accused the ANC government of 
presiding over rampant corruption and called on Zuma to quit.

'Wheels coming off' Zuma's South Africa, says Nelson Mandela Foundation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/nelson-mandela-foundation-jacob-zuma-south-africa>
 Cheryl Carolus 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/politics/2016/06/13/Cheryl-Carolus-Zuma-has-lost-it>
, a former ANC luminary and respected anti-apartheid activist, said the country 
was in crisis and younger generations were being betrayed. “We have reached a 
point where we feel that the people of this country, including us in the ANC, 
have to take a stand and draw a line in the sand,” she said.

 “We are appalled that … a small handful of people have decided that they 
would capture the state, its institutions and resources for their own benefit.”

The chief rabbi, Warren Goldstein, of the national religious leaders’ council, 
saidSouth Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> was at a 
crossroads. “There is a titanic struggle taking place,” he said. “Who is really 
sovereign in this country? Is the government elected by the people, for the 
people, exercising sovereignty on behalf of the people, or does the very 
sovereignty of this country belong to a few corrupt families and those who 
benefit from them?”

 Yet the opposition to Zuma is by no means united. Influential figures within 
the ANC are determined that he does not follow the former president Thabo Mbeki 
into involuntary early retirement, if only in order to safeguard their own 
interests. Others may wish to jettison him for the same reasons. There are also 
ideological divisions.

 Julius Malema, the former ANC youth wing firebrand who leads the Economic 
Freedom Fighters,condemned the Save South Africa movement 
<http://www.iol.co.za/news/politics/malema-shoots-down-save-south-africa-movement-2086039>
 as representatives of “white monopoly capital”. He added: “They must not think 
we are friends. We will never be friends.”

 If he is to survive, Zuma must hope his many critics dislike each other more 
than they dislike him.
 