
Three days ago, James Comey was one of Donald Trump’s symbols of Washington 
corruption and a law enforcer of “the highest integrity” to Hillary Clinton’s 
campaign. On Sunday, the FBI director was the most controversial figure in the 
capital, heroic to Trump,irresponsible to Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-fbi-director-comey-emails>
 and puzzling to nearly everyone.

Comey has a long history of trying to walk political tightropes, to varying 
success, dating to the earliest days of his career.

Clinton and Trump camps duel over FBI director's late email revelation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-fbi-director-comey-emails>
Comey, a career prosecutor who grew up in New Jersey and studied religion and 
chemistry, had his first brush with a high-profile investigation came in 1996, 
after a stint with the US attorney for New York. That year, he joined a Senate 
investigation into Bill and Hillary Clinton’s real estate investments, named 
Whitewater after a failed venture they joined.

He remained in the background of an investigation that ultimately petered out, 
but Comey soon joined two prestigious prosecutor’s offices, in eastern Virginia 
and Manhattan, where he pursued high-profile cases againstidentity thieves 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/11/26/nyregion/identity-ring-said-to-victimize-30000.html?pagewanted=all>
, a topCredit Suisse banker 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/13/business/top-technology-banker-indicted-on-obstruction.html>
 andMartha Stewart 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/06/05/business/prosecuting-martha-stewart-overview-martha-stewart-indicted-us-obstruction.html>
.

In 2003, he was named deputy attorney general in the administration of George 
W Bush, becoming a dissenting voice against surveillance programs of the 
National Security Agencyrevealed in 2005 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/12/16/politics/bush-lets-us-spy-on-callers-without-courts.html>
 by the New York Times.

Comey later testified to Congress that one night in March 2004, with attorney 
general John Ashcroft hospitalized for an emergency procedure, he raced to the 
sickbed to prevent the renewal of warrantless wiretapping programs which the 
justice department had determined were illegal.

Comey arrived just before Bush’s top lawyer and chief of staff, and Ashcroft 
did not sign the renewal. “I was angry,” Comeytold the Senate 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/05/15/AR2007051500864.html>
 in 2007. “I thought I just witnessed an effort to take advantage of a very 
sick man, who did not have the powers of the attorney general because they had 
been transferred to me. That night was probably the most difficult night of my 
professional life.”

The next day, Bush modified the wiretapping program.

In those hearings, about possible misconduct by the White House chief counsel 
and, ironically,missing emails from the Republican National Committee 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/13/washington/13emails.html>, Comey told 
Congress he felt it imperative that the justice department stand outside 
partisan politics.

“The Department of Justice, in my view, is run by political appointees of the 
president,” hetestified 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/05/07/AR2007050701299.html>
. “But once they take those jobs and run this institution, it’s very important 
in my view for that institution to be an other in American life.

“My people had to stand up before juries of all stripes, talk to sheriffs of 
all stripes, judges of all stripes. They had to be seen as the good guys, and 
not as either this administration or that administration.”

Comey left the justice department in 2005 for Lockheed Martin, the largest 
military contractor in the US, and eventually an investment firm and Columbia 
Law School. In 2013, Barack Obamanominated the registered Republican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/30/obama-james-comey-fbi-director> 
to lead the FBI, joking that the 6ft 8in prosecutor was “a man who stands very 
tall for justice and the rule of law”.

He was confirmed as the agency’s seventh director in a 93-1 vote – only 
Kentucky senator Rand Paulvoted against him 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2013/07/rand-paul-james-comey-fbi-093915>, over 
domestic drone surveillance – and quickly took on a series of controversial 
cases.

Will Hillary Clinton lose the election because of the FBI's email 
investigation?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/hillary-clinton-lose-election-fbi-email-investigation>
Though he opposed the NSA’s warrantless wiretapping, Comey has emerged as a 
steady advocate of US security agencies since the Guardianrevealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/07/nsa-phone-records-program-illegal-court>
a host of programs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/nov/01/snowden-nsa-files-surveillance-revelations-decoded>
 in 2013, a system thatgave the FBI access  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/08/fbi-changes-privacy-rules-accessing-nsa-prism-data>
to a trove of data. Comey has repeatedly  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/17/inside-the-fbis-encryption-battle-with-apple>
argued that security agenciesshould be given tools to bypass private encryption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/17/inside-the-fbis-encryption-battle-with-apple>
, andtook the FBI to court against Apple  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/25/fbi-director-james-comey-apple-encryption-case-legal-precedent>
overunlocking the phone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/01/apple-fbi-congress-hearing-iphone-encryption-san-bernardino>
 of one of the San Bernardino terrorists.

“We’re asking Apple to take the vicious guard dog away and let us pick the 
lock,” he told Congress in March. “It’s not their job to watch out for public 
safety. That’s our job. The logic of encryption will bring us to a place in the 
not too distant future where all of our conversations and all our papers and 
effects are entirely private.”

The legal battle ended in anticlimax, as the FBI found another way into the 
iPhone. It has since said thatthe hack it used does not work  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/07/san-bernardino-iphone-hack-work-newer-models-fbi-james-comey>
on newer phone models.

Comey has walked a careful line on race and police killings. Last year he said 
it was “unacceptable” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/08/fbi-chief-says-ridiculous-guardian-washington-post-better-information-police-shootings>
 that the Guardian and Washington Post had better data on police shootings than 
the federal government, but also dipped into controversy bysuggesting a 
“Ferguson effect” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/26/fbi-director-ferguson-effect-crime-policing-james-comey>
 – named after sometimes violent protests in Ferguson, Missouri, over the 
police shooting of an unarmed black teen – may cause police officers to step 
back from their responsibilities.

Comey conceded he lacked evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/26/fbi-director-ferguson-effect-crime-policing-james-comey>
 for that claim, which led him into an unusually publicdisagreement with the 
president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/27/policing-experts-ferguson-effect-theory-exists>
, whowarned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/27/policing-experts-ferguson-effect-theory-exists>
 last year: “What we can’t do is cherry-pick data or use anecdotal evidence to 
drive policy or to feed political agendas.”

Since then, tentative research by the justice department 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/15/ferguson-effect-homicide-rates-us-crime-study>
 and a St Louis criminologisthas suggested the “Ferguson effect” is plausible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/13/ferguson-effect-real-researcher-richard-rosenfield-second-thoughts>
 as an explanation fora single-year spike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/rate-murder-fbi-increase> in 
violent crime.

The director rose to national prominence in July, when he announced the FBI’s 
findings in its investigation into whether Clinton and her staff had acted 
criminally in their use of a private email server. He concluded there wasno 
evidence of intentional wrongdoing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/05/fbi-no-charges-hillary-clinton-email-investigation>
.

Comey used a press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/05/fbi-no-charges-hillary-clinton-email-investigation>
 – itself a break from tradition and his “original sin 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/james-comey-broke-with-loretta-lynch-and-justice-department-tradition>
”, in one former official’s words – to lay out the facts at the time,correct 
several false claims by Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/hillary-clinton-email-investigation-fact-check>
, and castigate her and her staff for their “extremely careless” email 
practices. He was then called to Congress to defend his decision, which ended 
months of expensive and inconclusive Republican investigations.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ffbi-email-investigation-hillary-clinton&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton%20email%20investigation%3A%20five%20key%20revelations%20from%20the%20FBI%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ffbi-email-investigation-hillary-clinton>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clinton%20email%20investigation%3A%20five%20key%20revelations%20from%20the%20FBI%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ffbi-email-investigation-hillary-clinton&media=>
Clinton email investigation: five key revelations from the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/05/fbi-email-investigation-hillary-clinton>
“You know what would be a double standard? If she were prosecuted for gross 
negligence,” Comeytold the House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/fbi-james-comey-hillary-clinton-email-investigation>
. “No reasonable prosecutor would bring the second case in 100 years based on 
gross negligence.”

“It’s not fair to prosecute someone on these facts,” he insisted, calling the 
procedure “celebrity hunting” and adding: “One of the things I have learned in 
this case is that the secretary may not have been as sophisticated as people 
would assume.”

Asked about his voter registration, Comey said he no longer belonged to any 
party.

Kellyanne Conway: Trump fan chanting ‘Jew-S-A’ behaved in ‘deplorable’ way
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/donald-trump-rally-jew-s-a-media-kellyanne-conway>
The short letter Comey wrote to congressional leaders on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
 admits that he does not know whether new emails found on a computer belonging 
to the estranged husband of a Clinton staffer have any significance. That lack 
of information has turned attention to the director himself, who reportedly 
broke with not only precedent but advice from top justice department officials 
by going public.

An internal memo Comey sent to staff, leaked to several news organizations, 
suggests the director felt he had no choice but to act, given his testimony to 
Congress.

“I also think it would be misleading to the American people were we not to 
supplement the record,” he wrote. “At the same time, however, given that we 
don’t know the significance of this newly discovered collection of emails, I 
don’t want to create a misleading impression.

“In trying to strike that balance, in a brief letter and in the middle of an 
election season, there is significant risk of being misunderstood, but I wanted 
you to hear directly from me about it.”
 