
Trump picks Mattis for secretary of defense


Donald Trump has selected the retired marine general James Mattis to be his 
nominee for secretary of defense. Mattis has deep wells of support on Capitol 
Hill and in the military, and his appointment comes with much establishment 
hope that he will be able to rein in Trump and bureaucratically neutralize Mike 
Flynn, the president-elect’s pick for national security adviser. “But Mattis 
has enough points of policy agreement with Trump to make his integration with 
the Trump hardliners as strong a possibility,” write Spencer Ackerman and Ben 
Jacobs. The retired general – nicknamed “Mad Dog” and known for his blunt 
remarks – would need a special waiver from Congress because he has not been out 
of uniform for the requisite seven years. Trump made the announcement at an 
Ohio rally on the first day of his “thank you tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-tour-midwest-indiana-ohio-carrier-factory-jobs>
” of states that he won last month. At the rally in Cincinnati,the 
president-elect returned to his bombastic campaign style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-victory-tour-ohio-speech-hillary-clinton-media>
, bashing Hillary Clinton and the media.

Donald Trump announces James Mattis as his choice for secretary of defense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/james-mattis-secretary-of-defense-donald-trump>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbkrsEmjDGjs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbkrsEmjDGjs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbkrsEmjDGjs&media=>
Trump’s cabinet could be wealthiest ever

“Trump, a former host of reality TV show The Apprentice, is surrounding 
himself with the 1%: billionaires and millionaires, investment bankers and 
venture capitalists, Wall Street insiders and family fortune heirs, many 
educated at elite schools,” David Smith writes. Opponents warn that his choices 
won’t help fulfill Trump’s promises to working-class Americans. Meanwhile,
experts are worried about the president-elect’s potential conflicts of interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest-business-ethics-president>
. In case you missed it: the Guardian’s Nadja Popovich and Jan Diehmcreated a 
visual guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
 to explain them.

Trump’s rich pickings: president-elect’s team could be wealthiest ever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/trumps-rich-pickings-president-elects-team-could-be-wealthiest-ever>

The ‘most practical’ way for US to drop climate change commitments

The US should completely quit the United Nations forum to tackle climate 
change in order to quickly exit the Paris climate agreement, according to 
Steven Groves, a lawyer at the conservative Heritage Foundation who is part of 
Donald Trump’s transition team. Groves told the Guardian that exiting the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change would be the “most 
practical” way for the US to drop its climate change commitments. Groves was 
speaking about the Heritage Foundation’s position on the issue as he was not 
authorized to speak on behalf of the Trump transition team. Trump has promised 
to “cancel” the Paris deal, and quitting the UN forum would allow the US to 
back out of the international climate effort within a year.

Quitting UN climate change body could be Trump’s quickest exit from Paris deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/trump-break-from-paris-climate-deal-unfccc-exit>

Tyra Patterson: victim’s sister says she is innocent


Earlier this year, the Guardian examined the struggle for justice of Tyra 
Patterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/jan/14/the-injustice-system-us-prisons-tyra-patterson-michelle-lai-dayton-ohio-montgomery-county>
, an Ohio woman who has been fighting for 22 years to clear herself of a life 
sentence for murder. Patterson has always insisted that she was an innocent 
bystander in the murder of Michelle Lai, a 15-year-old girl who was shot in the 
head in 1994 in Dayton, Ohio. Now, Holly Lai Holbrook, Michelle’s sister who 
was sitting in the car just feet from her when the teenager was shot at 
point-blank range, has come forward to say that she is now convinced of 
Patterson’s innocence and told police officers at the crime scene that 
Patterson had nothing to do with her sister’s killing. She has petitioned 
Ohio’s governor, John Kasich, to use his clemency powers to free Patterson.

Tyra Patterson is in prison for murder – now victim’s sister says she is 
innocent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/tyra-patterson-murder-case-ohio-prison-release-letter-john-kasich>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftyra-patterson-ohio-prison-holly-lai-letter-release-john-kasich&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Release%20her%20now'%3A%20John%20Kasich%20urged%20to%20free%20Tyra%20Patterson%20by%20victim's%20family%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftyra-patterson-ohio-prison-holly-lai-letter-release-john-kasich>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Release%20her%20now%27%3A%20John%20Kasich%20urged%20to%20free%20Tyra%20Patterson%20by%20victim%27s%20family%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftyra-patterson-ohio-prison-holly-lai-letter-release-john-kasich&media=>
‘Release her now’: John Kasich urged to free Tyra Patterson by victim’s family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/02/tyra-patterson-ohio-prison-holly-lai-letter-release-john-kasich>
Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

MDMA approved for final trials to treat PTSD

The US Food and Drug Administration has approved phase three trials of MDMA to 
treat post-traumatic stress disorder, the final phase of validation requiredto 
turn the party drug into a legal medicine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/16/mdma-ptsd-therapy-trauma-maps-medical-study>
. The treatment involves giving patients the drug just three times – once a 
month – during long talking therapy sessions, interspersed with weekly sessions 
without the drug. Early trials of the drug have shown encouraging results for 
patients with treatment-resistant PTSD.

MDMA approved for final trials to treat PTSD before possible legalization 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/01/fda-mdma-ptsd-final-trials>

Fake news becoming a global problem

Fake news online has been dominating discussions after the US election – but 
it’s also having an effect in countries around the world. Guardian 
correspondents examine the impact of fake news in Germany, France, Myanmar, 
China, Brazil, Australia and India.

Fake news: an insidious trend that’s fast becoming a global problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>

François Hollande will not seek re-election

Hollande, the least popular French president since the second world war, has 
announced he will not run for a second term in office. The Socialist president 
appeared shaken and emotional as he said in a live televised address from the 
Élysée palace that he would not attempt to run for a second term, conscious of 
the “risks” to the French left if he did so. His satisfaction rating recently 
dropped to just 4%.

François Hollande will not seek re-election as president of France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/francois-hollande-not-seek-second-term-president-france>

Isis recruiters targeting refugees in Europe, experts say

Islamic State recruiters are targeting vulnerable refugees in Europe to 
radicalize them in an effort to further polarize the European Union population, 
Europol, the law enforcement agency of the European Union, has said.

Isis recruiters targeting refugees in Europe, say counter-terror experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/02/islamic-state-recruiters-targeting-refugees-in-europe-counter-terror-experts-warn>

Former NFL player Joe McKnight killed 

Former NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> running back Joe McKnight 
was shot and killed in suburban New Orleans on Thursday afternoon, the 
Jefferson Parish sheriff’s office said.

Former NFL player Joe McKnight killed in reported road rage incident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/joe-mcknight-killed-louisiana-former-new-york-jets>

And another thing …

Struck by the legendary sniffing skills of man’s best friend, scientists 
fitted a dog-inspired plastic nose to an explosives detector and reported that 
it worked 16 times better.


Bomb detector works better with fake dog nose on the end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/02/bomb-sniffer-works-better-with-fake-dog-nose-on-the-end>

 