
James Mattis

Secretary of defense 

Background

One of the most highly respected military officers of his generation goes 
before the Senate on Thursday facing questions about the constitutional 
propriety of his holding the most important post in the US defense 
establishment.

There is little Senate opposition to the recently retired marine general James 
Mattis becoming secretary of defense; both Democrats and Republicans unsettled 
by Donald Trump’s inclinations on national security consider Mattis to be a
familiar and stabilizing factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/reagan-republicans-defense-foreign-policy-trump>
.

But “Mad Dog” Mattis retired from the Marine Corps in 2013, meaning he falls 
well short of having notched up the required seven years out of uniform before 
a member of the military can run the Pentagon – a requirement that underpins 
the subordination of the military to civilian control enshrined in the 
constitution. While none in Congress see a coup on the horizon, defense 
analysts have long warned of a gradual erosion of civilian control and 
depoliticization, chiefly around both parties’ increasing habit of signing up 
retired military support for their presidential candidates every four years.

That concern was sufficiently intense to prompt the Senate armed services 
committee, before which Mattis will testify on Thursday, to hold a separate 
hearing on Tuesday on civilian control. The top Democrat on the committee, Jack 
Reed, himself an army veteran, expressed alarm that confirming Mattis would set 
a precedent damaging “an essential tenet of our civil and military relations”. 
John McCain, the Arizona Republican and Trump critic who chairs the committee, 
agreed “civilians have the final say” but said he considered Mattis an 
“exceptional public servant” who would merit an exemption.

McCain’s assessment of Mattis is widely shared in US defense circles. The 
retired general with the call sign “Chaos” has been a fixture of the post-9/11 
era, leading marines in combat in Afghanistan and repeatedly in Iraq; 
co-captaining a seminal revision of the army/Marine Corps counterinsurgency 
field manual; and running US Central Command, which for 16 years has supervised 
US wars, airstrikes and raids throughout the Middle East and South Asia.

Along the way, Mattis acquired a reputation for extreme studiousness as well 
as a bellicosity that saw him fall out of step with Barack Obama on Iran, 
something encapsulated by another of his nicknames: the Warrior Monk.

Mattis’ ascension is hardly guaranteed. According to a congressional aide, the 
Trump transition team scotched his scheduled appearance Thursday afternoon 
before the House armed services committee, a hearing designed to convince 
legislators to approve the waiver. The waiver vote is likely to occur Thursday 
despite Mattis’ cancellation.

Outside of the civilian-control issue, Mattis is likely to face a variety of 
questioning from senators seeking to understand how he would run the Pentagon.

Key points to watch for

 * Iran. Mattis advocated aggressive responses to Iran while at Central 
Command that the Obama White House feared would result in escalation. With 
Trump having threatened to shoot Iranian naval vesselsout of the water 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/09/09/politics/donald-trump-iran/>, Mattis’s approach 
to Iran is a critical test of the theory that he would restrain the incoming 
president.

 * Syria. Mattis in the past advocated US military pressure on the Syrian 
strongman Bashar al-Assad <https://www.wired.com/2012/03/mattis-syria/> as a 
means to check Iran, one of Assad’s patrons, while Trump has signaled an 
inclination toleave Syria to Assad 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/trump-assad-iran-and-russia-are-the-only-partners-i-see-in-syria_us_57fb0087e4b0e655eab57d13?jde>
.

 * Torture. Mattis told Trump to back away from enthusiasm for torture, saying 
he could better elicit information with cigarettes and beer than with 
waterboarding.

 * F-35. Trump has criticized the Pentagon’s top acquisition priority, a 
hugely expensive and advanced, stealthy, multipurpose combat jet that three US 
military services and key US allies, including the UK, are purchasing. A 
Democratic senator on the armed services committee, Richard Blumenthal of 
Connecticut, said after meeting Mattis that the defense nominee wascommitted to 
the program 
<http://www.courant.com/politics/capitol-watch/hc-blumenthal-meets-james-mattis-story.html>
.

 * China. Trump has angered Beijing by speaking with the Taiwanese president 
and threatening high tariffs on Chinese goods. Mattis has had relatively little 
experience with China, and in 2015 Senatetestimony 
<http://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Mattis_01-27-15.pdf> called 
for a “parallel” policy of positive relations and “counterbalanc[ing]” 
Beijing’s naval buildup in the South China Sea.
 