Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4E8xsFTXGRQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4E8xsFTXGRQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4E8xsFTXGRQ&media=>
 Video:watch James Franco’s gooey Della Robbia interpretation for Sotheby’s 
<https://youtu.be/4E8xsFTXGRQ> 
A new video by “artist” James Franco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/james-franco> purports to interpret and 
modernise the Renaissance art of the Della Robbia family, by pouring 
transparent gel over models’ understandably grimacing faces. It is not just 
worthless in itself, but exposes the bankruptcy of the 21st-century cliche that 
you can set the art of today confidently beside the art of the past in a way 
that somehow liberates it from the dust of museums.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fjames-franco-sothebys-commission-glazed-della-robbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa575a3f47ca84c9548d5c0fc93f68262460f44d6%2F376_63_1455_1895%2F1455.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Franco's%20lubed-up%20riff%20on%20Renaissance%20art%20is%20an%20embarrassment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fjames-franco-sothebys-commission-glazed-della-robbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Franco%27s%20lubed-up%20riff%20on%20Renaissance%20art%20is%20an%20embarrassment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fjames-franco-sothebys-commission-glazed-della-robbia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa575a3f47ca84c9548d5c0fc93f68262460f44d6%2F376_63_1455_1895%2F1455.jpg>
 James Franco. Photograph: Getty Images 
Sotheby’s commissioned Franco 
<https://news.artnet.com/art-world/james-franco-sothebys-video-716699>, an 
actor who has convinced himself he is a great artist, to create his Della 
Robbia video to promote – sorry, “respond” to – its New York exhibitionGlazed: 
The Legacy of The Della Robbia 
<http://www.sothebys.com/en/auctions/2016/glazed-the-legacy-of-the-della-robbia-n09570.html>
.


Franco takes the idea that contemporary artists have something important, or 
at least cool, to say about the Renaissance, and trashes it. His video is 
desperate – a ludicrously overstrained attempt to sexualise and sensationalise 
something he obviously does not find at all interesting in its own right. As 
slimy wet cold stuff pours over flesh, Franco begs us to see the glamour of 
glazed ceramics. But in reality it is far easier for most people to see the 
merit of the Della Robbia dynasty than it is to comprehend the value of cheap 
performance art with lashings of erotic gel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fjames-franco-sothebys-commission-glazed-della-robbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fade9666e803871c36cf18dce65ba88d6974a23%2F231_95_884_530%2F884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Franco's%20lubed-up%20riff%20on%20Renaissance%20art%20is%20an%20embarrassment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fjames-franco-sothebys-commission-glazed-della-robbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Franco%27s%20lubed-up%20riff%20on%20Renaissance%20art%20is%20an%20embarrassment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fjames-franco-sothebys-commission-glazed-della-robbia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fade9666e803871c36cf18dce65ba88d6974a23%2F231_95_884_530%2F884.jpg>
 Slicked up … a scene from James Franco’s video work. Photograph: James 
Franco/Sotheby’s 
The Della Robbias churned out bright and breezy reliefs … pure and pretty, 
full of life and humanity

The Della Robbia style is charming, colourful and accessible. This talented 
family were the popular artists of 15th-century Florence. They made art to 
delight the innocent eye. While other Florentine artists were revolutionising 
painting and sculpture, they hit ona lovely method 
<http://www.mfa.org/exhibitions/della-robbia> of covering terracotta with 
coloured glazes and stuck to it to churn out bright and breezy reliefs of the 
Nativity, decorative crests and garlands and fruits. Perhaps their most sublime 
creations are Andrea della Robbia’sswaddled babies 
<http://www.paradoxplace.com/Perspectives/Italian%20Images/Montages/Firenze/Foundling%20Hospital/Foundling_Hospital.htm>
 flying in blue roundels on the front of the Hospital of the Innocents in 
Florence. This family’s art is both pure and pretty, full of life and humanity. 
Does anyone need to see models coated in slime to recognise its appeal?

Yet it’s unfair to blame Franco alone for his pointless intervention. 
Sotheby’s commissioned it, along with a monochrome poster that says GLAZED in a 
chic modern way. It looks as if they are anxious that art collectors don’t get 
the point of art from 500 years ago unless it is slicked up and made “new”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fjames-franco-sothebys-commission-glazed-della-robbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb0a0876a2065bd39696a33877cf4543ecc27abf%2F177_97_875_525%2F875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Franco's%20lubed-up%20riff%20on%20Renaissance%20art%20is%20an%20embarrassment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fjames-franco-sothebys-commission-glazed-della-robbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Franco%27s%20lubed-up%20riff%20on%20Renaissance%20art%20is%20an%20embarrassment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fjames-franco-sothebys-commission-glazed-della-robbia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb0a0876a2065bd39696a33877cf4543ecc27abf%2F177_97_875_525%2F875.jpg>
 Wreathed in shame... another still from Franco’s video. Photograph: James 
Franco/Sotheby’s 
This is just another of today’s often glib and frankly silly attempts to sex 
up art history. Even London’s National Gallery succumbed to the same insecurity 
when it got Jamie xx and other cool names to create“soundscapes” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/06/soundscapes-national-gallery-review-pointless-soundtracks-jamie-xx>
 for its paintings. The Royal Academy felt it needed Jenny Saville tospice up 
Rubens 
<http://www.apollo-magazine.com/jenny-saville-rethinks-rubenesque-royal-academy/>
, Versailles has brought in contemporary artists from Jeff Koons to Anish 
Kapoor toenliven 
<http://en.chateauversailles.fr/news-/events/exhibitions/kapoor-versailles> 
this monument to French classicism, and you’ll be lucky to visit Pompeii 
without seeing sometruly awful modern art 
<http://www.continiartuk.com/igor-mitoraj-exhibit-ancient-site-pompeii/> among 
the ancient wonders.

James Franco's gay porn drama: 'He loves his scandalous stories'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/21/james-franco-king-cobra-justin-kelly-brent-corrigan>
Perhaps even more clearly than the Della Robbia, the case of Pompeii 
illustrates the redundancy of a lot of contemporary “interventions” in history. 
Pompeii’s frescoes and frozen bodies fascinate visitors. Who needs modern art 
to make this place more interesting?

Curators and the press often assume that people are idiots. In reality, great 
art finds its own audience, and bad art just gets in the way. And a lot of art 
today is bad, not because there are no talented artists around, but because in 
its drive for novelty, the art world has abolished quality control. Allowing 
James Franco to desecrate the Renaissance reveals how pathetic we look beside 
the cultural heights of history.
 