
Donald Trump’s proposed new point man on the Middle East peace process, his 
36-year-old son-in-lawJared Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jared-kushner>, is almost unknown to 
Israeli business and political figures and an even greater mystery to 
Palestinians, as well as a diplomatic neophyte.

Trump’s insistence on pushing the untried Kushner into such an important and 
difficult role comes at a historic low point in the moribund peace process.

Trump has claimed in interviews that Kushner could succeed where other more 
experienced peace negotiators have failed. He has said Kushner, the husband of 
Ivanka Trump and an Orthodox Jew who is the grandson of Holocaust survivors, 
“knows the region, knows the people, knows the players”.

Related: Trump names son-in-law Jared Kushner as senior adviser, testing 
anti-nepotism law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jared-kushner-senior-adviser-donald-trump>

But the reality appears to be somewhat different. It has emerged that the only 
previous encounter Kushner – who was raised in a family that owes its wealth to 
real estate speculation – has had with Israel’s prime minister was when he was 
a child and Benjamin Netanyahu visited his father.

Indeed, Kushner’s only other significant contact with a senior Israeli 
politician before last year appears to have been with the mayor of Jerusalem, 
Nir Barkat. Kushner does, however, appear to be familiar with wealthy rightwing 
US Jewish figures who backIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.

Kushner’s views on the issue are believed to be reflected in his contribution 
to a speech Trump delivered to a pro-Israel lobby group, the American Israel 
Public Affairs Committee, in the spring. It included a promise to challenge 
Iran and to move the US embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.

Despite Trump’s enthusiasm for Kushner, he will have to navigate a US 
anti-nepotism law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jared-kushner-senior-adviser-donald-trump>
 that states a public official “may not appoint, employ, promote, advance, or 
advocate for appointment … any individual who is a relative of the public 
official”.

Amid a highly uncharacteristic silence from senior Israeli political figures 
over Trump’s repeated insistence that Kushner will be at the helm of US Middle 
East policy, Trump himself appears to have struggled in recent interviews to 
explain why he thinks Kushner is qualified for the job, besides the fact he 
likes him.

“You know what? Jared is such a good lad, he will secure an Israel deal which 
no one else has managed to get,” Trump told the German magazine Bild on Monday. 
“You know, he’s a natural talent, he is the top, he is a natural talent. You 
know what I’m talking about – a natural talent. He has an innate ability to 
make deals, everyone likes him.”

Trump refused to be drawn on whether he would go ahead with his threat to move 
the US embassy to Jerusalem. “I’m not going to comment on that. But we’ll see,” 
he said.

Trump’s embrace of Kushner seems to reflect an observation by the veteran US 
diplomat Henry Kissinger: namely, that such decisions are not always driven by 
logic. “Every president I’ve ever known has one or two people he intuitively 
and structurally trusts,” Kissinger told ­Forbes magazine. “Jared might be that 
person.”

Kushner’s long-mooted role has been welcomed behind the scenes by the 
Netanyahu government. “What we know, he’s a really tough, smart guy, and we 
hope he will bring new energy to our region,” Israel’s defence minister, 
Avigdor Lieberman, said of Kushner last month.

Related: Donald Trump's first UK post-election interview: Brexit a 'great 
thing' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>

Ron Dermer, Israel’s abrasive ambassador to the US, has also previously 
welcomed a role in the region for Kushner. “There’s no question that he feels a 
strong commitment to Israel’s security and Israel’s future,” he said.

Although Kushner is credited with guiding Trump’s thinking on the 
Israel-Palestine issue, pushing the incoming administration towards a more 
avowedly rightwing pro-Israel position, observers have been at a loss to 
pinpoint any direct experience of the issue, suggesting that if appointed he 
will have to learn quickly.

Palestinian officials, deeply concerned over the Kushner family’s links to a 
far-right Jewish settlement, told the Guardian that they had been told several 
weeks ago that Kushner was calling “the shots on the issue”, including over the 
embassy move.

Reflecting on Kushner’s lack of immediate experience, the veteran US Middle 
East peace negotiator Dennis Ross told the Jerusalem Post last week that 
Kushner would need to be a quick learner.

“People I know who know him describe him as smart, as someone who will clearly 
learn what he needs to learn and will approach things thoughtfully, carefully, 
even analytically,” Ross said. “So those would all be descriptors that I would 
hope would be accurate and emblematic of how he’ll approach his 
responsibilities helping the new president.”
 