
Oh Jason Roy! Oh Calcutta! This is where England’s gloriously instinctive 
opening batsman will be heading after playing his highest, most significant and 
most brilliant innings in international T20 cricket. His barnstorming 78 
enabled England to charge to a seven-wicket win over New Zealand with 17 balls 
to spare in theWorld Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> 
semi-final in Delhi. No one anticipated it could be that easy.

Carefree Jason Roy promises England will continue to play natural game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/30/jason-roy-england-world-twenty20-final-new-zealand>
The 154 target set by New Zealand may have been modest owing to some highly 
disciplined bowling and fielding at the end but New Zealand had defended three 
lower totals earlier in the competition. And although the pitch was true and 
firm, this was not Mumbai, so there was tension aplenty among England 
supporters.

It did not seem to permeate through to Roy. Out he came alongside Alex Hales 
and he hit four fours from Corey Anderson’s first over. There were two 
exquisite cut shots, two merry edges, inside and out, and they gave an early 
hint this was going to be England’s night.

Adam Milne charged in and bowled the fastest balls of the tournament. Another 
rasping square cut from Roy was the response; then Milne foolishly experimented 
with a slower bouncer. Roy stood up and flogged the ball back over the bowler’s 
head for six. Soon Kane Williamson had to turn to his match-winner in previous 
games, Mitchell Santner, a gifted, greenhorn left-arm spinner. Roy shimmied to 
the leg side and smashed the ball straight for another boundary; next ball 
Santner compensated too much so Roy could sweep a simple leg-side four. It 
would not be quite so easy for New Zealand to induce panic on this surface.

After the powerplay England were 67 without loss. Why bother to change tack? 
Well, they did not until Hales, who has had to get used to playing second 
fiddle alongside Roy, holed out to long-on against Santner. Out came Joe Root, 
who decided to bat with some good old-fashioned northern common sense.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fengland-new-zealand-world-t20-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F676704c207628ed6565a3d32e36484a25e4745e4%2F0_0_3552_2131%2F3552.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jason%20Roy%20batters%20New%20Zealand%20and%20carries%20England%20to%20World%20T20%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fengland-new-zealand-world-t20-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jason%20Roy%20batters%20New%20Zealand%20and%20carries%20England%20to%20World%20T20%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fengland-new-zealand-world-t20-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F676704c207628ed6565a3d32e36484a25e4745e4%2F0_0_3552_2131%2F3552.jpg>
 Jason Roy hits out during his belligerent innings for England against New 
Zealand in their World T20 semi-final. Photograph: Matthew Lewis-IDI/IDI via 
Getty Images 
Admittedly there were one or two tremors when Ish Sodhi, the wrist spinner, 
snatched two wickets in two balls. Roy fell first after getting into a rare 
tangle down the pitch before being bowled. He had played in a manner 
reminiscent of Virender Sehwag so it was not so surprising he should be given a 
rapturous reception. Sehwag would have been proud of this gem of 44 balls, 11 
of them were hit for four, two for six. How did he do that? “I just went out 
there and gave it a crack,” was his response, confirming the benefit of not 
over-complicating the process.

World Twenty20 semi-final: England defeat New Zealand – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/mar/30/world-twenty20-semi-final-england-defeat-new-zealand-in-pictures>
Eoin Morgan prodded forward and was palpably lbw, his second golden duck in 
Delhi. Root and Jos Buttler advanced in sensible mode until Buttler allowed 
himself the luxury of three mighty sixes to finish it all off. England had 
delivered the almost perfect game.

The toss was unnecessary. Morgan opted to bowl; Williamson would have batted, 
which had been his preference in every game in the group stages. As anticipated 
New Zealand had Martin Guptill and Milne back in their XI; England kept the 
same side.

Guptill did not hang around; he smashed the first ball of the match from David 
Willey over cover for four; he smote two more boundaries and then edged to the 
wicketkeeper, a source of considerable relief to the England bowlers since 
Guptill has tormented them frequently in the past.

Williamson was more discreet alongside Colin Munro in a 75-run partnership 
until he miscued an atypical smear off Moeen Ali that went up in the air. 
Moeen, running back, was grateful to cling on to the ball. Munro caused some 
havoc. He is notionally a left-hander, more in the mould of Lance Klusener than 
David Gower. He thumps the ball rather than caresses it and one could argue he 
is better when batting right-handed. Sometimes when he switches he seems to hit 
the ball further; he carted a blameless delivery from Adil Rashid way over what 
was once the off-side boundary.

When Munro was out in the second ball of the 14th over New Zealand were 107 
for three and on course for the 175 target they would have been looking for but 
England produced their best out-cricket of the tournament. Chris Jordan and Ben 
Stokes, not always the most reliable pair of bowlers, were magnificently to the 
fore.

England beat New Zealand to qualify for World Twenty20 final – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/30/england-v-new-zealand-world-twenty20-semi-final-cricket-score-live>
The yorker was their most potent weapon, though not their exclusive one. After 
Ross Taylor was spectacularly caught at extra cover off Jordan by the diving 
Morgan, the New Zealand batsmen were neutered by Stokes. Soon the bowler was on 
a hat-trick as Luke Ronchi and the dangerous Anderson were caught on the 
straight boundary off low full-tosses; Santner shortly perished in a similar 
manner. In their last four overs New Zealand mustered 20 for five, way below 
their expectations.

Admittedly this surface is not so terrifying to bowlers as the one England 
experienced in Mumbai but here was evidence of how rapidly their pacemen, in 
particular, have advanced during the tournament. Jordan kept landing the ball 
in the popping crease at pace; Stokes confirmed how much he relishes being 
given responsibility. Out puffs the chest and he gives it a crack. As does Roy.
 