
Two weeks after she polled even with the dead gorilla Harambe in a survey 
<http://www.publicpolicypolling.com/pdf/2015/PPP_Release_TX_81616.pdf> of Texas 
voters,Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/05/green-party-convention-jill-stein-bernie-or-bust-clinton>
 said on Sunday that the primate’s killing by Cincinnati zookeepers in May was 
a reminder to speak up for those who cannot.

Libertarian Gary Johnson: crazy election cycle means 'I might be next 
president'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/28/libertarian-gary-johnson-president>
“The killing of Harambe 3 months ago today reminds us to be a voice for the 
voiceless,” Steintweeted 
<https://twitter.com/DrJillStein/status/769972901428748289>, with a link to a 
statement she originally issued in early June.

The statement 
<https://amthirdpartyreport.com/2016/06/01/statement-by-jill-stein-for-president-on-the-killing-of-harambe-in-cincinnati/>
 called for “protections for the rights of animals”. The Stein campaign did not 
immediately reply to a request for elaboration on Sunday’s tweet.

Harambe, a 17-year-old silverback gorilla, was shot dead after grabbing a 
three-year-old boy who had climbed into its enclosure anddragging him through a 
moat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jun/01/gorilla-drags-boy-through-water-cincinnati-zoo-video>
.

The episode has inspired a circus of online activity – Harambe is a meme 
<http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/harambe-the-gorilla> – that grew so intense last 
week that the Cincinnati zoo asked people to stop talking about the incident.

“We are not amused by the memes, petitions and signs about Harambe,” director 
Thane Maynard said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/harambe-gorilla-cincinnati-zoo-jokes-memes>
. “Our zoo family is still healing and the constant mention of Harambe makes 
moving forward more difficult for us.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fgorilla-drags-boy-through-water-cincinnati-zoo-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gorilla%20drags%20boy%20through%20water%20at%20Cincinnati%20zoo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fgorilla-drags-boy-through-water-cincinnati-zoo-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gorilla%20drags%20boy%20through%20water%20at%20Cincinnati%20zoo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fgorilla-drags-boy-through-water-cincinnati-zoo-video&media=>
Gorilla drags boy through water at Cincinnati zoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jun/01/gorilla-drags-boy-through-water-cincinnati-zoo-video>
This week, the zoo deactivated its social media accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/23/cincinnati-zoo-twitter-facebook-harambe>
. Maynard’s own Twitter account was previouslyhacked 
<http://www.wcpo.com/news/local-news/hamilton-county/cincinnati/cincinnati-zoo-director-thane-maynards-twitter-account-hacked>
 and filled with messages about Harambe.

Stein and Harambe attracted an equal share of support, 2%, from likely Texas 
voters surveyed on their opinions of the presidential contest between 12 and 14 
August byPublic Policy Polling 
<http://www.publicpolicypolling.com/pdf/2015/PPP_Release_TX_81616.pdf>. A 
RealClearPoliticspolling average has 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/general_election_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-5952.html>
 Stein’s national support at 3.3%.
 