
On the heels of a legal victory in Michigan over the weekend, the Green party 
presidential nominee,Jill Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jill-stein>
, continued her campaign to recount presidential ballots in key swing states at 
a press conference outside Trump Tower on Monday.

“We’re here today to stand up for a vote that is accurate, secure, fair and 
just, in which every vote counts,” Stein said. The 2016 candidate has raised 
more than $7m to fund recounts in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin, three 
states in which Donald Trump narrowly defeatedHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> last month.

Stein’s appearance came just hours after her campaign announced a federal 
lawsuitin Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/jill-stein-pennsylvania-recount-green-party>
 to try and force a recount there. A previous state-level recount request by 
Stein’s campaign was denied after a judge ordered her campaign to post a $1m 
bond.

Trump allies fight election recount 'mayhem' across Rust Belt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/michigan-wisconsin-election-recounts-lawsuits>
“It’s clear that the fix was in against a verified vote in the state of 
Pennsylvania,” Stein said, “so we are now moving to a federal court to ask the 
court to please stand up for our constitutional right to vote.”

On Sunday in Michigan, where Trump won by a razor-thin 11,000-vote margin, the 
federal judge Mark Goldsmithruled that the state’s recount must begin Monday at 
noon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/michigan-election-recount-must-begin-at-noon-on-monday-judge-rules>
. In front of the president-elect’s Midtown Manhattan high rise, Jonathan 
Abady, one of the attorneys spearheading Stein’s recount push, called the 
decision a “major victory” on Monday.

Stein added that Goldsmith “affirmed in this decision that this recount 
advances our fundamental right to vote, election fairness and accuracy”.

During the campaign, Trump warned that the election would be rigged, and in 
his final debate against Clinton, he said that he might not accept the outcome 
of the election and would “look at it at the time”.

But since being named the victor, Trump’s tone has shifted and he has accused 
Stein of “attempting to sow doubts regarding the legitimacy of the presidential 
election” with her unprecedented multi-state recount effort – even as he 
himself has alleged thatwidespread voter fraud may have plagued the election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-scam-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton>
. Trump and his legal team have beenfighting Stein’s recount effort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-michigan-recount-objection>
.

“We are here to urge Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> that there is nothing to be 
afraid of,” Stein said Monday. “If you believe in democracy, if you believe in 
the credibility of your victory, put down your guards.”

Stein’s recount campaign has been based on a variety of accusations mostly 
tied to the idea that foreign actors may have attempted to turn the election 
through fraud and electronic hacking. So far, although many experts have
expressed concerns over the vulnerability of US voting operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/election-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton-donald-trump>
, no substantive, direct proof of widespread fraud has been discovered.

The most specific claim made by Stein on Monday involved what her campaign 
described as a preponderance of so-called undervoting in predominantly black 
Michigan precincts, which vote heavily Democratic. An unusual number of ballots 
there, according to Stein, were missing votes for president, with votes cast 
for candidates for other offices.

“It’s important that a miscount or a dismissal of votes in communities of 
color not be contributing to an erroneous outcome,” Stein said.
 