
In November and December of 2005, I was in Montreal to attend the United 
Nations Climate Change Conference – the annual meeting of countries that are 
party to theKyoto Protocol 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/kyoto-protocol>, which is aimed at 
reducing the emission of greenhouse gases. Each year, this large gathering of 
ministers, scientists, non-governmental organisations and concerned citizens is 
held in a different global city: more than 20,000 people were in attendance at 
Montreal. Although I came with full credentials from a leading US newspaper, my 
agenda was my own: I wanted to know if climate change was real.

For years, I had followed the testimony before Congress of Dr James Hansen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/hansen>, the world's pre-eminent 
climate-change scientist. However, like most Americans, I was confused. I 
didn't realise it at the time, but a systematic campaign of corporate-sponsored 
disinformation was at work sowing doubt in the collective American mind. These 
were the days beforeAl Gore's revelatory film, An Inconvenient Truth 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NXMarwAusY4>.
 Naalak Nappaaluk, Inuk elder from Kangirsujuaq, Nunavik, Canada. From When It 
Changed by Joel Sternberg 
What I heard and saw at this confence shocked me like nothing I've ever 
experienced. I live about five blocks from the former World Trade Centre andI 
was at my window as the first plane struck 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/sep/02/911-photo-thomas-hoepker-meaning>
 – but this was worse. In the opinion of nearly all the participants, not only 
was climate change occurring, it was also about to reach a tipping point and 
become irreversible.

This would mean that we would never be able to stop the ravages of climate 
change – or at least not without geoengineering solutions on a planetary scale. 
For example,Dr Paul Crutzen 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/1995/crutzen-autobio.html>
, who won the 1995 Nobel chemistry prize for his research into the hole in the 
ozone layer, has proposed a fleet of high-altitude balloons dispersing sulphur 
into the upper atmosphere. He believes this will reflect sunlight back into 
space.
 Bill Clinton, from When It Changed by Joel Sternfeld 
In Montreal, I tried to take photographs of delegates at the moment when the 
horror of what they were hearing was visible on their faces. At stake, after 
all, is the continuation of Earth as a planet fit for us to live on. No one can 
say how long the process of human extinction might take but, as it proceeds, 
the same global order will prevail that always prevails: rich nations will find 
ways to protect themselves and make themselves comfortable, while the poor 
nations and the poor people of the planet will suffer.

When I returned to New York, I spent two years researching and writing the 
text that sits alongside these pictures inWhen It Changed, my 2007 book 
inspired by the conference 
<http://www.steidlville.com/books/426-When-it-Changed.html>. At first, I pored 
over interviews we did in Montreal. Memorable among these were the words of 
Mohammad Reazuddin, minister of the environment for Bangladesh: "My voice may 
be small because I am from a small country. But those who will be washed away, 
their voices must be heard."
 Discarded headphones at the conference, from When It Changed by Joel Sternfeld
Eventually, I concluded that a fragmented text might be the best way to convey 
the urgency of the matter, simulating the transmission of news stories onold 
teletype machines <http://www.columbia.edu/cu/computinghistory/teletype.html>. 
The content spans 50 years, taking in reports of alarming scientific 
discoveries, the actions and inactions of governments and corporations, and 
Earth's ever more disastrous weather. Later, I converted the book into a DVD 
featuring my photographs of the delegates, a relentlessly scrolling version of 
the text, and – most importantly – a specially commissioned score bythe 
experimental US musician Chad Matheny 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CzftQOfrllI>, who performs as Emperor X. He 
writes songs about all sorts of things, from broken air conditioners to plate 
tectonics. <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sn3MbAoRMJ0> The music he composed 
for When It Changed is lyrical, haunting and unforgettable.

Is this "my best shoot"? That's hard to say. But I do know that nothing I've 
ever done has addressed a more desperate matter.
 