
The first major exhibition of watercolours by the Anglo-American painter John 
Singer Sargent – better known for hisswagger portraits 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_manner> of Edwardian beauties, worthies 
and rogues – will be shown at theDulwich Picture Gallery 
<http://www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk/> in London next spring.

Unlike his portraits, which often show his subjects in sombre – if expensive – 
clothing against plain dark backgrounds, his rapidly executed watercolours, 
usually made in the open air, sparkle with light and colour.

The exhibition will be co-curated by Richard Ormond, former director of the 
Maritime Museum, the great-nephew of the artist and an acknowledged expert on 
his work, who said the pictures revealed Sargent’s “zest for life and his 
pleasure in the art of painting”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjohn-singer-sargent-watercolours-dulwich-picture-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84b44e638a8dce12c63c684c468e8bbdbc8b23f4%2F0_0_8000_5502%2F8000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Singer%20Sargent's%20watercolours%20set%20for%20rare%20London%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjohn-singer-sargent-watercolours-dulwich-picture-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Singer%20Sargent%27s%20watercolours%20set%20for%20rare%20London%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjohn-singer-sargent-watercolours-dulwich-picture-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84b44e638a8dce12c63c684c468e8bbdbc8b23f4%2F0_0_8000_5502%2F8000.jpg>
 John Singer Sargent’s The Church of Santa Maria della Salute, Venice 
(c1904-09). Photograph: Catarina Gomes Ferreira/Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, 
Lisbon 
“The fluency and sensuality of his paint surfaces, and his wonderful command 
of light, never cease to astonish us. With this exhibition we hope to 
demonstrate Sargent’s mastery of the medium and the scale of his achievement.”

Ormond said Sargent had been painting in watercolour from the start, but often 
used it later in his career as an escape from his studio and the weight of his 
society portrait commissions.

How John Singer Sargent made a scene
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/30/how-john-singer-sargent-made-a-scene>
The 80 works are coming from more than 30 lenders, including a 1911 The Lady 
With the Umbrella 
<https://theartstack.com/artist/john-singer-sargent/lady-umbrella-1> – recently 
identified by Ormond’s co-curator, Elaine Kilmurray, as Sargent’s niece 
Rose-Marie Ormond, painted elegantly sprawled in a white dress in the dramatic 
cropped composition typical of his watercolours – which has never been 
exhibited in the UK before.

The pictures – which include figure paintings, landscapes and details of 
architecture – are coming from collections including the Tate, the British 
Museum, the Fitzwilliam in Cambridge, Oxford’s Ashmolean, the Museu de 
Montserrat in Barcelona, the Calouste Gulbenkian in Lisbon and the Petit Palais 
in Paris, as well as from private owners.

The exhibition at Dulwich Picture Gallery will run from 21 June until October 
8 2017, during celebrations of its 200th anniversary.
 