



John Kelly

US secretary of homeland security

Related: Jeff Sessions confirmation hearing for attorney general: the key 
points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-confirmation-hearing-news>

Background


The retired Marine Corps general is among three former senior US military 
personnel picked for cabinet-level positions in Donald Trump’s administration, 
and would be the first homeland security secretary to come from a non-civilian 
background if, as is likely, he is confirmed.

Kelly served for 45 years in the military, retiring last year as a four-star 
general and commander of the US southern command, where he held responsibility 
for all US military activities in South and Central America, including the 
controversial detention camp at Guantánamo Bay. Before this, the 66-year-old 
served as a senior assistant to Obama administration defense secretary Leon 
Panetta and completed numerous postings in the Persian Gulf war and the Iraq 
war.

Known as a straight-talking, no-nonsense pragmatist, Kelly is set to assume 
control of a department that oversees US domestic security, disaster management 
and immigration control, employing more than 240,000 people across 23 federal 
agencies, with a budget of over $40bn. The department, formed by the Bush 
administration after the September 11 attacks, will also be responsible for 
implementing some of Trump’s most controversial policy pledges, including mass 
deportations, curtailing immigration from some Muslim majority countries, and 
enhanced security at the southern border.

Key points to watch for

 * Border security: Kelly is likely to face rigorous questioning about the 
effectiveness of Trump’s hardline pledge to build a wall across the southern 
border and force the Mexican government to pay for it. Although Kelly has 
advocated a more holistic approach to stemming migration flows, including 
prioritizing economic international development goals, he has also claimed – to 
much criticism – that terrorist groups could be entering the country illegally 
through Mexico. Does he agree that the multibillion-dollar construction project 
is the most effective way to safeguard the border? 
 * Migration and religious freedom: Trump has also pledged to introduce a 
discriminatory ban on migration from Muslim majority countries and has offered 
mixed and incoherent pledges on whether to introduce a registry of Muslim 
citizens in the US. Kelly has branded himself as a proponent of religious 
freedom, but also argued Trump’s election victory was a sign the American 
people wanted to “take back sovereignty at our borders, and put a stop to 
political correctness that for too long has dictated our approach to national 
security”. Is it possible to balance the two? 
 * Immigration enforcement priorities: Trump has also pledged to deport 2-3 
million undocumented migrants that heincorrectly claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/donald-trump-deportations-undocumented-immigrants>
 are violent criminals. Kelly and the DHS would be responsible for commencing 
deportation enforcement, but little has been said about how the process will be 
enacted – so how will it work? 
Key moments from the hearing

6.37pm: Kentucky Republican senator Rand Paul, also a failed candidate for the 
2016 Republican presidential nomination, quizzed Kelly about his views on the 
department’s reported desire to build a national database of license plates, 
utilising license plate scanning technology.


Paul, an ardent libertarian, is opposed to the proposed scheme, and Kelly 
appeared to share his concerns when asked whether he preferred mass data 
collection or “traditional” information gather,Kelly said: “I would go with the 
traditional route. The scanning of the license plates I mean, there may be a 
reason, I can’t think of one right now. I’m not for the mass collection of data 
on people; I’d go the other way.”

After a little under two and half hours the confirmation hearing is adjourned. 
It remains highly likely that Kelly will sail through the nomination.

6.14pm: Newly elected California Democratic senator Kamala Harris took perhaps 
the most pointed round of questions, askingKelly about his immigration 
enforcement plans, particularly with regards to Deferred Action for Child 
Arrival (Daca) recipients, the roughly 700,000 children of undocumented 
migrants who have benefitted from Barack Obama’s executive order on immigration 
that entitled them to education and work rights.Harris asked whether Kelly 
could guarantee that information Daca recipients have provided to immigration 
authorities through their application process will not be used against them by 
law enforcement authorities with regards to deportation.

Kelly was non-committal and conceded he didn’t “know right now where the 
incoming administration is going” with regards to deportations,” adding: “I 
have not been involved in those discussions.”

After Harris pressed him further he acknowledged that “law abiding individuals 
… would probably not be at the top of the list” when it comes to deportations, 
a line in keeping with Trump’s most recent comments on deportations.

5.45pm: Kelly faced some more rigorous questioning from Michigan Democratic 
senatorGary Peters, who told the former general that there is a “great deal of 
fear” in the Muslim communities he represents following a number of 
discriminatory policy proposals made by Trump on the campaign trail.

Peters asked Kelly to commit to not using religion as “the basis of [DHS] law 
enforcement” and asked if he disagreed with Trump’s campaign pledges to 
increase surveillance in mosques and implement a database of Muslim Americans.
Kelly responded: “I don’t think it’s ever appropriate to focus on something 
like religion as the only factor, so yes sir.” Significantly,Kelly went on to 
argue that he would not be supportive of a database for non-American citizens 
present in the US. He argued his time in Iraq had taught him that community 
outreach was a significant counter-terrorism tool.

“Our success in Iraq, certainly my time in Iraq, was because I outreached with 
people across the sector of society, all of whom were Muslim, across the 
Islamic faith. Obviously the clerics, the communities, the way we won, 
certainly in my part of Iraq was we outreached to people, convinced them we 
were there for good, not evil,” he said.


5.24pm: Montana Republican senator Steve Daines continued the generally 
celebratory tenor of the hearing thus far by telling Kelly that “my family 
sleeps better knowing a four-star marine is guarding our homeland security”. 
Eliciting perhaps the most critical response of the hearing so far,Daines asks 
Kelly if he will improve DHS staffing levels at the northern border, which he 
describes as dangerously understaffed.

Kelly argued that the way to bring in new recruits was to improve morale among 
existing staff.

“What I hear mostly is, we’re not appreciated, we’re not allowed to do our 
job. We’ll take a look at that right away,” he said.

4.47pm: McCaskill began her questioning of Kelly by asking him whether he 
accepts the consensus among the US intelligence communities over Russian 
interference in the US presidential election.Kelly responded succinctly: “With 
high confidence.”

McCaskill then asked about Kelly’s understanding of the reasons behind the 
surge of illegal border crossings from central America.Kelly, demonstrating a 
more nuanced view of the surge than Trump delivered on the campaign trail, 
articulated three reasons.

“The first is that it is very unsafe, they are some of the most dangerous 
countries on the planet, unfortunately,”Kelly said. He also argued others 
coming to the US are purely economic migrants, and finally said migrants were 
“very confident” that “if they pay the money, get on the network… they will get 
into the United States”.

4.32pm: Kelly was asked almost instantly about his views on a erecting a 
border wall across the US southwest border byMcCain, who stated that “building 
a wall is not a way to prevent the flow of drugs or people across the borders” 
and argued it required a range of solutions using the “technological advantages 
we have”.

Kelly agreed with the thrust of McCain’s argument, and stated: “A physical 
barrier in and of itself will not do the job, it has to be a layered defense. 
If you were to build a wall from the Pacific to the Gulf of Mexico, you’d still 
have to back that wall up with humans patrolling.”

He argued that some of the most effective ways to ensure the integrity of the 
border were built around regional co-operation by partnering with “great 
countries”.

“I believe that the defense of the southwest border begins about 1500 miles 
south,” he said.

4.16pm: Kelly delivered a brief opening statement, paying tribute to his 
family and telling the committee he is “humbled to once again be called to 
serve”. “I have never had a problem speaking truth to power, and I firmly 
believe that those in power deserve full candor and my honest assessment and 
recommendations,” Kelly said.

4.12pm: Kelly was introduced to the committee by a group of senior 
politicians, notable for their selection from across the partisan divide. All 
of them paid tribute to Kelly’s ability to “speak truth to power”.

Arizona Republican senator John McCain said: “Those of us who have had the 
privilege of knowing General Kelly for a while, who have heard him testify 
before our committees … know that John Kelly says what he believes to be the 
truth, always, no matter the inconvenience it might cause him.”

Former US defense secretary Robert Gates, who served under both the Bush and 
Obama administrations, said: “To put it quite simply, I would trust him with my 
life. Many others, including young marines, quite literally have done so.”

Democratic senator for Delaware Tom Carper described Kelly as: “exceptionally 
well qualified leader”, and added: “He has the courage to stay out of step when 
everyone is marching in tune.”

3.56pm: The hearing into John Kelly’s nomination as homeland security 
secretary commenced with opening remarks from the homeland security and 
governmental affairs committee chair, Wisconsin Republican senatorRon Johnson, 
who described Kelly as an “extraordinary individual, a great American who has 
served faithfully and sacrificed mightily for this nation”. The committee’s 
ranking member Missouri Democratic senatorClaire McCaskill payed a similar 
tribute to the former general, and added that Kelly’s self-described strongest 
attribute of speaking truth to power is “music to my ears”.

“You will need it in your next job to speak truth to the commander in chief, 
who has used some his most extreme and divisive rhetoric about issues under the 
department of homeland security’s jurisdiction,”McCaskill said. 

 *  