
John Glenn, a former astronaut and US senator for almost quarter of a century, 
has died in Ohio aged 95.

Glenn died on Thursday afternoon at the James cancer hospital in Columbus, 
according to Hank Wilson of the John Glenn School of Public Affairs. Ohio 
governor John Kasich alsoconfirmed the news on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/JohnKasich/status/806957749133332480>. 

An Ohio State University spokesman had announced 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/07/health/john-glenn-hospitalized/index.html> on 
Wednesday that Glenn had been admitted to the hospital more than a week 
earlier. However, his illness was not disclosed and the spokesman had cautioned 
that it might not be cancer.

John Glenn – a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2016/dec/08/john-glenn-a-life-in-pictures>
Glenn became a national hero in 1962 when he became the first American to 
orbit the Earth, one year after the Soviet Union had sent their own man into 
orbit, Yuri Gagarin. Glenn was the third US astronaut in space and the first 
American in orbit, circling the Earth three times.

He received a distinguished service medal from then-president John F Kennedy 
upon his return and was greeted by millions for a ticker-tape parade in New 
York City.

“It still seems so vivid to me,” Glenn said in a 2012 interview with the 
Associated Press on the 50th anniversary of the flight. “I still can sort of 
pseudo-feel some of those same sensations I had back in those days during 
launch and all.”

Condolences came from politicians across the aisle, celebrities, Nasa 
<https://www.facebook.com/NASA/photos/a.67899501771.69169.54971236771/10154682440361772/?type=3>
 and more, reflecting a deep and widespread reverence for Glenn. 
President-elect Donald Trump called Glenn ahero 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/806970576359325696>. 

“To me he was a great American hero,” he told pool reporters on Thursday, 
adding that he had met him twice.

In a statement, president Barack Obama said the nation had lost an icon in 
Glenn.

“With John’s passing, our nation has lost an icon and Michelle and I have lost 
a friend,” the statement said. “The last of America’s first astronauts has left 
us, but propelled by their example we know that our future here on Earth 
compels us to keep reaching for the heavens. On behalf of a grateful nation, 
Godspeed, John Glenn.”

Glenn was the last survivor of the original “Mercury Seven” group of military 
test pilots selected in 1959 byNasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> 
to become America’s first astronauts.

John Glenn obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/08/john-glenn-obituary> 
Glenn was born in 1921 in the eastern Ohio town of Cambridge, and his desire 
to fly was born of a childhood obsession with airplanes.

He was a decorated combat pilot who quit college to enlist in the military 
after Pearl Harbor. He was never called up during the second world war but 
earned several medals for his service in the Korean war. He earned a reputation 
for staying on path despite heavy anti-aircraft fire, even once returning from 
a raid with 203 holes in his plane.


The Department of Defense and US Marines both tweeted condolences to Glenn: 
“The Corps lost a legend today,” the Marine Corps wrote. “Semper Fi, Sir 
<https://twitter.com/USMC/status/806962798446211073/photo/1>.” 

After the war he became a test pilot who helped develop the US navy’s newest 
fighter, the F8U Crusader.

Glenn later became a Democratic senator from Ohio in 1974 after several failed 
bids. He ended up holding office for 24 years, briefly making a run for 
president in 1984. He was the longest-serving US senator in Ohio history.

Glenn became the oldest person sent into space in 1998 when, aged 77, he 
boarded the Discovery space shuttle.

According to the Columbus Dispatch 
<http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2016/12/john-glenn/john-glenn.html>
, Glenn’s body will lie in the Ohio statehouse and a public memorial service 
will be held at Ohio State University’s Mershon auditorium. One of his last 
public appearances was at the Columbus airport, which was recently renamed for 
him.

His wife of more than 70 years, Annie, and his family were around him when he 
died, the Columbus Dispatch reported.
 