
The Republican senator John McCain on Sunday repeated his call for stronger 
sanctions against Russia and said the US could only improve itsrelations with 
Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/31/russia-hacking-malware-vermont-electric-obama>
 by taking a tough stance against President Vladimir Putin.


Trump spokesman on Russia: president-elect already getting 'wins' abroad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/donald-trump-vladimir-putin-russia-hacking-sean-spicer>
 On a tour of the Baltic states, Ukraine, and Georgia, McCain and other 
senators assured the former Soviet-dominated countries that the US would 
support them, despite Donald Trump’spraise of Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/30/donald-trump-russia-obama-sanctions>
 and expressions of doubts about Nato.

“We will strongly urge our colleagues toward more meaningful and stronger 
sanctions againstRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> because of 
their attack on the United States of America,” McCain told reporters in 
Georgia’s capital, Tbilisi.

 “I believe that we must continue to improve our relations and to understand 
that Vladimir Putin – unless we stand up to him – will continue his aggression 
and we must stand up to Vladimir Putin.”

 On Thursday, Barack Obama ordered the expulsion of 35 Russian diplomats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/29/barack-obama-sanctions-russia-election-hack>
 and imposed sanctions on two Russian intelligence agencies, over what US 
intelligence agenciesbelieve to be the hacking of US political groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/29/fbi-dhs-russian-hacking-report>
 during the election, in favour of Trump.

Trump signalled during his campaign that he might take a softer line with 
Moscow, and on Friday congratulated Putinfor not retaliating to the expulsions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
, using Twitter to say: “Great move on delay (by V. Putin) – I always knew he 
was very smart!“

 Earlier, in Kiev, McCain vowed continued US support for Ukraine, from which 
Putinannexed Crimea in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/putin-confirms-annexation-crimea-ukrainian-soldier-casualty>
 and whereconflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/ukraine-russia-fighters-donbass> 
between Ukrainian forces and pro-Russia militia has lingered.

US-Russia tensions rise as malware found at Vermont electric utility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/31/russia-hacking-malware-vermont-electric-obama>
 “I send the message from the American people – we are with you, your fight is 
our fight and we will win together,” McCain was quoted as saying by the press 
service of Petro Poroshenko, the Ukrainian president.

 “In 2017, we will defeat the invaders and send them back where they came 
from. To Vladimir Putin – you will never defeat the Ukrainian people and 
deprive them of their independence and freedom.”

 Reinforcing the idea that Congress could oppose any move by Trump to take a 
softer line on Russia, South Carolina senator Lindsey Graham, travelling with 
McCain and others, said it was time “to push back against Putin, to be a better 
friend to our allies here, including Georgia.

 “So 2017 is a year of offence and we’re going to tell our colleagues what’s 
at stake if we don’t push back.”
 