
Senator John McCain <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain>, the 
former Republican presidential nominee, has taken a swipe at Donald Trump’s 
hostility to Nato by praising the alliance’s response to the 9/11 terrorist 
attacks.

McCain also pleaded on Thursday with the next president – be it Trump or 
Democratic rival Hillary Clinton – to surround themselves with national 
security experts including David Petraeus, the wartime general who last year 
pleaded guilty to mishandling classified information.

Responding to a question from the Guardian at the Brookings Institution 
thinktank 
<http://www.brookings.edu/events/2016/05/19-national-defense-authorization-act-mccain>
 in Washington, McCain said: “As far as Mr Trump’s views are concerned, I’m not 
exactly sure what some of his views are because sometimes he makes 
contradictory statements.

“I agree with him to this extent, that our Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> allies should pay more and I’ve been 
urging all of that, all of us have, for years and years. But let’s not forget 
that after 9/11, the United States of America was attacked, Europeans weren’t 
attacked, and yet we invoked Article 5 and all those European countries came to 
our aid and sent troops to Afghanistan.”

Who supports Donald Trump? The new Republican center of gravity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/may/14/who-supports-donald-trump-the-new-republican-center-of-gravity>
The Arizona senator added: “You know, over a thousand of those Nato troops, 
non-Americans, were killed and several thousand wounded? So maybe we also ought 
to show some appreciation for what our Nato allies did for us in Afghanistan.”

Trump, the Republicans’ presumptive nominee, has previously accused Nato 
allies of “ripping off the United States” and called on them to pay back their 
share. “And if it breaks up Nato, it breaks up Nato,” he once shrugged.

His other surprise foreign policy pronouncements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/27/donald-trump-foreign-policy-speech>
 have included allowing Japan and South Korea to obtain nuclear weapons, saying 
he would have “no problem” speaking with North Korean dictator Kim Jong Un and 
predicting that he would not have a good relationship with British prime 
minister David Cameron.

These have drawn criticism, including from Republican stalwarts such as Robert 
Gates, the former defense secretary; James Baker, the ex-secretary of state; 
and Michael Hayden, the former director of the CIA. Clinton told CNN this week 
that Trump was “not qualified” to be commander in chief.

But in an ongoing effort to challenge such perceptions and gain gravitas, 
Trump this week met Henry Kissinger, the 92-year-old former secretary of state 
and joint winner of the 1973 Nobel peace prize.

On Thursday McCain said with a wry smile: “All I can say is that I understand 
Mr Trump met with Henry Kissinger. That is one meeting I am sorry I was not 
able to sit in on.”

There has been no love lost between McCain, who spent five years as a prisoner 
of war in Vietnam, and Trump sincethe latter remarked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/18/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-iowa-republicans>
: “I like people that weren’t captured.”

At the gathering in Washington, McCain could hardly have been described as a 
cheerleader for his fellow Republican, offering a fairly even-handed assessment 
of him and Clinton. “Obviously I have significant disagreements with Mr Trump 
on a number of issues. I also have some disagreements with Secretary Clinton as 
well. One of my disappointments, and I say very frankly to all my friends, is 
Secretary Clinton’s switch on the issue of TPP [Trans-Pacific Partnership]. I 
think a devastating blow to us and Asia would be failure to enact TPP.”

The senator, who lost the 2008 election to Barack Obama, continued: “Here’s my 
hope and I ask this of both candidates. I hope that you would sit down and 
bring in some of the finest military and diplomatic leaders that this country 
has ever been graced with. David Petraeus. Ryan Crocker. Jim Mattis. John 
Allen’s a great leader in Afghanistan.

“I would recommend either to Hillary Clinton or to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, call in these smart people; 
they’ve lived it for the last 15 years, some of them as junior officers and 
some of them as junior diplomats, and they can give you the advice and counsel 
you need to shape a national security strategy. That’s why one of my 
disappointments about this administration is that they haven’t called in those 
people.”

Most of McCain’s hour-long session was devoted to the 2017 National Defense 
Authorisation Act, which was approved last week by a Senate committee.He issued 
a stark warning 
<http://www.mccain.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/speeches?ID=CF9C8002-3573-43F3-87D7-A1C798F83FA1>
 of a “dangerous mismatch” between growing worldwide threats. “Each of our 
military services remains underfunded, undersized and unready to meet current 
and future threats,” he said.

Military personnel are being forced to cannibalise parts from old aircraft to 
keep combat planes flying, he added. “We are at risk of losing the military 
technological dominance that we have taken for granted for 30 years.”

McCain noted that the current military chiefs of staff, when asked to name the 
greatest security threat to America, named Russia, not Islamic State, a view 
that he agrees with. He pledged to fight for more funding on the Senate floor 
and said he would push for a reduction in the size of the White House’s 
National Security Council.

As he left the building, McCain was asked if he fully endorses Trump for the 
Republican nomination. He told the Guardian: “I support the nominee.”
 