
A few years ago a friend from New York told me that in America an acolyte of 
John McPhee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/28/john-mcphee-levels-game-more-great-sportswriting-tennis-william-fiennes>
 is known as a “McPhino”. It’s not a nice nickname, I admit – it sounds like a 
deluxe burger or a whisky cocktail. Nevertheless, I proudly state now that I 
am, have been for a dozen years, and am sure to remain for the rest of my life, 
a devoted McPhino.

The first book by McPhee I read was Oranges (1967), and it was obvious then 
that he was a writer who could juice the pulp of unpromising subject matter: a 
seven-sectioned book on, yes, oranges that brilliantly tracks the fruit’s uses 
and myths from sixth-century-BC China to the citrus barons of contemporary 
Florida. FromOranges I moved to his 1974 study of nuclear physics, The Curve of 
Binding Energy, and his investigations of intrinsic value and wise use in 
Encounters With the Archdruid (1971). It is commonplace among McPhinos to note 
that he is able to make gnarly subjects compelling; a refined version of this 
observation is that his devotion to bedizening the apparently drab is a kind of 
experimentalism. Oulipo-like, he sets himself escapological challenges – to 
write a book both expert and ardent on the shad (The Founding Fish, 2002), say, 
or the construction of traditional river craft (The Survival of the Bark Canoe, 
1975), or truck- and train-driving (Uncommon Carriers 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/uncommon-carriers.html>, 2006) – and 
consistently pulls them off.

Another of the pleasures of being a McPhino is that he has written so many 
books, on subjects so various that his work often proves apropos. While working 
onMountains of the Mind 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mountains-of-the-mind.html> in 2002, I was 
told by an American editor that I had to read what he called “the stone books” 
– by which he meant McPhee’s Pulitzer prizewinning sequence on geology and 
geologists, published in compendium form asAnnals of the Former World (1998). 
So I did, and they apprenticed me to writing about the dramas of deep time. 
When two years later I started work on the subject of wildness and wilderness, 
I found my way to the book that many people regard as McPhee’s greatest single 
classic, a book about Alaska, remoteness, the frontier myth and competing ideas 
of land use, which became a national bestseller on its publication in 1977.

Coming into the Country 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/310883/> did not come 
easily to McPhee. “When I wrote [it],” he recalled in an interview with Paris 
Review: “I was sitting up in an office I used to have in Nassau Street, this 
little room on the second floor, and I stewed like hell. My walls were covered 
in bulletin boards with three-by-five cards and maps of Alaska and everything 
else. I’d go in there and try to advance this piece. So I started thinking, if 
I ever finish this piece, I’m not going to write another word!”

He did finish the “piece”, it became a series of pieces, and then a book, and, 
of course, he went on to write millions more words besides. But to hear that 
even McPhee can “stew like hell” is both a reassurance to all writers and a 
further confirmation of the book’s achievement – because there is not a trace 
of that stew left in it. Several times in its course, McPhee refers to the 
“gin-clear” water of certain Alaskan rivers, and his prose shares an extreme 
lucidity with that water. Once you have embarked on the opening paragraphs, you 
are carried onwards by a style so clear-running that there are times you forget 
it is even present as a medium.

Coming into the Country is really three books in one: the first treating a 
river journey McPhee made in 1975 in the company of a group of men tasked with 
assessing the wilderness qualities of a river in the Brooks Range of Alaska; 
the second exploring “urban Alaska”, and the question – very much alive in the 
mid-1970s – of where the state’s capital ought to be located (kept in Juneau? 
Bestowed on Anchorage? Built afresh in a new site altogether?); and the third 
and longest a quiltwork of sketches describing the inhabitants of the small 
town of Eagle and the country around it, in the far east of the state, near to 
the Canadian border: tough people all, men most of them, former marines, 
oil-drillers, gold prospectors, fur trappers, and others who have “come into 
the country” and passed the severe test of surviving a year or two in deep 
Alaska.

McPhee is a passionate fisherman, physically tough, uncomplaining, good 
natured and very, very scared of bears

These three dissimilar parts of the whole are bound together by recurring 
preoccupations: perceptions of wilderness, the tensions between conservation 
and development, the relationship between legislation and landscape, and the 
utter apartness of Alaska – “a foreign country significantly populated with 
Americans”, as McPhee describes it (in one of the many fine one-liners that 
litter the book).

The river journey of the first section magnificently evokes this apartness. 
Though McPhee isn’t content with reductive definitions of wilderness, he is 
also alert to the awe of nature in its most raw and forceful forms. The prose 
of these early pages explores this “rugged, essentially uninvaded landscape 
covering tens of thousands of square miles – a place so vast and unpeopled that 
if anyone could figure out how to steal Italy, Alaska would be the place to 
hide it” (another fine one-liner).

McPhee’s sentences are born of patience and attention: he seems to possess a 
pair of eyes with the swivel, zoom and reach of a peregrine falcon’s, and a 
pair of ears with the recording ability of a dictaphone. He notices almost 
everything: a stand of “lovely young aspen” curved by the wind, “their leaves 
spinning like coins”, or the anatomy of grayling, fish whose “dorsal fins fan 
up to such a height that [they] are scale-model sailfish”. He calmly records 
the dynamism of Alaskan nature, as in this gorgeously paced paragraph:

Looking up from dinner, we saw a black bear, long and leggy, crossing a steep 
hillside at a slow lope. It stopped to graze for a time and then, apropos of 
nothing, suddenly ran and took a crashing leap into a stand of willow and 
alder, breaking its way through, coming out the other side on to a high plain 
of pale-green caribou moss.

It is worth pausing briefly here to reflect on McPhee’s own presence in his 
book. As a long-time staff writer at the New Yorker, discretion and a 
chameleon-like ability to fade into the background have been vital parts of his 
skillset: not for McPhee the front-and-centre yahooings of his gonzo peers (Tom 
Wolfe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tomwolfe>, Hunter S Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/huntersthompson>). In this book, though, we 
get quick glimpses of the man that gradually accrete into something like a 
portrait. He is wilderness-adept, content to keep silent, physically tough, 
quickened by nature, a passionate fisherman, uncomplaining, good-humoured, 
relishes self-reliance as a virtue in others and to a lesser extent himself, 
curates and admires male friendship, holds statistics in high regard and is 
very, very scared of bears.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fjohn-mcphee-coming-into-the-country-reissue-master-non-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436453874770%2Feef5f0cd-6013-4071-a5a4-7020a393ab64-2060x1406.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20McPhee%3A%20a%20master%20of%20non-fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fjohn-mcphee-coming-into-the-country-reissue-master-non-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20McPhee%3A%20a%20master%20of%20non-fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fjohn-mcphee-coming-into-the-country-reissue-master-non-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436453874770%2Feef5f0cd-6013-4071-a5a4-7020a393ab64-2060x1406.jpeg>
 Liquid money … the Trans-Alaska pipeline. Photograph: Orjan F Ellingvag/Corbis 
All travel writing has an origin in the notebook and the field journal. Some 
phrases ofComing into the Country seem to have been flipped so fresh from the 
moleskine that they’ve still got graphite on them. Here’s the start of an early 
section: “7am, and the water temperature is forty-four, the air fifty-six, the 
sky blue and clear – an Indian summer-morning, August 18, 1975.” Hour, 
temperature weather, month, day, year. An instant, date-stamped. It is a 
sentence unafraid of anachronism – and that is because the sentences that 
follow it are so vivid. McPhee is writing in the moment, and that makes his 
writing of the moment: to read such prose is not to step into sepia, but rather 
to be summoned into brightness.

That brightness is due in part to McPhee’s use of facts. David Remnick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-remnick> has said of McPhee that his 
non-fiction writing emulates the “freedom” of fiction but not its “license”, 
and it is evident that he is a man committed to accuracy and to metrics. He 
comes across wolf tracks pressed into river mud, “seven inches long” from heel 
to claw: an “amazing size, but there is a tape measure in my pocket and that is 
what it says”. Wolf-prints are measured, and the silt content of a glacial 
torrent is quantified: “At the height of the melting season, something near two 
hundred tons of solid material will flow past a given point on the river bank 
in one minute.”Coming into the Country carries an astonishing cargo of detail. 
There are times, it is true, when you wonder if he has so heavily freighted his 
prose that it will fail to take off. But somehow the floatplane always makes it 
over the larches at the end of the lake.

One reason for this is the lift given by the stories he tells along the way. 
At his best, I find McPhee to be as accomplished a master of the 
micro-narrative asLydia Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/lydia-davis> or
Ernest Hemingway <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ernesthemingway>. Here he 
is, in a small town close to Denali, which serves as a point of departure and 
return for mountaineers attempting that brutal summit:

I once saw a Japanese climber in Richard and Dorothy Jones’s store there, 
buying a cabbage. It was a purple cabbage and somewhat larger than his own 
head, which was purple as well, in places, from contusions and sunburn, and 
probably windburn, suffered in his bout with the mountain. On his cheek was a 
welted wound, like a split in a tomato. Leaving the store, he walked out of 
town, ate his cabbage, and slept it off in a tent.

This is an 80-word masterpiece, made vast by what it omits, and finished by 
that final perfect sentence. How, though, does McPhee know what happened to the 
climber and his cabbage? What we do know is that he does know, because he is a 
man who measures wolf prints and reports to the fiercest fact-checkers in the 
country: he must have followed up that unnamed climber’s story, and verified 
that outcome. The result is another example of whatWilliam Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/william-fiennes> – another McPhino – 
nicely calls “the golden detail rescued in unfussy language”.

A classic of tennis writing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/28/john-mcphee-levels-game-more-great-sportswriting-tennis-william-fiennes>
It is 40 years since McPhee made the canoe trip down the Salmon river in the 
Brooks Range that is described in the first section ofComing into the Country, 
“The Encircled River”. McPhee knew he was writing at a pivotal period of 
Alaskan history. In 1968 the first oil strike was made in Arctic Alaska: it was 
called “Prudhoe Bay State No 1”. In 1971 the Alaska Native Claims Settlement 
Act was passed, which “changed forever the status and much of the structure of 
native societies” and “opened the way to the Trans-Alaska Pipeline”. The first 
barrel of oil passed through the pipeline in 1977, the year McPhee’s book was 
published. Kaufmann, the wilderness-loving federal assessor who is central to 
the first section, knows that vast change is coming to the region. He speaks 
fervently in favour of locking up huge areas of wild land in Alaska “for the 
future of the future”. “It’s not sufficient just to set aside sights to see,” 
he tells McPhee in an inspiring speech, “we need whole ecosystems, whole 
ranges, whole watersheds … We’re going to have to live in close harmony with 
the Earth. There’s a lot we don’t know. We need places where we can learn how.”

“The question now,” he asks, gesturing at wild Alaska, is “what is to be the 
fate of all this land?”

Four decades on, we are in a position to offer some answers. Prudhoe Bay is 
now the largest oil field in North America, covering more than 86,000 hectares 
(212,500 acres) of Arctic Ocean coastline. The Trans-Alaska pipeline has 
shipped more than 16bn barrels of oil. The population of Alaska has almost 
doubled, to just over 730,000 people. The biggest zinc mine in the world has 
been established in the west of the Brooks Range. Climate change, brought about 
in part by the oil of the North Slope, is causing the melting of permafrost and 
the dwindling of sea ice in the Arctic Ocean. Among the consequences of the 
sea-ice loss are the opening of the Northwest Passage to shipping and new oil 
frontiers, and a calamitous reduction in the polar bear population. “As the sea 
ice goes, so go the bears,” concluded a report published in April. “We 
generally expect to lose two-thirds of the world’s [polar] bears by 
mid-century.” That said, immense realms of the Brooks Range remain uninhabited 
and undeveloped. The Salmon river down which McPhee paddled lies entirely 
within the Kobuk Valley National Park, which was itself created in 1980 by 
means of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act. The Kobuk has no 
roads leading into or through it, and is thought to be among the least visited 
national parks in North America.

Coming into the Country now reads like a combination of prophecy and elegy. It 
is a boreal classic: both memorial for, and testimony to, the awesome 
complexity of America’s “ultimate wilderness”.

• Coming into the Country 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/310883/> is reissued 
by Daunt; Robert Macfarlane is working on a film for Channel 4 about ice and 
oil in the Southern Beaufort Sea.

 * This article was amended on 13 July 2015. It originally said the Prudhoe 
Bay oil field covers more than 85,000 hectares (21,000 acres). That conversion 
should have been 212,500 acres. This has been corrected.
 