
Two senior senators called on Sunday for Washington to nearly triple military 
force levels in Iraq to 10,000 and send an equal number of troops to Syria as 
part of a multinational ground force to counterIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in both countries.


Republicans John McCain <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain> and 
Lindsey Graham criticised Barack Obama’s incremental Islamic State strategy, 
which relies on airstrikes and modest support to local ground forces in Iraq 
and Syria, and said the need for greater US involvement was underlined by this 
month’s Paris attacks.

John McCain says US is engaged in proxy war with Russia in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/04/john-mccain-russia-us-proxy-war-syria-obama-putin>
 “The only way you can destroy the caliphate is with a ground component,” said 
Graham, who isseeking his party’s presidential nomination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/16/republican-debate-lindsey-graham-jokes>
. “The aerial campaign is not turning the tide of battle.”

McCain, chairman of the Senate armed services committee, recently proposed 
intervention in Syria by a European and Arab ground force backed by 10,000US 
military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> advisers and 
trainers.

 On Sunday, he and Graham told reporters during a visit to Baghdad that US 
personnel could provide logistical and intelligence support to a proposed 
100,000-strong force from Sunni Arab countries like Egypt, Turkey and Saudi 
Arabia. Graham said special forces would also be included.

 Obama last month ordered the deployment of dozens of special operations troops
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/23/us-special-forces-to-arrive-in-syria-very-soon-as-assad-hails-russian-air-strikes>
 to northern Syria to advise opposition forces in their fight against Islamic 
State, adding to an increasingly volatile conflict in Syria.

 Russia and Iran have ramped up their military support for President Bashar 
al-Assad’s fight against rebels in Syria’s four-and-a-half year civil war, 
while the Paris attacks, in which 130 people died and hundreds were injured, 
showed how Isis has extended its reach to western cities.

 US counter-terrorism experts have warned that deploying ground troops risks 
backfiring by feeding Isis’s apocalyptic narrative that it is defending Islam 
against an assault by the west and its authoritarian Arab allies.

The US-led coalition which has been bombing Isis targets in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and Iraq for more than a year relies 
heavily on American resources despite including some 60 countries.

 McCain said it would be possible but not easy to rally Arab allies to 
contribute to the proposed ground force in Syria.

 “The question … is being asked all over the capitals of the west right now,” 
he said. “[Arab] countries for a long time have not seen what’s happening as a 
direct threat to them. Now I believe that they do.”

 The senators said removing Assad, who is backed by Russia and Iran, was key 
to getting Arab Sunni states to back the proposed ground force.

In neighbouring Iraq, where about 3,500 US troops are advising and assisting 
Iraqi forces, Graham said an increased American presence would include forward 
air controllers and aviation assets as well as special forces to carry out 
raids, like one last month which resulted in the firstUS combat death in Iraq 
since 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/24/us-soldier-killed-isis-raid-joshua-wheeler-remembered>
.


 The senators met earlier with the Iraqi prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, who 
they said had welcomed the idea of more US troops.

 “If you went up to 10,000, you’re not getting pushback from the Iraqis,” said 
Graham. “The difference between 3,500 and 10,000 is meaningless politically 
inside the country [but] militarily significant.”

 However, government spokesman Saad Hadithi said Abadi had not requested US 
combat troops on the ground but rather asked for more arms and advisers to 
increase air support for Iraqi forces. Hadithi declined to speculate about the 
number of additional personnel under discussion.

 Leading Iraqi politicians have repeatedly voiced opposition to a greater role 
for US forces, which withdrew in 2011 after a nearly nine-year war that left 
tens of thousands of Iraqis dead.

 Iranian-backed Shia Muslim militias seen as a critical bulwark in the fight 
against Isis have also resisted US involvement.

 “One reason I’d want to have more American troops is it neutralises the Shia 
militia advantage to some extent,” said Graham.
 