
John Oliver’s first post-election show gave the host a chance to implore that 
people refrain from normalizingDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> as president.

The comedian used the episode of his show Last Week Tonight with John Oliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/10/john-oliver-trump-groping-tape-last-week-tonight>
 to express his dismay and concern over the result.

Laughing through the pain: comics on how to handle a Trump presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/13/comedians-on-trump-presidency> 
“It turns out that instead of showing our daughters that they could someday be 
president, America proved that no grandpa is too racist to become leader of the 
free world,” he said. He said since Tuesday, there had been “wave after wave of 
nausea”.

He speculated on what a Trump presidency would look like, revisiting some of 
the reality TV star’s statements on the campaign trail.

“Our president-elect has, at various times, said he would bomb civilians, loot 
oil and waterboard, which isn’t a military strategy so much as the series of 
words that Donald Rumsfeld mutters so he can stay hard while he’s 
masturbating,” he said.

Oliver went on to say: “We are faced with the same questions as a guy that 
woke up the day after a Vegas bachelor party, deep in the desert, naked, tied 
to a cactus and a dead clown. Namely, how the fuck did we get here and what the 
fuck do we do now?”

He also discussed a common Republican response since the result: pundits and 
politicians telling us to give him a chance and see what happens.

“It’s like we’re on a plane and we just found out our pilot is a wombat,” he 
said. “I don’t like this, I don’t understand how it happened and I’m pretty 
sure we’re heading for disaster but what the hell, come on, batty, prove me 
wrong!”

He also believes that this can be a dangerous frame of mind to have. “Optimism 
is nice if you can swing it but you’ve got to be careful because it can feed 
into the normalization of Donald Trump, and he is not normal,” he said. “He is 
abnormal. He is a human ‘what is wrong with this picture?’”

One of Trump’s commonly used expressions was that he would “drain the swamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/19/donald-trump-on-congress-term-limits-i-will-drain-washington-swamp-video>
”, a reference to his claim that he will rid Washington of corruption and 
career politicians. But Oliver listed his projected new team, including Rudy 
Guiliani and Chris Christie, and noted the hypocrisy.

He said the government would now be “so swampy that you’re going to need to 
swap out Air Force One for one of those shallow bottomed boats with a big fan 
on the back”.


Oliver discussed the role the media has played in the election, refusing to 
call Trump out on his many lies and also the dangerous fact thatfake stories on 
Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/13/mark-zuckerberg-vows-more-action-to-tackle-fake-news-on-facebook>
 have been widely shared. “News is now one of the three things we get from 
social media,” he said. “The other two being our entire sense of self-worth and 
pictures of shaved alpacas.”

He went on to list organizations that people should be donating money to 
before Trump becomes president, from women’s rights to LGBT rights, given the 
worrying time certain groups will now face.

He also said people need to stay here and fight and again urged people not to 
consider this normal.

“A Klan-backed misogynist internet troll is going to be delivering the next 
State of the Union address,” he said. “That is not normal. That is fucked up.”
 