


One of the virtues of this England setup is that their glasses are usually 
half-full. It helps that they are young, they seem to enjoy each other’s 
company and they are winning a good proportion of their games. They are also 
keen to improve.

The latest example of this elusive outlook comes from Jos Buttler, the 
soft-spoken assassin of white-ball bowlers, whose hundred in Bloemfonteinpaved 
the way for a 39-run Duckworth-Lewis victory in the first match of the ODI 
series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/03/south-africa-england-first-odi-match-report>
.

Buttler’s century enough for England in first ODI despite De Kock blitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/03/south-africa-england-first-odi-match-report>
Buttler was back, faintly reminiscent of the young Mohammad Azharuddin in the 
manner in which he would crack another gobsmacking boundary and then stare 
sheepishly at his bootlaces for a few seconds before preparing for the next 
ball.

Buttler has had his disappointments recently. He has been dropped from the 
Test team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/31/england-jos-buttler-joe-root-pakistan>
 and for someone who has been a regular it is mighty galling to sit on the 
sidelines for six weeks while your replacement keeps shredding the opposition 
Test attack. The glass can easily seem half-empty. Very soon after that it can 
be completely empty and quite often refilled and emptied again in swift 
succession.

But not for Buttler. Speaking after striking his latest and slowest ODI 
century (it took as many as 73 balls), he could even find some benefits from 
his absence from the frontline in the Test series. “I’ve had some time not 
playing any competitive cricket, which in a way has been quite good – to be 
away from the pressures and out of the bubble of international cricket and 
having months of no one talking about you or bothering you.”

But don’t worry. Buttler is not about to imitate another gifted West 
Countryman Mark Lathwell, whoreally did abhor the limelight when given a 
glimpse of international cricket 20 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/aug/17/cricket.jonhenderson>. Buttler 
was glad to be back in the spotlight in Bloemfontein. “I was really excited 
about that game. It is really special when you haven’t played recently.”

He confided he was much more nervous than usual. “Then your first big shot 
comes off [his first damaged some roof tiles about 90 metres from the middle], 
and that settles you down and you immerse yourself in the game and the 
situation.”

There is also a more tangible silver lining on the horizon for Buttler after 
being dropped from the Test team. This weekendhe is in the Indian Premier 
League auction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/10/jos-buttler-ipl-auction-england-trevor-bayliss>
 and it will be surprising if there is not considerable competition for his 
services, with Wednesday’s century providing a handy reminder of his market 
value.

Even better, Buttler will be in that auction with the blessing of the ECB. 
Andrew Strauss in his role of cricket director is rather more enthused by the 
benefits of the IPL than when he was the captain of England. With Jonny 
Bairstow in possession of the gloves in Test cricket, Buttler can be available 
for the entireIPL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl>, which makes him a 
far more attractive proposition than most Englishmen in the past.

The Lancashire player will broaden his experience on and off the field. He 
will learn. And he will earn. We will find out how much on Saturday when 
England are playing in Port Elizabeth.

Buttler sounds more credible than most when he says: “I’ll just be focused on 
playing for England on Saturday. What happens away from that [in India] is 
outside my control. I’ll be interested to know what happens but it should be 
pretty easy to forget about it when involved in a full-blooded one-day 
international.”

However, he does concede: “It’s quite a strange feeling. You put yourself in 
the hat and see what happens. They might think I’m useless and I could be sat 
on my sofa in April.” When asked if he has a preferred team in the IPL he 
replied: “One that wins.” Trevor Bayliss, who coached the Knight Riders in 
Kolkota, will surely give Buttler a glowing reference if required.

For the moment Buttler has a pivotal role in England’s vibrant ODI side. In 
the past captains were reluctant to dabble with the batting order but on 
Wednesday Eoin Morgan told Buttler to stick his pads on around the 16th over, 
whereupon he was at the crease batting up the order at four without any time to 
think – or fret.

“When you get the promotion, you feel the expectation,” said Buttler, who 
obviously relished the extra responsibility. “The great thing in our side is 
that we have flexibility. It might be that we need a left-hander and Stokesy 
[Ben Stokes] can go in and chance his arm.” That is true but in this form of 
the game, as opposed to Test cricket, Buttler provokes even more angst among 
opposition captains.

One day Buttler, who is 25, will prevail and oh so quietly intimidate at Test 
level as well. There is no doubt about that but there is no great rush either. 
Remember that Adam Gilchrist did not make his Test debut until a week before 
his 28th birthday.
 