
Jos Buttler <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jos-buttler> is in line for a 
lucrative Indian Premier League contract after the England limited-overs 
wicketkeeper put his name forward for next month’s auction.

England’s wicketkeeper Jos Buttler will benefit from a spell on the sidelines 
| Vic Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/31/england-jos-buttler-joe-root-pakistan>
The 25-year-old was faced with a choice between starting the English summer 
playing Championship cricket for Lancashire in a bid to win his Test place back 
from Jonny Bairstow or furthering hisTwenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> experience in India.

After the head coach, Trevor Bayliss, gave his blessing last week Buttler’s 
name will go under the hammer on 8 February; Mumbai Indians, Sunrisers 
Hyderabad and Kolkata Knight Riders are among the franchises known to be 
interested in his services.

The IPL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> season runs from 8 April until 
the final on 24 May. The Test opener Alex Hales is still considering whether to 
put his name forward after Mumbai, the team he had a brief spell with last 
year, opted not to retain him in their squad.

The deadline to register for the auction is this Friday. Bayliss and the 
director of cricket, Andrew Strauss, are keen for one-day players not in the 
Test side to further their experience in overseas Twenty20 leagues and the 
England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board is 
considering specialist contracts for white-ball players that would allow them 
greater freedom to do so and see their counties compensated properly.

Meanwhile, the former England spinner Robert Croft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/12/glamorgan-kent-county-championship>
 is set to join Bayliss’s coaching setup for the one-day international leg of 
the tour of South Africa in a 12-day spell as a spin-bowling consultant.

Croft, on the coaching staff at Glamorgan, will work with Moeen Ali and Adil 
Rashid, while Paul Collingwood, the Durham captain who has worked as a coach 
for the limited-overs sides before, will return for the World Twenty20 in India 
in March.
 