
If Jonny Bairstow <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonny-bairstow> is 
growing tired of being asked whether he wants to continue as England’s Test 
wicketkeeper or revert to being a specialist batsman, then the man he replaced 
in the side – one who plans to mount a fresh assault on his place – can 
certainly empathise.

Jos Buttler <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jos-buttler>, now back in the 
country after 11 weeks of playing Twenty20 cricket around India, says he faced 
similar doubts over his desire to wear the gloves in the past having, like 
Bairstow, shot to prominence primarily through his exploits with a bat in hand.

It is what prompted Buttler to leave Somerset for Lancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> at the end of the 2013 season, 
when Craig Kieswetter was preferred as the club’s first choice wicketkeeper. As 
one of the country’s most dynamic and explosive talents, Buttler could have 
stuck it out as a batsman but instead decided to up sticks in order to remain 
behind the stumps.

What does Jos Buttler’s IPL deal say about cricket’s new world order? | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/11/jos-buttler-ipl-deal-cricket-england>
And so he fully understands why Bairstow, who needs only two dismissals in the 
third Test with Sri Lanka at Lord’s on Thursday to pass the English record of 
17 in a three-match series held by Geraint Jones against the same opposition in 
2006, might be a tad prickly on the subject, even if the alternative scenario 
that has been floated, one where the Yorkshireman’s astonishing batting form is 
harnessed up the order, sees Buttler back in.

“Jonny wants to be a wicketkeeper-batsman and it must be frustrating that 
people are questioning that,” Buttler told theObserver. “People need to leave 
him alone and get behind him – it’s obvious how much he wants to keep wicket 
and he’s done well. I remember those very same questions and it wasn’t until I 
moved to Lancashire people started to believe me.

“All that stuff about whether we can play in the same Test team, it’s 
irrelevant for me. He’s the man in possession. And if you have been dropped 
from the side you have to show you have improved and demand to be selected. 
That’s what he did. He made himself to impossible to ignore.”

How Buttler achieves this is complicated by the schedule. Sunday’s Royal 
London Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/royal-london-cup> fixture for 
Lancashire at home to Warwickshire continues an exclusive diet of white-ball 
cricket that began after the second Test against Pakistan in Dubai – the last 
in the whites of his country – and runs up until the end of England’s 
limited-overs series with Sri Lanka.

Given the 25-year-old’s status as England’s first-choice wicketkeeper for 
those five one-dayers and single Twenty20 where, ironically, Bairstow could 
feature as a batsman, the first County Championship fixture Buttler could play 
for Lancashire, against Durham on 16 July, comes two days after the first Test 
with Pakistan begins at Lord’s, with just one more before the series ends and 
the one-dayers start again.

Buttler does not regret his short-term career choices, however, having stayed 
on in India after the final of the World Twenty20 to play for Mumbai Indians in 
the Indian Premier League. It is a spell in which he claims to have learned “a 
lot about cricket and myself as a person”, having played 14 matches in the 
tournament and finished their third highest scorer.

As well as being blown away by the IPL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> 
experience, and having learned about coping with expectation that comes with 
having a £385,000 price tag and being one of four overseas players permitted in 
the playing XI, Buttler embraced the country as a whole, with a visit to the 
slums of Mumbai a personal highlight in an otherwise travel-heavy itinerary.

He said: “India is such an attack on your senses and is unrivalled for the 
passion surrounding cricket. But one of the best things away from playing was a 
visit to a Mumbai slum. You see people in their conditions, getting stuck into 
their way of life and not moaning, and realise how lucky you are to be doing 
what you are doing. It put things into perspective.”

While his time with Mumbai lacked one stellar knock, like the unbeaten 66 
against Sri Lanka that sealed England’s semi-final place in the World Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/england-sri-lanka-world-t20-match-report>
or his three record-breaking one-day knocks in the last two years, then it did 
benefit his game in terms of preparation; Buttler believes playing for a 
franchise, one coached by Ricky Ponting and with Sachin Tendulkar and Jonty 
Rhodes in the dugout, taught him the need for greater self-reliance.

“Going into a new environment with new coaches posed the question as to how 
well I actually know my own game. To have these big names asking what I want 
from them, and what makes me tick, showed me how selfish you have to be with 
your practice. You have to demand from them what you believe will get the best 
out of yourself, rather than be told what to do.”

While the focus was naturally on performing for his employer, Buttler did take 
the time to tap up Ponting, the former Australia captain, for advice on how 
best to break back into Test cricket. The feedback was mental, rather than 
technical, and reaffirmed his own suspicion that during last summer’s Ashes 
series, when he averaged 15.25 with the bat, his focus was all wrong.

“I had a bit of a chat with Ricky and his advice was about understanding your 
game and taking ownership of it. No one can do it for you, it’s down to you. 
That’s what you notice about the top players at the IPL, they have that belief 
and trust in their own ability.

“My Test career started well and I was happy but in the Ashes I fell away. I 
went away from what I do well. I was worrying about how Mitchell Starc, 
Mitchell Johnson or Josh Hazlewood would get me out and how I would counter it, 
but in doing that forgot how I was going to score runs and put pressure on 
them, which is what I’m good at. I have to be more focussed on myself.”
 