
Jos Buttler has the backing of England’s head coach, Trevor Bayliss, to put 
his name forward for the Indian Premier League auction this year following the
emergence of Jonny Bairstow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/29/england-jonny-bairstow-ab-de-villiers-south-africa>
 in the Test side.

While a key player in the one-day and Twenty20 teams, the 25-year-old 
wicketkeeper-batsman is an unused squad member in the current series in South 
Africa after losing his place to Bairstow at the start of November duringthe 
2-0 defeat by Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pakistan-v-england-2015>.

The situation looks set to continue for the foreseeable future, with Bairstow 
scoring hismaiden international century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/03/ben-stokes-south-africa-england-jonny-bairstow>
 in the drawn second Test at Cape Town and averaging 150 with the bat in the 
four innings against the Proteas so far.

Hashim Amla did the honourable thing by jettisoning his burden | Mike Selvey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/07/hashim-amla-burden-south-africa-captain>
It leaves Buttler facing a dilemma before the start of the English summer, 
with the option of either pushing for a Test recall by playing championship 
cricket for Lancashire or furthering hisTwenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> experience in the IPL, which 
starts on 9 April.

Having sent Adil Rashid to Australia’s Big Bash League instead of carrying the 
drinks in South Africa – the leg-spinner is currently starring for the Adelaide 
Strikers under the Yorkshire head coach, Jason Gillespie – Bayliss sees a 
similar situation emerging.

Asked about Buttler’s predicament, the England head coach said: “It’s 
something we’ve spoken about. Personally I’d think it would be something 
similar along the lines of Rashid.

“If he’s in the Test team he’ll be playing Test cricket for England and he 
definitely wants to play more Test cricket for England, which is great. But 
Jonny is there at the moment.

“If the opportunity arises and he’s not in the Test team and that IPL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> window is a possibility, I’d be all for 
it.”

As the scorer of England’s three fastest hundreds in one-day cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/20/jos-buttler-england-pakistan-odi-match-report>
, full availability for the IPL could mean Buttler attracts a lucrative deal in 
next month’s auction, with Kolkata Knight Riders, the team formerly coached by 
Bayliss, thought to be interested.

While it is Bairstow’s runs with the bat that look set to keep Buttler out of 
the Test frame for now, he has grassed two catches in the series so far, with 
Bayliss conceding that both rivals are still learning their trade behind the 
stumps.

“Both Jonny and Jos work terribly hard on their keeping and there are plenty 
of other wicketkeepers around the world that have started off their 
international careers not in the greatest fashion but ended up pretty decent 
keepers.

“He knows he’s in the team, No1, to keep wicket. So that is definitely a focus 
– to make him better, as it is with Jos as well. We know both of them in form 
can possibly play in this Test team as batters anyway. So it’s all in front of 
both of them.”

Bayliss admitted the drawn second Test at Newlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/06/england-draw-south-africa-second-test>
 represented a missed opportunity to go 2-0 up in the series heading to 
Johannesburg, withdropped catches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/07/second-test-talking-points-england-south-africa>
 in South Africa’s first innings squandering the 629 for six declared England 
had put on the board batting first, after Ben Stokes’ 258 and 150 from Bairstow.

Some 360 of the 627 runs amassed by South Africa in reply were added after 
nine reprieves by England, although the Australian – a stickler for fielding – 
claims not all were genuine chances. There will be no additional practice 
sessions for his players as a consequence, however.

Bayliss said: “I think it was four or five we should have taken. If we’d have 
taken those, you can’t tell how the rest of the game would have panned out but 
I believe it could have been us bowling on the last day going for a win.

“We’ll certainly be working on it but no more or less than what we’ve done in 
the past. We do spend a lot of time on the catching especially. That’s why it’s 
disappointing when you put in the hard yards, every now and again it doesn’t 
work.

“If it continues then that would be more of a concern but we’ve caught pretty 
well in the last six months. Hopefully it is something that’s a one-off.

“We’ve spoken before about the consistency of our play and that’s across the 
three facets of the game – batting, bowling and fielding. We won’t reach the 
pinnacle until we can do that.”
 