
A week ago, the BBC’s flagship current affairs programme in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, Spotlight, investigated a 
disgraced psychiatrist, Morris Fraser.

The Paedophile Doctor 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b07g3mc3/spotlight-the-paedophile-doctor> 
told how Fraser was allowed to continue working with children after being 
convicted in London in 1972 of sexually assaulting a 13-year-old boy.

He was allowed to remain in his post as a child psychiatrist at a Belfast 
hospital because the RUC (the Northern Ireland police force at the time) and the
Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> failed 
to tell the hospital authorities.

The programme was prompted by the findings in a research paper, “Morris 
Fraser, child abuse, corruption and collusion in Britain & Northern Ireland 
<https://www.academia.edu/23870062/Morris_Fraser_Child_Abuse_Corruption_and_Collusion_in_Britain_and_Northern_Ireland>
”, written by a Dublin-based journalism academic, Niall Meehan.

He was, of course, gratified that Spotlight followed up on his paper and 
pleased that it highlighted important new information, notably the negligence 
of the General Medical Council (GMC) in its dealings with Fraser’s case.

But time limitations, the problem that always faces TV documentary makers, 
prevented the programme from touching on several institutional failings.

So Meehan, who heads the journalism and media faculty at Griffith College, has 
now made formal submissions to boththe historical institutional abuse inquiry 
<http://www.hiainquiry.org/index/background-and_legislation.htm> (chaired by 
Sir Anthony Hart) andthe independent inquiry into child sexual abuse 
<https://www.iicsa.org.uk/> (chaired by Dame Lowell Goddard).

In his document, Meehan points to a disturbing series of events that suggest 
some kind of official cover-up. It begins with failures by both the Met police 
and the RUC to inform hospital authorities inBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> about Fraser’s 1972 conviction for 
abusing the boy in London.


At the time, Fraser was fined £50 and received a conditional discharge. Meehan 
notes: “The case was not reported in newspapers... He was effectively tried in 
secret.”

He calls on the Hart inquiry to “attempt to discover why both of these things 
happened.” Did the police seek to “manage” Fraser’s disgrace? If so, why?

Meehan suggests that Fraser may have had a relationship with the security 
forces, a belief reinforced bythe refusal of a 2015 freedom of information 
request 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/northern-ireland-authorities-refuse-to-reveal-details-of-paedophile-with-links-to-former-government-10382746.html>
 about Fraser, partly on the grounds of national security.

He also contends that there was a failure by the GMC to investigate Fraser’s 
criminal and unethical behaviour. In 1973, after Fraser was arrested in New 
York with seven other men accused of abusing 15 boys, the GMC’s disciplinary 
committee charged him with professional misconduct.

But it is Meehan’s belief that the committee not only ignored Fraser’s US 
arrest, it also overlooked the fact that, in the following year, he pleaded 
guilty to the New York offences.

Instead, he argues that the GMC considered, belatedly, only the London 
conviction and then took “the bizarre view” that he had been involved in a 
single “sordid” act, having been corrupted by a drug-addicted homosexual child.

Fraser accepted psychiatric treatment and this was later declared to have been 
successful, so he was permitted to practice without professional restriction.

Meehan also castigates media in Britain and Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> for promoting Fraser’s research - 
after his New York arrest - on the alleged affects of the Irish troubles on 
children. He also accuses journalists of failing to notice the July 1973 GMC 
revelation that Fraser, a convicted child abuser, was left in post for a year.

For a much fuller, detailed account of Meehan’s research to the two inquiries, 
which includes eye-opening “mistakes” suggestive of the authorities’ turning a 
blind eye to Fraser’s activities,see Meehan’s submission on Spinwatch 
<http://www.spinwatch.org/index.php/issues/northern-ireland/item/5878-submission-to-historical-institutional-abuse-inquiry-hart-inquiry-northern-ireland>
.
 