
The Home Office will alter its much-criticised policy on Eritrean asylum 
seekers, after a legal ruling found that the majority of those fleeing the 
country risk persecution or serious harm on returning.

The ruling, which could affect thousands of Eritreans, one of the largest 
groups to seek asylum in Britain every year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-july-to-september-2015/asylum#nationalities-applying-for-asylum>
, contradicts the government’s existing country guidance, which deems it safe 
for migrants to return to Eritrea after leaving illegally.

Earlier this year, a report by MPs found hundreds of asylum applications from 
Eritreans are beingincorrectly refused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/28/hundreds-of-eritrea-asylum-applications-still-incorrectly-refused>
, owing to what was described as the government’s “unacceptable” policy on 
accepting refugees from the country. The July report by the home affairs select 
committee found that, in the first quarter of 2016, 86% of appeals by Eritrean 
asylum seekers were decided in their favour.

There must be no compromise with Eritrea's tyrannical Afewerki regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/eritrea-afewerki-regime-human-rights-glenys-kinnock>
An appalling human rights record, forced labour, indefinite compulsory 
military conscription and widespread use of torture has earned Eritrea the 
sobriquet “Africa’s North Korea”. Migrants from the one-party, closed state 
formed thelargest group of people applying for asylum in the UK last year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-october-to-december-2015/summary>
. The UK received a total of 3,695 applications from Eritreans in 2015, 
approximately one-third of which (1,319) were granted.

In the judgment this month, the upper tribunal (immigration and asylum) issued 
a new country guidance case onEritrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea>, which determined that Eritreans of 
or approaching the draft age of 18, who had evaded national service, deserted, 
or were likely to be suspected of doing so, faced a “real risk of persecution 
or serious harm” if sent back. The tribunal rejected the argument, set out in 
existing Home Office guidance, that Eritreans could return safely by signing a 
letter of apology and paying a “diaspora tax”.

The country guidance ruling, where the tribunal lays down the approach other 
judges should take, was welcomed by MPs, human rights groups and immigration 
lawyers.

Stuart McDonald, a member of the home affairs select committee, said he hoped 
it would force the government to correct its guidance on Eritrean asylum 
seekers. The delay in doing so was “inexcusable”, he said.

McDonald, the Scottish National party’s spokesman on asylum and immigration, 
said: “The determination is a welcome one. It’s just very frustrating that it 
has taken this to force the Home Office to get its house in order.”

The Refugee Council’s policy manager, Judith Dennis, said: “This ruling has 
confirmed that the government’s treatment of Eritreans who’ve sought refuge 
here is both dangerous and unjustifiable. It’s vital that the Home Office now 
focuses on protecting Eritreans who’ve fled here in fear of their lives rather 
than putting them at further risk.”

Colin Yeo, a barrister at Garden Court chambers who specialises in 
immigration, said: “It’s been a massively wasteful and rather political 
decision by the Home Office. It is not only wasteful of Home Office funds but 
tribunal funds and legal aid funds as well as really stressful for applicants.”

Elizabeth Chyrum, director of Human Rights Concern Eritrea, said: “In short, 
the tribunal decided that it could not rely on Home Office policy … and that 
other evidence, including that provided by the UN commission of inquiry, 
provided a much more accurate assessment of political conditions in Eritrea.”

Hundreds of Eritreans' asylum applications still 'incorrectly refused'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/28/hundreds-of-eritrea-asylum-applications-still-incorrectly-refused>
The upper tribunal case was brought on behalf of three Eritreans and centred 
around a heavilycriticised report by the Danish Immigration Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/10/britain-refusing-asylum-eritreans-discredited-report>
, which was used to determine asylum applications in Denmark. The Home Office 
updated its country guidance for Eritrea in March 2015, based on the Danish 
report, advising that Eritreans are no longer at risk of persecution if they 
return home after leaving the country without official permission. The guidance 
is used by UK immigration officials to determine the legitimacy of asylum 
applications.

In its ruling, the tribunal appeared to suggest that not only would a letter 
of apology not establish a safe return, but that it could expose individuals to 
potential danger. Such a letter amounted to “a confession of guilt by the 
person who signs it”, stated the ruling, exposing returnees to what the regime 
might deem “appropriate punishment”.

The tribunal said: “We do not accept that the evidence goes anywhere close to 
establishing the payment of tax and the signing of the letter would enable 
draft evaders and deserters to reconcile with the Eritrean authorities.”

The case, brought by three Eritrean asylum seekers, centred on the Danish 
fact-finding mission on which the report was based, which has been criticised 
as misleading and inaccurate by theUN High Commissioner for Refugees 
<http://www.ft.dk/samling/20141/almdel/uui/bilag/41/1435206.pdf>, Human Rights 
Watch 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/12/17/denmark-eritrea-immigration-report-deeply-flawed>
 and others.

The ruling accepted that criticisms of the mission were “well made”.

Tasaddat Hussain, of Broadway House chambers, part of a legal team that 
represented two of the Eritreans in the case, said: “It appears that the 
outcome of the case is in line with what international opinion says: that 
nothing has changed in Eritrea.”


The ruling, which was seen by the Guardian, as well as those asked to comment 
on it, has now been removed from the upper tribunal’s website without 
explanation.

A Home Office spokesperson said: “We have noted the court’s ruling and will be 
updating the country guidance accordingly.


“All country information and guidance is based on a careful and objective 
assessment of available evidence from a range of sources including media 
outlets, local, national and international organisations, and the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office.”

Earlier this month, the Home Office removed country guidance on Eritrea from 
its website.
 