
A US judge accused of bias by Donald Trump because of his Mexican heritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/03/donald-trump-judge-curiel-university-case-biased-mexican>
 is to hold a pre-trial hearing on Thursday in a class-action lawsuit over the 
president-elect’s now-defunct Trump University.


US district judge Gonzalo Curiel is holding the hearing to instruct the jury 
and examine what evidence to allow at trial, which begins on 28 November. Trump 
could be called to testifying before his inauguration as the 45th US president.

Among the flurry of requests from both sides is a highly unusual petition by 
Trump’s legal team to exclude any statements made by or about their client 
during the presidential campaign.

Donald Trump's judge-bashing crosses a line | Scott Lemieux
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/donald-trump-bully-race-bait-judge-gonzalo-curiel-trump-university>
The request would apply to Trump’s tweets, a video of him making sexually 
predatory comments about women, his tax history, revelations about his private 
charitable foundation and public criticisms about Curiel.

Trump’s lawyer, Daniel Petrocelli, told the judge last month that evidence 
tied to the campaign would be irrelevant to the civil fraud case and may 
prejudice or inflame a jury, jeopardising rights to a fair trial.

He warned that allowing the jury to consider Trump’s remarks carried “an 
immediate and irreparable danger of extreme and irremediable prejudice to 
defendants, confusion of issues and waste of time”.

The lawsuit, filed in 2010 on behalf of former customers, alleges that Trump 
University, which was not accredited, gave seminars and classes across the 
country that were like infomercials, pressuring people to spend up to $35,000 
for mentorships and, in the end, failing on its promise to teach success in 
real estate.

The claims mirror another class action complaint in San Diego and a lawsuit in 
New York.

Petrocelli told reporters in May that Trump planned to attend most, if not 
all, of the trial and would testify. “He has very, very strong feelings about 
this case,” the lawyer said at the time.

At the May hearing, Petrocelli asked for a trial after inauguration day on 20 
January, but the judge raised concerns about distractions ifTrump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/23/donald-trump-rnc-hispanic-director-apology>
 won the election.

The lawyer said the period between the election and swearing-in was extremely 
hectic for a president-elect but that it was preferable to holding a trial 
during the campaign.
 