
In the early 1980s, when I was studying for my O-levels, my friends and I were 
members of CND, (that’s the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, for those of you 
who weren’t about for the cold war). There was a CND lapel badge we wore 
(badges were big in the 80s). We held earnest meetings in living rooms vacated 
by sympathetic parents, and worried aboutmutually assured destruction (MAD) 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-17026538>. As well as being concerned by 
the nuclear threat, we were implacably opposed to apartheid, frightened by the 
hole in the ozone layer, and concerned about the damage inflicted by 
multinational corporations on subsistence farmers in what we still called the 
third world. We listened to the Jam, the Clash and Steel Pulse, and were united 
in our hatred of Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan.


 At the same time, none of the issues we felt so anxious and passionate about 
actually touched on our lives. We were growing up in east Devon, anArea of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty <http://www.landscapesforlife.org.uk/>, and spent 
our weekends swimming in the sea, or camping on Dartmoor or sailing dinghies on 
the estuary. None of us, as far as I’m aware, had ever been anywhere in “the 
third world” and, despite attending a massive comprehensive school with 
two-and-a-half thousand pupils, everyone in our world was white – apart from 
one half-Jamaican boy, a cousin of a friend of mine, who was dispatched from 
London to the country for a year to get him out of some never-specified (but 
almost certainly incredibly glamorous) trouble.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fjulia-rochester-my-fiction-is-preoccupied-with-belonging-and-exile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F914d5e0325eac6f9de23a1495355351bce21d291%2F0_182_3224_4030%2F3224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julia%20Rochester%3A%20'My%20fiction%20is%20preoccupied%20with%20belonging%20and%20exile'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fjulia-rochester-my-fiction-is-preoccupied-with-belonging-and-exile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julia%20Rochester%3A%20%27My%20fiction%20is%20preoccupied%20with%20belonging%20and%20exile%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fjulia-rochester-my-fiction-is-preoccupied-with-belonging-and-exile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F914d5e0325eac6f9de23a1495355351bce21d291%2F0_182_3224_4030%2F3224.jpg>
 ‘What does it mean to belong to a place? Or to feel that you don’t belong?’ 
... Julia Rochester Photograph: Jochen Braun 
 The House at the Edge of the World is very far from being an autobiographical 
novel, but the germ of it lies in that juxtaposition: a group of socially 
conscious teenagers reacting to and resisting the cultural isolation in which 
they are growing up. In the novel, the setting is the harsh, stormy, granitic 
north Devon coast, rather than the gentle sandstone cliffs of my adolescence. 
That landscape chose me rather than the other way around, and once it had 
chosen me, the imaginary characters that I encountered were mostly solitary and 
misanthropic. They were people who inhabited a world where the frontier between 
the real and the magical was permeable.

 Despite being a compulsive list-writer, I am an accidental plotter and I look 
with envy on writers who are able to plan out their work before they start 
writing. I just start with a place and a couple of characters and let it 
unfold. It’s not at all efficient – there are all these homunculi running 
around in my head. Often they refuse to go in the direction in which I try to 
send them.(“What? Sleep with him? No way!”) Or they startle me with a new piece 
of information. (I just found out, for example, that in my current manuscript, 
one of my protagonists has a very interesting wife that I didn’t know about.)

 It feels random at the time, but what consistently emerges in both my fiction 
and nonfiction, is a preoccupation with belonging and exile. What does it mean 
to belong to a place? Or to feel that you don’t belong? Or to be carried away 
from your place by the tides of history? In The House at the Edge of the World, 
my narrator Morwenna can’t belong. It makes her detached and unsentimental. 
People hold it against her. She ends up in London. I have a theory that big 
cities are for all the world’s misfits. There’s a song in German that goes: 
“You’re crazy, my child / You’ll end up in Berlin / Where all the crazies are / 
that’s where you belong, my child!”

I studied in divided Berlin for a while and our Cold War world seemed set in 
stone. But, just two years later I was back there for New Year in 1990, where 
thousands of people sat on the Wall, cheering and waving flags with the hammer 
and sickle cut out, while East German border guards stumbled about drunkenly 
with streamers around their necks and waving Sekt bottles. The whole world had 
shifted on its axis, the political landscape irrevocably altered. But as for 
Devon, where we sat out our adolescence, unable to belong, waiting to join the 
big wide world – it seems immune to history: when I go down from London to 
visit, nothing seems to have shifted at all.

Extract

When I was eighteen, my father fell off a cliff. It was a stupid way to die. 
There was a good moon. There was no wind. There was no excuse. He was pissing 
into the chine at Brock Tor on his way home from the pub and fell headlong 
drunk into the spring tide with his flies open.

I spent that night on the beach with Corwin, watching the moon silver the sea, 
and later an image lodged in my mind of our father in slow descent, turning 
within a glittering moonlit arc of urine. When I confided this to Corwin, he 
was angrier than I had ever seen him. I had fixed the image, and now he must 
share it with me, as if it were a memory. He hit me, which was fair, I thought 
– a back-handed swipe across the mouth that drew blood. I was so upset that I 
ran to the cabin and lay there all night half awake. At dawn, Corwin came and 
crawled into the bunk with me to kiss my swollen lip and say sorry. He was more 
generous then.

More about The House at the Edge of the World

This book is far from being a detective story, but it depends as much on the 
element of surprise, so it would be unforgivable to give away too much of the 
plot. It can, however, safely be said that it grips, and that its strength lies 
in the understanding of human behaviour that underlies the unexpected twists 
and turns, each one of which moves from romanticism to credibility in a bracing 
way, so that the book’s charm resembles that of a building such as Brighton 
Pavilion: engagingly fantastic in appearance, but structurally sound.Diana 
Athill.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/17/the-house-at-the-edge-of-the-world-julia-rochester-review-novel>
.

Buy the book

• The House at the Edge of the World is published by Penguin for £8.99 and is 
available from the Guardian Bookshop for £6.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385695/s/the-house-at-the-edge-of-the-world/>
.
 