
As soon as my blog, A transgender journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/transgender-journey>, began on 
the Guardian in 2010, people asked if I would turn it into a book. For most of 
its two-year run, I said no. I had reasons for documenting my transition here: 
not least that the Guardian’s trans coverage hadnot always been favourable 
<https://transactivist.wordpress.com/2010/08/02/getting-down-with-the-guardian/>
. Through the writing, I wanted to push the discussion away from the crude 
stereotypes on which hostile outsiders often relied, and towards our lived 
experiences.


Using the confessional form  
<http://www.newstatesman.com/media/2012/10/liz-jones-and-me>was the compromise 
I made. InGender Outlaw 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/kate-bornstein/gender-outlaw/> 
(1994), Kate Bornstein wrote of how, for years, all we could get published were 
“long-suffering romantic narratives”. Activists began to use other forms: 
novels, plays, essays or new combinations. Older trans journalists said editors 
usually requested personal stories over political statements; I wanted to use 
the former to get the latter to a broader audience. Bornstein, Leslie Feinberg 
<http://www.lesliefeinberg.net/>, Julia Serano <http://www.juliaserano.com/> 
and others used autobiographical material to bolster their points, and I didn’t 
believe that theory and memoir were antithetical.


Top 10 transgender books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/21/top-10-transgender-books> 
After the series peaked with a long piece about surgery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/aug/30/sex-reassignment-surgery-transgender-journey>
, an agent suggested a book that would use my transition to explore the role of 
culture in forming an identity. I said yes. People still referred toJan 
Morris’s Conundrum 
<https://www.brainpickings.org/2016/06/30/jan-morris-conundrum/> (1974) as a 
touchstone: a new book might update the conversation, reach people who hadn’t 
seen the blog and help mainstream trans writing to move beyond the transition 
memoir.


Having found a purpose, I had to find a different way of telling the story. 
One was to focus on my identitybefore reassignment. Another was to discuss the 
media: not just its influence on me, but mine on it. I started the Guardian 
series when I was an NHS administrator in Brighton; by 2012, I was in London, 
in a similar job but writing for various publications and getting invited to 
swanky functions. I didn’t want that to affect the blog, but in the book I 
could consider the pros and cons of articulating an outsider perspective in 
mainstream media, and how it drew me closer to thedreaded “Establishment” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/16/author-geoff-dyer-literary-establishment>
.


After a failed first draft, we had a crisis meeting. I was about to offer to 
return the advance

Several publishers liked the idea but felt it was a gamble. Verso was keen, 
and let me depart from the “long-suffering” narrative and place my experiences 
into a context of 1990s and 2000s culture and politics. They suggested a title, 
Trans: A Memoir. I wanted to change it, but neither the subject matter nor I 
felt well-known enough for something more oblique (I was jealous ofJanet Mock’s 
Redefining Realness 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/culture/2014/04/janet-mock-who-will-ever-love-you-if-you-tell-truth>
, from Jennie Livingston’sParis Is Burning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/24/burning-down-the-house-debate-paris-is-burning>
.) But I grew into it: I liked how “memoir” described the form and “trans” the 
content; it chimed with my favourite band,the Pop Group 
<http://www.thepopgroup.net/>. So, when the publisher suggested a “more 
commercial” subtitle such as Finding the Real Me, I declined.


Getting the structure and voice right was arduous, made harder because I never 
read memoirs. When my editor asked how I might avoid a centralised narrative 
with a surgical climax, I asked if he’d read The Unfortunates by BS Johnson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d4ZLKd3krJw> (which presented unbound chapters 
in a box). His reply: “Absolutely not.” My first draft still cribbed from 
Johnson, breaking the fourth wall to question readers’ assumptions. That didn’t 
work, but I still found the obligation to “strip or be stripped” (as Feinberg 
put it) stressful. I couldn’t decide how to dramatise a closeted childhood or 
integrate theoretical material with the personal. I hated writing something so 
linear.


After a failed first draft, we had a crisis meeting. I was about to offer to 
return the advance when my editor suggested I open with the surgery to 
establish a sense of self, go back to a new starting point and cross-cut 
between personal chapters and theoretical sections. I was enthused:reproducing 
the Guardian surgery article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/aug/30/sex-reassignment-surgery-transgender-journey>
 with the headline would establish a book about the media as well as 
transition; my childhood could be woven into a story that began at university.


Energised by an event with a favourite author, Jean-Philippe Toussaint 
<http://www.jptoussaint.com/>, in which he discussed his writing methods 
<http://unrealisedfutures.tumblr.com/post/133967167880/jean-philippe-toussaint-urgency-and-patience>
, I had four months to produce the final draft. I interviewed people about 
times we’d spent together to give me some distance from myself – once I saw 
myself as a character, I could find the right voice and narrative. This was 
great fun. WriterJoe Stretch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/24/the-adult-joe-stretch-review> 
kept texting with ideas for how to represent him, and a new title: Who’s That 
Guy? It’s Joe Stretch.


With a clearer concept, it was easier to fight battles – over what to 
“reveal”, and the formal issues. I won the most important arguments: having the 
headline on the first chapter; avoiding an ending where everything seemed 
neatly resolved; adding an epilogue where I discussed writing, culture, trans 
activism and selfhoodwith Sheila Heti 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/read-an-extract-from-juliet-jacques-new-book-trans-235>
; using a drawingby Joanna Walsh  
<http://badaude.typepad.com/my_weblog/2015/08/juliet-jacques-trans-a-memoir.html>
for the cover (rather than a photo).


I was nervous about publishing something that included intimate, traumatic 
moments, some of which I’d never shared with anyone. I was pleasantly surprised 
by the positive reviews, though they focused on the text, and on my efforts to 
place myself in a social context, leaving the metatextual, media aspects rather 
neglected. It seemed timely: thanks to the work of numerous author-activists, 
individually and in groups such asTrans Media Watch 
<http://www.transmediawatch.org/>, trans issues have become widely discussed in 
mainstream media. And the book’s disillusion with LGBT politics spoke to a 
world in whichPride had become increasingly corporate 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/opensecurity/huw-lemmey/losing-pride> and in 
which Pink News named David Cameron asLGBT Ally of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/27/pink-news-defends-david-cameron-award-backlash-ally-year-lgbt>
.


Now it’s out, I feel quietly proud. I think I did as well as I could  within 
the genre’s limitations, 
<http://www.lambdaliterary.org/reviews/11/03/trans-by-juliet-jacques/> and the 
occasional emails I get from readers telling me that the book helped with their 
gender, or people around them, make the difficulties feel worthwhile. I’ve 
retreated from journalism and social media, fatigued with endless “debate” – 
and I feel no need to write autobiographically again – although perhaps people 
will keep asking.

Extract

I’d also found the Sussex Transgendered Page. I’d never seen that word 
‘transgender’ before: it just seemed like a way to cover the fact that the site 
was run by a ‘transvestite’ and a ‘transsexual’ woman. The site featured their 
life stories, an FAQ page about their identities and advice on coming out, 
buying clothes and presenting as female in public. Back in my first year at 
sixth-form college, I’d emailed Claire, the transsexual woman, and introduced 
myself. I told her that she’d made me feel less lonely, and asked if we could 
meet. She refused as I was under 18, but she gave me her phone number.

‘You don’t sound very camp,’ she’d said when I called her. ‘Why do you call 
yourself a drag queen?’

‘I’m gay and I wear women’s clothes,’ I’d replied. ‘I thought that made me a 
drag queen.’

‘A drag queen is someone who performs on a stage,’ said Claire. ‘Do you?’

‘No.’

‘Would you like to?’

‘Not really.’

‘Then you’re not a drag queen,’ said Claire.

‘Whatever,’ I’d said, laughing. ‘I’m worried about my parents finding out, 
though.’

‘Look,’ she told me. ‘The way I see it, if you have children, then you need to 
be ready for anything they do. If you’re not, then you shouldn’t have had them. 
You’ll find a way.’

More about the book

For all her protests against memoir form, Jacques’s book adheres to it, which 
is no bad thing. It is an honest, articulate account of one life so far, 
including the set pieces other trans memoirs contain: the moment of workplace 
transition, the self-destructive thoughts, the letter to friends and family, 
the joy and the anxiety of “spending a whole day as Juliet for the first time”. 
Other kinds of trans-identified people – trans men, cross-dressers, people who 
live in two genders (me, for example: I am both Stephen and Stephanie), and 
people who try to live outside gender entirely – may see themselves in some of 
these set pieces, too. The epilogue, an interview with the writerSheila Heti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sheila-heti> (author of How Should a Person 
Be? <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-should-a-person-be.html>), shows her 
more confident than the preceding chapters allow us to expect. Jacques will, 
for sure, get to write about “underground literature, film and art”. But she 
also seems set to keep writing about how the frames of gender have changed 
around her, and how they can change some more: when she returns to her 
sixth-form college, she meets not younger versions of Juliet Jacques, but a new 
set of LGBT, genderqueer and gender-fluid “teenagers creating space for 
themselves”.– Stephen Burt

Read the full review. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/23/trans-a-memoir-juliet-jacques-review-gender-transition>

Buy the book

Trans: A Memoir is published by Verso at £9.99. It is available from the 
Guardian Bookshop for £8.19 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/trans-439783.html>
.
 