
It was a summer’s day 18 years ago and I was sitting in a car with my brother. 
We were in Kristiansand, the town my father was from, and had stopped at a 
junction and were waiting for a gap in the traffic so we could pull out. It was 
hot and overcast, and as we were waiting it began to rain. My brother switched 
on the wipers, I remember, and then without looking at me said: “You can write 
about this. No one’s going to believe it anyway.”

We were in Kristiansand because my father had died. And what my brother was 
referring to there in the car were the circumstances of his death. Neither of 
us had been in touch with him during his final years and although we were aware 
that a lot of strange stuff had been going on – once we were informed that he 
had disappeared and the police were out searching for him, only for him to turn 
up at a hospital a few days later, unable to walk having suffered some kind of 
temporary paralysis, for which reason he was sent to a treatment home for 
alcoholics – it all took place outside our field of vision and was therefore 
rather abstract. Our father drank too much, we knew that, but what that 
actually entailed was still something we were ignorant about. We didn’t want to 
know either. Our uncle called my brother one time and told us we had to do 
something and take care of our father, but we said no, that was out of the 
question, he had to look after himself. So it came as no surprise to us to 
receive word that he was dead. The shock came when we travelled down to 
Kristiansand, to the house in which he had grown up, where he had lived out his 
final years together with his mother, our grandmother. There were bottles 
everywhere, on the floors, up the stairs, on all the tables and sideboards, and 
the fine old home we had visited so often throughout our childhoods had 
degenerated completely. It looked like a squat. Our grandmother had found dad 
in his chair, but she was in shock. Confused, she shuffled about the house as 
thin as a skeleton, and when we asked her about what had happened she would 
tell us it had been morning when she found him, only the next moment to insist 
it had been evening. When we visited the chapel to see our father for the last 
time, his nose was broken and the pores of his face seemed to be clogged with 
blood which the staff of the funeral parlour had been unable to remove.

But the question of what had actually gone on in the house was totally 
overshadowed by the feelings it aroused. I kept crying all the time. The hatred 
I felt towards my father, a hatred almost as old as myself, was now completely 
gone. I wept and wept again – for him, for me, for us.

In the midst of this emotional chaos, one thought remained unaffected, as if 
contained in its own compartment, lucid and distinct regardless of what I 
otherwise saw or felt, and that was the realisation that I had to write about 
all this. That it was a great story.

I was 29 years old and in my suitcase was the manuscript of my first novel, 
due to be published that autumn. My brother had read it, and the first thing he 
said was that our father would sue me. The book was fiction, but there was 
enough of my father in it for him to be able to recognise himself and hit the 
roof, so my brother thought. This was what he was alluding to with his comment 
in the car.

We buried our father and carried on with our lives. My novel came out as 
planned, but although its publication meant I had achieved everything I had 
ever dreamed about, I felt no joy at the fact, because what I realised when my 
father died was that I had written that novel for him.

During the next five years I tried to tell the story attached to the house in 
Kristiansand, the story of my father’s decline and death. But it wouldn’t work. 
I had 800 pages of beginnings, none of which led me inside the inversion of 
light and dark in which I had existed during those days, none came anywhere 
near representing what I had experienced, neither on the personal level 
relating to my father, my grandmother, my brother and me, nor in what issued 
out of it in terms of how death affects the way a person looks on life and the 
world. After seeing my father lying there on a stainless steel trolley in the 
chapel, the very fabric of the world, the physical and material aspects of all 
things, seemed altered, even the people surrounding me, who suddenly appeared 
to me as bodies, physiology, biology.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb44c2073ffc58d6115d1385e96cf87582bfc63b7%2F0_0_648_643%2F648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20the%20shame%20of%20writing%20about%20myself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20the%20shame%20of%20writing%20about%20myself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb44c2073ffc58d6115d1385e96cf87582bfc63b7%2F0_0_648_643%2F648.jpg>
 Karl Ove Knausgaard as a child with his father and brother. Photograph: PR 
Image 
After five years of trying, I got sidetracked into another novel, which I did 
complete. After it was published I returned to the story of my father, but 
again it resisted, I didn’t believe in it and lacked the strength to suspend my 
disbelief. Building a fiction room requires either great strength or great 
ignorance. To understand what I mean by a fiction room, one need only read 
Tolstoy’sWar and Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/22/war-and-peace-guide-philip-hensher>
. I have read it twice and have been sucked inside on both occasions, as 
happens only with the greatest of novels – one invests greater and more 
numerous emotions in them than in real life itself, occasionally becoming aware 
that one is yearning for the rooms the novel opens, even for the characters it 
portrays. The many scene shifts, from the manors to the cities, from the 
ballrooms to the battlefields, and the changing viewpoints, characters 
developing on the basis of their various experiences and therefore continually 
facing each other in new ways, winding in and out of each other’s lives, 
without ever standing alone, yet also without knowing this to be so, since only 
we, the author and the reader, have access to all viewpoints at once. The last 
time I readWar and Peace I sought to fill the void it left behind with another 
book from the same era and the same culture,Turgenev’s A Sportsman’s Sketches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jun/21/ivan-turgenev-brief-survey-short-story>
. It has practically nothing of what makesWar and Peace such a great novel – no 
action, no intrigue, no plot, none of the grand scenes, no overall development 
as such, with peaks and troughs, and no central characters.A Sportsman’s 
Sketches is a collection of short stories, sketch-like as the title suggests, 
and anecdotal, revolving around a hunter’s encounters and experiences in the 
region in which he lives. Yet as soon as I began reading it I felt a very 
strong sense of proximity to the real Russia of the 1840s, a sense of the 
landscapes and people Turgenev describes being real landscapes and real people, 
that this was the way they actually were. It was as if Turgenev’s prose in some 
way tore through the plastic of the novel’s packaging, allowing that world to 
emerge in all its colour, populated by its own idiosyncratic characters. How 
that feeling of authenticity, or world-nearness, arises, I don’t know, but it 
is certainly rare and has nothing to do with Turgenev’s characters actually 
having existed, as opposed to Tolstoy’s, who did not. But it seems crucial that 
Turgenev’s characters and descriptions point nowhere other than to themselves, 
they are not a part of any larger series of events and are as such open in 
respect of everything but time and place, which comprise the very basis of our 
world experience. This utmost authenticity, this proximity to the world, is 
partially sacrificed by the novel in favour of the form itself, to make it 
possible to convey essential insights in relationships in particular, but also 
in sequences of events, psychological patterns and social structures. This must 
be why reading Turgenev straight after Tolstoy was such a shocking experience, 
coming so much closer to the landscape, the people, the culture, because that 
was the only place the reader is meant to go, to that particular barn, for 
instance, on that particular night, and it must also be why I didn’t believe in 
what I myself was writing all the while I was trying to tell my story in the 
form of a novel. I didn’t want to write about the relationship between a father 
and a son, I wanted to write about my dad and me. I didn’t want to write about 
a house where a man lived with his aged mother, like some variation onIbsen’s 
Ghosts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/27/ibsen-ghosts-review-trafalgar-studios-theatre>
, but about that particular house and the concrete reality that existed inside 
it.

I was a novelist, and when I made use of experiences from my own life, they 
were camouflaged, part of the fiction

I didn’t know any of this during the years I sat trying to write that story, 
to me all writing is blind and intuitive, either it works or it doesn’t, and 
the explanation as to how a novel turns out the way it does is always a 
rationalisation after the event. What works always wins over in the end, 
seemingly of its own accord. So when, after 10 years of trying, I sat down one 
day and wrote a few pages about something that happened to me, something I felt 
so ashamed about I had never mentioned it to a living soul, and did so using my 
own name, I had no idea why I went there, nor did I to begin with connect it in 
any way to the novel I wanted to write, it was just something I did. I sent it 
to my editor, who described it as “manically confessional”, and I got the 
impression he took a step back, so to speak, because it was so disconcerting 
and not good in any literary sense. But there was something there, nonetheless, 
and both he and I saw it.

What was it? Firstly there was freedom. If I went in that direction, simply 
writing down things I had experienced, using my own name, it was as if all 
concerns about style, form, literary devices, character, tone, distance, at 
once ceased to exist and the vestments of literature suddenly became 
unnecessary posturing: all I had to do was write. But it wasn’t only the 
freedom of this that now fuelled the writing, it was also the unprecedented 
nature of it, the fact that to a large degree what I was doing was forbidden.

I was a novelist, I wrote novels, and to the extent I made use of experiences 
from my own life, they were camouflaged, part of the fiction. The option of 
abandoning that had never existed for me as a writer. I could bring the events 
of the novel as close to reality as I had experienced them, but to take that 
final step and write, “I, Karl Ove”, “my brother, Yngve”, or “my father, Kai 
Åge”, was something that had never as much as occurred to me. It wouldn’t be 
literature any more, would it?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8c476985b1f292906a24685f54a9922e4016673%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20the%20shame%20of%20writing%20about%20myself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20the%20shame%20of%20writing%20about%20myself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8c476985b1f292906a24685f54a9922e4016673%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Knausgaard outside his home in Sweden. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose for the 
Observer 
When finally I did it, it felt like a huge transgression. And not in any good 
sense either, because writing about myself using my full name meant there no 
longer being anything to hide behind. Moreover, who would be interested in my 
life, in the things I had thought and done, or that had happened to me? I was a 
nobody, or anybody. This is a very fundamental doubt I think all writers know, 
because submitting a manuscript to an editor is in itself both transgressional 
and embarrassing: what do I have that could possibly make another person want 
to spend time and effort reading about it? A work of fiction wears a veil of 
generality, it takes its place in a society alongside a host of other fictions 
from which it draws legitimacy. But this manuscript had no such legitimacy. Who 
would want to know that I had stood and pissed up against a pile of snow while 
listening to Talking Heads on a Walkman one night in the 1980s? Why even write 
about it? It wasn’t that I decided to write about my actual life as such, nor 
even to tell the truth. It was more the fact that writing under my own name, 
about my own reality, had its own set of premises, and its own particular 
consequences. Using my own name propelled me headlong into my own world, 
dominated as it was by trifles and inconsequential detail. This tiny quotidian 
universe was not intrinsic to any story and provided no narrative drive, but it 
was a part of me, and therefore I had to write about it. Another premise that 
emerged was that I had to be true to what I actually believed. That’s not 
difficult in a fictional novel, the writer can put his words into the mouth of 
a character, but in a non-fictional novel it’s different, because everything in 
it becomes binding. Writing about my brother, who means so very much to me, 
meant also having to write about how in our student days I would feel ashamed 
of him in certain situations. Would I be able to do that, knowing that at some 
point he would read it himself? How would it make him feel? This was true for 
all the people I wrote about, but it felt worst in his case, and I had to force 
the writing into being. This was my only moral compass, the physical resistance 
I felt towards writing about others. When the qualms became too many, the inner 
turmoil of conscience too great, I refrained.

I was trying to get words down on paper, before I started to get critical, 
before I started to think how stupid I was

So there I was, in an apartment in Malmö, with a wife and three children, 
writing about myself, flaring with shame and a burning sense of freedom. Only 
rarely did I think about anyone ever reading what I wrote. Mostly, I was trying 
to get words down on paper as fast as I could before I started to get critical, 
before I started to think about how stupid I was and how stupid the novel was, 
trying to exist within myself the way I was when I wasn’t writing. It was the 
only way to bring it about, to write without an audience, without readers, in a 
room on my own.

The purpose of the novel, its very reason and core, the death of my father, 
was still a matter I was unable to write about. The biggest problem with 
writing about something from one’s own life is perhaps exactly that – that 
you’re dealing with something that actually happened. An event is only true as 
it occurs, such an important part of its experience consisting in the fact that 
we are in the middle of it rather than outside, unable to see the overall 
picture, never knowing where it will lead.

Karl Ove Knausgaard: the latest literary sensation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/07/karl-ove-knausgaard-my-struggle-hari-kunzru>
What makes a novel feel vital is when it comes into being as it is written, in 
much the same way as the moment occurs as it is lived. So what I was doing was 
writing blindly, unknowing of what would come next. I started with something 
that happened when I was 16 and I was going to a New Year’s Eve party with a 
friend. The story could have been told in two sentences – we had a lot of 
trouble trying to get our hands on some beer, when we got it we hid it in the 
snow for a few days, and when finally we arrived at the party we were turned 
away at the door. But in the book that episode took up a 100 pages. While at 
the time I had no idea what I was writing or why, it is abundantly clear to me 
now: I was writing about life the way it appears to an uninformed 16-year-old, 
in all its enormous banality, and only when I had done so was it possible for 
me to write about my father’s demise, about death in all its enormous banality. 
I could then enter the house along with my brother, I could describe what we 
saw and what we did, because now those events represented nothing more than 
themselves, being so much a part of my own trivial experience. I was no longer 
looking at Death, but at death. The person who died wasn’t my Father, but dad. 
And Yngve was Yngve, not my Brother, not Abel.

I was unprepared for the storm that broke. My father's family wanted the book 
stopped

The novel was to have ended there, but it felt like I had described only the 
smallest fragment of life, at the same time as I had found a language for my 
non-narrative, day-to-day existence, and so I carried on, letting the text slip 
inside the life that was all around me, at a time when I had become a father 
myself, because that experience was quite as defining as death, and its natural 
counterweight. That’s how I experience life, as an ocean of quotidian existence 
in which meaning is diffuse and difficult to grasp, and then comes death with 
its unprecedented concentration of meaning, or else love or birth. By the time 
I delivered the book to the publisher it amounted to some 1,200 pages. They 
suggested putting it out in 12 parts, one a month over the course of a year. I 
loved the idea, not least because it reminded me of the rock band the Wedding 
Present releasing 12 singles in 12 months, but it turned out to be too 
complicated and too much of a risk, so we landed on six novels in a year. I 
could split the existing manuscript into six, but decided instead to divide it 
into two and write four more, to be published consecutively the same year. In 
that way, at pistol point, I could immerse myself in childhood, then pass 
through youth and my student days to approach, as if from below, the crux of 
the novel, my father’s death, which in the course of such a long sequence of 
events would have totally altered character and taken on a completely different 
significance than originally envisaged.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98567641061ac233d037f77820e9db7804f406b6%2F0_0_3499_2362%2F3499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20the%20shame%20of%20writing%20about%20myself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20the%20shame%20of%20writing%20about%20myself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98567641061ac233d037f77820e9db7804f406b6%2F0_0_3499_2362%2F3499.jpg>
 Knausgaard with his brother Photograph: 1996-2001 AccuSoft Co., All righ/PR 
IMAGE 
I sent copies of the first volume in manuscript form to the people I had 
written about, expecting some to be annoyed or angry, but the storm that broke 
was one for which I was quite unprepared. My father’s family wanted the book 
stopped, and the ensuing conflict became public. No one knew what a court case 
might entail, and the publisher hired a firm of solicitors to read everything I 
wrote about anyone who wasn’t me. The book I had written about myself, which I 
had seen as an experiment in realistic prose, infinitely dull and uninteresting 
to others, became a media story for some months in Norway.My picture was all 
over the front pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/07/karl-ove-knausgaard-my-struggle-hari-kunzru>
, a moral debate raged, and everyone wanted to read what I had written. I 
closed my doors, kept away from the papers, TV, radio. I told friends and 
family to keep me in the dark, I needed to write, to retain that space for 
myself, something I only partially succeeded in doing. Reporters were 
contacting everyone I had written about. They loitered outside the houses of my 
friends, waiting for them to emerge. They knocked on the door of my 
mother-in-law and scared the life out of her. They phoned her ex-husband, a man 
of more than 80 years living a secluded life in a forest, wanting to know his 
reactions to what Karl Ove had written about him. It was ironic. What I had 
written about were my thoughts and feelings, the most private part of any 
person’s life, only for them to be exposed in that most superficial of realms, 
the media.

The sixth book in the series was about the consequences of the first five, the 
reactions of those I had written about, the response of the media, the impact 
on me and my family. That book came to more than 11,000 pages. Four years have 
now passed since it came out in Norway, and I have travelled around the globe 
and talked about it as its translations have appeared in each new country. It 
is a soul-devouring task, the division between me and my literary self being so 
slight. One thing I know is that I will never do anything like it again. My 
plan now is to write something completely different. I may even visit the 
villages of Russia and see what the last 160 years have done to reality there 
since Turgenev tramped around with his rifle.

• Translated by Martin Aitken. Some Rain Must Fall: My Struggle Book 5 is 
published on 3 March. To order a copy for £14.39 (RRP £17.99) go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378741/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 