
There was not much demob-happiness on view. The Englishmen were still out 
there in the midday sun, the mid-afternoon sun and when that unforgiving orb 
began to dip behind one of the MA Chidambaram Stadium’s redundant stands they 
were still there chasing the ball to every corner of this foreign field. By 
then battered bowlers were on the third ball of the innings and it was being 
belted around the ground by Karun Nair, who became only the second Indian to 
score a Test triple century – after Virender Sehwag, who has done so twice.

India battering may decide Alastair Cook’s England captaincy, says Bayliss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/india-battering-alastair-cook-england-test-captain-decision-trevor-bayliss-cricket>
Nair, in just his third Test innings, struck an unbeaten 303 in India’s 
gargantuan total of 759 for seven declared, which left England gasping for air. 
Throughout the day they had tottered on as if stuck in a desert with their 
water supplies running out rapidly, bearing their increasing discomfort with as 
stiff an upper lip as they could muster. Here was the agony endured by Ralph 
Fiennes in The English Patient or John Mills in Ice Cold in Alex and for 
England there are no happy endings in sight. Their deficit, despite that 
substantial first-innings score of 477, was 270 at the close and there is still 
a day to go. At least the first five overs of their second innings were safely 
negotiated by Alastair Cook and Keaton Jennings.

The prospect of bowling India out on another sapping day was no more than a 
mirage with Nair exceedingthe efforts of his Karnataka team-mate, KL Rahul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/india-england-fifth-test-day-three>
, in a devastating assault on a bowling attack equipped with dud ammunition. 
This was not Nair’s highest score in first-class cricket since he hit 328 
alongside Rahul in the Ranji Trophy final last year. But this was a Test match, 
where the bowling is supposed to be of a higher standard. Goodness knows how 
the Indian selectors will sort out the batting lineup in their next Test 
against Bangladesh after the contributions of the Karnataka kids. By then some 
familiar names, like Rohit Sharma and Ajinkya Rahane, will be fit again. But it 
is tough to drop a triple centurion.

The upshot is that England face a most uncomfortable final day at the end of a 
very long tour. Ostensibly there are no demons in this pitch – it is the 
flattest encountered in this seven-Test trip – but there are some tired bodies 
and minds in that England dressing room as well as the seductive prospect of 
holding one of those lovely boarding cards in their hands on Wednesday morning; 
in the Indian dressing room, by contrast, there is a hunger for another Test 
win. The key senior men, Virat Kohli, Ravi Ashwin and Ravindra Jadeja have not 
forgottenthe humiliations of 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/17/england-beat-india-fifth-test-third-day-match-report>
. For England Tuesday could become a very nasty ordeal at the end of an 
exhausting, chastening tour.

If any Englishman can look back with satisfaction on another day of heat and 
dust it is Liam Dawson, most obviously because he captured his first Test 
wicket, that of Murali Vijay, who was lbw for a paltry 29, and later amid the 
mayhem he snatched a second when Jadeja holed out to long-on. Dawson should 
also be pleased that he was catapulted into the position of being Cook’s most 
trusted and economical spinner, not that this was very difficult. In all he 
propelled 43 overs, which was more than anyone else, a significant badge of 
honour. After all their travails from Chittagong to Chennai Moeen Ali (one for 
190 from 41 overs) and Adil Rashid (one for 153 from 29.4) looked hollow shells 
with nothing left to give. Some nasty bowling figures reflect that.

Karun Nair reaches 300 for India against England: fifth Test, day four – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/19/india-v-england-fifth-test-day-four-live>
If you bat as long as Nair there is bound to be some good fortune along the 
way. On Sunday he was dropped by Cook off Jake Ball on 34; on Monday Joe Root 
was the culprit at slip with poor Ball the bowler yet again and Nair had 217 at 
the time. Ball, a wholehearted, undemonstrative man, nonetheless sank to his 
knees when he realised that another drop had deprived him of a third Test 
wicket. He has bowled with much spirit and purpose in his two Tests but he must 
be pining for Trent Bridge.

On 246 a tricky stumping chance off Moeen allowed Nair another reprieve. But 
there was no mistaking the potential of a pocket battleship, whose mien at the 
crease is faintly reminiscent of Allan Lamb three decades ago. He possesses a 
sound technique but there are plenty of modern additions such as the reverse 
sweep, the slog sweep and the uppercut over the keeper’s head, which blend with 
drives of classical purity.

The local favourite, Ashwin, contributed a mere 67; he was given out lbw to 
Jennings on 54 but the review overturned the decision. In fact Jennings had a 
much better shout with his first ball in Test cricket when Nair was on strike. 
Jennings, who bowls little medium pacers, was one of England’s better bowlers 
on this nightmarish day.

Eventually Ashwin was brilliantly caught in the gully by Jos Buttler, diving 
to his left, when the score was 616 and the statisticians delighted in the fact 
that no wicket had ever fallen in Test cricket on this score before. England’s 
delight was rather harder to discern. Nair now accelerated alongside Jadeja and 
suddenly 300 was in his sights and Kohli was happy to let him go for that 
landmark with an array of technicolour shots. So, too, was an enraptured crowd. 
Batting will not be quite such a carefree occupation on Tuesday.
 