
As the presidential election approaches and worries linger over whether 
millennial voters will turn out in key swing states 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/26/millenial-voters-us-election-trump-clinton-third-party-video>
, the Clinton campaign has turned to the unifying force of celebrity. A flurry 
of get out the vote concerts, headlined by Katy Perry, Jennifer Lopez, the 
National and others, will take place between Saturday and 8 November.

Vote Hollywood: ranking this presidential election's celebrity PSAs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/28/ranking-celebrity-psa-presidential-election-spots-ben-affleck-scarlett-johansson>
On Saturday, the same day early voting begins in Florida, Lopez will appear 
withHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> in 
Miami. But the biggest act will hold court in one of the most crucial swing 
states on 4 November. Four days before the final vote, Jay Z will host a 
concert in Cleveland, Ohio.

According to the Clinton campaign, he will do so “to encourage unity and urge 
Ohioans to support Clinton by voting early or on election day”.

For a campaign that has faced headwinds in its efforts to motivate young voters
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/29/hillary-clinton-millennial-voters-bernie-sanders-election>
 andAfrican American voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/hillary-clinton-black-millennial-voters>
 – and which according to aReal Clear Politics poll average 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/oh/ohio_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-5970.html>
 trails Donald Trump by 1.1% in Ohio – the Jay Z concert will present a key 
opportunity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Flets-get-loud-jlo-endorses-hillary-clinton-for-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20get%20loud%3A%20JLo%20endorses%20Hillary%20Clinton%20for%20president%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Flets-get-loud-jlo-endorses-hillary-clinton-for-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s%20get%20loud%3A%20JLo%20endorses%20Hillary%20Clinton%20for%20president%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Flets-get-loud-jlo-endorses-hillary-clinton-for-president-video&media=>
Let’s get loud: JLo endorses Hillary Clinton for president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/30/lets-get-loud-jlo-endorses-hillary-clinton-for-president-video>
According to campaign sources, the concert will feature multiple “special 
guests”, with Cleveland Cavaliers star LeBron James,a Clinton endorser 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/02/politics/lebron-james-endorses-hillary-clinton/>
, a possible addition to the program.

Jay Z’s concert will be the penultimate event in a series under the title Love 
Trumps Hate, following Lopez in Miami and the National in Cincinnati on 2 
November. On 5 November, Perry,a longtime and vocal supporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/katy-perry-naked-vote-reveals-more-than-she-wanted>
, will perform in Philadelphia.

This is not the first time the Clinton campaign has recruited entertainment 
industry powerhouses. At the conclusion of the Democratic national convention 
in July, Lady Gaga and Lenny Kravitz performed for Democratic delegates in a 
thank-you concert held in Camden, New Jersey.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHhYgGudYJQI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHhYgGudYJQI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHhYgGudYJQI&media=>
In August, Clinton appeared with Cher in Provincetown, Massachusetts, at a 
private fundraiser in the gay vacation destination. That appearance was marred 
slightly whenCher compared Trump to Adolf Hitler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/24/cher-trump-hitler-video> 
in front of a semi-drunk audience.

Katy Perry’s naked vote reveals more than she wanted | Barbara Ellen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/katy-perry-naked-vote-reveals-more-than-she-wanted>
But, by and large, celebrities have put their wattage to good use. Leonardo 
DiCaprio, Ben Affleck, Justin Timberlake and Scarlett Johanssonare just a few 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/28/ranking-celebrity-psa-presidential-election-spots-ben-affleck-scarlett-johansson>
 of the stars who want to help get Clinton elected, whether throughInstagram 
posts of ballots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/25/justin-timberlake-voting-selfie-illegal-tennessee>
 or earnest advertisements extolling the virtues of voting.

The concert program draws a sharp contrast to those celebrities who have made 
appearances on behalf of Trump.

Although the businessman vowed before the Republican convention to host a 
“winners circle” of movie stars and sports heroes, and has enjoyed support from 
New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady, the candidate’s celebrity 
surrogates have largely been tarnished glitterati.

Among them have been former underwear model Antonio Sabàto and Natalie Gulbis, 
who is currentlythe 597th-best <http://www.rolexrankings.com/en/rankings/> 
female golfer in the world.
 