
Imagine a two-tiered society with elite citizens, genetically engineered to be 
smarter, healthier and to live longer, and an underclass of biologically 
run-of-the-mill humans. It sounds like the plot of a dystopian novel, but the 
world could be sleepwalking towards this scenario, according to one of 
Britain’s most celebrated writers.

Kazuo Ishiguro argues that the social changes unleashed by gene editing 
technologies, such asCrispr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/22/crispr-chinese-first-gene-editing-trial-humans>
, could undermine core human values.

“We’re going into a territory where a lot of the ways in which we have 
organised our societies will suddenly look a bit redundant,” he said. “In 
liberal democracies, we have this idea that human beings are basically equal in 
some very fundamental way. We’re coming close to the point where we can, 
objectively in some sense, create people who are superior to others.”
. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=6e73ba30-55e7-4012-a91b-7b9a9e41e191>
Ishiguro spoke to the Guardian ahead of the opening of a new permanent 
mathematics gallery at the Science Museum in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland/gallery/2014/sep/10/mathematics-gallery-science-museum-zaha-hadid-pictures>
, which features a machine to predict coastal storm surges built by his 
oceanographer father, Shizuo Ishiguro.

The author hopes that the £5 million exhibition, and others like it, will 
encourage people to engage with the process of science and its future 
trajectory, rather than simply tuning in for the headline results of research 
and only then worrying about the implications.

“Despite the atom bomb and things like this, we’re still in the habit of 
compartmentalising scientific endeavour,” he said. “It’s important that we, as 
a society, get much more interested in science and maths, that we don’t silo it 
off in our minds ... until there’s some breakthrough product that turns up.”

Ishiguro cites three areas - gene editing, robotics and Artificial 
Intelligence - that he believes could transform the way we live and interact 
with each other over the next 30 years.

“We are on the brink of all kinds of discoveries that will completely alter 
the way we run our lives,” said the author, whose 2005 book,Never Let Me Go 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/never-let-me-go.html>, imagines a dark future 
in which humans clones are raised to be organ donors.

The gene editing tool, Crispr, allows scientists to cut, paste and delete 
single letters of the genome with unprecedented precision, meaningaberrant genes
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/16/breakthrough-as-gene-editing-technique-restores-sight-to-blind-animals>
 can be overwritten with working copies, and, potentially, functional genes 
replaced with enhanced versions. Chinese scientists arealready trialling the 
technology 
<http://www.nature.com/news/crispr-gene-editing-tested-in-a-person-for-the-first-time-1.20988>
 in patients to treat lung cancer.

“When you get to the point where you can say that person is actually 
intellectually or physically superior to another person because you have 
removed certain possibilities for that person getting ill… or because they’re 
enhanced in other ways, that has enormous implications for very basic values 
that we have,” said Ishiguro.

He also has concerns that in AI and robotics the bulk of intellectual capital 
lies with “the Silicon Valley masters of the universe” rather than universities 
or government-funded labs.

“There are some very powerful and rich people who want to do enormous research 
in this area,” he said. “Some of them might want to come out with things that 
are very beneficial, but it’s probably outside of regulation and so, yes, I 
think society as a whole needs to be more engaged.”

Ishiguro’s father, an oceanographer originally based in Nagasaki, moved with 
the family to Guildford, Surrey, to work at the National Institute of 
Oceanography in 1957, when Ishiguro was five.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fkazuo-ishiguro-were-coming-close-to-the-point-where-we-can-create-people-who-are-superior-to-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d41542981b5ff9bd303d91955332f3545e98505%2F0_162_1868_1121%2F1868.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kazuo%20Ishiguro%3A%20'We%E2%80%99re%20coming%20close%20to%20the%20point%20where%20we%20can%20create%20people%20who%20are%20superior%20to%20others'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fkazuo-ishiguro-were-coming-close-to-the-point-where-we-can-create-people-who-are-superior-to-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kazuo%20Ishiguro%3A%20%27We%E2%80%99re%20coming%20close%20to%20the%20point%20where%20we%20can%20create%20people%20who%20are%20superior%20to%20others%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fkazuo-ishiguro-were-coming-close-to-the-point-where-we-can-create-people-who-are-superior-to-others%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d41542981b5ff9bd303d91955332f3545e98505%2F0_162_1868_1121%2F1868.jpg>
 Dr Shizuo Ishiguro with his electronic analogue machine, which converted 
meteorological and ocean data into electrical signals on a series of wire 
meshes. This allowed the height of storm surges, and where and when they would 
make coastal impact, to be predicted. Photograph: Image courtesy of NOC Archive.
Despite the two countries having been at war just a decade previously, the 
family were made welcome, he said. “The British people of that era had a very 
sophisticated sense of the international community because they had come 
through the war,” he said. “They knew the difference between serious things and 
less serious things, [having] lived through a period when they thought they 
were going to be under Nazi occupation.”

Ishiguro contrasts this with the anti-immigrant rhetoric that dominated the 
Brexit and US election campaigns.

“We have become much more multi-cultural and much more cosmopolitan in many 
ways, but the attitude to, say, the refugee crisis, I think is quite different 
to what I remember from the Britain I grew up in,” he said.

His father’s electronic analogue machine, which is the size of a large 
wardrobe, converted meteorological and ocean data (wind speed, tidal motion, 
water depth and so on) into electrical signals on a series of wire meshes. This 
allowed the height of storm surges, and where and when they would make coastal 
impact, to be predicted. The system was originally developed to help Japanese 
fishing fleets, but modified to be applied to the North Sea, where floods 
following a storm surge in 1953 led to more than 2,000 deaths.

Ultimately, the machine was superseded by digital computers, but the scientist 
continued to perfect his creation in the family garden shed in Guildford until 
his death in 2007 – a fact Ishiguro describes as “entirely unsurprising”.

Despite having taken a different career path, Ishiguro inherited an obsessive 
attitude towards work from his father, he said, recalling him mulling over 
equations every evening while watching American thrillers on television.

“Looking back now I can see that the whole approach to his work is quite like 
my approach to my work as a writer,” he said. “He didn’t think of it as a job 
at all. It was something he obsessively thought about the whole time. That was 
my model.”

Mathematics: The Winton Gallery 
<http://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/visitmuseum/plan_your_visit/exhibitions/mathematics>
, designed by Zaha Hadid Architects, opens on 8 December. It spans 400 years of 
mathematics, focusing on ideas and objects that have influenced everyday lives.
 