
Senior Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> adviser 
Kellyanne Conway on Sunday appeared to threaten Senate minority leader Harry 
Reid with legal action for criticizing the president-elect, saying the senator 
should be “very careful about characterizing somebody in a legal sense”.

Donald Trump's immigration plans: start by deporting 3 million 'criminals'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-deportation-immigration-criminals>
In response, a Reid spokesman said: “Trump owes the nation leadership, not 
petty attempts to silence his critics.”

Reid did not seek re-election for his Nevada Senate seat this year, but was 
succeeded by a Democrat there.

In a statement released on Friday, after Trump visited Washington before 
returning to transition planning,Reid said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/democrats-harry-reid-elizabeth-warren-donald-trump>
: “If this is going to be a time of healing, we must first put the 
responsibility for healing where it belongs, at the feet of Donald Trump, a 
sexual predator who lost the popular vote and fueled his campaign with bigotry 
and hate.”

Trump is on course to lose the popular vote to Hillary Clinton by about 2m 
ballots 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/11/opinion/clintons-substantial-popular-vote-win.html?mtrref=www.theguardian.com&gwh=BA88C88F41EA54C774F8812B4FB517A8&gwt=pay&assetType=opinion>
, as votes are continuing to be counted, but he defeated Clinton by at least
290-228 in the electoral college 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-results-live-clinton-trump>
, winning the presidency.

Over the course of his campaign, Trump proposed a ban on Muslims entering the 
country,called Mexicans “rapists” and criminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/30/trump-comments-mexico-rapists-planned-deposition-video>
, encouraged the “birther 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/trump-birther-claims-chris-christie-mike-pence>
” conspiracy about Barack Obama, has been slow to disavowexpressions of support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/former-ku-klux-klan-leader-and-us-alt-right-hail-election-result>
 from far right groups and has beenaccused of using antisemitic imagery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/senator-al-franken-accuses-donald-trump-of-launching-antisemitic-tv-ad>
 in ads and onsocial media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/02/donald-trump-star-of-david-tweet-hillary-clinton>
.

After the publication of an Access Hollywood tape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 in which Trump bragged about making sexual advances without consent,13 women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/donald-trump-rape-lawsuit-13-year-old-cancels-public-event>
 came forward to accuse him of inappropriate sexual behaviour or assault. Trump 
has denied all the claims andthreatened to sue his accusers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/donald-trump-gettysburg-contract-with-america-sue-accusers-hillary-clinton>
.

Conway told Fox News Sunday that Reid’s comments deserved repudiation from 
Barack Obama, because “everybody is looking for a peaceful transition here in 
the name of democracy and you’ve got the Senate minority leader acting like 
some garden variety political pundit”.

“I find Harry Reid’s public comments and insults about Donald Trump and other 
Republicans to be beyond the pale,” she said. “They’re incredibly 
disappointing. Talk about not wanting my children to listen to somebody.

“And he should be very careful about characterizing somebody in a legal 
sense,” she continued. “He thinks he’s just being some kind of political pundit 
there, but I would say be very careful about the way you characterize it.”

Conway denied that she was suggesting Trump might sue, but Reid’s deputy chief 
of staff, Adam Jentleson, issued a statement in response.

“It only took five days for President-elect Trump to try to silence his 
critics with the threat of legal action,” he said. “This should shock and 
concern all Americans.

“Trump has always used threats and intimidation,” Jentleson said. “Now he 
wants to silence a discussion of the acts of hate and threats of violence being 
committed in his name across the country. Silencing this discussion normalizes 
hate and intimidates the victims.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-accusers-could-still-sue-defamation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20accusers%20could%20still%20sue%20for%20defamation%2C%20says%20lawyer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-accusers-could-still-sue-defamation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20accusers%20could%20still%20sue%20for%20defamation%2C%20says%20lawyer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-accusers-could-still-sue-defamation-video&media=>
Trump accusers could still sue for defamation, says lawyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/11/trump-accusers-could-still-sue-defamation-video>
In the days since Trump’s victory, reports of alleged hate crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-spike-us-donald-trump-president>
 have been common across the country.

“Instead of rising to the responsibility of his office,” Jentleson said, 
“Trump is hiding behind his Twitter account and sending his staff on TV to 
threaten his critics.

My journeys in Trumpland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house>
“If this is going to be a time of healing, Trump must take action immediately 
to stop the acts of hate and threats of violence that are being committed in 
his name across the country.”

Referring to continuing anti-Trump protests across the country and a march by 
10,000 or more people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/anti-trump-protests-new-york-portland-shooting>
 in New York City on Saturday, which was halted near Trump Tower, Conway said 
Reid was “egging people on”.


“I walked right into the firestorm yesterday getting into Trump Tower,” she 
said. “A lot of these protesters are not there peacefully, are not there 
because they just want to express themselves and make a point or make the 
difference.

“They are there for nefarious conditions, they’re booing us, spitting on us. 
They’re causing all kinds of havoc.”
 