
Kenyan university student Edwin Inganji was happily pursuing his passion – 
computer science – until he lost his laptop in an armed robbery. Beaten and 
bruised, and wondering how he could call for help since his mobile phone had 
also been stolen, Inganji came up with a new coding idea: what about a type of 
“panic button” app that could be activated quickly and silently, alerting the 
emergency services of your location and directing them straight to you?

Thus was born “Usalama” (Swahili for security), a smartphone app activated 
simply by shaking one’s phone three times, holding down the volume button, or 
tapping on the emergency icon. The app alerts the police, medical or fire 
authorities – as well as every other Usalama user within 200m – broadening the 
scope of help available to the person in need.

Had Inganji configured the app before the robbery, he could have reached into 
his pocket, shaken his phone and activated the app, and, perhaps, still lost it 
– but the police would have been notified of both the location of the crime, 
and the thieves’ new location, tracing them through GPS on Inganji’s stolen 
mobile phone.

Revealed: how raid by Kenyan police drove street children to their deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/exposed-kenyan-polices-brutal-attacks-on-street-children>
“In Nairobi, in Kenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> generally, 
reaching the emergency services when you need them is really difficult – the 
toll-free line just doesn’t go through,” says Inganji, 22. “Either you have to 
take yourself [to the police station or hospital], or have a witness take you. 
If no one is around to help you, most of the time you’re screwed.”

The government’s 999 emergency number was disconnected in 1998 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-23549168> amid claims that the state 
lacked both the personnel and the facilities to deal with callers. And since it 
was reconnected in 2013 – the year Inganji was mugged – the toll-free line has 
beenoverloaded with prank callers 
<http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2000089937/fight-against-crime-boosted-as-police-emergency-line-999-is-restored>
 asking for recipe ideas and hotel bookings.

Nairobi’s crime rate is twice the national average 
<http://www.the-star.co.ke/news/2016/07/20/crime-rate-in-nairobi-almost-twice-national-average-ipsos_c1390019>
, and armed street crime, carjackings, home invasions and kidnappingoccur at 
any time, anywhere 
<https://www.osac.gov/pages/ContentReportDetails.aspx?cid=19607>. Inganji’s 
app, which he developed with his classmates (who are co-founders), includes a 
database of all the crimes logged, which helps emergency services to know where 
most crimes are being committed, and as a result where best to position 
officers.

“It shows us where crime is happening but the services are failing to deploy,” 
says Inganji. “So it shows who is not being accountable, and should make the 
services act with more responsibility.”

The app requires the user to input three personal contacts – such as a spouse, 
parent or work colleague – who are notified alongside the services of any 
emergency situation, and are given updates every five minutes until the 
situation is resolved. In this way, the user’s contacts can also ensure 
services are accountable, says Inganji.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkenyas-panic-button-app-shake-of-phone-sends-distress-signal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7abf16f95933dbdfd2a696265c4d20bf5b0af5c4%2F0_0_7258_4839%2F7258.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kenya's%20'panic%20button'%20app%3A%20%20shake%20of%20phone%20sends%20distress%20signal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkenyas-panic-button-app-shake-of-phone-sends-distress-signal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kenya%27s%20%27panic%20button%27%20app%3A%20%20shake%20of%20phone%20sends%20distress%20signal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fkenyas-panic-button-app-shake-of-phone-sends-distress-signal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7abf16f95933dbdfd2a696265c4d20bf5b0af5c4%2F0_0_7258_4839%2F7258.jpg>
 Edwin Inganji, centre, at his office in Nairobi, with co-founders Marvin 
Makau, left, and Kenneth Gachukia, right. The ‘panic button’ app was 
shortlisted for an engineering innovation prize. Photograph: Brett Eloff/The 
Royal Academy of Engineering. 
Inganji and his team plan to broaden the app beyond its “panic button” use, 
with a platform where users can share safety news of crimes occurring in their 
immediate area, in turn alerting police but also warning other Usalama users of 
dangers in the vicinity. They also plan to make a “timer”, whereby a user can 
trigger a distress signal if they have not returned home by a set hour; as well 
as a “walk with me” feature, which allows users to escort one another home 
virtually and ensure that each party has returned safely (it is cancellable at 
any time by either user).

Ultimately, says Inganji, the app could fill a void that has plagued Kenya for 
years: a desperate need for security in almost all aspects of life. “We want it 
to be something that you use every day,” he says of the app. “Not just 
something you use when you’re in distress, but something that helps you feel 
safe.”


• Edwin Inganji’s app was shortlisted for the Royal Academy of Engineering’s 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> prize for engineering 
innovation
 