
For Khalid Abdalla, the boundary between life and art has repeatedly blurred 
and shifted over the past six years. The actor, best known for his roles in 
films such asThe Kite Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/121902/kite-runner> and Green Zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/133271/green-zone>, has portrayed a 
film-maker struggling to finish a documentary in the tense political climate of 
pre-revolutionary Cairo, starred in a documentary about the 2011 revolution, 
actually documented the same uprising and its troubled aftermath, and set up a 
film centre in the Egyptian capital to support independent film-makers.

Khalid Abdalla: from movies to Tahrir Square
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/03/khalid-abdalla-movie-star-tahrir-square-united-93>
Juggling these politically sensitive projects, Abdalla says he felt 
“profoundly trapped in a loop”. From being at the centre of the anti-government 
protests in Tahrir Square, he has since experienced the optimism of the 
revolution give way to disillusionment. With the rise ofPresident  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>, he now finds himself 
precariously navigating a new crackdown on Egyptian artists and activists that 
recalls the corruption and brutality of the ousted Mubarak regime.

Just to compound the sense of deja vu, Abdalla is currently promoting his 
latest film,In the Last Days of the City 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IiFlSxEGnQU>, which finished shooting in Cairo 
six weeks before mass demonstrations broke out acrossEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> on 25 January 2011. The actor plays a 
film-maker, also called Khalid, in the midst of a creative and personal crisis, 
seemingly unable to find a direction for his documentary, failing to find a new 
flat and coming to terms with a breakup – circumstances complicated by the 
everyday chaos of the city and the organised violence of the regime.


“He is the kind of person that you’re actually afraid you are, who’s nice 
enough and warm enough, a good enough person but not special,” says the actor. 
“He’s been a difficult character to live with.”

Yet the actor says there is something progressive about the ineffectual nature 
of his alter ego. “The hero [in western and Arab cinema] is frankly someone who 
normally kills us. Whether it’s the patriarchal or the political, they’re 
essentially what we’re revolting against.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fkhalid-abdalla-interview-in-the-last-days-of-the-city-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F063f0e5da5aa44f9bead12c76bd9dff817ec1b88%2F0_166_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Khalid%20Abdalla%3A%20'I%20didn't%20have%20the%20right%20to%20play%20Arab%20roles%20unless%20I%20had%20lived%20the%20struggle'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fkhalid-abdalla-interview-in-the-last-days-of-the-city-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Khalid%20Abdalla%3A%20%27I%20didn%27t%20have%20the%20right%20to%20play%20Arab%20roles%20unless%20I%20had%20lived%20the%20struggle%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fkhalid-abdalla-interview-in-the-last-days-of-the-city-egypt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F063f0e5da5aa44f9bead12c76bd9dff817ec1b88%2F0_166_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
 Abdalla in The Kite Runner, 2007. Photograph: Snap Stills/Rex 
In person, Abdalla, 35, exudes the same quiet intensity as the character he 
portrays. Polite and soft-spoken, his answers are often steeped in political or 
cultural theory and he can examine or unpick an idea – sometimes exhaustively – 
from every angle. But unlike his fictional counterpart, the actor’s 
intellectual curiosity does not deter him from action.

Abdalla was in London when the revolution broke out on 25 January 2011, but 
quickly returned to Cairo to join the anti-government demonstrations. He 
immersed himself in the political and cultural change overtaking Egypt, helping 
to found the media collectiveMosireen <http://mosireen.org/> (meaning “we are 
determined”) to document the protests in Tahrir Square, shooting on the 
frontline of clashes with the police and the army. For the past five years, he 
has been helping to assemble a digital archive of these historic events from 
thousands of hours of footage shot by the collective, protestors and 
eye-witnesses. “I hadn’t picked up a camera before In the Last Days of the 
City,” he says. “I played a version of who I’ve become.”

As Abdalla puts it, the film was made with a sense of foresight and edited 
with a sense of hindsight. Footage shot amid actual anti-government 
demonstrations in Cairo in 2010 took on new meaning after the revolution broke 
out but the actor denies the film anticipated the uprising.

“It’s not like we had any special insight in terms of what was going to 
happen,” he says. “The film’s title was decided in 2008. It’s just that the 
situation was so awful, things couldn’t carry on like they were. There was a 
strong sense that something was going to shift and the whole country knew that 
… What you see extremely in the film is a people, city, buildings that have 
been broken down. Broken in the way that you break down animals.”

Meanwhile, the film’s portrayal of media censorship, state propaganda and 
police oppression – in one scene officers grab a man off the streets and beat 
him in a side alley – remains all too recognisable. “Scenes we captured so 
innocently pre-revolution have resonance in the [current] counter-revolution 
situation,” says Abdalla. “Everyone jokingly says that things have gone back to 
the way they were [before the revolution] and the film embraces [that].”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fkhalid-abdalla-interview-in-the-last-days-of-the-city-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9072e8ca7816300102f5dc3e842978ee921e9b1e%2F295_0_1187_712%2F1187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Khalid%20Abdalla%3A%20'I%20didn't%20have%20the%20right%20to%20play%20Arab%20roles%20unless%20I%20had%20lived%20the%20struggle'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fkhalid-abdalla-interview-in-the-last-days-of-the-city-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Khalid%20Abdalla%3A%20%27I%20didn%27t%20have%20the%20right%20to%20play%20Arab%20roles%20unless%20I%20had%20lived%20the%20struggle%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fkhalid-abdalla-interview-in-the-last-days-of-the-city-egypt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9072e8ca7816300102f5dc3e842978ee921e9b1e%2F295_0_1187_712%2F1187.jpg>
 Khalid Abdalla in a scene from In the Last Days of the City. Photograph: Zero 
Production 
This perhaps explains why In the Last Days of the City has just been excluded 
from theCairo international film festival <http://ciff.org.eg/> (CIFF), where 
it was due to have its Middle East and North Africa premiere on 17 November. 
The official reason, given by the festival board ina letter sent after the film 
was shown at the London film festival 
<https://www.facebook.com/daysofthecity/posts/980893552022540> last month, is 
that it has had too many international screenings, but Abdalla suspects the 
truth is more political. More than300 film-makers and cultural figures 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/5/32/247159/Arts--Culture/Film/In-the-Last-Days-of-the-City-continues-to-fight-fo.aspx>
 have published a letter calling on CIFF, which is organised by Egypt’s 
ministry of culture, to reverse the decision.

“It’s a heartbreaking situation for us,” says Abdalla. “Their last-minute 
deselection has left us without aMiddle East and North Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast> festival premiere, and sabotaged 
our plans. We just hope it’s not a sign of what’s to come from censorship.”

I first met Abdalla in Cairo in March 2014, when he was helping to establish 
Cimatheque <http://cimatheque.org/>, an alternative film centre in downtown 
Cairo, near Tahrir Square, co-founded with the director of In the Last Days of 
the City, Tamer El Said. This was, he tells me two and a half years later, the 
darkest period in his life. The revolutionary movement was reeling from the 
return to military rule following a coup in July 2013 that ousted Egypt’s first 
elected president, Mohamed Morsi, theRabaa massacre the following month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/16/rabaa-massacre-egypt-human-rights-watch>
, when hundreds of Morsi’s supporters were killed in clashes with the security 
services, and the subsequent declaration of a state of emergency and curfews 
across the country.

As a star of The Square <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-square>, the 
award-winning 2013 documentary about the revolution and the subsequent 
political fallout, Abdalla was a highly visible figure and understandably 
anxious of reprisals by the authorities. One of his friends, who I interviewed 
days before, had recently burned the source material for his artworks after his 
flat was raided by the secret police.

“I hit the darkest place I’d ever hit at the end of 2013/beginning of 2014,” 
Abdalla recalls. “TheRabaa massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/16/egypt-massacre-morsi-clashes-mosques>
 had happened and the whole country was under curfew. Mosireen was under 
threat. The Square was coming out. Cimatheque was being built. I was living in 
one room in my parents’ house. I was suffocating myself between the split of 
focus of all of this.

“I had a point where I would be woken up by the negativity of my thoughts 
attacking me for an hour or longer. I couldn’t get rid of the thoughts. It was 
an hour and a half of attack in the morning. Me staring into space. Just blank 
walls, a loop of thoughts. The sense of the abyss was overwhelming.”

How did he resurface from that hole? “This will sound really pretentious, but 
what got me out of it was as soon as I would hear that voice, I’d pick up a 
book and drown it out with someone else’s words, which I actually wanted to 
hear,” he says. “Books of history and the philosophy of revolution, Gilles 
Deleuze, a lot of economics, stuff that was bigger than me. Reading all of this 
became therapeutic.”

Abdalla’s choice of self-help reflects his deep political convictions and the 
sense of having a responsibility to pursue a life and career that doesn’t 
compromise those ideals. Born in Glasgow to Egyptian parents and brought up in 
London, activism is part of his heritage. His father, Hossam, was a leading 
student activist in the 1970s and his paternal grandfather, Ibrahim Saad 
El-Din, was a respected leftist economist. Both men were imprisoned several 
times because of their politics.

So it is perhaps unsurprising that Abdalla’s filmography reads like a guide to 
the 21st century’s geopolitical crises:United 93 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/111619/united.93> (9/11), The Kite 
Runner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/121902/kite-runner> (the Afghan 
war),Green Zone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/133271/green-zone> (the 
Iraq war), and The Square (the Egyptian revolution). His next project, out in 
2017, is a documentary calledThe Vote <http://chickeneggpics.org/film/the-vote/>
, about the first Egyptian election after Mubarak’s fall, co-directed by his 
sister,Hanan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tFeI1mrfTW8>, and his wife, 
Cressida Trew.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fkhalid-abdalla-interview-in-the-last-days-of-the-city-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1516a72b08262512b0efbb6563444fce18feea4%2F0_171_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Khalid%20Abdalla%3A%20'I%20didn't%20have%20the%20right%20to%20play%20Arab%20roles%20unless%20I%20had%20lived%20the%20struggle'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fkhalid-abdalla-interview-in-the-last-days-of-the-city-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Khalid%20Abdalla%3A%20%27I%20didn%27t%20have%20the%20right%20to%20play%20Arab%20roles%20unless%20I%20had%20lived%20the%20struggle%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fkhalid-abdalla-interview-in-the-last-days-of-the-city-egypt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1516a72b08262512b0efbb6563444fce18feea4%2F0_171_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
 Paul Greengrass ( left) and Khalid Abdalla (right) on set of the film United 
93. Photograph: Moviestore Collection/Rex 
“I started my career not seeing my colour,” says Abdalla. “But I graduated 
from university in 2003, right after the war in Iraq started and while I was 
there, 9/11 happened. And the films have asked me the question: am I willing to 
live up to the responsibilities they put in front of me? The last 10 years has 
been me going into Hollywood cinema, playing Arab roles. I had a right to do 
that but I don’t feel I had a right to make a career of it without living in 
the Arab world and without struggling in Arab cinema.”

Abdalla’s recent return to London sees him taking on a new but happier 
responsibility – fatherhood. His son Nawar’s name means one who brings light. 
“We certainly need it,” he says, smiling. “I’m extremely happy I have a child 
now. I feel freed by it.”

Yet the actor will return to Cairo in this month, staying until just before 
Christmas. “Then in January we work out what to do afterwards,” he says. “We’ve 
understood that there has to be a lifetime of living in both places. I can’t 
leaveEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> and I can’t leave here. 
Part of that struggle is the arc of my family and I don’t want to burden my 
child with it.”

What hope does he have now for a democratic Egypt to emerge from the remains 
of the revolution? “The situation right now is horrendous – economically, 
politically, socially,” he says. “I don’t know whether it’s going to go from 
worse to worse or whether there’s another watershed moment that no one will 
easily put their faith in. Everything’s closing down. But we’re going to try to 
salvage as much as we can. I feel the need to live for that whatever the cost.”

• In the Last Days of the City 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/festivals/in-the-last-days-of-the-city-review-berlin-film-festival-1201705591/>
 will be screenedon 5 November at the ICA 
<https://www.ica.org.uk/whats-on/film-africa-last-days-city-akher-ayam-el-madina-qa>
, London, as part of theFilm Africa 
<https://www.ica.org.uk/whats-on/film-africa> festival. There will be a Q&A 
session with Khalid Abdalla and co-star Laila Samy afterwards.
 