
If everyone who saw it donated a pound, the annual US aid budget for Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> would have been raised in barely a 
week.

Since Monday, 70 million people have watched Kony2012, a viral web video about 
Joseph Kony <https://www.theguardian.com/world/joseph-kony>, the Ugandan 
warlord of the Lord's Resistance Army militia, which has won enthusiastic 
praise from millions of viewers but also criticism from human rights activists 
and Ugandan journalists.

For Invisible Children, the aid group that produced the video, the viewing 
figures represent money in the bank: the group raised $5m (£3.2m) in just 48 
hours after uploading the film, which makes an explicit call for contributions.

What will happen to those funds is unclear: financial statements for Invisible 
Children show that only 32% of the $8.6m it raised last year went to direct 
services in northern Uganda. Invisible Children did not return calls for 
comment.

Maria Burnett, a researcher on Uganda for Human Rights Watch, said: "What it 
leads to remains to be seen, but the goal to bring pressure on key leaders, to 
protect civilians and to apprehend LRA leadership is important."

Jonah Peretti, a social media expert, founder of the social publishing site 
Buzzfeed <http://www.buzzfeed.com/>, said Kony2012's success was due to its 
focus on social media itself rather than gruesome images. "The horrific stuff 
is only shown very briefly. And then the video quickly transitions to inspiring 
things you can do to change the situation. There's this upbeat music and … an 
emotional high.

"People care about these tragedies but they also want everyone to know they 
care. Sharing the Kony2012 video is a great way to tell all your friends that 
you are someone who cares about the world, wants to make a difference, and is 
participating in fighting evil personified."
 