
Fifty years ago, a wall of art consisting of stone, cement and found objects 
was removed from a small barn in the English Lake District and transported 120 
miles away to Newcastle. The installation,Kurt Schwitters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jan/19/kurt-schwitters-artist-order-chaos>
’ Merz Barn wall, can now be viewed at the city’sHatton Gallery 
<https://hattongallery.org.uk/collections/kurt-schwitters-merz-barn-wall>, but 
theoriginal barn <http://www.merzbarn.net/elterwatermerzba.html> still stands 
in Elterwater.

The Observer’s correspondent described the day in September 1965 when the wall 
was eased down a slope and onto a transporter:
The Observer, 26 September 1965.
 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/9/23/1443014631603/Obs-26-Sept-1965-001.jpg>
 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/9/23/1443014631603/Obs-26-Sept-1965-001.jpg>
A £10,00 barn wall moves on
Ambleside, September 25

Seventeen years after his death it has required an ingenious civil engineering 
exercise and a protracted road haulage operation to reveal for public 
appraisement the proudest work of a brilliant German artist.

Kurt Schwitters’s “Merzbarn” is certain to attract great interest when it is 
eventually put on view in a new section of the FineArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Department at Newcastle 
University.

Reactions are predictable. The aesthetes will admire it. The sceptics will 
find it hard to believe that it could possibly be worth £10,000-plus, or that 
its removal to Newcastle from a remote valley in the Lake District could have 
cost £5,000.

 Schwitters, a highly talented conventional artist, made a precarious living 
painting portraits and landscapes after fleeing from the Nazis, first to 
Norway, then to Britain.

While he was living in lodgings at Ambleside, Westmorland, at the end of the 
war, he asked Mr Harry Pierce, whose portrait he was painting at the time, if 
he could use his old barn.

Junk materials
Schwitters took a daily four-mile bus ride to the dry-stone barn at 
Elterwater, and after several months his masterpiece covered a 7½ ft by 12½ ft 
section of one of the barn walls.

The rough stone provided a key for a few hundredweights of plaster which 
Schwitters moulded into sweeping shapes set with odd bits of junk like a broken 
drainpipe, part of a wheel, bamboo canes and the rose of a watering-can.

He completed the mural in various colours, most of which have since faded or 
worn off in the damp barn. Altogether it is a strange confection of line and 
colour which experts now regard as one of the foremost examples of abstract art.

Mr Pierce, an 80-year-old retired landscape gardener with a deep respect for 
Schwitters’s work, realised that the “Merzbarn” – a name which has no literal 
interpretation – was deteriorating and offered it as a gift to any deserving 
gallery who could get it away. The Tate wanted it, but were advised that its 
removal was impracticable.
 The exterior of the Merz Barn in 2012. Photograph: Mark Pinder 
Two-day journey
The Professor Kenneth Rowntree, head of the Fine Art Department at Newcastle 
University, stepped in. He had a survey made of the barn, discovered that the 
removal of the Merzbarn was feasible and raised £5,000 in grants and gifts to 
pay for the delicate operation.

Six workmen spent two months preparing the wall by painstakingly removing the 
dry-stone outer shell and replacing it with concrete.

Today and tomorrow all 23 tons of it will be eased on skids down a 150-yard 
slope to the road and loaded on to a transporter which will take at least two 
days to cover the 120 miles to Newcastle.

A background feature about the Kurt Schwitters panel appeared in the Guardian 
on 13 July 1965.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Fkurt-schwitters-merz-barn-1965%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443014501935%2F219747b5-806f-493b-9726-b212fbc44482-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kurt%20Schwitters'%20Merz%20Barn%20wall%20moves%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Fkurt-schwitters-merz-barn-1965%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kurt%20Schwitters%27%20Merz%20Barn%20wall%20moves%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Fkurt-schwitters-merz-barn-1965%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443014501935%2F219747b5-806f-493b-9726-b212fbc44482-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Guardian, 13 July 1965.Click to read the full article. 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/9/23/1443023486538/Merzbarn-13-July-1965-001.jpg> 