
This week’s biggest stories

Many people are afraid of mice, but these ones really take the (cheese) 
biscuit: a study designed to examine the predatory instinct in mice successfully
used optogenetics to switch their killer instincts off and on at will 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jan/12/scientists-use-light-to-trigger-walking-dead-killer-instinct-in-mice-optogenetics>
. In a slightly more romantic(? maybe not) vein, a malesnow monkey was observed 
attempting to mate with female sika deer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jan/10/snow-monkey-attempts-sex-with-deer-in-rare-example-of-interspecies-mating>
 in Japan. This is only the second recorded example of sexual relations between 
two distantly related species, and could be down to “mate deprivation”, say 
researchers. In more heartwarming news, scientists have studied theimpact of 
babytalk on dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jan/11/puppies-response-to-speech-could-shed-light-on-baby-talk-suggests-study>
, concluding that that puppies respond well to it, but older dogs are unmoved. 
It might also shed light on the way humans communicate with actual babies. And 
if animals aren’t your thing, don’t despair: there’s someexciting knot news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jan/12/knotty-professors-chemists-break-world-record-to-create-tightest-knot-ever-made>
 as well! Chemists have broken a world record, creating tightest knot ever made 
– a microscopic circular triple helix built from a strand of atoms, which could 
make a whole new world of materials possible. And if even that’s knot (aha!) 
enough to banish the January blues, perhaps the possibility of rare thundersnow 
might interest you.This video explains it all  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/12/what-is-thundersnow-video-explainer>
AND contains one of the most excitable reactions to weather I’ve ever 
witnessed. In more serious news,medical and legal specialists have warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jan/11/new-fertility-procedure-may-lead-to-embryo-farming-warn-researchers-in-vitro-gametogenesis>
 that recent breakthroughs in fertility procedures could lead to “embryo 
farming” on a massive scale and drive parents to have only “ideal” future 
children – and that we must start to plan for the potential impact on society 
now.

More news from Guardian Science <https://www.theguardian.com/science> | Sign 
up to Lab notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/07/sign-up-for-lab-notes-the-guardians-weekly-science-update>

___

The Friday feature
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b6d1a4f80c3cd2ea54645d814a462106a5243f8%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lab%20notes%3A%20killer%20mice%20and%20interspecies%20sex%20put%20the%20'wild'%20in%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lab%20notes%3A%20killer%20mice%20and%20interspecies%20sex%20put%20the%20%27wild%27%20in%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b6d1a4f80c3cd2ea54645d814a462106a5243f8%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Split hinges on a condition known as dissociative identity disorder (DID), 
formerly known as split personality, or multiple personality disorder, and 
frequently mislabelled as schizophrenia. Photograph: UNIVERSAL 
M Night Shyamalan’s new movie, Split, stars James McAvoy as a character with 
23 different personalities. And, like most screen portrayals of the disorder, 
it is seen as dangerous and violent. Butwhat’s the truth behind the stigma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/12/cinema-dissociative-personality-disorder-split-james-mcavoy>
?

__

Straight from the lab – top picks from our experts on the blog network
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd42578c13465910d1053c78fa60ef281a8e79dc7%2F0_2_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lab%20notes%3A%20killer%20mice%20and%20interspecies%20sex%20put%20the%20'wild'%20in%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lab%20notes%3A%20killer%20mice%20and%20interspecies%20sex%20put%20the%20%27wild%27%20in%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd42578c13465910d1053c78fa60ef281a8e79dc7%2F0_2_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Grigori Yefimovich Rasputin, a mystic and spiritual healer born in Pokrovskoe 
in Siberia, wielded huge influence over the Russian royal family, particularly 
Alexandra, the Tsarina. Photograph: Kachelhoffer Clement/Corbis via Getty Images
Poisoned, shot and beaten: why cyanide alone may have failed to kill Rasputin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2017/jan/13/poisoned-shot-and-beaten-why-cyanide-may-have-failed-to-kill-rasputin>
 | Notes & Theories

The whole account sounds fanciful from start to finish, but remarkable things 
do happen. Human beings have achieved incredible physical feats in spite of 
horrible injuries. During a duel in the sixteenth century one man received a 
stab wound directly to the heart but still managed to run 230 yards to chase 
down his opponent before collapsing. Maybe Rasputin really was still alive 
after the first shot and capable of a fight. But what about the poison? Surely 
no one could eat so much cyanide with so little effect?

Why do people persist in beliefs that are wrong – and even harmful? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2017/jan/12/why-do-people-persist-in-beliefs-that-are-wrong-and-even-harmful>
 | Occam’s corner

Even more powerfully, there are strong evolutionary reasons why these beliefs 
persist even in the face of overwhelmingly contrary evidence. Apparent 
irrationality, argue the Gormans, can be a survival mechanism. Our species has 
got this far by making quick inferences based on scarce information, inferring 
causality where there may be none, and avoiding actions that have an 
infinitesimal risk of a nonetheless deadly outcome. We cannot easily escape our 
evolutionary chains.

Palaeontologists reveal 350m-year-old tropical Scotland bursting with life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jan/11/palaeontologists-reveal-350m-year-old-tropical-scotland-bursting-with-life>
 | Lost Worlds Revisited

Tiny is a rare fossil indeed. She comes from a time in the rock record that 
has traditionally yielded very few fossils. This time was namedRomer’s Gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/19/fossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land>
, after the scientist who identified the paucity, and it has achieved 
palaeontological notoriety both as an intriguing enigma, and because this 
enigma obscures the development of the first animals to live on land. What 
caused the gap? Mass extinction? Low oxygen? Or is there no gap at all, are we 
just not looking hard enough? Recent finds from Southern Scotland (including 
Tiny) suggest the latter may be true, yielding exciting new fossils of the 
earliest land-living vertebrates.

Visit the Science blog network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/series/science-blog-network>


___


Monday Mind Games
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee1109cc6851eee3e035d18668dfad0132ddf258%2F0_147_5241_3145%2F5241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lab%20notes%3A%20killer%20mice%20and%20interspecies%20sex%20put%20the%20'wild'%20in%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lab%20notes%3A%20killer%20mice%20and%20interspecies%20sex%20put%20the%20%27wild%27%20in%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee1109cc6851eee3e035d18668dfad0132ddf258%2F0_147_5241_3145%2F5241.jpg>
 In November last year, the dress <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EqolSvoWNck> 
that Marilyn Monroe wore to sing Happy Birthday to President John F Kennedy 
sold for$4.81 million <http://www.juliensauctions.com/>. Photograph: 
SNAP/REX/Shutterstock 
Celebrity items tend to be relatively common artefacts, yet attract phenomenal 
sums of money Britney Spears’ chewing gum being a case in point). Why? This 
week’sMind Game explores the ‘magic’ of celebrity memorabilia.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2017/jan/09/why-do-people-pay-thousands-for-celebrity-memorabilia>

Visit the Head quarters blog, home of Mind Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters>

___


Science Weekly podcast
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfde271102688861056e344e4ba6cb6e097d17b4%2F0_123_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lab%20notes%3A%20killer%20mice%20and%20interspecies%20sex%20put%20the%20'wild'%20in%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lab%20notes%3A%20killer%20mice%20and%20interspecies%20sex%20put%20the%20%27wild%27%20in%20wildlife&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flab-notes-killer-mice-and-interspecies-sex-put-the-wild-in-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfde271102688861056e344e4ba6cb6e097d17b4%2F0_123_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
 Are we born knowing the rules of language? Photograph: Alamy 
In the 1960s, world-renowned MIT linguist Professor Noam Chomsky declared his 
theory of Universal Grammar (UG). Often defined as “a system of categories, 
mechanisms and constraints, shared by all human languages and considered to be 
innate”, Chomsky’s idea that children are somehow born with access to rules of 
language is, to this day, vehemently refuted. But what’s the evidence for and 
against UG? And what are some of the alternatives?Join the Science weekly 
podcast team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2017/jan/11/universal-grammar-are-we-born-knowing-the-rules-of-language-science-weekly-podcast>
for all this and more.

___

Eye on science – this week’s top video
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpress-paws-point-of-view-camera-reveals-polar-bears-in-action-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Press%20paws%3A%20point-of-view%20camera%20reveals%20polar%20bears%20in%20action%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpress-paws-point-of-view-camera-reveals-polar-bears-in-action-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Press%20paws%3A%20point-of-view%20camera%20reveals%20polar%20bears%20in%20action%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpress-paws-point-of-view-camera-reveals-polar-bears-in-action-video&media=>
Press paws: point-of-view camera reveals polar bears in action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2017/jan/10/press-paws-point-of-view-camera-reveals-polar-bears-in-action-video>
Scientists from the US Geological Survey (USGS) attached a camera to a female 
polar’s neck to study behaviour, hunting and feeding rates. Yes, yes, yes 
there’s science involved, but I find it fascinating purely for the incredible 
sensation of seeing what the bears see.
 