
After spending tens of millions of dollars in hopes of electing Hillary 
Clinton, the labor movement fears that President-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, the Republican-controlled 
Congress and the supreme court will be hostile to labor and take numerous steps 
to hobble unions.


 These steps can range from appointing a National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) 
that does business’s bidding to erasing an array of Obama administration 
regulations, including one making overtime pay available to millions more 
workers.

“These are going to be some challenging times,” said Lee Saunders, president 
of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, which has 
1.3 million members. “We’re just going to have to hunker down.”

Trump's conflicts of interest take White House into uncharted territory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest-business>
Saunders, who is chairman of the AFL-CIO’s political committee, fears that 
Congress might enact a so-called nationalright-to-work law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/10/wisconsin-right-to-work-law-union-supreme-court>
, which would prohibit any requirement that employees at unionized 
private-sector workplaces pay union fees. Saunders also worries that the 
supreme court – after Trump nominates a presumably conservative justice to fill 
the vacancy left by Antonin Scalia’s death – will rule that government 
employees can’t be required to pay union fees.

 Labor leaders fear that such moves would encourage many workers not to pay 
anything to unions representing them, depleting union treasuries and making 
unions weaker in bargaining, lobbying and politics. Many Republican lawmakers 
are eager to weaken unions because they are major supporters and funders of the 
Democratic party.

 After Scalia died, the supreme court deadlocked, 4-4, in a case, Friedrichs v 
California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/09/supreme-court-friedrichs-case-public-sector-unions-doom>
, in which a public school teacher asserted that a requirement that she pay 
fees to the union representing her violated her first amendment rights. “There 
are at least 27 cases in the lower courts that would do the same thing 
Friedrichs would have, and you have to expect that one of those cases will 
bubble up to the supreme court,” Saunders said. “That will be a major challenge 
for us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Funions-labor-movement-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3222764807e654cc51a9e138c24dc95cb425a55c%2F0_307_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labor%20movement%20braces%20for%20three-front%20battle%20with%20Trump%2C%20Congress%20and%20courts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Funions-labor-movement-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labor%20movement%20braces%20for%20three-front%20battle%20with%20Trump%2C%20Congress%20and%20courts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Funions-labor-movement-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3222764807e654cc51a9e138c24dc95cb425a55c%2F0_307_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 People against the California Teachers Union rally in front of the US Supreme 
Court building January 11, 2016 in Washington, DC. There are another 27 
anti-union cases pending Photograph: Mark Wilson/Getty Images 
 Missouri’s new Republican governor, Eric Greiten, with the help of his 
state’s Republican-controlled legislature, has signaled he will push for a 
“right-to-work” law, following in the footsteps ofWisconsin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/09/governor-scott-walker-signs-wisconsin-right-to-work-bill-law>
 andMichigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/11/michigan-right-to-work-bills-unions>
. And with Republicans winning a supermajority in both houses of the 
Pennsylvania legislature, they might be able to enact such a law over a likely 
veto by the state’s Democratic governor.

 Marshall Babson, an employment lawyer who served on the NLRB under president 
Ronald Reagan, said he wasn’t sure whether Trump would push to hobble labor 
unions. “How much this guy cares about labor issues and whether he’s going to 
do anything about them, I have no idea,” Babson said.

But he said Congressional Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> were eager to enact 
anti-union measures and would press Trump to go along. Babson said Trump was 
likely to appoint business-friendly NLRB members who would seek to reverse 
pro-union decisions made by the Democratic-controlled board under Obama. He 
predicted that a Trump board would undo a rule that has sped up union 
representation elections, giving companies less time to fight against 
unionization efforts.

 Babson said a Trump board, backed by the nation’s business community, would 
scrap efforts by the Obama NLRB to make it easier to declare employers like 
McDonald’s joint employers with their individual franchisees. Joint employer 
status would make McDonald’s, Burger King and other giant franchising companies 
co-responsible for legal violations by franchisees and more vulnerable to 
unionization drives.

A Trump board, Babson said, would take aim an another Obama board initiative – 
one that bars employers from making workers sign waivers that prohibit them 
from bringing class actions on employment-related issues, like wage violations 
or sex discrimination. And there’s a good chance the Trump NLRB would reverse 
the Obama board’s decision to give graduate students at private universities 
the right to unionize.

If the NLRB doesn’t take such actions, the Republican-controlled Congress 
might seek to. “The other hot issue on the Hill is workers using their 
employer’s computer system for unionizing,” Babson said. The Obama board has 
ruled that employees have the right to use their company’s email system for 
union-related activity if they’re also permitted to use it for other personal 
activity.


Honeywell workers say lockout aims to destroy union: 'It's corporate greed'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/04/honeywell-union-lockout-united-auto-workers>
 Babson said he doubted Congress would enact a national “right to work” law 
because there were enough Democratic senators to filibuster to stop it.

 Joseph McCartin, a professor of labor history at Georgetown University, added 
that Republicans might see little reason to push for a national “right-to-work” 
law as they saw additional states moving to enact such laws.

 Pointing to a future Friedrichs-like case, McCartin said: “I think the 
public-sector unions will face the biggest problems.” He added that federal 
employees’ unions would be on the defensive, except for the union representing 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents, which endorsed Trump.

 With Trump voicing hostility toward regulations, many labor experts say he 
may seek to undo numerous Obama-era regulations, among them those enabling 
millions more workers to qualify for overtime pay and requiring federal 
contractors to report labor and employment-law violations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Funions-labor-movement-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c141368014d4770c33de96e6cce388fe738c1e5%2F0_161_3007_1803%2F3007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labor%20movement%20braces%20for%20three-front%20battle%20with%20Trump%2C%20Congress%20and%20courts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Funions-labor-movement-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labor%20movement%20braces%20for%20three-front%20battle%20with%20Trump%2C%20Congress%20and%20courts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Funions-labor-movement-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c141368014d4770c33de96e6cce388fe738c1e5%2F0_161_3007_1803%2F3007.jpg>
 US Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton had cheered plans for an 
increase in the minimum wage. Photograph: Jason Szenes/EPA 
 With the percentage of workers in unions dropping to 11.1%, McCartin 
predicted a further decline for labor under Trump. “The status quo in labor 
policy is toxic for the union movement unless the status quo is changed in a 
positive way,” he said. Nonunion worker-advocacy groups, such as the Restaurant 
Opportunities Center and the Coalition of Immokalee Workers in Florida, have 
become increasingly effective in pressuring employers, and McCartin said a 
Trump NLRB might seek to change definitions so that these groups would be 
considered labor unions, which would subject them to stricter rules on 
picketing and other activities.

 One of the few bright spots for labor last Tuesday was that voters in 
Arizona, Colorado and Maine voted to raise their states’ minimum wage to $12 an 
hour by 2020. In Washington state, voters approved an increase to $13.50 by 
2020.

 As Congressional Republicans signal continued opposition to raising the $7.25 
federal minimum wage, more such state actions are expected. “When we take these 
issues closer to the ground, we’re able to move – there is popular support,” 
McCartin said. “At the state and city level, we can do things. The cities are 
the laboratories for rebuilding the labor movement.”
 