
Have we reached peak boutique? Farrow and Ball paint jobs, roll-top baths, 
Roberts radios, stripped floorboards, exposed brick and mismatched furniture 
are as common today as floral curtains and doilies were in the 1980s. It’s not 
that these aren’t attractive features; it’s just that there’s a certain 
predictability to many of today’s small hotels, pubs with rooms and B&Bs.

But, as with fashion, you don’t have to slavishly follow the latest trends to 
look good. Larkbeare Grange is a luxury B&B that manages to be both elegant and 
comfortable by sticking to more classic design. There are family portraits on 
the cream walls, carpets in the bedrooms, antique furniture and, yes, floral 
curtains. It’s neat and cosseting but the thing that struck me most about our 
spacious bedroom – one of four – was the view of fields and gentle hills from 
the large sash windows. The setting of Larkbeare is lovely – an avenue of 
cherry trees, currently being replaced with tulip trees, leads to a detached 
house painted the colour of clotted cream. My partner and I were greeted by 
owner Julia and ushered to seats overlooking a lawn strewn with croquet mallets 
and balls. Two minutes later Julia returned with a tray of tea and shortbread 
and we relaxed into a quintessentially English scene.

The original house dates from 1750 and was once part of the nearby Escot 
Estate – now a wildlife park, of which more later – and although the A30 is 
only two miles away, you’d never know it. Larkbeare sits deep in the folds of 
rolling Devon countryside.

Julia’s husband Charlie worked in luxury hotels in London for years before the 
couple and their daughter moved to open their own place – and it shows. They 
seem to have thought of everything. The homemade shortbread was so good we 
squabbled over the last piece (the secret ingredient is semolina for added 
crunch). We found a ready-stamped postcard in our room, a make-up towel in the 
bathroom (many’s the time I’ve accidentally smeared mascara on pristine white 
towels) and covetable eco-toiletries.

The same attention to detail extends to the Granary, a new modern, wood-clad 
self-catering unit next to the house, which is accessible to disabled guests. 
Both the B&B and the Granary are heated by a biomass boiler – the B&B has won 
several green awards.
 Food that looks as good as it tastes at the Five Bells pub. 
Larkbeare doesn’t do dinner, which gave us a good excuse to try the much-lauded
Five Bells <http://fivebells.uk.com/> (now under new management), five miles 
away, an idyllic thatched, whitewashed pub, and another place where the design 
is low-key but the service and food are anything but. Kicking off with a glass 
ofLyme Bay fizz 
<https://www.lymebaywinery.co.uk/english-wines/brut-reserve-sparkling>, our 
meal was faultless and as pretty as it was tasty, served on slate and scattered 
with nasturtiums. I resisted the urge to eat the entire basket of warm homemade 
sourdough bread to leave room for my sea bass and a pudding of strawberry 
sorbet, purée and flakes.

We hadn’t seen much of the countryside from the narrow country lanes on the 
drive to the pub, so in the morning we decided to explore the local area. 
Breakfast of organic porridge, stewed greengages, homemade marmalade and jam 
(from fruit from their own orchard), and an Aga-cooked full English provided 
fuel for a cross-country walk from Talaton before exploring the gardens and 
replica Saxon village of Escot Park (wildwoodescot.org 
<http://www.wildwoodescot.org/>).

Despite being a regular visitor to south Devon, I’d never heard of Escot, yet 
it proved to be another gem – where our failure to spot a single resident of 
the red squirrel enclosure or find the middle of the maze did nothing to 
diminish our enjoyment.
• Accommodation was provided by Larkbeare Grange (01404 822069, larkbeare.net 
<http://www.larkbeare.net/>, doubles from £110 B&B) 

Ask a local


Robin Rea, owner, Rusty Pig <http://www.rustypig.co.uk/> butcher and 
restaurant, Ottery St Mary
 The Lazy Toad Inn, Brampford Speke 
• Eat
The gammon, egg and chips at the Lazy Toad Inn <http://www.thelazytoad.co.uk/>
, Brampford Speke, near Exeter, is perfection on a plate. The gammon really 
cuts the mustard – the owners keep their own pigs, and you can taste the 
difference.

• Walk
It takes about an hour to walk from Ottery St Mary to Tipton St John along the 
Otter river. Early on you follow an old railway line, but most of the walk is 
by the river. Watch out for egrets and if you’re very lucky,beavers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jun/27/beavers-ottery-st-mary-east-devon-coast-river-glamping>
. In Tipton a stop-off at theGolden Lion <http://www.goldenliontipton.co.uk/> 
pub is a must for its great food.

• Shop
Rio <http://www.recyclinginottery.com/map.htm> (or Recycling in Ottery) is a 
not-for-profit community organisation in Ottery St Mary. It’s a treasure trove 
of furniture, toys, and bric-a-brac in good condition.

• Visit 
Seaton Jurassic <http://seatonjurassic.org/> visitor centre is a great place 
to find out about the Devon coastline and wildlife. It’s great for kids as 
there are indoor and outdoor activities (we love the giant rockpool). The 
centre also runs guided walks.
 