
The deep fissures in the Republican race for the White House have been laid 
bare during a televised debate marked by profound ideological clashes between 
candidates desperate to be noticed amid the suffocating dominance of the 
Republican frontrunner,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

On a night that may be remembered for Trump’s defence of a policy of 
deliberately killing innocent civilians if they are the family members of 
Islamist fighters, his rivals for the Republican nomination appeared divided on 
issues as fundamental as immigration, surveillance, freedom of speech and 
regime change abroad.


Republican presidential debate in Las Vegas: 10 things we learned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/16/republican-presidential-debate-las-vegas-recap>
It was a debate of repeated, one-on-one duels on the debate stage in Las 
Vegas, the most consequential of which occurredbetween Texas senator Ted Cruz 
and Florida senator Marco Rubio. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/15/ted-cruz-marco-rubio-clash-surveillance-republican-debate>


The two candidates, who are best poised to challenge Trump in a nomination 
process that begins with the Iowa caucus in just seven weeks, repeatedly locked 
horns over the ideological battles that have been engulfing their party for 
years.

It was the final Republican presidential debate of the year – and the first 
since the terrorist attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, California, which 
prompted Trump’s incendiary proposal toban foreign Muslims from entering the 
country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
.

None of the other eight candidates on stage supported Trump’s plan for 
religious discrimination at the border. Butamid polls showing as many as 59% of 
Republicans supporting a halt on Muslims entering the country 
<http://apps.washingtonpost.com/g/page/politics/washington-post-abc-news-poll-dec-10-13-2015/1914/>
 few candidates showed much appetite for taking on the former host of The 
Apprentice.

“I understand why they feel that way,” Rubio said of Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> supportive for Trump’s ban on 
Muslims. Cruz chose similar language, saying “everyone understands why Donald 
has suggested what he has”.

Amid a general show of timidity toward the frontrunner, one of the exceptions 
was former Florida governorJeb Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeb-bush>, who stepped up to the plate to 
swing at Trump with uncharacteristic zeal.

Bush said the ban on Muslims was “not a serious proposal” and would alienate 
the very allies in the Middle East required to defeat Islamist fighters.

“Donald, you know, is great at the one-liners,” Bush added. “But he’s a chaos 
candidate, and he’d be a chaos president.”

It was the first of several tense bouts between Trump and Bush, who twice told 
the billionaire: “You’re not going to be able to insult your way to the 
presidency.” Another altercation occurred when Trump defended his position of 
intentionally killing innocent civilians who are family members of Islamic 
State militants – a breach of international law.

Trump invoked the September 11 terrorist attacks to justify killing family 
members of militants, saying it would deter future attacks. “They may not care 
much about their lives, but they do care, believe it or not, about their 
families,” he explained.

Bush hit back, insisting the real estate mogul’s proposal was “just crazy”. 
Trump, who tolerated him at first, eventually turned on Bush in a tart and 
petty exchange that scarcely rose above the level of playground taunts about 
whose turn it was to talk.

The fracas ended with Trump mocking Jeb’s standing in the polls. “I’m at 42 
and you’re at three,” Trump said, referring at a poll this week that showedhe 
has increased his already commanding lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/15/donald-trump-rally-scuffles-threats-support-candidate-riding-high>
. “So I’m doing better.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fdonald-trump-jeb-bush-video-republican-debate&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450238360949%2FKP_792512_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20v%20Bush%20round%203%3A%20'Am%20I%20talking%20or%20are%20you%20talking%2C%20Jeb%3F'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fdonald-trump-jeb-bush-video-republican-debate>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20v%20Bush%20round%203%3A%20%27Am%20I%20talking%20or%20are%20you%20talking%2C%20Jeb%3F%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fdonald-trump-jeb-bush-video-republican-debate&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450238360949%2FKP_792512_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Trump and Bush clash during the debate. 
‘World War III’

The tussles between Trump, who has exceeded all expectations in this race, and 
Bush, who even allies concede has been underwhelming, set the tone for a debate 
that drew out the points of differences between the White House aspirants.

The most noteworthy divisions were between Cruz and Rubio, who are second and 
third respectively in most of the polls. Early on, the pair became embroiled in 
a detailed debate over the merits of the USA Freedom Act, the legislation that 
halted the bulk collection of American’s phone records disclosed by National 
Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden.

Rubio criticised Cruz for having supported the legislation. 

“I promise you the next time there is an attack on this country, the first 
thing people are going to want to know is why didn’t we know about it and why 
didn’t we stop it,” the Florida senator said.

“And the answer had better not be because we didn’t have access to records or 
information that would have allowed us to identify these killers before they 
attacked.”

Other candidates quickly became involved in the debate over privacy and 
national security – one that will keep fact-checkers busy for days to come.

Ohio senator John Kasich called for legislation to “solve the problem of 
encryption”, after claiming secure communications impeded the FBI from viewing 
communications between the San Bernardino shooters and other individuals they 
were monitoring. (No such evidence has been made public by the FBI.)

Meanwhile, Carly Fiorina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/carly-fiorina> 
touted her cooperation with the NSA when she was chief executive of Hewlett 
Packard, and claimed that other Silicon Valley tech firms “do not need to be 
forced” to cooperate with law enforcement because they will happily comply if 
asked. (Companies such as Apple, Facebook and Twitter, which are all resisting 
what they regard as undue government interference, may beg to differ.)

Trump, on the other hand, did not show much interest in the finer points of 
privacy, encryption and internet freedom, instead advancing a vague notion that 
parts of the internet could somehow be “closed”. He declined to be drawn on 
specifics on what that would mean, saying only that he would want “brilliant 
people from Silicon Valley and other places” to figure out a way to impede 
Islamic State’s use of the internet

“You talk freedom of speech. You talk freedom of anything you want,” he said. 
“I don’t want them using our internet to take our young, impressionable youth.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fdonald-trump-video-stop-islamic-state-internet-gop-debate&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450234313804%2FKP_790938_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20We%20must%20stop%20Isis%20from%20using%20'our%20internet'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fdonald-trump-video-stop-islamic-state-internet-gop-debate>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%3A%20We%20must%20stop%20Isis%20from%20using%20%27our%20internet%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fdonald-trump-video-stop-islamic-state-internet-gop-debate&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450234313804%2FKP_790938_crop_640x480.jpg>
Trump: We must stop Isis from using ‘our internet’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/dec/15/donald-trump-video-stop-islamic-state-internet-gop-debate>
Libertarian senator Rand Paul <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rand-paul> 
was left aghast at what he portrayed as multiple assaults on constitutional 
rights from his fellow Republicans.

The Kentucky senator took rivals to task over the the wisdom of seeking to 
depose dictators such as the Syrian leader, Bashar al-Assad, and the logic of 
shooting down Russian fighter jets found to be intruding over any future no-fly 
zone over Syria.

It was the New Jersey governor, Chris Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chris-christie>, who is predicating his 
bona fides as a tough, no-nonsense commander-in-chief, who said that he would 
not flinch when faced with errant Russian fighter jet in the region.

“Yes, we would shoot down the planes of Russian pilots if in fact they were 
stupid enough to think that this president was the same feckless weakling that 
the president we have in the Oval Office is right now,” Christie said.

Paul responded that any such move would be “reckless”. “It’s a recipe for 
World War III,” the senator said. “If you’re in favour of World War III, you 
have your candidate.”

‘Fireman and arsonist’

The end of the debate, hosted at the Venetian, an Italian-themed casino resort 
owned by Republican mega-donor Sheldon Adelson, and billed as a wide-ranging 
discussion of national security in its broadest terms, focused mostly on issues 
of defence.

The CNN moderators did not ask a single question about the historic global 
accord reached in Paris on Saturday toavert the most catastrophic effects of 
climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
 – which Barack Obama and many other leaders around the world regard an issue 
of national security.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frepublican-candidates-weigh-in-on-nsa-bulk-data-collection-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Republican%20candidates%20weigh%20in%20on%20NSA%2C%20bulk%20data%20collection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frepublican-candidates-weigh-in-on-nsa-bulk-data-collection-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Republican%20candidates%20weigh%20in%20on%20NSA%2C%20bulk%20data%20collection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Frepublican-candidates-weigh-in-on-nsa-bulk-data-collection-video&media=>
Republican candidates weigh in on NSA, bulk data collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/dec/16/republican-candidates-weigh-in-on-nsa-bulk-data-collection-video>
Neither did they ask about gun control, despite the recent spate of mass 
shootings.

Immigration, however, was discussed extensively, and was the source of the 
most significant standoff between Cruz and Rubio. The two senators, both 
staunch conservatives elected on the back of Tea Party support, are vying for 
the position as Trump’s chief challenger.

Both are sons of Cuban immigrants but are on opposing ends of the Republican 
spectrum on the vexed issue of immigration reform. Rubio’s achilles heel in the 
race is his failed attempt to pass comprehensive reform through the Senate two 
years ago, and his continued – albeit heavily caveated – support for a path 
that would enable some undocumented migrants to one day become US citizens.

It has put him at odds with the majority of his party – and at loggerheads 
with Cruz who, like Trump, is making an unforgiving stance on immigration a 
cornerstone of his campaign.

When Rubio tried to downplay the differences between the two candidates, Cruz 
responded with a sharp retort. “For Marco to suggest our record’s the same is 
like likening the fireman and the arsonist because they are both at the scene 
of the fire,” he said.

Cruz added the battle against the Islamic state “isn’t just in Iraq and Syria, 
it’s in Kennedy airport and the Rio Grande” and accused Rubio of being on the 
side of the “massive amnesty plan” pushed by Obama and other Democrats.

Yet for all his debating skills, Cruz also found himself cornered by Rubio. 
After weeks of ducking questions from reporters over whether he would 
countenance granting undocumented immigrants any form of legal status, Cruz was 
finally pressed to take a position when his rival asked him whether he would 
rule it out. “I have never supported legalisation, and I do not intend to 
support legalisation,” he said.

The argument was concluded when the moderator intervened and asked Trump which 
of the candidates – Cruz or Rubio – he sided with. The frontrunner looked 
momentarily flummoxed. “I have a very hardline position,” he answered, 
declining to take sides. It was an apt response after a night when, despite all 
of the fighting talk from Republican hopefuls, there was no clear victor.

Neither was there an obvious loser, although the retired neurosurgeon Ben 
Carson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson>, who has watched his 
support base collapse in recent weeks, struggled to make an impression.

Carson opened the night with a moment of silence for victims of the San 
Bernardino that lasted all of five seconds, responded to his very first 
question by complaining he wasn’t being given enough airtime – and then 
declined a request to contribute to the debate over surveillance.

“I think you have to ask them about that,” Carson answered when CNN anchor 
Wolf Blitzer invited him to intervene in a discussion over reform of the NSA. 
“I don’t want to get in between them. Let them fight.”
 