
When I am asked what I do for a living, there tends to be a blank look when I 
reply Highways England traffic officer. Mention the word womble, however, and 
people start to get the picture.

Or at least they think they do. Traffic womble is a nickname invented by dear 
Jeremy Clarkson <http://www.sunmotors.co.uk/news/lack-of-drive-for-wombles-2/> 
(thank you, Mr Clarkson), who would rather we didn’t exist at all.


Contrary to the nickname we do not pick up litter. You will find us wielding 
brooms on occasion, but only to clear the carriageway of debris after accidents.

Cuts within the other emergency services are making our role increasingly 
important. If you are unfortunate enough to crash , we may well be the first to 
get to you. As long as no one is hurt and there are no accusations, we can deal 
with many accidents without assistance from the police, fire or ambulance 
service, freeing them up for other duties.

The Grand Tour review – Clarkson and co leave the BBC in their dust
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/the-grand-tour-review-jeremy-clarkson-james-may-richard-hammond-leave-the-bbc-in-their-dust>
When you’ve been sat in a queue for an hour and reach the front to see our 
black and yellow Battenberg four-by-fours parked behind one car on the hard 
shoulder, you might be tempted to think there was no real reason for the 
tailback.

 What you don’t see is that half an hour earlier there were three cars spread 
across the carriageway, one facing the wrong direction, another buried in the 
barrier. You don’t see the oil spillage that had to be cleared up and assessed 
before we could reopen the lane or the barrier that had to be repaired. You 
don’t see the fleet of police cars, fire engines and ambulances that initially 
attended.

You just see us, those jobsworthy wombles, making you late for that meeting. 
We’ve never quite shaken off that image in the 12 years since the creation of 
the Traffic Officer Service.


In reality our priority at such a big incident is to make the scene safe and 
fully reopen the road as soon as possible.


We stop traffic to clear obstructions, tow broken-down vehicles (our cars and 
straps can tow a fully loaded HGV), use cones and signs to close lanes and 
whole carriageways, and remove abandoned vehicles from the hard shoulder. 
You’ll often find us walking around asking how long things are going to take 
and trying to get vehicles moved if they don’t need to be blocking lanes.

Ask any traffic officer what they consider to be their main role, and they 
will say to keep the traffic flowing. We don’t close roads unless we really 
have to. Quite often I find myself being introduced as a traffic womble by 
friends and family - but I don’t really mind. You’ll even find a quite a few 
affectionately dotted around our outstations and control rooms.


I don’t even mind being shouted and sworn at by passing traffic. But sometimes 
the lack of recognition and respect for what we do is demoralising. Earlier 
this yeara traffic officer was killed 
<http://www.itv.com/news/border/update/2016-02-22/highways-england-officer-killed-on-duty-after-m6-crash/>
 and his crewmate seriously injured when a car lost control and struck them 
while they were dealing with an incident on the hard shoulder. Our job can be 
very dangerous – we mitigate those dangers to the best of our abilities, but we 
cannot control every car that passes.

I'm an NHS ambulance dispatcher and I know my service is failing you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jul/30/nhs-ambulance-dispatcher-service-failure>
Everyone hates being stuck in traffic and being delayed, but the next time you 
see us on the motorway please know that we are trying to make sure that 
everyone on that road that day makes it home safely, ourselves included.

This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contactkirstie.brewer@theguardian.com <mailto: kirstie.brewer@theguardian.com>

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 