
Until Fates and Furies, my books had been sparked by an urgent need to force 
something wild and inchoate in me into focus. The spark of Fates and Furies 
came from a more complicated place: while I still wanted to say something 
shadowy and seemingly unsayable, I also wanted to write against the book I was 
working on at the time,Arcadia. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/13/arcadia-lauren-groff-review>

This second novel was about the aftershocks of the failure of a utopian 
community. The need to write it had come directly out of my nightmares; it was 
hellishly hard to write, a distillation of moral ambivalence I felt about 
bringing my first son into theanthropocene era <http://www.anthropocene.info/> 
and my fear for the world he’d inherit. I knew that, in order to finish it, I 
had to look at all of my own darknesses every day I sat down to write. I gave 
the book every bit of myself that I could spare, and was rapidly wrung dry.


Lauren Groff: 'I didn't want there to be extramarital sex in this book'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/22/lauren-groff-interview-fates-and-furies>
And so, in the moments I couldn’t handle any more anxiety or sadness, I’d 
stand up from my desk and stretch and dream a little about a project that would 
be the opposite of Arcadia, something full of blazing sunlight and sex and 
drama. I’d read and loved theOld Filth books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/08/last-friends-jane-gardam-review> 
of the great Jane Gardam, and was obsessed at that time with the modern 
masterworks Mr Bridge andMrs Bridge by Evan S Connell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/02/overlooked-classics-mrs-bridge-evan-s-connell>
. Perhaps, I thought, my new project could be two books, one told from the 
perspective of the husband in a marriage, one from the perspective of the wife.

I’d always been critical of the misogynistic latencies in the institution of 
marriage, though I am very happily married myself: what if I described a 
conventional vision of marriage in one book, and then punctured that vision in 
the second book? I laughed at the idea, but it hung around for long enough that 
at some point, the project came alive in me. Though I was only half finished 
with Arcadia, I put up two huge pieces ofbutcher paper 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Butcher_paper> on opposite walls in my studio in 
Florida, and in the breaks from my dark and solemn book, I would turn to the 
other project, writing a gold-toned scene from the wife’s perspective, then 
running across the room and writing from the husband’s greener point of view.

The more I wrote on the walls, the wilder my vision of the project became. The 
husband became a playwright; his narrative, not only being romantic in terms of 
the love story, would be made up from the kinds of narratives that men have 
always dominated: bildungsroman, campus novel, myth, medieval courtly romance, 
even opera, in which women’s sexuality always seems to be punished by death. In 
contrast, the wife’s point of view would be spiky, elliptical, its own thing.

Arcadia came out; shortly afterwards I had my second son. Perhaps it was my 
feeling of being trapped by small children, but I began to see that the women 
around me appeared to be barely containing their rage. I lent their elegance 
and self-control and internal flames to Mathilde, the wife. I lent elements of 
my maddening home state, Florida, to Lotto, the husband; its heat and sexiness 
and deep-down weirdness.

A few years later, when I finished my project, I still thought I had written 
two novels, but when my agent read it, he laughed at me. We met to discuss the 
book in a vegan restaurant in Manhattan’s East Village. I flew up in person 
because I was sure he was going to hold my hand and tell me gently that nobody 
was going to publish such a crazy project as mine, to start something new 
instead. Instead, he pushed the two halves together. Here, he said. Two flawed 
humans in one codependent project. I’d written a novel, he told me, in the 
shape of a marriage.

Extract

A thick drizzle from the sky, like a curtain’s sudden sweeping. The seabirds 
stopped their tuning, the ocean went mute. Houselights over the water dimmed to 
gray.

 Two people were coming up the beach. She was fair and sharp in a green 
bikini, though it was May in Maine and cold. He was tall, vivid; a light 
flickered in him that caught the eye and held it. Their names were Lotto and 
Mathilde.

 For a minute they watched a tide pool full of spiny creatures that sent up 
curls of sand in vanishing. Then he took her face in his hands, kissed her pale 
lips. He could die right now of happiness. In a vision, he saw the sea rising 
up to suck them in, tonguing off their flesh and rolling their bones over its 
coral molars in the deep. If she was beside him, he thought, he would float out 
singing.

 Well, he was young, 22, and they had been married that morning in secret. 
Extravagance, under the circumstances, could be forgiven.

 More about Fates and Furies

“This insightful portrayal of a marriage is even more complex than it first 
appears. Groff has a subtle ear for the way personalities interact in love, 
especially when the distribution of talent and effort is uneven, as it always 
must be.”- Washington Post
Read the full review 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/books/fates-and-furies-review-a-masterful-tale-of-marriage-and-secrets/2015/09/09/85cbadd4-4c08-11e5-84df-923b3ef1a64b_story.html>

“Groff is a manipulator of information, who controls what the reader 
understands in a novel that is all about narration.”- the Guardian
Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/28/fates-and-furies-lauren-groff-review>

• Fates and Furies by Lauren Groff is published by Windmill Books in paperback 
priced £7.99.It is available from the Guardian bookshop for £6.55 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fates-and-furies-441855.html>.

 