
It’s quite weird to say that I got to know Leonard Cohen first as a person 
rather than an icon. I didn’t get into his music as a teenager – I was an opera 
fanatic from 13 – but my sisterMartha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/marthawainwright> did, so there we were, 
embarking on very dramatic voyages in terms of the music that we liked, with 
Cohen just being this low voice to me through the wall. Obviously I knew who he 
was, as he was a god in Montreal, where my family are from. But it wasn’t until 
I moved to LA at 18, and met his daughter, Lorca [with whom Wainwright would 
later have a daughter, Viva, whose upbringing is shared between her, Wainwright 
and his husband, Jörn Weisbrodt], that I got to know him. Also, it wasn’t until 
my late 20s that I started really listening to his songs after beingasked to 
sing Hallelujah <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PBo-n_17XU0> for the Shrek 
soundtrack. Then I started really digging in, and realised how untouchable he 
was.

He was a very happy grandfather. I remember one day when we were all sitting 
watching Viva play, he was smiling so much

In person, Leonard always scared me more than anything else. He was always so 
perfectly put-out with his suits and his hat, so intense and obsessed with 
whatever he was doing. When I was around his house hanging out with Lorca, I 
didn’t want to disturb him so much. He did speak to me occasionally, though. He 
listened to a song off my first album called Sally Ann, and told me he liked 
it, and once he asked to hear my new record. He sat there with his eyes closed, 
and turned to me, very warmly, and said I’d really progressed, which was 
lovely. But one of the reasons I was let in like that, I think, is that I 
always left a space between me and him. The best way to keep him in my life, 
and not take advantage of Lorca, was to not to take advantage of that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fleonard-cohen-remembered-by-rufus-wainwright-grandfather-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd499d351e9842c96052db9e17f977a318142940%2F0_295_2216_1341%2F2216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leonard%20Cohen%20remembered%20by%20Rufus%20Wainwright&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fleonard-cohen-remembered-by-rufus-wainwright-grandfather-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leonard%20Cohen%20remembered%20by%20Rufus%20Wainwright&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fleonard-cohen-remembered-by-rufus-wainwright-grandfather-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd499d351e9842c96052db9e17f977a318142940%2F0_295_2216_1341%2F2216.jpg>
 Leonard Cohen and Rufus Wainwright, 2006. Photograph: George Pimentel/WireImage
I loved his humour. He’d say funny things like, “Jesus said it’s more 
important what comes out of your mouth than what goes in it.” He was very 
disarming when he met people too. He’d hold their hands, and instead of saying 
“Hello” or “How are you?” he’d say, with a smile, “You’re never going to get 
us.” That’s playful, of course, but also mixed with real edge. Once I remember 
him getting really mad at a contractor who’d made a terrible mistake with a 
toilet or something – it was incredible to watch this poetic human who could 
write perfectly about the moonlight choosing his words perfectly to win an 
argument. I also bought him a Japanese print once for his apartment, and he 
stood there with his hand on it, motionless, staring for about two minutes. I 
was all, God, has he had a stroke or something? But he came out of it like he’d 
been in a trance. He’d also do odd things all the time.

He was a very happy grandfather. I remember one day when we were all just 
sitting there quietly, watching Viva play. He was smiling so much. He was 
always very sweet to me as Viva’s father. He’d introduce me to people by 
saying: “This is Rufus, he’s a member of my family.”

Leonard Cohen's life and career – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohens-life-and-career-in-pictures>
When I saw him play live in the last decade, I’d love it when it was just him 
and his guitar. He was a magnificent guitarist. My favourite songs of his are 
the devilish ones like Chelsea Hotel #2, and I adoreWho By Fire 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ilGahIwQEQ0>. I said I wouldn’t sing Hallelujah
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ttEMYvpoR-k> again until Trump lost the 
election. I felt slightly happy about that when Trump won, as it was the only 
positive thing to take from it! But then Leonard died, and that song moves 
people so much, I felt like I had to. That reaction’s a very important thing.

I think it’s a tragedy that we lost the man now. He was such a smart guy at a 
time when there aren’t many smart guys around. There’s also so much more that I 
wanted to ask him as a man in my 40s, as he had such an incredible 
transformation as a musician and a spiritual person at this time in his life. 
I’m sad I can’t ask him as a songwriter and as a human being, because he knew 
so much. It really feels like someone superhuman has gone.

Main photograph by Michael Putland/Getty
 