
Democratic delegates drowned out the former defense secretary Leon Panetta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/leon-panetta> with a chant of “no more 
war” on Wednesday night, prompting convention organisers to turn the lights out 
in their section of the Wells Fargo arena and the protesters to light it 
themselves using cellphones.

Meet the Bernie Peacekeepers, the group trying to keep protests safe at the DNC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/bernie-peacekeepers-democratic-convention-protests>
The former CIA director was on stage to show his support for Democratic 
candidate Hillary Clinton. “In this election, there is only one candidate for 
president who has the experience, temperament and judgment to be 
commander-in-chief, and that is Hillary Clinton,” he said.

Panetta credited Clinton with supporting the decision to go after Osama bin 
Laden – “Hillary was clear: we have to go after Bin Laden” – and said she was 
determined to defeat “Isis, al-Qaida, Boko Haram, al-Shabaab, terrorists who 
pervert the teachings of Islam to kill innocent people.”
Dan Roberts (@RobertsDan) 
DNC shuts off lights over Bernie protestors chanting "no more war" during 
former defence secretary Panetta's speech.pic.twitter.com/hHRHMGDYdX 
<https://t.co/hHRHMGDYdX>
 <https://twitter.com/RobertsDan/status/758466637326487552> July 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RobertsDan/status/758466637326487552> 
He added: “Meanwhile, Donald Trump says he gets his foreign policy experience 
from watching TV and running the Miss Universe pageant. If only it were funny. 
It is deadly serious. Donald Trump asks our troops to commit war crimes, 
endorses torture, spurns allies from Europe to Asia, suggests more countries to 
have nuclear weapons, and praises dictators from Saddam Hussein to Vladimir 
Putin.”

But when Panetta referred to Trump’s call for a Russian hack on Clinton’s 
emails, he was interrupted by the chants, which were temporarily drowned out 
when Panetta said: “Donald Trump cannot become commander-in-chief.”

He added: “We cannot put an erratic finger on our nuclear weapons,” he says. 
“This is no time to roll the dice and gamble.” The chant changed to USA! USA!

When Panetta left the stage the DNC organisers turned the lights back on for 
the section that was chanting, many of whom appeared to come from Oregon.
 