
The hoary old cliche in politics is that the only poll that matters is the one 
on Election Day. This is false. After all, polls have become the lifeblood of 
measuring who is up and who is down in the frantic 24-hour news cycle that now 
defines American presidential elections. They are so central that the current 
Republican frontrunner devotes time in every rally to reading out his poll 
numbers. But what polls don’t have is the blunt force of reality. Polls are 
ephemeral. Actual votes are fixed, hard numbers.

With the Iowa caucuses on Monday, candidates will face actual returns from 
actual voters. Neither the candidates nor the pundits candismiss the figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/29/iowa-caucuses-whats-at-stake-for-main-democratic-and-republican-hopefuls>
, which means everything changes.

Winning in Iowa has the potential to transform also-rans into frontrunners, 
especially among Democrats. Barack Obama’s 2008 win in the Hawkeye state gave 
him a lead overHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/30/hillary-clinton-guns-bernie-sanders-iowa-emails>
 that he never relinquished. John Kerry’s win in 2004 had the same effect. 
Although Kerry didn’t win the presidency, it helped make him the Democratic 
nominee.

In 2012, though, a win in Iowa didn’t quite have the same impact for Rick 
Santorum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jan/28/presidential-election-2016-campaign-republican-debate-ted-cruz-donald-trump>
. The state wasn’t called for him until weeks later after a counting error 
mistakenly gave the victory toMitt Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/16/mitt-romney-speculation-surprise-presidential-bid-2016>
 on caucus night. This delay cost Santorum momentum, though he still managed to 
finish second in the primary and won 11 states despite being severely outspent.

Republican candidates go on attack ahead of Des Moines Register poll - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jan/30/iowa-caucus-2016-presidential-campaign-election-sanders-clinton-trump-cruz>
In 2008, Mike Huckabee used a win in Iowa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/iowa> to firmly establish himself in the 
upper tier of GOP candidates. Although he did well in the primaries, the 
continued presence of Fred Thompson in the South Carolina primaries denied 
Huckabee the conservative support he needed in the state.

But winning isn’t everything in Iowa. It’s all about “beating expectations”. 
In 2012, what appeared to be a win for Romney on caucus night but eventually 
ended being a close second was a huge boost to his campaign. Romney tried hard 
to underplay expectations in the Iowa, where polling had long been volatile 
throughout the 2012 GOP primary. But even if the excited Bud Light-fueled 
cheers of his staffers proved to be premature, it was more than enough for him 
to firm up his role as a frontrunner.

A second place finish in a crowded field isn’t always a victory, however. In 
2008,John Edwards <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-edwards> finished 
second after camping out in Iowa for years. His silver medal in effect spelled 
the end of the former North Carolina senator’s campaign. Romney himself was 
deeply wounded by finishing second in Iowa during his first bid for the White 
House in 2008, and it allowed John McCain to elbow him out of the way to 
establish himself as the champion of the Republican establishment.

But their failures in Iowa didn’t end their campaigns. However, the casualty 
list from past Iowa caucuses is long. Disappointing finishes in Iowa in 2012 
ended the campaigns of Michele Bachmann and Rick Perry and, in 2008, these had 
the same impact on Joe Biden, Bill Richardson and Chris Dodd.

It’s still unclear what will happen on caucus night. With Bernie Sanders and 
Hillary Clinton neck and neck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/30/hillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-democratic-presidential-debates>
, it’s likely whatever candidate pulls out a win will be given a huge burst of 
momentum going into New Hampshire and the same phenomenon will hold on the 
Republican side as Donald Trump andTed Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/30/ted-cruz-delivers-firebrand-pitch-iowa-caucuses-2016-campaign>
 battle for a win.

For underdog candidates like Democrat Martin O’Malley or Republican Mike 
Huckabee, a strong performance is needed to keep their campaigns alive. Both 
have staked their political fortunes in Iowa and a poor performance on caucus 
night will likely end their ambitions for the White House.
Past Iowa winners - Democrats 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/01/2016-02-past-primary-winners/?party=dem>
Past Iowa winners - Republicans 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/01/2016-02-past-primary-winners/?party=gop> 