
What will Lester Holt do when Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> says that he opposed the Iraq 
war from the beginning?

Holt, 57, the most-watched daily news broadcaster in the country, has been 
tapped to moderate the first presidential debate Monday between Trump and
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>. To say 
there is a lot riding on the night is not quite to capture it.

Clinton camp says Trump in 'sewer' as debate looms and fight gets dirty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/25/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-debate-gennifer-flowers>
A record 100m Americans are expected to watch the showdown, probably making it 
one of the biggest television broadcasts ever. The political stakes are higher: 
many partisans on both sides think the fate of the republic, all 330m strong, 
is on the line.

Although under intense pressure from the Democratic side to play fact-checker 
as a bulwark against Trump’s baloney, and under equal pressure from the 
Republican side to stay out of it, Holt has not talked about how he sees his 
role. But he has shown persistence, in exclusive interviews with both 
candidates in recent months, in pinning the candidates down where they would 
rather speak unaccountably.

Hillary Clinton supporters hope that means that Holt might intervene, unlike 
his network colleague Matt Lauer at a forum earlier this month, should Trump 
repeat hislie about having opposed the Iraq invasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/19/trump-fact-check-iraq-war-san-bernardino-nato>
 from the beginning, or should Trump roll out any of the other 48 
“pants-on-fire” lies that the nonpartisan group Politifact hascounted him 
telling 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/lists/people/comparing-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-truth-o-met/>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIhzRABE4Mqw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIhzRABE4Mqw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIhzRABE4Mqw&media=>
Trump supporters may hope that a different Holt shows up, one closer to the 
amiable broadcaster who co-hosted a weekend morning show for 12 years. They 
want the man who announced the Westminster Kennel Club dog show for three 
consecutive years in the aughts, not a fact-checker of the nightly news.

After 35 years as a newscaster, Holt currently hosts the top-rated nightly 
news program in America, NBC Nightly News, attracting 7 to 8 million viewers on 
an average weeknight. Any doubts about the calibre of his talent that 
accompanied his unusual arrival in the role – amid thecareer implosion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/19/brian-williams-matt-lauer-interview>
 of his predecessor, Brian Williams – quickly dissipated. Holt drove the 
ratings still higher.

A native Californian who has written that he “grew up on air force bases”, 
Holt has reported from zones of armed conflict and natural disaster while 
charismatically serving up lighter stories as weekend anchor of NBC’s morning 
news and variety show, Today. He alsoplays upright bass. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZuKh5lQrMvA>

Holt will encounter an unprecedented challenge, however, on Monday night, when 
he will mediate between two hungry candidates now tantalizingly close to 
claiming the most powerful post on Earth. He has interviewed both candidates in 
recent months, and brought a healthy journalistic antagonism to the job.

‘Voting for a racist’: Trump enters key debate fresh from pivot that wasn’t
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/25/donald-trump-pivot-hillary-clinton-debate>
In June, Holt sat three feet away from Trump on gaudy Louis XVI chairs in 
Trump Tower, nearly knee-to-knee, and demanded that the candidate show evidence 
for a recent claim that Clinton’s private email server had been hacked. Anyone 
who doubts Holt’s ability to fact-check Trump shouldwatch the exchange 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IhzRABE4Mqw#t=1m59s>, in which he reduces 
Trump to the lame assurance, “I will report back to you.”

Two weeks later, Holt pressed Clinton 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LamMIOGSjRw> on the opposite side of the email 
issue, confronting her with a finding by FBI director James Comey that she had 
been “extremely careless” in handling classified information. She ended up 
squirming, too.

Trump has expressed displeasure with Holt. “Lester is a Democrat,” Trump 
flatly told Fox News a week ago. But whether Holt checks that “fact” at the 
debate or not, it is false. Holt is aregistered Republican. 
<https://twitter.com/davidfolkenflik/status/778315866903642112?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>



 