
Why go now?
It’s puffin season. Outdoor Guernsey’s kayak puffin patrols 
<http://outdoorguernsey.co.uk/activities/puffin_patrols> run from Shell beach 
on Herm, a gorgeous stretch of white sand, past secluded Belvoir Bay to Puffin 
Bay, where you can see the birds up close (until June).Bumblebee Cruises 
<http://www.bumblebee.gg/cruises/puffin-patrol.aspx> has a similar patrol by 
boat.

Anything else happening?
Great walks: the Channel Islands heritage festival 
<http://www.visitguernsey.com/heritage-festival> (until 11 May) includes guided 
strolls around Herm; the Guernsey walking festival (2-17 May) has tours of 
secret and historical Herm; or you canvisit the island’s colourful coastal 
gardens <http://www.herm.com/activities/herm-garden-tours/default.aspx> with 
head gardener Brett Moore (£7.50pp, every Tuesday at 11am until mid-September).

Any must-dos?
Snorkelling in the clear water and lazing on the sandy beaches – as well as 
Shell and Belvoir, try tranquil Oyster beach and sheltered Bears’ beach. Visit 
neolithic tombs, the 11th-century St Tugual’s chapel and the minuscule prison 
(capacity: one).

Where shall I go for dinner?
The Ship Inn brasserie 
<http://www.herm.com/wine-and-dine/ship-inn/default.aspx> serves dishes such as 
Guernsey mushrooms on toast and locally-caught, beer-battered whiting. The
Conservatory restaurant 
<http://herm.com/wine-and-dine/white-house-hotel/default.aspx> at the White 
House hotel is more refined – sea bass with chorizo and butter bean stew, for 
example. Sample Herm ice-cream at a beach cafe.
 The 1½ mile-long island is car-free and ideal for a stroll. Photograph: Alamy 
How about a drink?
Old fishermen’s pub the Mermaid Tavern <http://www.herm.com/mermaid/> runs 
twice-yearly beer festivals (next one, 9-14 June), and serves coffee from beans 
grown and roasted in Guernsey. It also does pub lunches and barbecues, and its 
Grill Room specialises in steaks.

Anywhere to stay for under £100 a night?
The White House <http://www.herm.com/hotel/>, the island’s only hotel, is way 
over budget (doubles from £244), although that includes a four-course dinner. 
It is cheaper torent a cottage <http://herm.com/holiday-cottages/>, converted 
barn, log cabin or even a tower (from £301 a week for two). The best budget 
option is theSeagull campsite <http://www.herm.com/camping/>, which has 
fantastic views of Sark and France (from £8.50pp).

Do I need a car?
Cars are banned on the island and because it is only 1½ miles long by half 
a-mile wide, you won’t need one anyway. The only way to get there is via 
Guernsey: theTrident Ferries catamaran <http://www.traveltrident.com/> from St 
Peter’s Port to Herm’s old jetty takes 20 minutes (£11.50 return).
 