
Why go now?
Rugby fans will flock to the Welsh capital on 6 February, when Wales host 
England for the opening game of theSix Nations 
<http://www.rbs6nations.com/en/home.php> tournament at Millennium stadium. It’s 
the first time there has been an Anglo-Welsh Friday night match since 2011, 
when a jam on the M4 meant thousands of fans missed the kick-off. There’s a 
great atmosphere in Cardiff when the rugby’s on, but there’s a lot more to be 
enjoyed.

Top 10 craft beer pubs in Cardiff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/oct/14/top-10-craft-beer-pubs-cardiff-wales>
Such as?
Bute Park is the green heart of the city. A river taxi will take you from here 
toCardiff Bay and the Millennium Centre <http://www.wmc.org.uk/> . From 6 
February, it’s showing Illumination, an exhibition of artwork and creative 
writing by inmates of secure hospitals and prisons across Wales. TheWelsh 
National Opera’s production of Hansel and Gretel 
<https://www.wmc.org.uk/Productions/2015-2016/212658/WNOHanselandGretel/?view=Standard>
 opens on 21 February, tickets £5-£40.Chapter <http://www.chapter.org/>, 15 
minutes’ walk away in Canton, has films, art exhibitions and performances, and 
a decent watering hole in Caffi Bar. Cardiff is home to no fewer than eight 
Victorian and Edwardian shopping arcades.Morgan Arcade is home to Spillers 
Records <http://spillersrecords.co.uk/>, said to be the world’s oldest record 
shop.

Sounds like thirsty work
Y Mochyn Du <http://www.ymochyndu.com/> (the Black Pig, above), a much-loved 
local in an old gatekeeper’s lodge, is better known by cricket fans, as it’s 
next to Glamorgan county cricket ground, but it’s a pleasant walk from 
Millennium stadium through Sophia Gardens. The closerCity Arms 
<http://www.thecityarmscardiff.com/> is an institution for sports fans, and 
Camra’s Cardiff pub of the year in 2012 and highly commended in 2014. Both keep 
local beers on cask as well as guest draughts and ciders. Another fine pub is 
nearbyUrban Tap House <http://www.urbantaphouse.co.uk/> on Westgate Street.

What’s for dinner?
Hokkei <http://hokkei.co.uk/> on Crwys Road is a new takeaway by two 
Masterchef finalists (Dale Williams and Larkin Cen in 2013) offering 
high-quality, unusual Chinese food.The Potted Pig <http://thepottedpig.com> at 
the south end of Bute Park is in a former bank vault, with a small, seasonal 
menu. Try Welsh lamb rump with creamed leeks and celery (£20).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flets-go-to-cardiff-six-nations-millennium-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421850404153%2F57ad5e43-95c5-4524-b096-7f7c46b8bcee-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Cardiff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flets-go-to-cardiff-six-nations-millennium-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Cardiff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flets-go-to-cardiff-six-nations-millennium-stadium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421850404153%2F57ad5e43-95c5-4524-b096-7f7c46b8bcee-1020x612.jpeg>
 Hokkei restaurant 
Anywhere to stay for under £100?
Budget chain hotel Sleeperz <http://sleeperz.com/>, right next to the station, 
has 74 compact if spartan rooms, from £85 a night. A high-end boutique hostel
Safehouse <http://www.safehousehostel.co.uk/> opens on 1 March with dorm beds 
from £22, including breakfast.

Do I need a car?
Cardiff is a small city, so everything’s easily accessible without a car. 
Direct trains from Birmingham or London take roughly two hours. Bus fares are 
low (£1.70 a trip, £3.40 for a day pass) and the regularBaycar service 
<http://www.cardiffbus.com/english/page.shtml?pageid=693> links the city centre 
and Cardiff Bay.
 