
Why go now?


The New Forest is the only remaining place in the UK where you can witness the 
ancient practice of pannage <http://www.thenewforest.co.uk/discover/pigs.aspx>, 
where pigs are released into the woods to forage for acorns, beechmast and 
chestnuts. Not only does this result inBritain’s own Ibérico-style ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/dec/01/pannage-pork-british-iberico-style-ham-acorn-fed-pigs>
, it also protects the forest’s free-roaming ponies and cattle, as acorns would 
be poisonous to them if they ate them in large quantities. This year’s pannage 
season started on 14 September and runs until 12 November.


Apart from the pigs …
 See the forest by Twizy 
The area is popular with walkers, cyclists, horse-riders and kayakers, but 
there’s also a less strenuous way to get around:by Twizy 
<http://www.hireatwizy.co.uk/> (£42 a day). These two-seater electric vehicles 
are a fun way to explore the woodland and coastline of the 566 sq km national 
park. Good stops include Georgian Lymington and medieval Ringwood, and the 
villages of Lyndhurst, Brockenhurst, Burley andBeaulieu 
<http://www.beaulieu.co.uk/>. The latter is home to the National Motor Museum 
<http://www.nationalmotormuseum.org.uk/>, Palace House 
<http://www.beaulieu.co.uk/attractions/palace-house-gardens/> and Beaulieu Abbey
 <http://www.beaulieu.co.uk/attractions/beaulieu-abbey/>, while Exbury Gardens 
<http://www.exbury.co.uk/website/> and Buckler’s Hard 
<http://www.bucklershard.co.uk/> are nearby.


Anywhere to refuel?

Four New Forest food trails 
<http://www.thenewforest.co.uk/food-and-drink/food-trails.aspx> showcase the 
best local produce.The Elderflower <http://elderflowerrestaurant.co.uk/> 
restaurant opened in Lymington last year, serving imaginative British food such 
as Solent sea bass with pickled clams.The Terrace 
<http://www.montaguarmshotel.co.uk/terrace_restaurant.html> at the Montagu Arms 
in Beaulieu is the area’s only Michelin-starred restaurant.


How about a pint?

The Foresters Arms <http://the.littlepubgroup.co.uk/the-foresters-arms> in 
Frogham has been stylishly refurbished. The Royal Oak in Fritham is best for a 
pint and a pork pie.


Anywhere to stay for less than £100?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnew-forest-pubs-museums-camping-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441901405560%2Fe681777c-cc72-485e-958b-74bec2b195ab-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20New%20Forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnew-forest-pubs-museums-camping-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20New%20Forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnew-forest-pubs-museums-camping-food%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441901405560%2Fe681777c-cc72-485e-958b-74bec2b195ab-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Four poster at Cottage Lodge, New Forest 
The Forest <http://www.campingintheforest.co.uk/england/new-forest> has 10 
woodland campsites (from £11.50 a night for two).Cottage Lodge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/29/cottage-lodge-brockenhurst-new-forest-hotel-review>
 (doubles from £60), a small hotel in Brockenhurst, has been renovated to 
include four-poster beds made from local trees. The quirkyAngel and Blue Pig 
<http://angel-lymington.com/> in Lymington (doubles from £95) has 14 gorgeous 
rooms.
 