
Why go now?

Well, it’s the Glastonbury festival next weekend, of course … but if you can’t 
wait till then, Sunday is the summer solstice. Crowds will gather at mystical 
Glastonbury Tor to watch sunrise on the longest day of the year, and there will 
be meditation at noon at theChalice Well <http://www.chalicewell.org.uk/> peace 
garden. This being Glastonbury, there’s plenty of hippy action beyond the 
crystal and new-age book shops.

Beyond Glastonbury: Michael Eavis's tour of Somerset
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/31/michael-eavis-glastonbury-somerset-tour>
What else is there to do?

Later in the summer, Ray Davies will be headlining the Glastonbury Abbey 
Extravaganza on 8 August. But this is a lovely part of the world to visit at 
any time of year: as well as doing the town’s sights, such as the abbey, the 
ancient Chalice Well in its landscaped gardens, and GlastonburyTribunal 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/glastonbury-tribunal/>, a 
15th-century stone house run by English Heritage, there are 12 circular 
heritage walks and four cycle routes in nearbyAvalon Marshes 
<http://www.avalonmarshes.org>, an ancient wetland area. The cider ride (past 
lots of pubs and a cider farm) sounds especially appealing.

What about further afield?


Wells is England’s smallest city, with a magnificent cathedral and medieval 
palace. Further on are the spectacular cliffs and stalactite caverns of Cheddar 
Gorge, on the edge of the Mendip Hills, one of Somerset’s three areas of 
outstanding natural beauty.

Where to refuel?

The Looking Glass Cafe <http://www.thelookingglasscafe.co.uk/>, opposite the 
abbey, does a mean breakfast (vegan and gluten-free options available), as well 
as homemade main courses and a good line in cakes. More tasty organic food can 
be found at theHundred Monkeys Cafe, <http://www.hundredmonkeyscafe.com/> a 
busy bistro and bakery nearby. There are pubs aplenty, too. Sup a local ale in 
quirky surroundings (upside-down bike and red phone box) at theWho’d a Thought 
It Inn <http://www.whodathoughtit.co.uk/> on Northload Street.

Anywhere to stay for under £100?

To tap into the town’s spiritual vibe, stay at the Arimathean Cottage 
<http://www.arimatheanretreat.com/>, something of a sanctuary, despite being on 
the High Street: it offers B&B from £70 as well as retreat packages. Out of 
town,Greenacres Camping <http://www.greenacres-camping.co.uk/> (from £9 a night 
adults, £4.50 kids) has lovely views of the Tor.
 