
Why Lancaster?
Lancaster, of England’s 11 heritage cities <http://www.heritagecities.com/>, 
may not have the allure of Bath or Durham but it has a fascinating past and a 
diverting present.

So what can I do?
Soak up history at Lancaster Castle <http://www.lancastercastle.com/>, site of 
the UK’s most infamous witch trial in 1612. A new tour has opened up previously 
unseen parts of the castle (£8). The best views are from the Ashton Memorial 
(50p entrance), an Edwardian folly in Williamson Park. For more modern fun,The 
Storey <http://www.thestorey.co.uk/> is a creative hub that hosts free arts 
events. AndThe Dukes <http://www.dukes-lancaster.org/> has film screenings, 
comedy nights and alternative theatre.

Any decent shopping?
The twice-weekly Charter market 
<https://www.facebook.com/lancasterchartermarket> has a Christmas food and 
gifts trail this weekend, plus music and street theatre. TheAssembly Rooms 
<http://www.lancaster.gov.uk/community-and-living/markets/assembly-rooms-market>
 has a vintage market Monday to Saturday.Arteria <http://www.arteriashop.co.uk/>
 sells gorgeous contemporary homewares, and thePort of Lancaster Smokehouse 
<http://www.lancastersmokehouse.co.uk/> specialises in smoked fish, cheese and 
black pudding.

Anywhere to stay for under £100?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Flancaster-lancashire-weekend-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1419011775180%2F14bdfae4-a532-41dc-9dfc-de9c9e833b1f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20to%20...%20Lancaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Flancaster-lancashire-weekend-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20to%20...%20Lancaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Flancaster-lancashire-weekend-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1419011775180%2F14bdfae4-a532-41dc-9dfc-de9c9e833b1f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Borough B&B 
The Borough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/16/the-borough-lancaster-hotel-review>
 (doubles from £95 B&B), in a Georgian building, was once home to the mayor of 
Lancaster. Today it’s a restaurant with a microbrewery and nine rooms, all with 
marble wetrooms.

Where should I eat?
Bar 1725 <http://bar1725.co.uk/> does regional tapas, such as Catalan zarzuela;
Quite Simply French <http://quitesimplyfrench.co.uk/#home> has a daily changing 
menu of Gallic classics. For top Lancastrian cuisine, head out of the city to 
Michelin-starredNorthcote <http://www.northcote.com/>, near Blackburn. 
Afternoon tea is £20, or blow £220 on a Christmas tasting menu at the chef’s 
table.

And to drink?
J Atkinson & Co  <http://www.thecoffeehopper.com/page/96/the-hall.htm>has been 
selling tea and coffee in Lancaster since 1837, most recently in The Hall, an 
art deco conversion that does a mean flat white. TheTap House 
<http://www.taphouselancaster.co.uk/> is a craft beer shrine that also serves 
Lake District gin.

Do I need a car?
If you’re coming from Manchester or Liverpool, it’s an easy drive. From 
Glasgow or London, the train is your best bet. And the slogan “Small city, big 
story” tells you that you won’t need a car while you’re there.
 