
Why the Isle of Wight?
Queen Victoria made it fashionable in the 19th century. Hollywood royalty is 
doing the same for it today: Benedict Cumberbatch got married there last week, 
the couple holding their reception at the National Trust’sMottistone Manor 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/mottistone-gardens/>, bringing the island to 
the attention of the Heat readership. The island attracts top bands to Bestival 
and the Isle of Wight festival. Coming up soon is the secondAcoustic Isle 
festival <http://www.visitisleofwight.co.uk/events/acoustic-isle> (28 
February-8 March), featuring unplugged gigs in pubs, restaurants and on boats.

Cycling the Isle of Wight: fine foods and easy rides
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jun/14/cycling-the-isle-of-wight> 
Where to head?
Ventnor, on the south coast, has a bit of an arts scene. As well as several 
Acoustic Isle gigs, it hosts theIsle of Arts festival <http://www.artsisle.org> 
(2-5 May), theVentnor Fringe <http://www.vfringe.co.uk> and the Isle of Wight 
Film Festival <http://www.isleofwightfilmfestival.co.uk> (both 11-15 August). 
The art decoWinter Gardens Pavilion <http://www.theventnorwintergardens.com> is 
now a theatre and brasserie; the former post office has become theVentnor 
Exchange <http://www.ventnorexchange.co.uk>, a theatre, record shop and bar; 
and a 1920s bank is nowVentnor Arts Club <http://www.ventnorartsclub.com/> – a 
members club that visitors can join for £10 a week.

Vintage bathing machines converted into beach huts can be hired on the town 
beach, and lovelySteephill Cove <http://www.theboathouse-steephillcove.co.uk/> 
is a hidden beach reached on foot. TheBotanic Garden <http://www.botanic.co.uk/>
 grows subtropical plants in Ventor’s mellow microclimate.Appuldurcombe House 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/daysout/properties/appuldurcombe-house/> in 
nearby Wroxall is an English Heritage property and the setting for a 
forthcoming BBC drama, The Lady in Red.Blackgang Chine 
<http://www.blackgangchine.com/>, on the edge of Ventnor, claims to be the 
oldest theme park in the world.

Any decent grub?
Try the crab on chips <http://crabonchips.com/about.html> at posh chippy 
Ventnor Haven Fishery. The Crab Shed serves seafood pasties andthe Boathouse 
restaurant <http://www.theboathouse-steephillcove.co.uk/restaurant/> dishes up 
the morning’s catch (lunch only). TheWinter Gardens 
<http://www.theventnorwintergardens.com/index.html?frommobile=Y> serves all-day 
breakfast, lunch and fancy dinners.
 Beach huts at Ventnor. The Spyglass Inn can be seen in the distance. 
Photograph: Alamy 
How about a pint?
The Spyglass Inn <http://thespyglass.com/> perches above the western edge of 
the beach, serves decent ale and has regular live music most nights, not just 
during the acoustic festival.

Anywhere to stay for under £100?
No24 Ventnor <http://www.no24ventnor.co.uk/> opened last summer as a 
cafe/cocktail bar with five simple rooms above (doubles from £60, B&B).

Do I need a car?
It’s not essential. Take a ferry from Portsmouth to Ryde, a train 
<http://www.southwesttrains.co.uk/island-line-timetable.aspx> (1930s tube 
carriages!) to Shanklin, then a taxi. Or the No 3 bus goes from Ryde to Ventnor 
– more atvisitisleofwight.co.uk <http://www.visitisleofwight.co.uk/>
 