
Why go now?


Launched in time for Halloween, the Legends Tombstone Trail offers a novel way 
of exploring Camarthenshire, Neath Port Talbot, Swansea Bay and Pembrokeshire – 
by visiting graves and memorials in cemeteries across the four areas. 
Taphophiles (yep, tombstone tourism is a thing) are in for a treat – and for 
everyone else there’s beautiful scenery plus plenty of good pubs and pretty 
villages en route.

So how does it work?


There are five tombstones with tales attached in each area, with an 
interactive map to guide you <http://southwest.wales/legends/>. Allow 
two-to-three hours for each, otherwise make a mini-break of it and spend two 
days visiting all of them on a 200-mile road trip.
 Stone commemorating18th-century pirate Barti Ddu. 
Who might I encounter?


Saints, sinners, pirates, wizards and everyone in between. From Welsh poet 
Dylan Thomas’s final resting place in Laugharne to fearsome Welsh pirate Barti 
Ddu – buried near Fishguard in 1722 – there are fascinating and spooky stories 
galore. Sites associated with mythical characters, from King Arthur to Merlin, 
feature too, alongside mere mortals such as gamekeeper Robert Scott, murdered 
and buried in Margam Abbey cemetery, where his ghost has been spotted.

Where should I stay?


Try the Kings Head <http://www.kingsheadgower.co.uk/> at Llangennith (doubles 
from £85 B&B), on the Gower peninsula, or the famousBrown’s Hotel 
<http://www.browns.wales/> in Laugharne, Camarthenshire, which dates from 1752 
(doubles from £95 a night).
 Bar at The Pilot of Mumbles. 
What about refuelling?


There are brilliant pubs a-plenty. The Pilot 
<http://www.thepilotofmumbles.co.uk/> in Mumbles, near Swansea, serves great 
real ale; in St Davids, near the end of the trail, theFarmers Arms 
<http://farmersstdavids.co.uk/> is a cosy place for a tipple. For food, go to 
DanteithionWright’s Food Emporium <http://www.wrightsfood.co.uk/#about> in 
Llanarthne, Carmarthenshire, worth it for its pork belly cubano alone.The Swigg 
<http://www.theswigg.com/> is a fab, newly opened cafe and deli in Swansea 
Marina.

What else is there to do?


South Wales is made for outdoor adventure. Richard Burton fans will love new 
walking trails in his honour <http://www.visitnpt.co.uk/default.aspx?page=6983> 
in Port Talbot. TheBotanic Gardens of Wales <https://botanicgarden.wales/> in 
Carmarthenshire have lovely autumn colour or, if the weather isn’t so kind,LC 
Swansea <http://www.thelcswansea.com/waterpark> is the country’s largest indoor 
waterpark, complete with surf machine, while theGlynn Vivian Art Gallery 
<http://www.glynnvivian.com/> reopened in the city last weekend after a 
multi-million pound transformation.
 