
Why go now?
To visit the new Remembrance Centre at the nearby National Memorial Arboretum, 
which has opened in time for Armistice Day. The centre has three new galleries, 
a restaurant, cafe and shop, and a cloistered courtyard garden. The woodland 
contains 30,000 trees and 330 memorials to fallen soldiers and emergency 
workers (grounds free, centre £7.50,thenma.org.uk <http://www.thenma.org.uk/>).

What else is there to do?
 Lichfield Cathedral. Photograph: Alamy 
Lichfield is a lovely cobbled market town with some interesting sights: a 
three-spired gothic cathedral <http://www.lichfield-cathedral.org/>, Erasmus 
Darwin’s house <http://www.erasmusdarwin.org/> and Samuel Johnson’s birthplace 
museum <http://www.samueljohnsonbirthplace.org.uk/>. Beacon Park 
<http://lichfieldhistoricparks.co.uk/beacon-park/visiting-beacon-park/> has 70 
acres of beautiful gardens, and there isan excellent theatre 
<http://www.lichfieldgarrick.com/>, named after local Shakespearean actor David 
Garrick.Drayton Manor <https://www.draytonmanor.co.uk/> children’s theme park 
is a short drive away.

Anywhere good to eat?
The Wine House <http://www.thewinehouselichfield.co.uk/>, which specialises in 
wagyu steak and seafood, has just started bottomless lunches: three courses and 
as many glasses of prosecco/cocktails as you can drink (£25, Friday to Sunday).
Pom’s Kitchen & Deli <http://pomskitchen.uk/> is open from breakfast right 
through to dinner, and has regular events such as an upcoming beer (they brew 
their own), wine and food night (11 November, five courses, five beers, five 
wines for £45pp).

How about a drink?
The Lichfield Real Ale trail comprises 10 great pubs (download it at 
visitlichfield.co.uk 
<http://www.visitlichfield.co.uk/sites/default/files/files/Real%20Ale%20Trail.pdf>
). The trail includesthe Whippet <http://whippetinnmicro.co.uk/>, the city’s 
first micropub, which sources beers from small breweries within 50 miles, 
serves top-quality pork pies and has free cheese boards on Sundays.Beebohm 
<http://www.beerbohm.co.uk/> specialises in world beers and Le Reve 
<http://lereve-bar.com/> is the place to go for cocktails and live music. Look 
out forFifth Spire <http://www.fifthspire.com/>, a new gin distilled in the 
city.

Anywhere to stay for under £100 a night?
 St Johns House 
St Johns House <http://stjohnshouse.co.uk/>, a gorgeous restored 17th-century 
home and stables, has nine stylish rooms (doubles from £100).The Inn Keeper’s 
Lodge <https://www.innkeeperslodge.com/lichfield/> at the Hedgehog pub has nine 
basic rooms (doubles from £55).
 