
Why now?
Brum is a great city to head to for the January sales, with a huge number of 
shops to trawl. Add into the mix fun and varied restaurants and nightlife, plus 
a decent arts scene, and this unfairly maligned city ticks all the boxes for an 
indulgent quick break, as well as being widely accessible for a large 
proportion of the population.

How do I approach the shopping then?
Bargain clothes can be hunted down at the iconic Bullring 
<http://www.bullring.co.uk/>, one of Britain’s most popular shopping centres, 
home to 160 of the usual high street suspects, from Topshop to Selfridges. Sort 
through discounted designer wear atThe Mailbox <http://www.mailboxlife.com/>, 
an old Royal Mail sorting office turned designer mall, featuring Harvey 
Nichols, Hugo Boss and Emporio Armani. Or for something more original head to
Disorder <https://www.disorderboutique.com/>, a cool independent boutique, just 
off New Street; down to Digbeth to snoop around theCustard Factory 
<http://www.custardfactory.co.uk/> (including the Sunday flea market), with 
shops such asCow Vintage Clothing <http://www.wearecow.com/contacts/#birmingham>
; or theGreat Western Arcade <http://www.greatwesternarcade.co.uk/>, a restored 
Victorian gem with a wide variety of retailers – everything from designer shops 
to cigar and whisky parlours. A handful of beauty bars in the stores, and a spa 
within theMalmaison hotel <https://www.malmaison.com/locations/birmingham/> – 
also inside the complex – offer a time out from scrabbling among the rails. 
Another top place to relax isThe Spa at The Cube 
<http://www.theclubandspabirmingham.co.uk/>, where a day pass to access the 
pool, saunas and salt room starts at £35.

What’s new?
Later this year yet another colossal shopping centre will open, above the 
revamped New Street station:Grand Central Birmingham 
<http://www.grandcentralbirmingham.com/> will hold 40 shops, including the 
largest John Lewis outside London.

What to do once I’m done with shopping?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2Flets-go-to-birmingham-city-guide-shopping-sales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F6%2F1420536307601%2F2939e2d0-0218-45a6-b5d1-94e3e99d2a3f-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2Flets-go-to-birmingham-city-guide-shopping-sales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F06%2Flets-go-to-birmingham-city-guide-shopping-sales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F6%2F1420536307601%2F2939e2d0-0218-45a6-b5d1-94e3e99d2a3f-2060x1374.jpeg>
 Brindley Place. Photograph: Robin Weaver/Alamy 
For culture head to the Library of Birmingham 
<http://www.libraryofbirmingham.com/>, which opened in 2013. Its flamboyant 
facade divides opinion (it looks like an enormous present wrapped in gold 
Christmas paper) but the view over the city from the rooftop is fabulous. For 
more fresh air, with stops for tea or beers, walk by the canal from nearby 
Brindley Place; or for more culture theIkon gallery is celebrating its 50th 
anniversary 
<http://ikon-gallery.org/ikon-announces-50th-anniversary-celebrations/> with a 
series of special exhibitions and events.Edible Eastside 
<http://www.edibleeastside.net/> is an urban garden project in Digbeth 
combining gardening and art; its monthly First Friday event hosts a mini food 
fair and outdoor film screenings.

Anywhere to stay for under £100?
Of course! Bloc is a budget hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/may/28/hotel-review-bloc-birmingham-review>
 with small but sort-of stylish rooms, with king-size pocket-sprung beds and 
wet rooms. Most standard doubles are between £40-£55 a night through January.

What’s for dinner?
Relative newcomer Adam’s <http://www.adamsrestaurant.co.uk/menus/> is already 
Michelin-starred (one of four in the city) and has a three-course lunchtime 
tasting menu for £32. Then there’s La Tour hotel’s new steak place,La Tour Grill
 <http://hotel-latour.co.uk/la-tour-grill/>; Sabai Sabai for Thai 
<http://www.sabaisabai-restaurant.co.uk/>; and about a zillion other good 
options too.

Where do I party

 Cocktails at Jekyll and Hyde 
For drinks in the Jewellery Quarter, the Rose Villa Tavern 
<http://www.therosevillatavern.co.uk/> is a creative take on the classic pub, 
with Victorian stained-glass windows and green tiling offset by madcap touches 
such as fairy-lit tree branches, antler chandeliers and a red phone box. In the 
city centre, the Jekyll and Hyde <http://www.thejekyllandhyde.co.uk/> serves 
cocktails in anything but glasses in its Alice in Wonderland-themed garden and 
obsessively well-stocked gin parlour. For live music there’sJools Holland’s Jam 
House <http://www.thejamhouse.com/> (also in the Jewellery Quarter) or the 
Bull’s Head in Moseley; thegay quarter 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birmingham_Gay_Village> is just south of the city 
centre; or try Scandi barNörjske <http://norjske.com/> in Edgbaston.

Do I need a car?
Nope. It’s one of the best connected cities in the country for rail 
passengers, though it’s easy to find on a map too if you want to drive.
 