
The Ukrainian film director Oleg Sentsov, who is serving a 20-year prison 
sentence in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/25/russian-court-jails-ukrainian-filmmaker-oleg-sentsov-for-20-years-over-terror-offences>
, has smuggled a defiant letter from his jail in Siberia, comparing himself to 
a “nail that will not bend”.

Sentsov, a film-maker and pro-Ukrainian activist, was arrested in Crimea in 
May 2014 soon after Russia’s president,Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, annexed the peninsula. He 
had been helping to deliver food to Ukrainian soldiers marooned at their bases 
following Russia’s takeover.

Mohsen Makhmalbaf voices support for imprisoned fellow director Oleg Sentsov
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/07/mohsen-makhmalbaf-oleg-sentsov-robert-bresson-prize-venice-film-festival>
In 2015, a Russian court convicted him and fellow activist Alexander Kolchenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/aug/25/film-director-sings-ukrainian-national-anthem-sentenced-20-years-prison-video>
 after what his family say was like a Stalin-era show trial.

They were accused of being part of a terrorist conspiracy, setting fire to the 
offices of a political party in Crimea’s regional capital, Simferopol, and 
trying to blow up a Lenin statue, charges his lawyers say were absurd and 
fictitious.


Sentsov is incarcerated at a strict penal colony in the Siberian region of 
Yakutia, about 3,500 miles from Ukraine’s capital, Kiev.


In his first letter successfully smuggled out of jail, he denounces Russia’s 
“cowardly” war in Ukraine – a war in whichMoscow maintains it isn’t a 
participant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/19/russia-official-silence-for-families-troops-killed-in-ukraine>
.


“For three years I’ve been sitting in a Russian prison. For those three years 
a war has been conducted against my country,” Sentsov writes. “The enemy is 
fighting like a coward, vilely, pretending he’s got nothing to do with this. 
Nobody believes it. But that doesn’t stop him.”


At least 10 Ukrainians are serving long jail sentences in Russia following 
dubious trials. Others are in captivity in separatist-run easternUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>. “There are many of us held in 
Russia and even more in Donbass,” Sentsov writes. “Some have been freed. Others 
hope and wait.”


In May, the Ukrainian pilot Nadiya Savchenko was released in a high-profile 
prisoner swap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/ukrainian-pilot-nadiya-savchenko-released-by-russia-in-prisoner-swap-deal>
 agreed between Putin and the Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko, and with 
France and Germany. Since her release, Savchenko has turned out to be a vocal 
critic of her own government.


For three years I’ve been sitting in a Russian prison. For those three years a 
war has been conducted against my country

In his letter, Sentsov says he does not want preferential treatment. “I want 
to remain just a surname on a list,” he writes. He adds that there is 
relatively little he can now do for his country – except “hold on”. He urges 
Kiev not to cave in to the Kremlin on his account, “or to pull us out at any 
cost”.


He concludes: “We’re not your weak point. If we’re supposed to become nails in 
the coffin of a tyrant, I’d like to become one of those nails. Just know that 
this particular nail will not bend.”


At his trial, Sentsov said he had been beaten up by his interrogators, who put 
a bag over his head and told him to confess. He refused. He told his court 
hearing in Rostov-on-Don: “I don’t know what your beliefs can possibly be worth 
if you are not ready to suffer or die for them.”


Sentsov’s cousin, Natalia Kaplan, received the smuggled letter last month. She 
said it was the first direct communication from him since he was jailed.


The prison authorities make it difficult to send and receive post – a standard 
tactic to put pressure on inmates, she said. “Oleg doesn’t complain,” she said, 
adding that “snow has already fallen” at his colony.


The film director has two children, aged 13 and 12. He has declined visits by 
his family after observing that other prisoners “fall into terrible deep 
depression” once their loved ones are gone, Kaplan said. She described him as 
“very direct”, “goal-oriented” and with a “strong sense of justice”.


Speaking from Kiev, Kaplan also said that support in Ukraine for political 
prisoners seized byRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was 
fading. This was because society was “sick of Crimea” and disillusioned with 
ex-prisoners now released. She still hoped Sentsov would be freed but 
acknowledged it would take time.

Oleg Sentsov’s letter in full

For three years I’ve been sitting in a Russian prison. For those three years a 
war has been conducted against my country. The enemy is fighting like a coward, 
vilely, pretending he has nothing to do with it. No one believes him now but 
that doesn’t stop him.

War is never pretty but truth is on our side. We attacked no one and are just 
defending ourselves. However, there are other enemies besides the known, 
outside ones. They are smaller and on the inside, here, under our skin, almost 
native. But they aren’t supporting us. They are supporting themselves.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foleg-sentsov-jailed-ukrainian-film-maker-letter-siberian-prison-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f64095e0a3215d220c83cd6bf415c52e1ef6398%2F0_0_714_933%2F714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Letter%20from%20Ukrainian%20film-maker%20Oleg%20Sentsov%20smuggled%20out%20of%20prison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foleg-sentsov-jailed-ukrainian-film-maker-letter-siberian-prison-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Letter%20from%20Ukrainian%20film-maker%20Oleg%20Sentsov%20smuggled%20out%20of%20prison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Foleg-sentsov-jailed-ukrainian-film-maker-letter-siberian-prison-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f64095e0a3215d220c83cd6bf415c52e1ef6398%2F0_0_714_933%2F714.jpg>
 ‘This nail will not bend’: Sentsov’s letter from prison. Photograph: Oleg 
Sentsov 
Some of them are leftovers from old times, times of poverty and fear. Some 
desire just to live in the old ways but in a new guise: newly rich and 
empowered. But it’s not going to work out. Each enemy, the larger and the 
smaller one, has different goals but we are on paths different from the ones 
they’re taking. I’m not going to state: “we’ll see who wins”. I know who will 
win. The desire for freedom and progress is unstoppable.


There are many of us in captivity in Russia and even more in Donbass. Some 
have been freed. Others wait and hope. Everyone has their story and their 
experiences of conditions of detention. Some do PR on behalf of the captives. 
Some really get down to work. Becoming a better-known prisoner – to get 
exchanged for Russian captives in Ukraine – faster than others isn’t, however, 
the way I’d choose.


I don’t want to pull a blanket over me. I want to remain just a surname on the 
list. I doubt I’ll be given an offer to leave prison last – but that would’ve 
been a good choice all the same. Here, in captivity, we are limited: and not 
even by freedom – this can no longer be taken – but by being of little help to 
our country while we’re in here. To be more precise, we can do one thing: hold 
on.


There is no need to pull us out of here at all costs. This wouldn’t bring 
victory any closer. Yet using us as a weapon against the enemy will. You must 
know: we are not your weak point. If we’re supposed to become the nails in the 
coffin of a tyrant, I’d like to become one of those nails. Just know that this 
particular one will not bend.

 