
When I see the word “Muslim” in the press, the fear is always that the 
following word will be “terrorist” or “fundamentalist”. After theOrlando 
shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/18/orlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline>
, where a Muslim man opened fire in a gay nightclub killing many LGBT patrons, 
I felt like two parts of my identity had been mixed together under very 
gruesome circumstances. I was speechless for a day, reflecting on the tragedy. 
As a gay man, I was sickened by the thought that people had been killed because 
of their sexuality. As a gay Muslim – where it often feels like I live in the 
world’s smallest Venn diagram – I also feared that there would be increased 
Islamophobia on the LGBT scene.

What’s it like to be queer and Muslim? Let this photographer show you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/15/queer-muslims-samra-habib-portraits-just-me-and-allah>
As Owen Jones highlighted last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/24/no-asians-no-blacks-gay-people-racism>
, there is a worrying problem in the LGBT community. Anecdotes aside,according 
to FS magazine <https://www.fsmag.org.uk/fs148-racism-and-the-gay-scene>, 
approximately three quarters of BAME men have personally experienced racism on 
the scene. After Orlando, I decided to bring together the LGBT and Muslim 
communities in an evening meal during Ramadan called “A Big Gay Iftar”. What 
started out as an event intended for eight friends at home turned into over 80 
people showing up at a church to eat together, meet people they wouldn’t 
usually encounter on a Saturday night, and break down the wall between Islam 
and LGBT communities. It was the first time it felt like I, as an LGBT person 
from an ethnic minority, could own and tell our story. It was life-changing to 
feel the acceptance in the room and also to hear the shocking comments that 
LGBT people of colour have faced in their coming-out journey.

I have only ever faced outright discrimination once, and to this day I am 
still shocked it happened in a well-known gay bar in the middle of Soho, 
London. Mid-conversation with a friend, a man came up to me and asked where I 
was from. Thinking I was being chatted up, I replied “London”. He wasn’t 
convinced, pointing at his face and implying that my skin tone did not match 
that of a native Londoner.

I have only faced outright discrimination once. I'm still shocked that it 
happened in a well-known gay bar in Soho

“Well my parents are Indian,” I replied. “Oh right. So you’re Hindu?”. When I 
told him I was Muslim, he said, “So you must support Isis, right?”

It could have been playful flirting, but I felt downright offended. I have 
never, not even at an airport, been asked outright if I support a terrorist 
organisation. I still want to give him the benefit of the doubt, but it’s 
really not OK to ask someone that – especially somewhere both of us should 
consider a safe space.

The scene is no less hostile online. Friends from LGBT ethnic minorities share 
screengrabs from apps such asGrindr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grindr>, where they’ve been blocked, 
abused or insulted over their backgrounds or skin colour. When we try to call 
it out as racism, we all come up against a common response: “Yes, but it’s just 
a sexual preference!”

I’m all for differing preferences. Variety is the spice of life (actually, 
garam masala is the spice of life, but we’ll let that slide), but to wrap up 
racism under the guise of “but Asians and black people are not my thing” does 
not mean you can block someone purely because their heritage doesn’t match what 
arouses you.

It goes beyond sexting. A close friend told me he was once called “my little 
Aladdin” during sex. Jokes about lantern-rubbing aside, that’s not a sexual 
preference: it’s racism.

The fact is, there are very few high profile role models from LGBT ethnic 
minorities. Tradition pushes many of us towards careers like medicine and 
accountancy. Sometimes it feels as though you can compare coming out for 
someone from an ethnic background with a white British person who came out in 
the 1980s. Both experiences carry the possibility of social exclusion, violence 
and in extreme cases, suicide.

It’s important to remember that we as a group haven’t benefitted from the 
acceptance that comes from a household personality likeTom Daley publically 
declaring his sexuality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/dec/03/tom-daley-new-way-to-come-out>
. If we are brave enough to come out, the scene needs to be a safe, welcoming 
place, otherwise staying in the closet will end up being a more comforting 
option. Movements likePride in London <http://prideinlondon.org/> and 
organisations such asStonewall <http://www.stonewall.org.uk/> are making active 
efforts to expand their work within BAME communities, but progress will only 
happen when the LGBT community, young and old, black and white, remembers 
everything it took to fight for what we have today. We all have a 
responsibility to speak up and not let racism slam the closet door shut behind 
us.

Tom Daley: a new way to come out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/dec/03/tom-daley-new-way-to-come-out>  