
Trevor Bayliss has had precious little time to run the rule over county 
cricketers during his 18 months in charge of the England side and while this 
may change next summer, he is currently going on the words of his three fellow 
selectors and only very occasionally a personal hunch.

Liam Dawson, who is making a Test debut here in Chennai, represents a touch of 
the latter, having jumped the queue of domestic spinners such as Jack Leach and 
Ollie Raynerto join the India tour as Zafar Ansari’s injury replacement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/30/keaton-jennings-liam-dawson-england-india>
 on the back of what Bayliss described as “having something about him.”

Liam Dawson delivers on debut for England before India’s solid reply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/england-india-liam-dawson-match-report-vic-marks>
Ostensibly, the Hampshire all‑rounder is in the side for his spin‑bowling – 
the facet of his game that brought 20 championship wickets last season – but 
his batting is his real forte. On his second day in Test cricket, having spent 
the first in the pavilion perhaps staring at the cap presented to him by Vic 
Marks, his unbeaten 66 that turned a potentially a dreadful end to a tough 
series for England into something resembling safety.

“It’s his game sense, he almost knows what’s going to happen before it 
happens,” is another previously uttered Bayliss-ism, which, two balls into 
Dawson’s innings, did not appear to be the case when he was clonked on the 
helmet by a bouncer from Ishant Sharma that was slightly less welcoming to the 
Test club, you would hope, than the Observer correspondent had been.

“It was a good bouncer and I tried to watch it as hard as I could but that’s 
part of the game and something you get wrong occasionally” said Dawson. “I’ve 
watched a lot of international cricket and knew the bouncer was going to be a 
factor. The first 20 balls were probably the most nervous I’ve ever been.”

Liam Dawson surprised by England call but Keaton Jennings can stake claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/england-cricket-india-tour-2016-mumbai>
Dawson’s confidence grew thereafter, however, showing the bit of mongrel that 
caught the eye of the England head coach during a net session for the Lions in 
Dubai last winter when staring downVirat Kohli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli> after the India captain struck 
him with a poorly aimed throw as well as more than a bit of skill in his 
handling of the world’s No1 spinner in Ravi Ashwin.

“I’ve never experienced this type of pressure before. but I think I’m dealing 
with it pretty well. You make one Test debut and I was extremely excited and 
from a team point of view we said we wanted to finish this tour on a high and 
we’re in a fairly good position.”

While the runs will do plenty for the 26-year-old, you suspect only a cascade 
of wickets will further his chances of a second cap next summer given England’s 
current glut of all-rounders.Moeen Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/moeen-ali> has the spin-bowling slot among 
these sewn up at present, albeit his 146 here has done plenty to help him nail 
down the top-five batting spot he so craves. “It’s tough when you haven’t got a 
consistent number,” he said. “Wherever I’m needed in the team I’ll bat. I was 
batting at five at the start of the tour but now I’m batting in four. It’s a 
good place to bat but I’d rather bat five. Hopefully, one day I’ll have a 
settled spot.”

Despite an exasperating end – picking out the man on the hook following a 
score of earlier near-misses –Moeen’s innings, the bulk of which came on the 
first day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/16/england-india-moeen-ali-century-fifth-test>
, was a pretty handy nudge to the management on this front, even when 
considering a pitch that thus far looked flat as a roti.

It would be mean to criticise the surface though, with the match representing 
something of a triumph for the groundstaff given the devastation across Chennai 
that was wreaked byMonday’s cyclone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/trevor-bayliss-england-chennai-india>
; the hot coals they used to dry out the strip took any life out of it but it 
is better than no match at all.

If there is one legitimate grumble it would be with the rows of empty seats on 
a day when a number of supporters who walked up were greeted with sold-out 
signs at the ticket office. There were few answers from the officials, however, 
who pointed to local clubs not taking up their allocations as they shrugged.

Test cricket in India has received a jolt through the dynamism of Kohli’s No1 
side but it is not in a position to turn people away just yet.
 