
The oft-quoted notions about the deficiencies of England’s spinners were swept 
aside as the latest trio held swayhere in Chennai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/17/india-v-england-fifth-test-day-two-live>
. Admittedly, they were batting rather than bowling but England’s answer to 
Bedi, Chandrasekhar and Prasanna mustered 272 runs between them. It must have 
taken the legendary triumvirate of Indian spinners two years to score that many 
runs.

Moeen Ali (146), Adil Rashid (60) and most notably Liam Dawson (66no on his 
debut) ensured that England reached the dizzy heights of 477 in their first 
innings. Nothing is ever impregnable in the 21st century but from here England 
are unlikely to suffera humiliation on the scale of the one they experienced in 
Mumbai in the previous Test. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/ashwin-takes-six-wickets-as-india-clinch-series-against-england>
 By the same token it is not obvious how they are going to take the 20 wickets 
they will require to win the match; the challenge of taking 10 on such a benign 
surface is formidable.

Liam Dawson: I’ve never experienced this pressure before but dealt pretty well
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/england-india-liam-dawson-chennai>
So there was something to savour at the tail-end of an arduous tour. Dawson 
hit the highest score by an England debutant batting at No8 in an innings of 
remarkable composure – once he had recovered from being hit foursquare on the 
helmet by the second delivery he received in Test cricket.

This blow seemed to clear Dawson’s mind most effectively as he went on to 
occupy the crease for almost four hours. His success should not surprise us too 
much because he is essentially a batsman; that was his primary function when he 
captained England Under-19s and when he became Hampshire’s youngest centurion 
in 2008. Now he has evolved into an all-rounder, albeit one whose bowling has 
been more effective with a white ball rather than a red one.

Here, Dawson demonstrated that he has an impressive temperament capable of 
making the most of an unexpected opportunity. Recently, his batting experience 
has been limited toa few swishes in the Bangladesh T20 competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/england-cricket-india-tour-2016-mumbai>
, but this was a proper Test match innings, which might have been played by a 
20th-century cricketer.

Dawson’s stance is old-fashioned; his bat is not raised in anticipation of 
swiping the ball into the middle distance; instead it taps the crease in 
time-honoured fashion as the bowler runs up. His preference is to hit the ball 
along the ground preferably with a straight bat and no frills – like the 
opening batsman he once was for Hampshire and perhaps will be again.

Dawson and Rashid, who began his innings in unusually dogged mode, were at the 
crease far earlier than England hoped. The more obvious dangermen could not 
deliver when play resumed. It seems that batting is a little more taxing in the 
morning session.

Ben Stokes was caught behind in Ravi Ashwin’s first over. He was beaten not 
only because of significant turn but also because he misjudged the length of 
the ball. Another Ashwin demolition job seemed on the cards, yet curiously the 
off-spinner would take no more wickets in the innings while conceding 151 runs 
from his 44 overs.

Jos Buttler never settled against Ishant Sharma, one of the quickest bowlers 
ever to bowl with a bun (I’m confident that Larwood, Tyson or Trueman never 
employed one). He was palpably lbw when trying to hit a full-length ball 
through the leg side.

Moeen, 120 not out overnight, flickered uncertainly. He hit two gorgeous shots 
off Ashwin, a drive over wide long-off that went for six followed by a 
slog-sweep to the midwicket boundary, but soon succumbed exasperatingly to 
Umesh Yadav. Three men were stationed near the leg-side boundary for the hook 
but this was an insufficient deterrent for Moeen. He kept hooking and pulling 
and soon he mistimed straight into the hands of Ravindra Jadeja.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fengland-india-liam-dawson-match-report-vic-marks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a5cc6c2c6c17d0c06d1a922eeaf1a1bd4450382%2F0_0_5000_3208%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liam%20Dawson%20delivers%20on%20debut%20for%20England%20before%20India%E2%80%99s%20solid%20reply&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fengland-india-liam-dawson-match-report-vic-marks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liam%20Dawson%20delivers%20on%20debut%20for%20England%20before%20India%E2%80%99s%20solid%20reply&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fengland-india-liam-dawson-match-report-vic-marks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a5cc6c2c6c17d0c06d1a922eeaf1a1bd4450382%2F0_0_5000_3208%2F5000.jpg>
 Moeen Ali in action before his dismissal on day two. Photograph: Tsering 
Topgyal/AP 
What a bundle of contradictions Moeen presents. His contribution of 146 was 
vital.After such a scratchy start on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/16/england-india-moeen-ali-century-fifth-test>
 it was a fantastic effort yet the manner of his departure was horrible and it 
is fair to conclude that a dreadful shot is a dreadful shot whether the batsman 
is on four or 140. Even so, Moeen’s value to the side has been cemented once 
again.

As Alastair Cook ponders his England future, is it time to release the hounds? 
| Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/16/alastair-cook-england-test-captain>
England lost three wickets – for 68 – in the morning, but just one fell in the 
afternoon. After lunch Rashid returned to skittish mode. He and Dawson have 
played long enough to recognise when a pitch is sleeping and that was now the 
case. Any turn was slow; the bounce was reliable as the sun baked the turf – 
not the sort of pitch one wants to be bowling on. Perhaps this thought spurred 
them on. They resolutely added 108; Dawson, all easy orthodoxy looked as 
relaxed as he must have been when batting in his youth for Chippenham, while 
Rashid was chipping them here and there with impish flicks of the wrists.

Eventually, Rashid was caught behind off Yadav. Then Stuart Broad, also quite 
capable of recognising a good batting pitch when he sees one, was disgruntled 
to be run-out after a misunderstanding with Dawson about the possibility of a 
third run. Broad could easily argue that he was left up the creek by his 
partner, especially since he does not change direction quite so quickly 
nowadays.

Jake Ball was deceived by the googly of Amit Mishra, who thereby gained some 
modest relief since this would be his solitary wicket.

With Murali Vijay nursing a damaged shoulder, Parthiv Patel was promoted to 
open the batting again, but this proved no hardship. India would bat 20 overs, 
during which Alastair Cook tried six bowlers, but none of them offered much of 
a threat on a surface that seems to be becoming ever more batsman-friendly.

Dawson bowled his first over in Test cricket, the penultimate one of the day, 
and it was a highly respectable maiden. The likelihood is that he will have 
plenty of opportunity to impress as a bowler in the days to come.
 