
A further 340 public libraries could close in the next five years if the 
government does not act urgently to halt drastic funding cuts, the head of a 
leading library organisation has warned, which would equal the number of 
closures witnessed by the sector over the past eight years.

Nick Poole, chief executive of the Chartered Institute of Librarians and 
Information Professionals (Cilip) said: “We have already lost 340 libraries 
over the past eight years and we think that unless immediate action is taken, 
we stand to lose the same number over the next five years.”

Is your library under threat? Share your experiences with us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/06/is-your-library-under-threat-share-your-experiences-with-us>
Official figures revealed last week showed that UK libraries had lost £25m in 
their budgets in just one year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/08/uk-library-budgets-fall-by-25m-in-a-year>
. As 2017 is not an election year, Poole said, Cilip was anticipating that 
“local politicians will try to get library cuts through” over the next 12 
months.

In the 20 library authorities Cilip is monitoring over proposed cuts, Poole 
said five – Swindon, Warrington, Lancashire, Edinburgh and Denbighshire – were 
cause for deep concern. He warned that the list of endangered libraries would 
grow if government does not challenge authorities over proposed cuts.

Though new libraries minister Rob Wilson 
<http://www.cilip.org.uk/news/rob-wilson-takes-public-libraries-brief-dcms> has 
made robust promises about protecting the sector, Poole said the only way to 
wrestle libraries from terminal decline would be to allow councils to break the 
2% ceiling for council-tax rises. Ministers are discussing the possibility of 
allowing councils to raise tax bills by more than 2% to plug the hole in 
care-service provision. At present, a rise of more than 2% must be passed by 
local referendum.


“We would like to see Theresa May consider libraries as a special case as well 
as the care sector,” Poole said. Such a move would, he believed, buy librarians 
time in which to make long-term savings without profoundly damaging provision: 
“These problems are all the result of a … programme of austerity that was 
rushed through. Asking people to make these sorts of savings in a year is 
unrealistic.”

Poole’s remarks follow news that a further three local authorities have joined 
Swindon in proposing significant cuts to library provision. Last week,Swindon 
council approved plans to close 10 of its 15 local libraries 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/swindons-plans-cut-ten-libraries-approved-council-446301>
 by August 2017. Under the planned closures, due to go before the council’s 
scrutiny committee on Monday night, Swindon will be left with only one library 
for every 40,000 people – less than a third of the European average of one 
library per 15,000 people.

“There are countries with library provision as low as that but they tend to be 
in wartorn areas,” Nick Poole said. “This is no way to be creating a society or 
economy that delivers for every person in the country.”

Wilson was reported to have had a “robust” meeting with Swindon council 
leaders last Monday as part of an early-intervention strategy aimed at ensuring 
the closures do not undermine its statutory duty to provide a sustainable 
library service. The minister has vowed to restore the sector and earlier this 
month announceda £4m innovation fund for projects to help disadvantaged 
communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/01/libraries-receive-4m-fund-as-part-of-strategy-to-secure-their-future>
. Swindon is among those authorities expected to bid before the 4 January 
deadline.

A statement from the culture ministry said: “Local authorities have a 
statutory duty to provide a comprehensive and efficient library service and we 
have powers to ensure they comply. The department is monitoring Swindon borough 
council’s changes to its library service, and … Rob Wilson met with the local 
MP and council’s library portfolio holder to discuss the council’s proposals.”

In Warrington, campaigners have vowed to fight plans 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/first-uk-public-library-threatened-closure-394136>
 to create “lockers” in place of five libraries planned for closure. Under the 
plan, borrowers will use lockers to collect loans. The culture ministry said it 
was “actively monitoring the situation”.


Among the five libraries considered for closure is the 168-year-old Warrington 
Central library, the first publicly funded library in the UK. Ten thousand 
local residents have signed an online petition to scrap the proposals.

The government is probing plans given the go-ahead in Lancashire to close 29 
libraries, after local MPs lodged a complaint with the culture ministry. For 
ministers to intervene, the government department needs to receive a formal 
complaint that council provision is falling beneath that required by the 1964 
PublicLibraries <https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> and Museums Act.

A consultation to change the library service in Warrington has now closed, and 
DCMS is actively monitoring the situation.



Severe cuts are also proposed in Edinburgh and Denbighshire. The Welsh local 
authority is raiding the library funds in a bid to cut £10m from its budgets. 
This follows a raft of cuts to library services across the principality, which 
comes under the jurisdiction of the 1964 act.

UK library closures and the fights to save them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/17/library-closures-campaigns-fights-cuts-uk>
In Scotland, which is not covered by the act, Edinburgh council has launched a 
review of its library service 
<http://www.edinburghnews.scotsman.com/news/services-cut-as-edinburgh-seeks-70m-saving-1-3954848>
 in order to save £2.8m. Under its plan, libraries will be amalgamated and 
buildings closed.

Library closures have already been announced in North Lanarkshire, while in 
September, children’s author Julia Donaldson wrote to Argyll and Bute council, 
to protest at the closure of school libraries in the region.
 