
Public libraries’ significant role supporting the mental health of young 
people risks being undermined by swingeing budget cuts forced on local 
authorities, the head of their professional body warned this week. He added 
that, if funding is not protected, the work of libraries as frontline 
information resources for young people in need will be pushed on to the already 
overstretched police, health and social services.

It is estimated that one in 10 UK children experience mental health problems 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/training_services/policy/mental_health_statistics>
, as do one in four adults. Nick Poole, head of the Chartered Institute of 
Librarians and Information Professionals (Cilip) providers, told the Guardian 
that cuts to local library services would “continue to bite the availability of 
dedicated resources such as advice on anxiety, stress, exams and bullying”.

He warned: “Under-investing in our libraries simply pushes costs elsewhere and 
means that a young person growing up today has less help and is more vulnerable 
to the impact of mental health problems on their life.”

His comments follow prime minister Theresa May’s announcement this week of a 
raft of measures to “transform” attitudes towards mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-mental-health-pledges-cuts>
, including an extra £15m for community care, extra training for teachers and 
improved workplace support.

Wellbeing initiatives run by libraries around the country include the 
Association of Senior Children’s and Education Librarians’ autism–friendly 
libraries, the Cilip-backedreading for pleasure and empowerment scheme 
<http://www.cilip.org.uk/blog/reading-pleasure-empowerment> as well as yoga and 
mindfulness sessions run as part of Oldham libraries’ mental health and 
wellbeing support. Birmingham, Devon and Bolton city councils are also among 
library authorities that run dedicated mental health services.

I would like to think that the powers that be recognised the role of libraries 
in helping vulnerable people.
Sarah Lungley, Suffolk libraries mental health coordinator 
The Shelf Help scheme 
<https://readingagency.org.uk/news/media/shelf-help-the-books-helping-british-teens-turn-the-page-on-mental-health.html>
, which is dedicated to children and young people and was launched in 2016 by 
the Reading Agency, provides a list of 35 books selected by mental health 
experts and young readers that range from self-help and information guides to 
comics, memoirs and novels including The Curious Incident of the Dog in the 
Night-Time by Mark Haddon and The Perks of Being a Wallflower by Stephen 
Chbosky. Subjects covered range from body image to depression and self-esteem.

Suffolk library authority said that 68% of the books on the scheme had a 30% 
or higher loan status than other stock. Last year, 10,000 wellbeing inquiries 
were handled by the county’s libraries. Although it did not have an official 
breakdown of who sought help through its branches, Sarah Lungley, mental health 
and wellbeing coordinator, said anecdotal evidence suggested that the majority 
of enquiries came from concerned parents of young people experiencing 
difficulties.

“We are in a really good position to connect people to the help and services 
that they need,” Lungley said. “I would like to think that the powers that be 
recognised the role of libraries in helping vulnerable people. A lot of people 
in the community who struggle with mental health will be left vulnerable and 
lonely if their local library shuts.”

Poole added: “Children, young people and their parents are simply going to 
find it harder to find a well-stocked library where they can find information 
about the issues they face.” Without access to professional librarians trained 
in mental health resources, he said, those struggling would be more reliant on 
unmediated internet searches to gain information. “As a parent myself, I would 
be worried about my children using Google like that.”

Public libraries have been caught in the crossfire of a ferocious funding 
battle being fought between local councils and central government. Official 
figures released at the end of 2016 revealed thatlibrary budgets had fallen by 
£25m in a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/08/uk-library-budgets-fall-by-25m-in-a-year>
, as a result of councils raiding their resources to shore up frontline 
services such as social care.


According to an annual survey of library authorities in the UK undertaken by 
the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (Cipfa), total 
expenditure for the sector fell from £944m to £919m over the year, a 2.6% fall. 
Over the same period, 121 libraries closed, taking the total number open down 
to 3,850.

Related: Library closures 'will double unless immediate action is taken' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/12/library-closures-will-double-unless-immediate-action-is-taken>

Before Christmas Poole predicted that over the next five years, a further 340 
libraries will face closure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/12/library-closures-will-double-unless-immediate-action-is-taken>
 if proposed cuts go ahead. Libraries in Warrington, Lancashire, Edinburgh, 
Denbigh and Swindon are among those facing the most severe losses.

Poole said: “We have to find a way of making our political stakeholders 
understand that a big part of what libraries do is making sure that people with 
a whole range of issues feel safe and can access information.

“If we remove that function from communities, all you are doing is pushing 
those library users on to the police and healthcare professionals. If Theresa 
May isn’t aware of that, her comments are nothing more than an empty soundbite.”

‘The library was a calm, quiet and safe place for me to be’

Fifteen-year-old Josh is adamant that his local library has saved his life. A 
year-and-a-half ago, school felt like a prison for him, as he struggled to keep 
up with his classmates due to a variety of issues including severe anxiety and 
Irlen syndrome, a problem that affects his ability to read and process 
information. He was also suspected to be on the autism spectrum.

Two years earlier, anxiety attacks and vulnerable feelings had begun to make 
him dread each school day. “School became an oppressive place to be,” he says. 
“I was scared and upset and everything just became too much. Everything made me 
worried and afraid.”

The troubled teen was not a victim of bullying, but the normal noise and chaos 
to be found in any classroom were a daily nightmare he had to confront.

Only one place made him comfortable: his local library. “The library was a 
calm, quiet and safe place for me to be,” he says.

Already a regular user, Josh welcomed the available support and guidance when 
he needed it. Based in a deprived part of Suffolk, his library benefits from a 
coordinated county-wide health and wellbeing policy funded by the MentalHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Pooled Fund, which is a 
combination of Suffolk County Council and Suffolk’s Clinical Commissioning 
Group.

He was eventually allowed to swap school days for days in the library – and 
the impact on his learning has been considerable: “Because I don’t have to go 
into school much, I use the library to do my revision. It’s quiet and I find it 
much easier to study. I am relaxed and calm when I am working because I can 
take as much time as I want without being constantly rushed.”


When stuck on a difficult maths or English problem, librarians are at hand to 
guide him towards answers. “They have really supported me,” he says. “They are 
always there to talk to and help me through a basic part of a question and then 
will find me a book to help me with the rest. It has given me a lot more 
confidence.”

A sign of how positive an experience it has been for Josh is that he has now 
begun volunteering, leading groups of eight to 12-year-olds who have been 
bullied by older children. “I wanted them to get off the street and come into 
the library and have a safe space to be,” he says. His idea was to set up an 
after-school club; by the end of 2016, 20 children were attending every 
Wednesday.

“It’s great,” says the teenager. “It has given them their own space where they 
aren’t being picked on by the older children. Before it was a struggle to talk 
to people because it really scared me. But now I am much more calm and 
confident.” He smiles: “I seem to be smiling a lot more and am feeling a lot 
better about life.”
 