
Tripoli militias have staged an attempted coup against Libya’s United 
Nations-backed government, seizing key state buildings and a TV station and 
pledging they are ready to fight to take power.

After capturing the central Rixos hotel, home of the government’s state 
council assembly, on Friday night, the plotters issued a televised statement 
declaring the coup a “historic initiative to rescue Libya”.

In what is the most serious crisis faced by the Government of National Accord 
(GNA) since its creation, with strong international support, late last year, 
its presidency issued a counter-statement ordering the interior ministry to 
arrest the coup leaders.

The coup unfolded after militias from the plotters and the GNA confronted each 
other around the Rixos, a complex of administrative buildings, with GNA forces 
pulling back in the late afternoon without violence.

The plotters are led by Khalifa al-Ghwell, former prime minister of the 
national salvation government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/06/libyas-self-declared-national-salvation-government-steps-down>
, which was displaced by the GNA when it arrived in the capital in March. In 
its statement, the plotters declared the GNA was now “void” and had been 
replaced by the salvation government.

Intervening in Libya in 2011 was the right thing to do | Bernard-Henri Lévy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/21/we-failed-in-libya-but-going-in-right-thing-to-do>
The fate of the coup is likely to depend on the loyalty of dozens of militias 
which control Tripoli, and who have been skirmishing in the city for several 
weeks.

Pro-coup militiamen in pickup trucks with mounted machine guns remained in 
place around the Rixos complex early on Saturday, while the location of the 
GNA’s seven-strong presidency,led by prime minister Fayez al-Sarraj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/30/chief-libyas-un-backed-government-fayez-sarraj-arrives-tripoli>
, is unclear, with some reports saying they are in neighbouring Tunisia.

Libya has been in turmoil since forces from the elected parliament in Tobruk, 
which opposes both Tripoli governments,captured four key central oil ports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/key-libya-oil-terminals-seized-by-rival-government-sparking-call-for-military-action>
 from pro-GNA forces in September.

The oil ports operation, led by Tobruk’s powerful General Khalifa Haftar, 
deprived the GNA of the bulk of the country’s oil production, in the Sirte 
Basin, weakening its credibility in the eyes of critics.

UN diplomats, with strong backing from Washington, London and the European 
Union, want the GNA to become a “unity government”, bringing Libya’s factions 
together to confront the twin problems of Islamic State and mass migration to 
Europe.

But the GNA has failed to win mass support or, crucially, the backing of the 
Tobruk parliament. Meanwhile pro-GNA forces have been engaged in a five-month 
battle, backed with US airstrikes, tocapture the coastal town of Sirte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/sirte-libya-forces-capture-university-isis-islamic-state>
 from Isis.
 