
Khalifa Haftar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/24/libyan-renegade-general-khalifa-haftar-war>
, the military commander ofLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>’s 
eastern government, has met Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov and said he 
was seeking Moscow’s help in his fight against Islamic militants at home.

 Haftar, on his second visit to Moscow since the summer, requested military 
support from the Kremlin in September, according to Russian media. It was 
unclear on Tuesday if such help would be forthcoming.

 “Our relations are crucial, our goal today is to give life to these 
relations,” the TASS news agency quoted Haftar as saying at the start of talks 
with Lavrov. “We hope we will eliminate terrorism with your help in the nearest 
future.”

 Libya splintered into rival political and armed groupings after the uprising 
that toppledMuammar Gaddafi in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/20/colonel-muammar-gaddafi> and 
remains deeply divided between factions based in the east and west that back 
rival governments and parliaments.

 Haftar, who is aligned with the eastern parliament and government based in 
Tobruk, has been fighting a two-year military campaign with his Libyan National 
Army against Islamic extremists and other opponents in Benghazi and elsewhere 
in the east.

Khalifa Haftar: renegade general causing upheaval in Libya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/22/libya-renegade-general-upheaval> 
Many suspect he seeks national power.

 Donning a Russian fur hat as he entered the snow-lashed foreign ministry, 
Haftar told Lavrov he had met Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu on Monday 
to tell him about his military needs.

 Haftar has received public backing from Egypt and the United Arab Emirates, 
and France sent special forces to work alongside Haftar’s Libyan National Army 
earlier this year. Recent military advances by Haftar’s forces have boosted his 
popularity at home.

 A UN arms embargo in place since 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/30/arming-libya-rebels-america-warned>
 prohibits the transfer of weapons into Libya. Only the country’s UN-backed 
government in Tripoli, which Haftar opposes, can bring in weapons and related 
material with the approval of a UN Security Council committee.

 When asked, the Kremlin did not say whether it might offer Haftar any 
military support, describing the talks with him as business as usual.

 “Moscow is in touch with various Libyan representatives and contacts with 
Haftar take place as part of this process,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov 
told reporters on Tuesday.

Haftar’s allies have previously cultivated ties with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, which printed banknotes for an 
eastern breakaway branch of Libya’s central bank. “We spoke in general,” Haftar 
told reporters after the talks with Lavrov.

 “We explained our position with regards to arms supplies. As a great country, 
Russia respects the arms embargo until it indicates it is an unjust verdict.“

 Russian president Vladimir Putin has blamed the west for pursuing policies 
that he said led to civil wars in Libya and Syria.Russia launched a military 
operation to support Syrian president Bashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/21/bashar-al-assad-thanks-russia-vladimir-putin-syria-airstrikes>
 last year.

 