
Accusations of betrayal. Demagoguery and hatred. The bunker in Berlin. 
Comparisonswith Adolf Hitler 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/28/books/hitler-ascent-volker-ullrich.html?action=click&contentCollection=Book%20Review&module=RelatedCoverage&region=EndOfArticle&pgtype=article>
 have been tempting throughout Donald Trump’s 2016 campaign for the presidency 
– never more so than at its mad, destructive climax.

The Republican’s presidential bid appears to have become the campaign 
equivalent ofthe last days of the reich 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pR5q0ajW8Ko>, when Germany’s leadership raged 
at bearers of bad news from the battlefield, ordered non-existent divisions to 
launch counteroffensives, and embraced a nihilistic plan to burn it all down 
and take everyone along.

The difference is, unlike then, there seems to be little awareness of 
impending defeat or understanding of how it came to be. Instead, attitudes are 
like those after the first world war when Germans on the far right coined a 
word for their myth of betrayal: Dolchstoßlegende.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
This election is being rigged by the media pushing false and unsubstantiated 
charges, and outright lies, in order to elect Crooked Hillary!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/787258211283918848> October 15, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/787258211283918848> 
Trump is trailing Hillary Clinton badly in national polls, sometimes by double 
digits. Jubilant Democrats are eyeing so-called “red states” such as Georgia 
and Utah and expanding their ambitions to takeboth the Senate and House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/republicans-focus-congress-battle-trump-campaign>
. The Trump campaign has yanked advertising and staff out of Virginia, and 
major donors are pulling the plug. The writing seems to be on the wall of 
polling firms, campaign offices and newsrooms across the country.

“So is this presidential election over?” asked Michael Barone 
<http://www.aei.org/publication/trump-might-already-be-in-free-fall/?utm_source=paramount&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=POLElectionRoundup3>
, resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. “Almost certainly.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fdonald-trump-i-am-a-victim-political-smear-campaign-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20am%20a%20victim%E2%80%99%20of%20political%20smear%20campaign%2C%20says%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fdonald-trump-i-am-a-victim-political-smear-campaign-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20am%20a%20victim%E2%80%99%20of%20political%20smear%20campaign%2C%20says%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fdonald-trump-i-am-a-victim-political-smear-campaign-video&media=>
‘I am a victim’ of political smear campaign, says Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/15/donald-trump-i-am-a-victim-political-smear-campaign-video>
In September, Trump appeared competitive. In October, he collapsed. A 2005 
video in which hebragged about groping women  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
was followed by a slew of allegations of sexual assault and more than160 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/08/29/us/politics/at-least-110-republican-leaders-wont-vote-for-donald-trump-heres-when-they-reached-their-breaking-point.html>
 Republican leaders who abandoned Trump. He has declared war on members of his 
own party, attacking the House speaker, Paul Ryan, and turned to increasingly 
authoritarian claims, insisting thatClinton must be jailed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/trump-jail-hillary-clinton-private-email-server-us-election>
.

Clinton senses big victory after Trump's week of self-inflicted defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-presidential-election>
Republicans have started to fear that 8 November will not be the end but 
rather the beginning of all-out civil war, askingwhether Trumpism can survive 
Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/republican-party-survive-post-trump-election-landscape>
, and whether those who support him can survive his candidacy. Who can unify 
the party of Abraham Lincoln? Who can avoid a historic fourth consecutive 
defeat in the election of 2020?

Much depends on whether 2016 has an effect on the Senate, where Democrats 
stand a strong chance of taking control, and on the House, which may now be in 
play. The maverick businessman has already threatened to dispute the election’s 
result,claiming the election is rigged 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/us/politics/trump-election-rigging.html>, 
and already lashed out at moderate Republicans for not backing him.

“No one knows what’s going to be left of the party on November 9,” said 
Charlie Sykes <http://www.wtmj.com/charlie-sykes>, an influential conservative 
radio talkshow host. “Republican officials I’ve talked to have gone beyond 
anger to a sense of anguish about the future of the party,” he said.

“The damage that Trump has done will not end on November 8. I don’t think any 
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> really know what 
a post-Trump party looks like. They’re hoping it’s a one-off event but I don’t 
see the civil war going away any time soon.”

Sykes, who has known Ryan <https://paulryan.house.gov/> since he was first 
elected to the House in 1998, regards the 46-year-old Wisconsin Catholic, a 
family man and devotee of Ayn Rand, as its intellectual leader. “If there’s 
anybody who ought to emerge as the titular leader of the party in the ruins, it 
will be Paul Ryan.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Frepublican-party-after-donald-trump-paul-ryan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b55321611269433a97962b88aeb6e0737e1d180%2F0_95_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20after%20Trump%3A%20Republicans%20brace%20for%20betrayal%20and%20civil%20war%20after%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Frepublican-party-after-donald-trump-paul-ryan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20after%20Trump%3A%20Republicans%20brace%20for%20betrayal%20and%20civil%20war%20after%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Frepublican-party-after-donald-trump-paul-ryan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b55321611269433a97962b88aeb6e0737e1d180%2F0_95_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 ‘If there’s anybody who out to emerge as the titular leader of the party in 
the ruins, it will be Paul Ryan.’ Photograph: Tannen Maury/EPA 
After the defeat of Mitt Romney – a harsh critic of Trump and Ryan’s 2012 
running mate – Republican officials produced an“autopsy report” 
<http://goproject.gop.com/rnc_growth_opportunity_book_2013.pdf> concluding that 
to win back the White House, the party needed to appeal to young voters, women 
and minorities.

“They did the precise opposite,” Sykes said, noting how Trump had alienated 
those precise constituencies. “They’ve got to get grips with the fact that if 
you want to be a national party you cannot win elections if you do not appeal 
to women, African Americans and Hispanics and young people.”

Instead, Trump’s rallies are dominated by largely white crowdswho have 
embraced his angry, anti-immigrant rhetoric. “The Trump campaign is premised on 
turning out a part of the American population that’s shrinking,” saidLanhee Chen
 <http://www.hoover.org/profiles/lanhee-j-chen>, policy director for the Romney 
presidential campaign.

“For the party to succeed, it needs to focus on the part of the population 
that’s actually growing. I think that challenge is one that can be addressed 
post-election in very short order.”

But that shrinking population is not going quietly. The hard core of Trump’s 
support remains defiant and vociferous and now feels under siege. At a rally in 
Cincinnati, Ohio, this week, his supporters were fuelled by disdain towards a 
party establishment that they saw as trying to drag their candidate down.

“They are scared because he is going to stop the bullshit,” said a man who 
declined to give his last name but said he was called Scott, and had traveled 
from Aurora, Indiana. He called Ryan “a spineless moron” and defended Trump. 
“Hillary’s pulling shit that people have been put in prison for years for,” he 
said. “Trump kisses some woman on the cheek 30 years ago andPaul Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/paul-ryan> says, ‘I’m not going to support 
him any more. I’m not going to defend him anymore.’ He didn’t want to defend 
him from day one.”

Anna Rigdon, wearing a shirt saying, “Trump Pence: fuck your feelings”, 
expressed similar thoughts. She thought politicians who had backed away from 
Trump “should be ashamed” and singled out Ryan and “the Bush family” in 
particular.

If Trump loses, Rigdon said, “I think it is Paul Ryan’s fault and the other 
Republicans who are not standing by Donald Trump.” She added that in Ohio’s 
contested Senate race, she would not vote for the incumbent Republican, Rob 
Portman, who recentlywithdrew his endorsement of Trump 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-10-13/how-republican-rob-portman-may-derail-the-trump-train-in-ohio>
.

Invariably, Trump supporters rejected surveys that show the Republican nominee 
facing a catastrophic loss. Linda Hernandez, a middle-aged Hispanic woman 
wearing a “Deplorables for Trump” shirt, said: “I don’t believe the polls. I 
believe that the liberal media is controlling everyone’s minds.”

The danger for the Republicans is that, should Trump lose, voters who have not 
believed the polls and the media will conclude that the party itself betrayed 
them. Instead of learning lessons, party members fear, Trump’s supports will 
believe they were stabbed in the back, as Trump has insinuated at rallies.

At least three factions of the party will struggle for control: ideologues led 
by Ryan, an establishment embodied by former presidents George HW and George W 
Bush (neither of whom endorsed Trump), and a so-called “Breitbart wing”, led by
Steve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-registered-vote-donald-trump>
 of the rightwing news network, now chief executive of the Trump campaign.

“It’ll be a war,” said Rick Tyler 
<https://twitter.com/rickwtyler?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, a political analyst and former spokesperson for the primary runner-up, Ted 
Cruz. “The Breitbart wing is going to try to impose its will on the party and 
its brand of Republicanism, which is win at all costs without a guiding 
philosophy. The establishment is well funded but represents the status quo. The 
conservatives are underfunded and underrepresented and lack a leader to 
convince Americans why it’s a winning strategy and philosophy.”

Tyler cited Ryan, Mike Pence <http://www.in.gov/gov/2358.htm>, the Indiana 
governor who is Trump’s running mate, and Tom Cotton, a senator from Arkansas, 
as potential leaders. But he noted: “Ronald Reagan was not obvious. They 
emerge. They’re not obvious, so I don’t know who they are. You won’t know who 
they are until they come forward. As we saw with Winston Churchill, great 
leaders emerge in times of great turmoil.”

He also struck a rare optimistic note. “It’s an exciting time to be a 
Republican. With turmoil there’s also opportunity. The party could work on a 
new brand and a new set of leaders.”

Others, however, saw no future in Trump’s destructive wake. Asked where the 
Republican party should go from here,Tom Tancredo 
<https://twitter.com/ttancredo>, a former Republican congressman from Colorado, 
replied: “To hell. At least I hope so. If they do go south, the demise of the 
Republican party is the only good thing that can come of it. It has no 
relevance philosophically and so it deserves to go.”

Tancredo, the head of the Team America political action committee, likened the 
scenario to the 2004 disaster movie The Day After Tomorrow. “We have to think 
about the day after the election and what should we do as conservatives. The 
major problem trying to have a movement take hold in America is a lack of 
leader. You have to have someone who can articulate their concerns and inspire 
people.

“I haven’t the foggiest ideas who that may be. I guess they’re yet to be 
discovered because I can’t name one. I would have said Cruz but he 
self-destructed plus he’s not charismatic. You need a Reagan.”

For the conservative blogger Erick Erickson, the key is rediscovering the 
party’s moral compass after many defended the indefensible in Trump. “Most 
important, the Republican party must recommit to a basic principle – character 
counts,” hewrote in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/opinion/erick-erickson-the-gop-after-donald-trump.html>
 on Friday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Frepublican-party-after-donald-trump-paul-ryan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0792704cfd9f04af285b5ab44a90905daff76e94%2F127_381_4738_2844%2F4738.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20after%20Trump%3A%20Republicans%20brace%20for%20betrayal%20and%20civil%20war%20after%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Frepublican-party-after-donald-trump-paul-ryan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20after%20Trump%3A%20Republicans%20brace%20for%20betrayal%20and%20civil%20war%20after%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Frepublican-party-after-donald-trump-paul-ryan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0792704cfd9f04af285b5ab44a90905daff76e94%2F127_381_4738_2844%2F4738.jpg>
 The party will survive – ‘they always do,’ says the pollster Frank Luntz. 
Photograph: ddp USA/Rex/Shutterstock 
There could be light at the end of the tunnel. Clinton, herself deeply 
unpopular, will be trying to defy political gravity if she runs for a fourth 
successive Democratic presidential term in 2020. Republicans could also learn 
from Democrats in 1992 who, after three losses,reinvented themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/04/democratic-republican-party-bill-clinton-hillary-us-election-2016>
 and swept back into power with Bill Clinton.


The Republican pollster Frank Luntz 
<https://twitter.com/FrankLuntz?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 saw another historical parallel. “I am expecting a Republican insurrection 
similar to what happened to the Democrats after George McGovern lost in 1972,” 
he said. “Every component of the GOP will be at war with each other. There will 
be an attempt to unseat Paul Ryan as speaker. You’ll hear ‘I told you so’ from 
Ted Cruz and John Kasich.

“The House, which will still be controlled by Republicans, will be at war with 
the Senate – which is truly up for grabs. It will be nasty, ugly and very 
personal. Far more effort will be spent blaming each other than trying to pull 
together.”

Still, Luntz said that Republicans would survive just as Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> did in the 1970s. “They always 
do.”

But part of the reckoning may have to be a realisation that Trump’s hostile 
takeover did not occur in a vacuum. Critics have argued that he merely said, in 
a crude and explicit way, what many rightwing Republicans have been saying for 
years in code resulting in racially charged anger, obstruction in Congress and 
cancer in the body politic.

Barack Obama, now at the end of his term, recently articulated the idea to New 
York Magazine 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/10/barack-obama-on-5-days-that-shaped-his-presidency.html>
. “I see a straight line from the announcement of Sarah Palin as the 
vice-presidential nominee [in 2008] to what we see today in Donald Trump, the 
emergence of the Freedom Caucus, the Tea Party, and the shift in the center of 
gravity for the Republican party,” he said.

“Whether that changes, I think, will depend in part on the outcome of this 
election, but it’s also going to depend on the degree of self-reflection inside 
the Republican party. There have been at least a couple of other times that 
I’ve said confidently that the fever is going to have to break, but it just 
seems to get worse.”

 