
Life expectancy in Syria fell by six years in the first three years of the 
civil war, according to a study showing that the health of populations in many 
countries that experienced uprisings or conflict during theArab spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/15/arab-spring-badly-wrong-five-years-on-people-power>
 has suffered serious effects.

Between 2010 and 2013, average life expectancy dropped by approximately three 
months in Yemen, Tunisia and Egypt, according to research published in the
Lancet global health journal <http://www.thelancet.com/>. Libya experienced a 
steep drop in life expectancy after the 2011 uprising that deposedMuammar 
Gaddafi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/muammar-gaddafi>, but it rose after 
the initial conflict ended.

Worst affected was Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, where men 
and women were expected to live to 75 and 80 respectively in 2010, but 69 and 
75 by 2013. Infant deaths in the country rose by 9.1% over the same period, in 
stark contrast to the average 6% yearly decline in the decade to 2010, 
according to the study.

Ali Mokdad, professor of global health at the Institute for Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Metrics and Evaluation at the 
University of Washington, Seattle, who led the research, said the situation was 
likely to have worsened since.


Omran’s picture must be a turning point in Syria’s war | David Nott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/20/omran-picture-turning-point-syria-war-aleppo-david-nott>
“The sad part is that we stop at 2013 and we know that the war has been raging 
in Syria [since], and there’s a war in Yemen and war inLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> right now as well,” he said. “People 
are dying from killing and bombing, but they’re also dying because they’re 
unable to get their blood pressure medicine, not able to get to hospital. Kids 
are not eating properly, getting anaemia – we need to stop this madness.”

The study authors warn that hard-won gains that have led to life expectancy in 
the eastern Mediterranean region as a whole increasing from 65 in 1990 to 71 in 
2013 are under threat. In the same period, life expectancy in Libya, Syria and 
Yemen rose steadily by about three months per year.

Report on Syria conflict finds 11.5% of population killed or injured
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/report-on-syria-conflict-finds-115-of-population-killed-or-injured>
Mokdad said the situation had been aggravated by a brain drain of doctors, who 
were often among the first to leave when conflict broke out even though their 
skills would be vital during war and beyond.

The report, funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/16/what-is-the-bill-and-melinda-gates-foundation>
, warns that on top of the direct threat posed by conflict, millions of people 
in countries where uprisings took place in 2010 are faced with dire water 
shortages and poor sanitation, which can lead to outbreaks of disease. Frequent 
attacks on vaccination teams have slowed immunisation campaigns, andpolio has 
again become a major concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/29/syria-polio-world-health-organisation-who-virus>
 – especially in refugee camps – at a time when the region was close to 
eradicating it.

Mokdad said: “We need a road map for building health infrastructure in these 
countries. All we do in immunisation is based on electricity for the fridges to 
keep medicines in, everything is based on roads, everything is based on safety, 
so drivers can deliver. All countries need to come together to fix this.”


Just under two years ago, the UN estimated that the death toll in Syria from 
the conflict was 250,000. But in February, the Syrian Centre for Policy Research
said 470,000 people had died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/report-on-syria-conflict-finds-115-of-population-killed-or-injured>
 – about 400,000 directly owing to violence and 70,000 because of a lack of 
adequate health services.
 