
I’ve always thought of the mixtape as one of the quintessential American art 
forms. Songs arranged with care and trepidation; the boy’s heart laid bare on 
an audio cassette; an object of intimacy and vulnerability, which the girl 
could embrace or crush on a whim. In Bulgaria, it was the Communist Party that 
did the crushing. How absurd it seems to me now, the idea that getting caught 
listening toSmoke on the Water <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zUwEIt9ez7M> 
could get you in serious trouble. The idea that you had to mix your tapes in 
secret, like bombs. Then in the 90s, when the Party had already fallen, the 
mixtape, like our people, grew savage, ruthless, unapologetic. You could go to 
the market and next to the crates of tomatoes, cucumbers and potatoes find 
others packed with bootleg cassettes – Serbian Turbofolk, or Scandinavian Death 
Metal? American rap, or British pop? A cornucopia of choices in a world where 
“copy right” signified, and still does, one’s immutable right to make copies 
completely unimpeded.

In my novel Stork Mountain 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376706/>, a young 
immigrant returns to Bulgaria and searches for his disappeared grandfather, 
ending up in a village on the border with Turkey, a stone’s throw away from 
Greece, up in the Strandja Mountains. This is a place of pagan mysteries and 
storks nesting in giant oaks; a place where every spring, possessed by 
Christian saints, men and women dance barefoot across live coals and seek 
rebirth. There in the village, the boy reconnects with the old man, falls in 
love with the rebellious daughter of the local imam and gets drawn in a maze of 
insanity and half-truths.


1. Isihia <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vhxm8o7JXqY>, Ipostas

I wrote the novel over the course of five years, first in English, and then in 
Bulgarian. And while I wrote, I listened obsessively to the same musical 
composition, over and over, and over again: Ipostas by the Bulgarian band 
Isihia. Here, underneath the music, there lie the mountains of my book, with 
their hills and rivers, mists and rains, the fires and their walkers, the 
storks nesting in the giant oaks. In Hellenic philosophy “ipostas” or “
hypostasis” is taken to signify the underlining, inner reality of things. In 
Orthodox Christianity the Trinity is viewed as one God existing in three 
distinct hypostases. A fitting name then for a song, which at least in my mind, 
is now one with the book, or maybe has always been.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVhxm8o7JXqY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVhxm8o7JXqY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVhxm8o7JXqY&media=>
2. March of the Black Queen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ckRX0k9owAY>, 
Queen

“Everything you do,” sings Freddie Mercury in this strange song, “bears a will 
and a why and a wherefore.” The character of Elif, daughter of the local imam, 
stepped out of the dark faceless, but driven by a single, simple desire – to be 
allowed to wear jeans in a world where other women were made to wear shalwars. 
This desire fueled her will, gave her the “why,” illuminated her face so I 
could see it better. Elif, the daughter of the imam, who cut herself before he 
let her buy those jeans; who starved herself until he let her go to college; 
who smokes pot in a stork nest, up a giant walnut, her safe and sacred place; 
who whispers all her troubles into a human skull buried in the branches two 
centuries before. “I reign with my left hand,” the Black Queen sings with 
Freddie’s voice, “I rule with my right. I’m lord of all darkness. I’mQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/queen> of the night. I’ve got the power – 
Now do the march of the black queen.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DckRX0k9owAY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DckRX0k9owAY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DckRX0k9owAY&media=>
3. Feuer und Wasser <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jk6wF4QAZLc>, Rammstein

I don’t speak a word of German, but I chose Rammstein’s Feuer und Wasser 
because it exemplifies a basic alchemical principle which helped me conceive of 
two of the novel’s main characters – the narrator and Elif. In alchemy, “
coincidentia oppositorum” is the sacred marriage of opposites, the coniunctio 
which makes two opposing forces (fire and water) into a single unified one.

“Feuer und Wasser kommt nicht zusammen,” sings Till Lindemann. “Fire and water 
don’t come together. Can’t be bound, aren’t related. Sunken in sparks, I am 
aflame. And I’m burned in the water.”

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Coincidentia oppositorum. Beyond the duality, there is unity. Water that 
burns. I like the idea of beginning a character with a stereotype, or in the 
case of this novel, an archetype. The boy, the novel’s hero. Grandpa, the 
figure of the Old Man, the mentor, the guide through the shadowy realm. Elif, 
the shapeshifter, the hero’s opposite. Her father, a shadowy villain, there not 
simply to oppress, but also to tempt the hero to “the dark side.” And then 
these archetypes begin to make their own decisions, to act freely and evolve 
until in the end, I hope, they break liberated from the mold.

What a surprise it was for me, and everyone in the book, to discover towards 
its end that the boy, this fish out of water, the weakling who everyone thought 
could manipulate and use for personal gains, was in fact the force of change in 
everyone’s life, the fire that had come to the mountain to cleanse it through 
its flame.

4. Enter Vryl-Ya <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l9K83ppW3Sc>, Therion

I made up many wild tales in this novel – Attila is a character and so is the 
Slavic goddess Lada; Murad the Godlike One, the first Ottoman sultan; Captain 
Kosta, a fictional rebel who fought the Turks and ended his life alone and 
forgotten. But perhaps the wildest story is one that actually unfolded, the 
only real story I allowed myself to use.

In the early 80s the Communist Party began excavations in the Strandja 
Mountains at a site where they believed was buried Bastet, the Egyptian cat 
goddess. They were guided by an ancient map and the word of a venerated 
Bulgarian psychic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fliterary-mixtapes-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fliterary-mixtape-miroslav-penkov-cranks-up-radiohead-and-queen-on-the-shores-of-the-black-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59393661a8e745865149fa8638c8b5cf866c0b4e%2F0_6_1581_950%2F1581.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Literary%20Mixtape%3A%20Miroslav%20Penkov%20cranks%20up%20Radiohead%20and%20Queen%20on%20the%20shores%20of%20the%20Black%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fliterary-mixtapes-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fliterary-mixtape-miroslav-penkov-cranks-up-radiohead-and-queen-on-the-shores-of-the-black-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Literary%20Mixtape%3A%20Miroslav%20Penkov%20cranks%20up%20Radiohead%20and%20Queen%20on%20the%20shores%20of%20the%20Black%20Sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fliterary-mixtapes-by-electric-literature%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fliterary-mixtape-miroslav-penkov-cranks-up-radiohead-and-queen-on-the-shores-of-the-black-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59393661a8e745865149fa8638c8b5cf866c0b4e%2F0_6_1581_950%2F1581.jpg>
 A sculpture of the ancient cat-goddess Bastet found amongst a temple’s ruins 
in the Kom el-Dekkah area of the Mediterranean port city of Alexandria – a 
temple that Egypt said dated back more than 2,000 years and may have been 
dedicated to the cat-goddess. Photograph: AP 
In 1871 Edward Bulwer-Lytton published The Coming Race 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1014436.The_Coming_Race>, a novel in which 
a young traveler accidentally stumbles upon a subterranean world inhabited by 
powerful beings, descendants of a lost civilization and masters of a great 
force called “Vril” (think Star Wars); a force both of healing and destruction. 
For a while The Coming Race was enormously popular in England and so convincing 
in its narrative that certain prominent theosophists of the day (like Helena 
Blavatsky and Rudolf Steiner) believed it to be grounded in deep occult truth.

“Enter the underworld,” sing Therion in this bizarre song, “Enter Vril-Ya. A 
step down the stairway … In this world they got the key to time and space. And 
to forces too strong for mankind to know.” I just love imagining the Communist 
Party, in all its atheist godlessness, digging in hopes of finding the remains 
of a lioness goddess, buried in the hills of the Strandja alongside scrolls 
supposed to hold great knowledge of past and future. And who knows what the 
Party really found?

5. July Morning, Uriah Heep

For decades now people in Bulgaria gather on the Black Sea coast to meet the 
first rays of the sun on the first day of July. They build fires, play songs 
all night and wait for sunrise. This tradition takes its name from Uriah Heep’s 
cult song July Morning, so beloved in our country that John Lawton, one of the 
band’s later frontmen (July Morning was originally sung by David Byron) has now 
been given “honorary citizenship” to Kavarna, a small town on the Black Sea, 
which boasts a famous mussel farm, a statue of Ronnie James Dio, and an annual 
rock fest that has seen performances from the likes of Deep Purple, Scorpions 
and Motorhead.

July Morning may not be explicitly mentioned in my novel, but there is a trip 
to the Black Sea (no more than twenty miles away from the Strandja) and the 
general sense of waiting for the sun and for its fire, and through them, for 
rebirth.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnzRrGNygjzs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnzRrGNygjzs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnzRrGNygjzs&media=>
6. Sweet Dreams <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QUvVdTlA23w>, Marilyn Manson

Annie Lennox is great and who am I to disagree? But there is something 
magnetically macabre, impossibly irresistible about Marilyn Manson’s cover. In 
2001 I moved to the US to study at the University of Arkansas and quickly felt 
the inescapable pull of Southern literature.Faulkner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamfaulkner>’s adage that the past is 
never dead, that it’s not even past, alongsideKatherine Anne Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/nov/27/katherine-anne-porter-survey-short-story>
’s brilliant long story Old Mortality changed the way I think of life, of 
familial bonds, of the tales we tell each other and of the myths we create so 
as to face the faceless void. But the line between past and present is not the 
only line that blurs. “Oh, who can divide dream from reality, day from night, 
night from dawn, memory from illusion?” writesDanilo Kis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/02/short-story-danilo-kis> in his 
story The Legend of the Sleepers. “Who can draw a sharp line between sleep and 
death?” What more can we do then, but “travel the world and the seven seas … 
looking for something?”

7. Exit Music (For a Film) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RByvzmmEFiQ>, 
Radiohead

Katherine Anne Porter's short story changed the way I think of life, of 
familial bonds, of the tales we tell each other

I didn’t speak a word of English until I was fourteen. So used am I to the 
idea of not understanding the lyrics to a song that even today, unless I 
purposefully focus, the words flow by me unintelligible, like a great river. 
And when Thom Yorke sings, even if Ido focus, the words are still, for the most 
part, a mystery. Except in ExitMusic <https://www.theguardian.com/books/music> 
(For a Film). This song I understand. “Today we escape,” Yorke sings. “Pack and 
get dressed. Before your father hears us. Before all hell breaks loose.” And I 
can’t help but think of the boy in my novel and of Elif, of the world which 
holds them trapped, yet makes them terribly hungry for freedom; and of the 
boy’s grandfather and of the Greek girl, that sad, beautiful fire walker, he 
loved, many years before. “Return where you have failed,” Nikos Kazantzakis 
writes, an old Cretan proverb, “leave where you have succeeded.” There in the 
mountains where the grandfather once failed, the grandson now returns. And when 
at last the grandson triumphs, in his victory, the grandfather finds the 
strength to move on. “Now we are one,” Thom Yorke sings, “in everlasting peace.”

 * Stork Mountain is out in the US from Farrar, Straus and Giroux 
<http://us.macmillan.com/books/9780374222796> and in the UK from Sceptre. Get 
your copy at the Guardian Bookshophere 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376706/>. 

 * Miroslav Penkov was born in 1982 in Bulgaria. He moved to America in 2001 
and received an MFA in creative writing at the University of Arkansas. His 
stories have won theBBC International Short Story Award 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/03/miroslav-penkov-bbc-international-short-story-award>
 and The Southern Review’s Eudora Welty Prize. Published in over a dozen 
countries,East of the West 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/9967908-east-of-the-west> was a finalist 
for the 2012 William Saroyan International Prize for Writing and the Steven 
Turner Award for First Fiction by the Texas Institute of Letters. In 2014-15 he 
was the literature protégé in the Rolex Mentor and Protégé Arts Initiative, 
working with mentor Michael Ondaatje. Penkov teaches creative writing at the 
University of North Texas, where he is editor-in-chief of the American Literary 
Review. 
Do you have a great story about a mixtape you made or that someone made for 
you? Share it with us here 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/546c7d51e4b0f35d9da91092> – we’ll 
publish a selection on the Guardian.
 