
I’ve spent a lot of time thinking about teen films, specifically the movies 
John Hughes made in the 1980s. I spent so much time obsessing over them that at 
some point in my twenties I tried to write a biography of the director, but it 
never panned out. I write about that in my memoir,Searching for John Hughes, 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/29099281-searching-for-john-hughes> but I 
also write about why his films, and other films with teen protagonists — from
Heathers to Dope — have always appealed to me. A big part of it is the music.

A perfect example is a scene in one of my favourite movies, Over the Edge, 
where the main character, Carl, is lying in bed, blasting Cheap Trick’s 
Surrender in his headphones. It’s so simple, but to me it’s one of the best 
moments in any teen film I can think of. The song fits so perfectly into a 
moment that we all experienced in high school (and maybe even still experience 
as adults), just sitting around listening to music and daydreaming.

Picking music for a good soundtrack for a movie focused on teens isn’t a 
difficult thing to pull off, but good songs can help really make a movie. 
There’s sort of a formula to it, you just have to keep in mind there are 
basically three ways to do it:

 * The current, cool song route 
 * The nostalgia, period-specific route 
 * The score route 
The current route is pretty easy. Think almost any new wave-heavy John Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-hughes> film from the 80s, Bittersweet 
Symphony by The Verve in that final scene ofCruel Intentions or the Clueless 
soundtrack packed with Radiohead, The Muffs and Jill Sobule — that’s about as 
90s as you can get. Even today, a movie likeEdge of Seventeen utilises songs by 
A$AP Ferg and Santigold. You’re portraying teens, so you want to try your best 
to put music they’d maybe listen to on the soundtrack .

Nostalgia might take a little bit of work. What kind of music would stoned 
teens from some Texas town in 1976 listen to? Richard Linklater did a good job 
figuring it out with all that Runaways and Foghat inDazed in Confused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/31/richard-linklater-dream-is-destiny>
. I think if you were going to adapt a book likeRainbow Rowell’s Eleanor & Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/mar/25/review-rainbow-rowell-eleanor-and-park>
, which is set in the 80s, then you’re going to want to go with period-specific 
songs, but you could probably get away with throwing in something that sounds 
like it comes from the era — Savages or The Horrors both come to mind. Hell, if 
you do some sort of new take on a story from the Reagan era, you could easily 
throw the title track off the new Bruno Mars album,24K Magic, into the mix, as 
long as there’s a dance scene (and there should almost always be some sort of 
dance scene). If I were to adapt Robin Wasserman’s greatGirls on Fire, there 
would obviously be a ton of Nirvana, but I’d also try and throw in some other 
grunge songs by Soundgarden and Mudhoney, maybe a Bikini Kill song, as well as 
some early 90s pop hits to balance things out.

The other nostalgia thing is you need to have a few older songs in a movie no 
matter what. Not sure how that rule came about, but Duckie dancing to Otis 
Redding andPretty in Pink and The Kinks in Juno make it a rule. Sorry.

Or you could do the score route. The Harry Potter films did a good job with 
that, but normally I wouldn’t recommend it. You’d be better off mixing in some 
weird synth stuff with pop songs, like inRisky Business, or just doing a total 
Tangerine Dream worship deal, like they did inStranger Things.

The most important thing is mood. Teens are moody as hell, and I’ll be honest, 
I think a movie that captured this well wasThe Lost Boys. INXS? Echo and the 
Bunnymen covering The Doors? That was smooth. I won’t say you always have to go 
the goth kid route with this one, but I think it could help.

With all that in mind, here is my soundtrack for a teen film with just about 
everything thrown in. Let’s just imagine it’s a movie about a quiet (but really 
good looking) 16-year-old guy who is in love with a popular girl who’s a senior 
and who also happens to be a vampire.

1. Hit by Sugarcubes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z5fAWpv_axs>

Every movie like this needs some sort of upbeat opening, especially one that 
starts out with a record scratching. In my mind it’s got to be this Sugarcubes 
song. We show the school or the town or the mall where our characters spend a 
lot of time as this song plays over the opening credits.

2. Still Life by The Horrors <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sJQk0jDZx8o>

The popular vampire girl is at a house party and sets her sights on the neck 
of the 16-year-old, but then they lock eyes while this song plays. She feels 
something, but she doesn’t know what. Vampires aren’t supposed to have feelings!

3. Mercedes Boy by Pebbles <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lQS0t5Hdc6M>

The popular vampire is hanging out at the mall with her friends. There’s some 
whole special way she’s allowed to hang out indoors in the daytime, but we 
won’t get into that now. Let’s just say she has a really cool crystal around 
her neck that her arch rival (we will name her Heather because this is a teen 
movie) totally covets. They’re walking around as this song plays.

4. The Way I Walk by The Cramps <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kaIW7KJXKfQ>

Sixteen-year-old boy is talking to his good friend. Let’s call him Billy 
Rogers. Billy does the high school radio show, “Rockin’ With Billy.” He’s got a 
pompadour, wears creepers and bolo ties, and always has a cigarette tucked 
behind his ear. A recurring gag: a teacher in a short-sleeve shirt and a tie 
walks up to him and says, “No smoking, Mr. Rogers” and pulls the cigarette out 
from his ear.

5. Heaven or Las Vegas by Cocteau Twins 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6KnYw4EwYGc>


Sixteen-year-old and cool vampire bump into each other. It’s awkward because a 
few scenes earlier she was trying to kill him. They lock eyes again, but she’s 
got to go. “She’s amazing,” 16-year-old says to Billy. “Get over her,” his 
friend tells him. “She’s out of your league.”
 Just reimagine Cher as a vampire. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/PARAMOUNT 
6. Pale Moon by Wymond Miles <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b5-BTacz-R0>

Cool vampire is feeling things. She’s fretting about it. Her father comes to 
talk with her. He confides in her he had feelings once, hundreds of years ago. 
He decided to bite the neck of the woman he loved and made her his eternal 
bride — cool vampire girl’s mom. This is a somewhat shocking revelation.

7. I’m Dead by The Limiñanas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=USMd2Jl8wTc>

This song plays as the cool vampire and 16-year-old boy try on clothes. They 
both know they’re going to be at the same place and they each plan to tell the 
other how they feel.

8. Madder Red by Yeasayer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0-85bIZv-Do>

They’re… on the beach! It’s nighttime, everything is chill. She sees him from 
a distance, he smiles, but she realises that it can never be. The cool vampire 
turns into a bat and flies away. The worst part is her rival (remember her?) 
steals her cool crystal.

9. Release the Bats by the Birthday Party 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AWKXrYS7MOA>

Upset, the cool vampire slaughters a gang of bad guys who are preying on 
unsuspecting victims (we could foreshadow this earlier in the film, but they’re 
bad dudes).

10. I Know it’s Over by The Smiths 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AC-KsUAdj0U>

We find both the cool vampire and the boy sulking in their rooms. The Smiths 
has to play in this scene. I think it’s a law or something.

11. What About Your Friends by TLC 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=92gHq1s6G-c>

It’s the night of the dance. We see the school gym packed with balloons and 
cool kids. The cool vampire is at home sulking in her coffin until her mom 
walks in and gives her a pep talk, opens up the closet and there’s a 
Victorian-era dress dress soaked in blood hanging in there. “Now go out and get 
that boy,” she says.

12. Love Comes Close by Cold Cave <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fzku_5WB5yE>

The cool vampire and the 16-year-old boy both walk into the gym from opposite 
sides and lock eyes. As they walk towards each other, cool vampire rips her 
crystal from her rival’ neck and says, “I believe that’s mine.” She and the boy 
stand face to face and look into each others eyes. They start dancing and then 
kiss!

Yay! Happy ending.

13. Dream Baby Dream by Black Tambourine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_A9i0-iPFUI>

Credits! You need a song like this for the credits. We could have used the 
original version but whatever.

*****

 * Jason Diamond is the author of the memoir Searching for John Hughes 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/29099281-searching-for-john-hughes>. He is 
the founder ofVol. 1 Brooklyn <http://www.vol1brooklyn.com/> and the sports 
editor atRollingstone.com <http://www.rollingstone.com/>.
 