
The most blood-pumping five minutes of last summer's Olympics? Clue: it wasn't 
the Spice Girls driving away from each other in a fleet of black cabs. For our 
money, the BMX heats left every other sport standing. The way the riders tore 
around a track that looked like a Formula One circuit that had been thrown into 
a hot wash and come out rucked up and shrunken was one of the Games' few 
remaining lo-fi thrills; sport at its most visceral.

In Liverpool, BMXing has never been more popular. The city is home to the UK's 
largest indoor ramp park, Rampworx, and an urban park of poured concrete and 
graffiti at the Baltic skatepark.

No wonder it's home to the internet-sensation-cum-BMX-champion Harry Main (
ffwdbmx.com/2013/02/harrymania <http://ffwdbmx.com/2013/02/harrymania/>). When 
he's not doing 1080 turns (that's three 360-degree backward flips), he's 
directing and starring in his tips and tricks videos (filmed everywhere from 
California to Estonia) for YouTube.

"The action-sports scene in Liverpool is immense," Harry says. "It's not the 
usual sports that you're forced to participate in at school." He says he loves 
the Baltic skatepark, which is an expanse of lumps, bumps and curves tucked 
away between the warehouses and new media studios off Jamaica Street in the 
Baltic triangle (baltictriangle.co.uk <http://www.baltictriangle.co.uk/>).

As we watch him contort bike and body into another balletic aerial display, 
we're taken with a sudden desire to shop for kneepads. But are we, perhaps, a 
touch too old for all this?

"Nah, one of the best pro-riders on the scene now is 41, he turned pro at 29. 
It's about finding the time to fit riding into your everyday life. There's 
nothing like it," says Harry.

• What to see: Rampworx Skatepark, 1-3 Leckwith Road, Netherton (0843 155 0097,
rampworx.com <http://rampworx.com/>, closed Mondays, admission from £5.50 for 
two hours, £4 for spectators, free for adults accompanying children)
 