
If you’re thinking of moving for work or family, the Yorkshire town of 
Rotherham has lots to offer for both jobs and lifestyle.

Nestled in South Yorkshire, the metropolitan borough of Rotherham is home to 
260,000 people across 100 square miles. It’s made up of 70% open countryside, 
complemented by three popular country parks, and it also has easy access to the 
M1, M18, high speed capital rail links and an international airport – a balance 
of green space with the ability to hop to the next city.

Those thinking of moving to the area may be surprised to learn that Rotherham 
has an appealing average house price of just £138,255 (July 2015). This is 
lower than the national average, giving you far more for your money in green 
locations, all within easy commute of major cities like Leeds and Sheffield.

If you are a parent or carer, schools will be an issue close to your heart. 
Move to Rotherham and you can be sure of getting your child into some of the 
best schools in the country, with the borough reporting consistently 
above-average GCSE grades, with this year being no exception. Rotherham schools 
are expected to show very high percentages of pupils gaining A to C grades this 
year. These figures are to be verified later in the year, but early indications 
are Rotherham’s statistics will be significantly higher than the national 
average.

This news comes just a week after A-level results again indicated a record 
year, with some of the best results in the country coming from Rotherham’s 16 
secondary schools.

But the excellent results are not just in the secondary sector – with primary 
schools reporting excellent results at key stages 1 and 2, with both 
significantly and consistently outstripping national averages.

Those who like to maximise their free time will be spoilt for choice of what 
to do in Rotherham, as the town is home to four leisure centres, a museum, 
theatre, and 15 public libraries. It also hosts the annual Rotherham Show, 
which is the largest free land show in the north of England and receives more 
than 70,000 visitors over two days in September, celebrating the borough in 
style and showcasing the best the town has to offer.

Throughout the year, Rotherham also celebrates its communities with events 
including the Rotherham Carnival, armed forces day and much more as it aims to 
thoroughly embrace every resident.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Frotherham-council-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fliving-working-rotherham-childrens-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed030b1936d6256ccaa862d0c5a505295d9ecd61%2F0_7_1772_1062%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Living%20and%20working%20in%20Rotherham%3A%20join%20a%20community%20with%20big%20hearts%20making%20big%20changes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Frotherham-council-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fliving-working-rotherham-childrens-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Living%20and%20working%20in%20Rotherham%3A%20join%20a%20community%20with%20big%20hearts%20making%20big%20changes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Frotherham-council-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fliving-working-rotherham-childrens-services%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed030b1936d6256ccaa862d0c5a505295d9ecd61%2F0_7_1772_1062%2F1772.jpg>
 The village of Wentworth in Rotherham borough. Photograph: Rotherham council 
So, what would it be like to work in Rotherham? Specifically, at Rotherham 
council in children’s services?

A key focus at the council is being a “child centred borough” – by putting 
children at the heart of everything the council does. Therefore anyone who 
works in children’s services will be pivotal to the change in services and will 
be able to support children and young people across the borough.

There are 62,400 children and young people in the borough – making up 24% of 
the population – and of them are 1,600 children in need, while 407 are looked 
after children, who need the dedication, support and passion of social workers.

This could be you. There are a whole host of new jobs available for all levels 
of social workers in the council’s children and young people’s services after a 
radical restructure, with a fresh approach and new opportunities, now is the 
time to join.

Rotherham’s children and young people’s services also have a number of senior 
vacancies, which we will be advertising later this month. In particular we are 
looking for an assistant director for commissioning and performance, a head of 
commissioning, a head of service for children in care and a service manager for 
leaving care.

Your reward for working for the council goes far beyond the salary you 
receive, you can make a difference to young people and families across the 
borough and see that the child’s voice can be heard and be part of the change 
happening in Rotherham.

If you want to live and work in Rotherham, join a community with big hearts 
making big changes.

What you can expect if you join the team:

 * Manageable caseloads (current average 15 per full-time caseworker) 
 * Retention bonus of up to £2,701 after one year 
 * A supportive, close-knit unit with regular supervision 
 * Competitive basic salary for experienced social workers up to £36,019 
 * Generous holiday entitlement of 26 days plus bank holidays 
 * Local government pension scheme – taking care of your future 
 * Childcare vouchers – a helping hand at home 
 * Salary sacrifice car parking scheme – reducing the cost of travel 
 * Very attractive green car lease salary sacrifice scheme – doing your bit 
for the environment and value for money 
 * Making a difference to the lives of children, young people and families in 
Rotherham. 

More information about children’s social care jobs in Rotherham is available 
here 
<http://childrenssocialcarejobs.org.uk/?utm_source=GJ&utm_medium=content&utm_campaign=living-working-rotherham-childrens-services>

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Rotherham council
 