
In a splendidly sunlit and excitingly contested match West Indies won the 
first Prudential InternationalCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Cup through an innings of near 
genius from Clive Lloyd; Australia lost it through three prodigal run-outs. 
After their defeat by West Indies a week earlier, and as a side cruelly out of 
match practice, Australia's was a characteristically combative attempt to win. 
The eventual difference was only 17 runs, and at several points it was possible 
to objectively anticipate an Australian win.

A crowd of 27,000 paid a record Â£66,000 to watch the longest day's play - over 
nine-and-half hours. The entertainment was prodigious, only the fielding 
sometimes wavered, but it was always eager.

The pitch was slow; only Thomson and Roberts roused lift from it; but its 
bounce was unreliable; the occasional ball squatted disconcertingly. This 
factor imposed some degree of doubt on every batsman in the match except Lloyd, 
who thus deserved to win it.

Ian Chappell, the opposing captain, came nearest to his mastery and, for that 
reason, mounted the major challenge to Lloyd's purpose. Chappell's decision to 
send in West Indies probably was prompted by his wish to know how many runs his 
side would need to make to win. Certainly there was no morning greenness in the 
wicket. The game was resolved without any bias of conditions in favour of 
either side, and a crowd preponderantly - in volume - West Indian delighted in 
every moment of it.

Although Chappell posted two slips, a gully, and nearly-short leg for Lillee 
and Gilmour, Fredericks and Greenidge began the West Indies innings 
aggressively. They had scored 12 when Fredericks hooked the last ball of the 
third over - bowled by Lillee - into a jubilant crowd at long leg. By dismal 
ill-luck - and possibly an improvident lack of spikes in his boots - he slipped 
and dislodged a bail, which lost him simultaneously both his six and his 
wicket. Kallicharran gave two examples of his semi-finals splendour before he 
misjudged a cut and was taken at the wicket. When Greenidge, who had been 
strangely quiet, touched a barely bouncing inswinger and Marsh dived to scoop 
up the shred of a catch, West Indies were 50 for 3, and Lloyd lounged in to 
join an unusually subdued Kanhai.

Lloyd is often a hesitant starter. Now, however, he middled his first ball 
with monumental certainty and, without further ado, launched himself upon an 
innings of majestic power. He moved with lithe, almost languid, smoothly 
muscular speed of a tiger; hit with the unstrained leverage of inborn timing. 
Only Thomson, who bowled with good sense, clear purpose and high, controlled, 
pace imposed any curb on him.

Kanhai intuitively resigned himself to securing an end while Lloyd batted as 
even he has rarely done. He hit where and how he wished. Once Walker, a fast 
medium bowler of some quality and resource, dropped fractionally short to him. 
Lloyd might have gone back and hooked. Instead he moved on to the front foot 
and with a lazy swing, hit into the exultant crowd at square leg. He drove, 
hooked, glanced or pulled with such power that he scattered Chappell's close 
field until he could push a single as casually as scratching his head.

The fourth wicket partnership had made 149 runs from 26 overs and Lloyd had 
scored his century off 82 balls when, after consultation between the umpires, 
he was given out, caught down the leg side by the wicket keeper. Gilmour, like 
Thomson, overcame his early delivery-stride troubles and was Australia's most 
successful bowler. Then, in rapid sequence, Kanhai, missing an off drive, and 
Richards, beaten by a slower ball, were bowled by Gilmour, and three wickets 
had gone down for ten runs in three overs.

At this crucial phase West Indies maintained their purpose. Boyce, Julien and 
Murray re-established the innings and swept it through to a massive 291 for 8 
by the end of their 60 overs. Those who watched from distant sitting positions 
could argue that Australia missed six possible catches. They were at best 
half-chances, some of which they might have taken at high season, but hardly 
after five days' play in what for them was a new season.

If 292 seemed a remote objective - and would have been a competition record - 
Australia aimed at it with no hint of resignation. McCosker, groping, was soon 
caught at second slip, and then Ian Chappell and Turner created the foundation 
of a possible Australian win. Lloyd came on for his possibly crucial 'fifth 
bowler' stint. Chappell has a typically Australian belligerent streak and now 
he batted at his highly competent best. He and Turner had come to 81 in the 
21st over when, as they went for a quick single from Chappell's stroke, 
Richards threw down the stumps from mid-wicket. The Chappell brothers had made 
34 assured runs from seven overs when Ian pushed into the covers; they 
hesitated about the run as brothers should never do and again Richards threw 
down the stumps.

Walters batted with a certainty he has rarely shown in this country; another 
47 runs came from ten overs, and Australia were still in the hunt Ian Chappell 
played Lloyd to mid-wicket and, as he made for the bowler's end, Richards threw 
in to Lloyd who completed the run-out.

So, in the 38th over, Australia were 162 for 4 and three of those four lost 
men had been run out. There was no recovery. Two more were run out later, but 
by then the issue was decided. Walters played capably and aimed still for the 
arithmetically possible win until, looking for runs across the line, he was 
bowled by Lloyd. Marsh, Edwards and Walker ploughed on as their objective 
receded. Boyce, returning, took their three useful wickets.

Although Thomson and Lillee in an unaccustomed partnership put on 41 for the 
last wicket, Australia were already in the classic over-limit dilemma. The 
field held back and overs ran out as the innings was steadily strangled. At a 
quarter-to-nine in the 59th over, after several false starts, the crowd swarmed 
over, leaving the Australians to curse those three run outs.
 