
Local government <https://www.theguardian.com/society/localgovernment> bodies 
have welcomed measures announced in the autumn statement to stimulate 
affordable housebuilding, devolve further powers and boost regional 
infrastructure – but there was disappointment over the chancellor’s failure to 
address the social care funding crisis.

Lord Porter, chair of the Local Government Association, said the government 
must take urgent action to fund social care properly, if councils are to stand 
any chance of protecting care services for elderly and vulnerable people. 
Porter said that extra council tax-raising powers would not bring in enough 
money to alleviate the pressure on social care and that councils will not 
receive most of the new funding in the Better Care Fund until the end of the 
decade, but services for elderly and vulnerable people are at breaking point 
now.

The Association of Directors and Adult Social Services (Adass) has forecast 
that local councils willoverspend almost £500m 
<http://www.localgov.co.uk/500m-council-overspend-due-to-social-care-crisis/41964>
 in adult social care as the crisis deepens.

The New Local Government Network welcomed the 30p increase in the living wage 
from £7.20 an hour to £7.50, but director Adam Lent warned that this would also 
push up the cost of delivering social care, putting increasing strain on local 
authorities that have already seen their budgets slashed.

Similar disappointment came from Jo Miller, president of the Society of Local 
Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers and chief executive of Doncaster 
council, who said Hammond had failed to address “the elephant in the room’ – 
funding for the social care system.


Jo Miller: ‘Councils can’t take more shocks to an already shocked system’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/15/jo-miller-doncaster-council-chief-executives-solace>
 Miller said professionals in both health and social care had hoped for some 
concessions from the chancellor in recognition of the seriousness of the 
situation, and some “clear measures” to tackle it. “We can only hope that, in 
the public spending review the chancellor announced, the government is 
developing a serious plan to ensure the future sustainability of our health and 
care systems.”

Porter added that the measures announced to boost affordable housebuilding 
would be good news for local government, but said they must be supported by 
adequate infrastructure to help councils tackle some of the nation’s roads 
repair backlog and improve broadband.


Local enterprise partnerships 

Hammond announced that the government would be investing in local 
infrastructure across England, via a £1.8bn allocation from the local growth 
fund. The plan will see £556m allocated to Local Enterprise Partnerships in the 
north of England, £542m to the Midlands and east of England, and £683m to LEPs 
in the south-west, south-east and London.

 The chancellor also reaffirmed existing commitments to devolve powers to 
Swansea, Edinburgh, North Wales and Tay Cities and also announced a new city 
deal for Stirling.


In a recent interview with The Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/15/jo-miller-doncaster-council-chief-executives-solace>
, Miller said she would like what she calls “proper” devolution: real scope 
locally to work on developing skills and apprenticeships to support the 
government’s industrial strategy. Hammond announced today that London – at 
least – would be getting just that. Central government is devolving the 
capital’s adult education budget, and giving it “greater control over the 
delivery of employment support services for the hardest to help”, said the 
chancellor.

The news has been welcomed by mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, who said he hopes 
to go further on this in the future with control of skills budgets for 16- to 
18-year-olds too.

Hammond also announced new borrowing powers for new mayoral combined 
authorities in England, and further talks with London and the West Midlands on 
possible devolution of further powers.
Stirling Council (@StirlingCouncil) 
WE DID IT! #Stirling <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Stirling?src=hash> has 
secured a#CityDeal <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CityDeal?src=hash> which will 
be transformational for the area. Find out more athttps://t.co/idgFmUTkJg 
<https://t.co/idgFmUTkJg> pic.twitter.com/zLy8Tf6MdW <https://t.co/zLy8Tf6MdW>
 <https://twitter.com/StirlingCouncil/status/801413319819165696> November 23, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/StirlingCouncil/status/801413319819165696> 
Jonathan Carr-West, chief executive of the local government information unit, 
said there was nothing about devolution beyond the major cities in the 
statement, and that it was disappointing to hear the chancellor blame higher 
spending by local authorities as a cause of the weaker economic outlook.

 Carr-West said his real worry was what the chancellor didn’t talk about. In 
addition to no mention of funding for social care, Carr-West pointed out the 
absence of anything about how business rate retention is going to work and how 
local government will be financed in the medium to long term. “This was 
presented as an upbeat autumn statement, but between the lines there was 
nothing for local government to celebrate.”

'I worry about money all the time': the Jam reality in Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/i-worry-about-money-all-the-time-jam-reality-in-birmingham-just-about-managing>
Jonathan Owen, chief executive of National Association of Local Councils 
(Nalc) said devolution must not stop at Whitehall or County Hall and that the 
autumn statement fails to recognise the potential of local action to make a 
difference and contribute to the health of the democratic state as a whole. 
“The devolution plans announced are great but this next phase of localism is by 
no means localist enough, nor is it bold enough,” he said. Nalc is calling for 
the government’s devolution plans to include communities, neighbourhoods and 
local parish and town councils. “If anything, this year has taught us that some 
communities feel left behind by our national economy and politics. Supporting 
these communities can be part of the solution,” he said.

Transport infrastructure 

An extra £1.1bn investment in English transport networks was announced in the 
autumn statement, with £220m to address traffic pinch points on strategic 
roads; £450m to trial digital signalling on railways; and £390m invested in low 
emission and autonomous vehicles.

The chancellor said the Department for Transport will continue to work with 
Transport for the North to develop detailed options for Northern Powerhouse 
Rail.

Despite his enthusiasm for affordable housing plans, the mayor of London 
voiced his disappointment that the autumn statement did not include any 
measures to devolve to the capital some control over suburban rail services.


Universal credit

From April the universal credit taper rate will be reduced from 65% to 63%, in 
effect a tax cut of £700m by 2022. Hammond described universal credit as an 
“important reform” to the benefits system.
Helen Barnard (@Helen_Barnard) 
Reducing Universal Credit Taper Rate from 65% to 63%. Chosen instead of 
restoring Work Allowances or unfreezing benefits.#autumnstatement 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/autumnstatement?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Helen_Barnard/status/801415718289838080> November 23, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/Helen_Barnard/status/801415718289838080> 
The next few years will be a challenge for local councils, which face a £5.8bn 
funding gap by 2020, according to LGA figures, and difficult decisions about 
which services are scaled back or stopped.

“Even if councils stopped filling in potholes, maintaining parks and open 
spaces, closed all children’s centres, libraries, museums, leisure centres, 
turned off every street light and shut all discretionary bus routes they will 
not have saved enough money to plug this gap by the end of the decade,” said 
Porter.

 The LGA has called on the chancellor to allow local government to use the 
extra business rates income it will keep by 2020 to plug the growing funding 
gap. “The ability to fix longer-term funding settlements has been important for 
councils and something we have long called for. Given the majority of councils 
have taken up the option, the government now needs to publish the local 
government finance settlement as soon as possible,” said Porter. “This will 
give councils more time to plan for the difficult funding decisions which lie 
ahead.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.

 