
Tourists could be forced to pay a £1-a-night “bed tax” for hotel stays in 
centralLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> as councils attempt to 
cash in on their international appeal to plug their funding gaps.

Camden council is looking at adopting the charge used in European cities 
including Paris, Berlin and Barcelona to raise £5m a year, which it would spend 
on extra street cleaning in popular tourist areas, including Camden Lock.

The council said it has been forced to consider a tourist levy because 
government cuts had left its finances badly depleted and it had to think 
creatively about other ways to raise cash for vital services.

Theo Blackwell, Camden’s cabinet member for finance, said: “We face £70m of 
government cuts over the next three years. The money would be used to keep our 
streets clean and maintain and improve the public realm. Currently these 
budgets face a 20% cut.”

Local authorities do not currently have the power to tax hotel stays, which 
would require national legislation or a local voluntary agreement. Camden, 
which is to launch a campaign in next few weeks calling for more local spending 
powers, is seeking to join with other London councils to lobby for the right to 
impose a tourist levy.

Westminster 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/tax-on-sleep-in-west-end-hotels-6369728.html>, 
Birmingham 
<http://www.birminghampost.co.uk/news/local-news/birmingham-hotels-could-foot-bill-3909237>
,Brighton 
<http://thelatest.co.uk/brighton/2013/08/27/brighton-mp-and-councillor-join-debate-about-hotel-tax/>
,Edinburgh 
<http://www.edinburghnews.scotsman.com/news/politics/government-rules-out-bed-tax-on-edinburgh-tourists-1-3592054>
 andCornwall 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/travelnews/8566765/Cornwall-may-cream-off-25m-with-1-a-night-tourist-tax.html?mobile=basic>
 councils have all considered a tourist tax in recent years but none have gone 
ahead.

A review of local government funding <http://www.lyonsinquiry.org.uk> 
commissioned in 2007 by the last Labour government recommended a tax but this 
was rejected by ministers.

However, a London finance commission 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/business-economy/championing-london/london-finance-commission>
 set up by the mayor of London, Boris Johnson, in 2012 backed a tourist tax, 
arguing that if the capital’s tourist and entertainment industry was to 
flourish, there was “a powerful argument for a levy that could then be 
reinvested in marketing and urban realm improvements”.

The idea was criticised by hoteliers, who said it would put off tourists and 
impose a further burden on hotel operators. Martin Couchman, deputy CEO of the 
British Hospitality Association, said: “Any additional tax on top of the 
existing 20% VAT, which is almost the highest in Europe, would directly 
discourage international tourists from visiting London.

“A tourist tax could also be costly to collect and almost impossible to 
collect from the flats and houses let illegally through online companies like 
Airbnb.”

But Blackwell argued the levy was well within the means of central London’s 
tourist economy: “The price per stay is already over £100 a night and targeted 
at high-end visitors. A small charge of £1 a night would not make much 
difference. The levy is common in many European cities.”

Hundreds of thousands of visitors to the capital every year stay in hotels in 
the borough of Camden. Bloomsbury, Kings Cross, Euston and Holborn are popular 
because of their proximity to London’s West End. The council argues that 
London’s £16bn tourism economy is flourishing and could well withstand a “bed 
tax” levy.

Councils are increasingly looking to find ways of raising extra cash and many 
are introducing new charges or raising existing charges for services from 
social care, to car parking and football pitch hire.

The communities secretary, Eric Pickles, confirmed before Christmas that 
councils in England would seean average cut in central government grant of 8.8% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/18/local-government-financial-settlement-councils-breaking-point-cuts-spending>
 in 2015-16, equivalent to £2.6bn in cash terms

Camden council faces £70m of cuts to its £350m budget over the next three 
years, at the end of which it estimates it will have seen its funding from 
central government reduced by a half since 2010. Camden has set out cuts to 
budgets for social care, libraries, youth services and community safety, and 
will shed 600 more jobs by 2017, on top of 800 lost over the past four years.

Although Camden raises £25m in parking charges it says they cost £15m to 
operate. A council tax levy on second homes raises just £150,000 a year. It is 
considering launching a late-night opening levy for pubs and clubs to help pay 
for the cost of extra cleaning and policing.

ends
 