
Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> is being urged to 
halt the construction of a skyscraper because it mars a centuries-old view of 
St Paul’s Cathedral.

Conservationists are calling on the London mayor to take action against a 
42-storey tower in Stratford, eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>
, which they say damages the view of Sir Christopher Wren’s landmark from King 
Henry’s Mound in Richmond Park.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Flondon-mayor-urged-to-act-over-tower-that-compromises-st-pauls-view%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3de4ed6d410de97556cde695616490251e51892%2F0_32_1225_735%2F1225.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20mayor%20urged%20to%20act%20over%20tower%20that%20'compromises'%20St%20Paul's%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Flondon-mayor-urged-to-act-over-tower-that-compromises-st-pauls-view%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20mayor%20urged%20to%20act%20over%20tower%20that%20%27compromises%27%20St%20Paul%27s%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Flondon-mayor-urged-to-act-over-tower-that-compromises-st-pauls-view%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3de4ed6d410de97556cde695616490251e51892%2F0_32_1225_735%2F1225.jpg>
 View of St Paul’s before construction of the tower started. Photograph: 
Architect's Journal 
The charity Friends of Richmond Park has written to Khan urging him to halt 
the construction of Manhattan Loft Gardens, designed by SOM and described on 
its website as “Europe’s most ambitious residential tower”. It comprises three 
extensive sky gardens, a 145-bedroom hotel, almost 250 residential units, and 
retail and restaurant space.
 SOM’s proposed 42-storey mixed-use skyscraper by Stratford station, near the 
Olympic Park in east London. Photograph: Architect's Journal 
The charity said current planning rules should have protected the view, which 
has existed for more than 300 years and draws crowds of visitors to Richmond 
Park. Under the capital’s overarching planning documentthe London Plan 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/planning/london-plan/current-london-plan>
, theLondon view management framework (LVMF) 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/LVMF%20March%202012%20part%201.pdf>
 states that any development in the background of St Paul’s should be 
“subordinate to the cathedral and that the clear sky background profile of the 
upper part of the dome remains”.

However, photographs released by Friends of Richmond Park show that the 
emerging skyscraper in Stratford is clearly visible behind the cathedral.

A clear strategy on tall buildings can cut developers down to size | Rowan 
Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/27/skyscrapers-poll-planners-developers-strategy>
The charity said on its website 
<http://www.frp.org.uk/news/1414-st-pauls-view-destroyed>: “The new development 
clearly and substantially compromises the profile of the whole of the dome of 
St Paul’s and, for almost the entire east side of the building, the clear sky 
background is obliterated.”

Its chairman, Ron Crompton, said in a statement: “It is a tragedy that such a 
wonderful and iconic protected view, between two of London’s most historic 
landmarks and created over 300 years ago, should be destroyed not just for 
today but for many years to come.”

Crompton’s letter to Khan 
<http://www.frp.org.uk/pdf/news/1414_FRP_letter_to_Mayor_re_KHM_final_181116_.pdf>
 calls for an urgent investigation into how GLA officers allowed the proposal 
to win planning, in contravention of the LVMF. He has also called for the 
housing and planning minister Gavin Barwell to ensure that future applications 
relating to the sight line are referred to English Heritage and the mayor.

Is the only way up for London's skyline?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/06/london-towers-shard-paddington-bishopsgate-undershaft>
Historic England, the UK’s statutory adviser on heritage, has also protested 
against the development and said it was not consulted. Its London planning 
director, Emily Gee,told the Architects’ Journal 
<https://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/outrage-over-som-skyscraper-that-destroys-view-of-st-pauls/10015058.article?blocktitle=news-feature&contentID=17135>
 (AJ): “In the wrong places, tall buildings can do serious, irrevocable harm to 
important views and the special character of London.

“We are very concerned that this has happened and see it as a failing of the 
current approach to the planning for tall buildings.”

The AJ reports that the planning application for the tower was referred to the 
GLA in 2010 by the Olympic Delivery Authority (ODA), which was acting as the 
planning authority in the run-up to the London Olympics.

A spokeswoman for the Manhattan Loft Corporation told the Guardian the 
developer went through a transparent and public process to gain planning 
permission, adding that that maps of the LVMF protected view indicated that the 
background area to be protected beyond St Paul’s was 3km (1.86 miles) long 
whereas its tower was 7km (4.35 miles) beyond.


“Throughout the planning process we found the GLA and all the other planning 
bodies to be very supportive for such an aspirational residential project,” the 
spokeswoman said. “As planning approval was achieved [on] 18 July 2011, we were 
never asked about the LVMF background view impact.

“However, SOM has a long history of working with the St Paul’s view corridors 
and the more recent London Plan LVMF document.

“We would recommend that the King Henry VIII’s Mound also be illustrated as 
seen from the naked eye where the distance to St Paul’s Cathedral is 15.5km 
(and Manhattan Loft Gardens is an additional 7km beyond).”

A spokesman for Khan said: “We are currently looking into the issues involved 
with this development.”
 