
London’s skyline is changing dramatically, with almost double the number of 
tall buildings in the pipeline compared to two years ago, and only three 
planning applications rejected over the past 12 months, according to a report 
by New LondonArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> and GLHearn.

Since this time last year a total of 119 new buildings with at least 20 
storeys have entered the planning process. These take the total number in the 
pipeline to 436 – 89 are under construction, 233 have approval but work is yet 
to start, and 114 are at the planning or pre-application stage. This is almost 
doublethe 230 in the pipeline two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/mar/29/london-skyline-lack-of-consultation>
.

The report also found that – of the 94 tall buildings submitted for planning 
approval over the past year – 43 were approved and only three refused. Most of 
the 43 form part of the Greenwich Peninsula scheme, while those rejected were 
Hounslow House in west London, the “central phase 4 site” in Woolwich, and 
Gagarin Tower in Southwark.Renzo Piano’s controversial “Paddington Pole” scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/30/paddington-skyscraper-scrapped-after-fierce-opposition>
 was withdrawn. The rest still await a decision.

In the City, 1 Undershaft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/dec/07/1-undershaft-tallest-skyscraper-city-of-london-eric-parry>
 will match the Shard for height and become the tallest in the square mile at 
73 floors high.Reworked plans for 22 Bishopsgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/17/city-of-london-to-get-new-skyscraper-as-the-pinnacle-gets-planning-permission>
 were approved. Elsewhere in London, Tower Hamlets is home to 93 proposed tall 
buildings – including Hertsmere House, set to be the tallest residential 
building in western Europe at 240.5 metres – Greenwich has 67, Barnet has 23 
and Croydon has 18.
City of London now and with approved towers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/c5c78efef84188048c55d3bf1d3438c3515349b1/0_0_480_324/480.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/6d0c0e7f343c0da28d5274358de99c14d3e15fa1/0_0_1280_1147/1280.jpg&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/d629c722f96d592d369c6e42b3ea92f8ab38522e/0_0_480_324/480.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/e5b8eafcefaf4db7b27c4722912552f609208b37/0_0_1280_1147/1280.jpg&credit=Photos 
by Visualhouse/Dan Lowe&label_before=Now&label_after=Proposed&>  The City of 
London now – and when the towers which have approval are finished 
Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 