
London has a special relationship with the government’s benefit cap. When 
introduced in 2013 it had by far its widest impact in the capital, thanks to 
our famously high housing costs and resulting high levels of housing benefit. 
On Monday, thecap was lowered <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37873922>. 
The reduction wasless in London than everywhere else 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/extended-benefit-cap-hit-116000-families-housing-experts>
, but even so it is estimated that this will easily double the number of 
households here affected by it. The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS)calculates
 <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8717> that the 8,400 being pinched by the 
cap before the change will increase to 19,000 losing some money as a result.
London Councils <http://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/>, the body representing the 
capital’s 33 local authorities, thinks the figure likely to be well on its way 
to 25,000.

In London, the cap has been reset from £26,000 a year to £23,000. That is the 
total amount in benefits that can now be paid to a couple or to a single person 
whose children live with them. For single adults without children the maximum 
is £15,410. Let’s apply some context. The last census put the number of 
households in London at 3.27 million and it will have increased since then, so 
the cap affects only a very small percentage of the city’s population. That 
said, £23,000 a year does not buy alife of luxury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/aug/31/londoners-incomes-the-data-in-detail>
. The medianLondon household income 
<https://data.london.gov.uk/apps/gla-household-income-estimates/> is more than 
than £39,000. The mean is around £52,000 (much higher than the median because 
of very high earners). A recently calculatedminimum income standard 
<http://www.londonspovertyprofile.org.uk/indicators/topics/income-poverty/> for 
a London couple with two young children is around £25,000. Families that must 
get by on £23,000 don’t find it easy to make ends meet.

London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Councils believes that single 
parent households will comprise the majority of those made worse off and that 
three-quarters of all affected households will contain children. In a briefing 
to members, they also point out that the government’s own impact assessment 
anticipates that women will be disproportionately hurt. A majority of capped 
households are described as “likely to lose less than £50 a week (£216 a 
month),” while “a sizeable minority (around 44%) will lose more than this”.

What does the cap achieve? It reduced benefit spending nationally in 2015-16 
by avery puny £65m <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8717>. But the 
government maintains that imposing it has created an incentive for claimants to 
find jobs. Being employed for more than 16 hours a week or, if a couple, for 24 
hours a week combined, exempts claimants with children from the cap and means 
they qualify forworking tax credits 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Working_tax_credit>. The IFS says there is 
“fairly robust evidence” fromgovernment figures 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7482> that about 5% of people nationally 
affected by the original cap moved into work and an even smaller fraction 
responded to it by moving house. In the capital, however, as of May, nearly 35% 
of all London households capped since the policy was introduced have taken 
jobs, according to London Councils - the highest of any UK region - with many 
boroughs running schemes to help people find them.

Another part of the answer to the cap will be boroughs dispensing 
discretionary housing payments 
<http://england.shelter.org.uk/get_advice/housing_benefit_and_local_housing_allowance/changes_to_housing_benefit/discretionary_housing_payments>
 to help local tenants struggling to pay their rent in the short to medium term 
if the social consequences look particularly severe - a house move that would 
result in a vulnerable child having to change to an unfamiliar school, for 
example. London Councils say that boroughs have increasingly relied on these 
payments (in 2015-16, 41% of them were made in Greater London) which are made 
available by central government, but that they have a diminishing capacity for 
allocating it from pots that aren’t getting any fuller. They’ve also been 
helping capped claimants manage their money better.

But London Councils believes the lowered cap is bound to place greater 
pressure on the housing and benefit services of local authorities and, in its 
own words, “likely to result in greater demand for temporary accommodation for 
homeless households”. There are alreadyover 50,000 
<http://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/our-key-themes/housing-and-planning/homelessness/temporary-accommodation-london-report>
 households in temporary dwellings in the capital, including 4,600 who’ve been 
capped (see page 26here 
<http://file:///Users/davehill/Downloads/SN02110%20(1).pdf>). Evidence is being 
gathered and discussions are underway with the government about the next 
discretionary housing payment budget and the devolution of thework and health 
programme 
<http://blogs.ncvo.org.uk/2016/07/13/what-to-expect-from-the-work-and-health-programme/>
 - the coming successor to thework programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/21/work-programme-creates-48000-long-term-jobs-three-years>
 - to London so that better results can be achieved. The prime minister may 
have changed, but the wheels of austerity grind on.
 