
It turns out that staying away from Facebook for a bit could be good for you. 
Known by anyone who is actually honest with themselves, that piece of 
obviousness is now backed up by academics: experts – boo, hiss! – from the
University of Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/22/facebook-break-can-boost-wellbeing-study-suggests>
. The publication ofThe Facebook Experiment: Quitting Facebook Leads to Higher 
Levels of Wellbeing 
<http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1089/cyber.2016.0259> makes it 
scientific fact now: social media sucks for you.

But you knew that. Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> 
is, and always has been at heart, a party made up of people you don’t really 
like who all have better lives than you, and you’re the prat who walked through 
the door to hear about it. Everyone else’s holidays are more exciting than 
yours, their relationships happier, and their jobs way more impressive than the 
crap you’re dragging yourself through every day to scrape enough money together 
for Super Noodles. Because you can’t really cook, either. They can all cook.

Oh, and by the way, they look better than you too, because they are better 
than you. And they’re all here at this party to talk about it. There you are in 
the corner, worrying about how pathetic you are in comparison because you 
holidayed in Bognor again this summer with the kids, and it rained.

Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, therefore, is an 
approximation of any real party you’ve ever attended during your corporeal 
existence on this earthly earth, except there aren’t any Twiglets. It’s 
terrible. Why the hell are you at this party? It was an open invite, but you 
didn’t have to come.

The hierarchy of attendees harmed by the simple fact of being there, according 
to the Facebook Experiment, runs as follows: the “heavy [partiers], passive 
[partiers], and [partiers] who tend to envy others” (so, not just people who 
went to Bognor this yearand want to keep it quiet – it’s more refined than 
that).

Those who just popped their head in for 10 minutes for a quick catch-up before 
heading out seem to be OK, as do the people in the centre who are walking 
around engaging with everyone and talking about their holidays at length – 
they’re fine.

The passive and the envious on the outskirts of the casual and enthusiastic 
Facebook reveller group: well, they aren’t doing so great. They’d do better to 
leave the party early, according to the research. And according to everyone 
else at the party as well, probably, because if this were a real gathering the 
latter would turn around to see a circle of people lurking in the corners of 
the room quietly resenting them.

Had the results of this Facebook experiment been a simple Black Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/black-mirror>-like assertion that 
technology is generally quite bad, it would be simpler. Cold, unfeeling tech is 
harmful for our fragile, fleshy selves, so we should all be outside, breathing 
fresh mountain air, milking things, living off the land, etc. That’s already 
suspected – and ignored – by most hunched over a computer/tablet/phone through 
the waking hours: ie all of us. And we don’t care.

Which is OK actually because, y’know, Facebook probably isn’t a source of pure 
evil and unhappiness. Loneliness and envy totally existed outside it already:
Cro-Magnon <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cro-Magnon> man didn’t have higher 
rates of life satisfaction because he didn’t log in to check out his friends’ 
timeline. His levels of wellbeing probably weren’t wonderful either.

Feelings of loneliness and envy are still common, and happen to be the 
bring-your-own bottled-up emotions of any shindig, online or real. If you’re 
the kind of person who’d walk into a gathering with feelings of “oh no, not 
this”, you’re likely to feel the same on Facebook. The kind of person who would 
compare online social networking to suffering through a crap party for an 
article about the Facebook Experiment, say. One of those people who signed up 
to Friends Reunited, back in the day, when that kind of thing was done, just to 
make sure everyone they went to school with was living lives as inconsequential 
as theirs. But enough about those people …

Facebook is a place to which you bring your own insecurities, preoccupations 
and holiday pictures. Which makes who you are in there the same as who you are 
out here, even if you’re just intending tocatfish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/16/catfish-review>.

Going in to casually mingle and chat to some friends? You’ll have a fun time. 
Going in to be a pain, because you’re actually a pain in real life? You’ll be 
poison wherever you go. Heading in feeling lonely and not ready to interact 
with others, full of envy for other people’s lives? As backed up by the science 
now, and lived experience forever – this party isn’t for you, not right now. 
Take a break and go outside to seek your Twiglets and wellbeing elsewhere for a 
while. You’ll be much happier.
 