
“I don’t want people to feel at ease,” Lord Snowdon once said of his approach 
to portrait photography. “You want a bit of an edge.” You would be hard 
pressed, though, to detect that edge in his work, which tended more towards the 
immaculately ordered, but emotionally detached.

Whether photographing the royals among whom he moved, or the likes of the 
young and radical Germaine Greer 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portraitLarge/mw19244/Germaine-Greer?set=256%3BPhotographs+by+Lord+Snowdon&search=ap&rNo=10>
, his images are characterised by a certain distance that can make them seem 
altogether less captivating when compared to the work of his biggest influence,
Henri Cartier-Bresson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/henricartierbresson>, and positively 
tame when contrasted with the starker portraits of his contemporaries Richard 
Avedon and David Bailey.

Related: Lord Snowdon, royal photographer, dies aged 86 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/13/lord-snowdon-royal-photographer-dies-aged-86>

Snowdon said more than once that he was uninterested in the notion of rapport 
between himself and his sitter, and it shows. Yet there is flattery aplenty in 
his portraits of the fashionable, the aristocratic and the famous. For me, his 
best portraits are the ones that reflect the ennui of his sitters, or where 
Snowdon’s detached gaze is returned by the subject.

His monochrome portrait of Iris Murdoch 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw19272/Iris-Murdoch?set=256%3BPhotographs+by+Lord+Snowdon&wPage=1&search=ap&rNo=26>
 is a case in point. Made in 1980, it is a study in a peculiarly English kind 
of composure, the mixture of resignation and compliance she exudes palpable 
both in her languorous pose and almost sullen stare. It is Irving Penn, rather 
than Cartier-Bresson, whose presence is most apparent here in the rich 
textures, shadows and shades of grey.
 Rich textures … Snowdon’s portrait of Iris Murdoch 
 Photograph: Snowdon Archive 
Snowdon’s artfully composed study of John le Carré also possesses some hint of 
the edge he sought, the author’s knitted brow and fierce stare exuding a rare 
suggestion of anger and impatience, while his mirrored profile looks off out of 
the frame, a more unreadable double who hints at the shapeshifting George 
Smiley, his most famous, and inscrutable, creation.

Last year, among the many previously unseen portraits included in A Life in 
View at the National Portrait Gallery in London, there was another surprise –an 
early colour portrait of Lucian Freud 
<http://media.vanityfair.com/photos/54cab9457e4b004120bcb515/master/h_590,c_limit/image.jpg>
 from 1963. In it, he looks furtive and slightly wired, his staring eyes 
offering more than a hint of threat.
 Lord Snowdon and Princess Margaret on their wedding day in May 1960. 
Photograph: Sketch Npa Rota/Rex/Shutterstock 
In the 1960s, when he was made photography editor of the Sunday Times, one 
senses that Snowdon was hungrier – at least creatively – and less cynical about 
the nature of photography. Back then, he shot working-class East Enders as well 
as fashion models and aristocrats, but the grit and determination that fired 
the likes of David Bailey, Brian Duffy and Terence Donovan were absent in his 
life, and thus his work. His marriage toPrincess Margaret 
<https://uk.pinterest.com/jean0442/princess-margaret-uk/> certainly gave him a 
certain added social cachet as a photographer in class-bound Britain, but 
raised inevitable questions about his giftedness.

It is surprising, then, amid his archive of portraits, to come upon a series 
he did for the Sunday Times Magazine in 1968 entitledMental Hospital 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=lord+snowdon+mental+hospital&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjZu8-av7_RAhVGPRoKHW0oA6UQsAQIJg&biw=1249&bih=588#imgrc=XJV5VCoFohms3M%3A>
, its subject matter as stark and unsettling as its title suggests. Here is a 
glimpse of another Snowdon, utterly focused and unflinching in his pursuit of a 
harsher kind of truth about the extremes of the human condition. Young, 
disturbed patients look directly at his camera in a way that flies in the face 
of detachment. It is so visceral that it almost seems to be the work of another 
– more engaged, compassionate and driven – photographer.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Lord Snowdon dies aged 86 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/13/lord-snowdon-former-husband-princess-margaret-photographer-dies-aged-86-video-obituary> 