
US attorney general Loretta Lynch spoke at a mosque in Virginia on Monday in 
an attempt to calm fears about rising hate crimes in the wake of the election, 
and the future of the Department of Justice under theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>.

Lynch spoke 
<https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/attorney-general-loretta-e-lynch-delivers-remarks-interfaith-event-justice-department-s>
 at an interfaith event held at the All Dulles Area Muslim Society (ADAMS) 
Center. She highlighted the post-election spike in hate crimes that have 
targeted a variety of groups.

“There is a pernicious thread that connects the act of violence against a 
woman wearing a hijab to the assault on a transgender man to the tragic deaths 
of nine innocent African-Americans during a Bible study at Mother Emanuel AME 
in Charleston, South Carolina,” she said. “There is a thread that links all of 
those and when one of us is threatened all of us are threatened.”

Lynch’s visit comes on the heels of the FBI’s release of hate crime statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/fbi-anti-muslim-hate-crimes-rise-2015>
 for 2015, which found that hate crimes overall had risen by 6% since 2014 and 
there was a 67% increase in hate crimes against Muslim Americans specifically – 
the highest spike since 9/11.

Furthermore, the Southern Poverty Law Center has been tracking incidents 
reported directly to them or published in the media. In the ten days following 
the election the advocacy groupcounted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/trump-related-hate-crimes-report-southern-poverty-law-center>
 867 hate incidents. SPLC’s president also directly tied these incidents to the 
election of Donald Trump and the rhetoric he used during the campaign.

Lynch did not name the Trump administration but she acknowledged fears that 
some have expressed about the future.

“I know that many Americans are feeling uncertainty and anxiety as we witness 
the recent eruption of divisive rhetoric and hateful deeds,” she said. “I know 
that many Americans are wondering if they are in danger simply because of what 
they look like or where they pray. I know that some are wondering whether the 
progress we have made at such great cost, and over so many years, is in danger 
of sliding backwards.”

Trump will nominate Jeff Sessions, US senator from Alabama, to take over from 
Lynch as attorney general. The senator’scheckered history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
, including allegedly using the N-word and referring to a black assistant US 
attorney as “boy”, combined with his anti-immigrant stance, has left many 
fearing the impact he will have on the department’s civil rights division.

In addition to her visit to the mosque, Lynch is expected to further discuss 
hate crimes with a group of LGBTQ students at the Harvey Milk high school in 
New York on Tuesday, where she will also visit the Stonewall Inn and Stonewall 
National Monument.
 