
Tunisians used to say that one in five of their countrymen worked for the 
secret police.Leyla Bouzid <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leyla_Bouzid> was an 
aspiring young noughties film-maker in Tunis’s Fédération des Cinéastes 
Amateurs when she found out that one of her close friends in the club was an 
informer. It wasn’t an isolated experience. Of the paranoia that runs through 
her galloping debut featureAs I Open My Eyes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kgx_48jQAmE>, about a rock group trying to 
find their voice and hold their nerve in the final months of former president
Ben Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/20/ben-ali-sentenced-35-years-jail>
’s rule, she says plainly: “These are things either that I saw, or that friends 
or myself lived through.”

Bouzid left Tunisia shortly after the informer incident to study literature at 
the Sorbonne, but returned as soon as she could, in fiction. As I Open My Eyes 
pivots around an incandescent performance from Baya Medhaffar as the 
corkscrew-haired chanteuse Farah, foolhardy and fiery in her determination to 
confront the regime. People’s Choice award-winner at Venice last year, it is a 
fine addition to a strong recent crop of feminist Middle Eastern and Maghreb 
cinema, including Wadjda,Mustang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/mustang-review-women-rural-turkey-oscar-nominated>
, the Moroccan prostitution dramaMuch Loved,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/10/much-loved-review-sex-trade-morocco-nabil-ayouch-loubna-abidar>
and the Pakistani thrillerDukhtar 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x21nel2_dukhtar-pakistani-movie-official-trailer-2014_shortfilms>
. But for Bouzid, the film’s importance is precisely Tunisian; its mission to 
return to 2010 and the stirrings of what became the Arab spring. “It was very 
important for me to go back,” she says. “It’s true there was this revolution, 
and the world went: ‘Wow!’ But we didn’t go deeply into things at all. People 
took to the streets, but the problems were much more profound.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkgx_48jQAmE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkgx_48jQAmE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkgx_48jQAmE&media=>
As I Open My Eyes intimately explores the effects of living in a police state; 
both the all-pervasive fear and the self-censorship it produces in society at 
large. Farah’s mother, who tries to protect her by insisting she stop her 
rebellion, is her most visible enemy for most of the film. Ben Ali may be long 
gone, but such problems have not vanished: Bouzid citesthe 2014 arrest  
<http://www.middleeasteye.net/news/drugs-charges-dropped-against-prominent-tunisian-blogger-996563949>
of blogger Azyz Amami underlaw 52 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/02/02/tunisia-widespread-abuses-under-drug-law>, 
an anti-drug measure still used by the Tunisian state to clamp down on youth 
expression. She is in no doubt that there is major work to be done if the 
country is to move forward. “I believe in the necessity of a cultural 
revolution in our country. Not just political revolution, but creating new 
forms of thought.”

Holding court the morning after her film has screened at Cinemed festival in 
Montpellier, the 32-year-old is getting into her stride. “Our young musicians 
and artists don’t have a voice in Europe today. We just talk about Daesh etc. 
[But] in times when there’s been a very, very strong kind of extremism, like 
during the wars of religion in the west, that’s given rise to a new thought. A 
rejection of extremism.” She tails off, almost wistfully. “It’s very personal. 
Maybe it’s just me that thinks that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flove-rock-and-rebellion-in-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc915eafb4a070e2ee44e6ffa36ed2a3ba27678f1%2F0_271_4528_2717%2F4528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%2C%20rock%20and%20rebellion%20in%20Tunisia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flove-rock-and-rebellion-in-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%2C%20rock%20and%20rebellion%20in%20Tunisia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flove-rock-and-rebellion-in-tunisia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc915eafb4a070e2ee44e6ffa36ed2a3ba27678f1%2F0_271_4528_2717%2F4528.jpg>
 Director Leyla Bouzid. Photograph: Gareth Cattermole/Getty Images for DIFF 
She cast Medhaffar in the film, made for just €600,000 (£500,000), exactly 
because she seemed uninhibited by the past and ready to embrace new things such 
as a degree of sensuality unusual in films from the region (Bouzid worked as 
assistant director on fellow TunisianAbdellatif Kechiche’s Blue Is the Warmest 
Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/27/abdellatif-kechiche-interview-blue-warmest>
). “She’s very free in her head. She was one of the few people who didn’t say: 
I can’t do that because my mother and father wouldn’t like it.” There is, 
Bouzid admits, some correlation between herself and Farah. “I was also very 
free in my head, but I was smarter than Farah. I was aware of what I didn’t 
have the right to do, but I knew how to get around it.” She partly means 
romance – Farah’s second preoccupation in the film.

“Love affairs when you’re 18 in Tunis aren’t simple. Especially if you’re 
headstrong by nature. But it’s very Mediterranean, too; you see that idea in 
southern France or Italy. A girl with a thirst for life who doesn’t want 
limits. And a boy who really loves her, but can’t control her and gets 
possessive.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flove-rock-and-rebellion-in-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0cd78833c8a6629943a49534ebab7334e0a4a72%2F58_0_1082_649%2F1082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%2C%20rock%20and%20rebellion%20in%20Tunisia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flove-rock-and-rebellion-in-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%2C%20rock%20and%20rebellion%20in%20Tunisia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flove-rock-and-rebellion-in-tunisia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0cd78833c8a6629943a49534ebab7334e0a4a72%2F58_0_1082_649%2F1082.jpg>
 Baya Medhaffar in As I Open My Eyes. 
Bouzid grew up with her mother, a GP and culture buff who introduced her to 
Citizen Kane and Bergman: ironically, although her father isNouri Bouzid 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nouri_Bouzid>, perhaps Tunisia’s leading postwar 
director, he never took her to the cinema (her parents are divorced). 
Distancing herself from his reputation was another reason she decided to study 
in France.

“I’ve got a good rapport with my father, but I try to progress on my own, a 
way off from him. He read a version of the script, but I didn’t let him come on 
set. My production company has never worked with him. That was important for 
me: he’s someone with strong opinions; you can’t take it for granted that 
you’re going to form your own.” They both make socially conscious films – her 
father’s 1986 debutMan of Ashes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1kP5nX7bcc> 
dealt with homosexuality in Tunisia, and 1989’sGolden Horseshoes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T23mfafOpPw> with the failure of the country’s 
May 1968 protesters – but in different ways. “He said I relate violent things 
with a caress, but he does it with claws,” says Bouzid.

Actually, As I Open My Eyes has both at its disposal: in musical terms, both 
the crepuscular laments narcotically delivered by Farah, and punky rai 
moshpit-botherers. All were purpose-written by Iraqi-British oud masterKhyam 
Allami <http://www.khyamallami.com/site/#.V8gocph97IU> to fit lyrics by 
Bouzid’s poet friend Ghassen Amami. Small gestures, but hopefully resonant ones 
in keeping with the director’s idea of a DIY cultural revolution that might 
actually take hold in the scorched earth that has killed the Arab spring. 
“There’s been a long wait for cinema for young people. There’s a Tunisian 
audience, but also in other Arab countries, waiting for this kind of film that 
gives voice to this kind of energetic youth.”

• As I Open My Eyes is showing at Safar film festival of contemporary Arab 
cinema <http://www.ica.org.uk/whats-on/season/safar-film-festival> on 17 
September. The festival runs from 14 to 18 September.

• This article was amended on 3 September 2016. The original stated Khyam 
Allami was Syrian-British. This has been corrected.
 