
“I don’t know when you will go blind, Allan. I just don’t know.” My doctor, 
Professor Peng Tee Khaw, was trying to explain the unpredictable and volatile 
nature of my degenerative eye condition. “You could be sighted at 90 or you 
could wake up tomorrow to find that the lights are all off.” This filled me 
with a sudden sense of urgency. It was a race against time. I was born blind 
but, thanks to surgery, I have 10% vision in my left eye. It was summer 2015. 
“I want to see the world before it’s too late,” I told my mother.

Backpackers' experiences: readers’ travel tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/14/readers-backpackers-trips-adventure-travel>
A week later I was ready to board a one-way flight to Mexico. I had that weird 
feeling you get in your stomach when you forget to delete your browser history 
before your mum starts online shopping at Dorothy Perkins.

All my life I’ve been a stubborn shit: to ask for help was to concede defeat. 
I threw a hissy fit when my mum refused to let me go home alone on my first day 
of secondary school. I wanted to climb buildings and throw eggs at buses like 
the other boys on the estate in London where I grew up. I have sought 
independence in every area of my life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fblind-backpacker-allan-hennessy-mexico-central-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F728ccccf4e1a8964fc591383e9ce99b40db0064e%2F0_175_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%2C%20grace%20and%20kindness%3A%20a%20blind%20backpacker%20in%20Central%20America%20and%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fblind-backpacker-allan-hennessy-mexico-central-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%2C%20grace%20and%20kindness%3A%20a%20blind%20backpacker%20in%20Central%20America%20and%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fblind-backpacker-allan-hennessy-mexico-central-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F728ccccf4e1a8964fc591383e9ce99b40db0064e%2F0_175_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
 Clouds over forest and mountains, San José del Pacífico, Mexico 
When I landed in Mexico City, I slowly began to accept that I could not run 
this race alone. This was not a one-man sprint; it was a relay and I was the 
baton. I was passed around from one Mexican hand to the next until I was 
delivered to my hostel. There, I found my first runner, Yilena, who had left 
Moscow after a nasty break-up. A few guacamole-laden tacos and cold beers 
later, we were ready to hit the town.

As the party lights came on Javi said: “In three hours I take the bus to the 
Pacific coast – come with me, amigo.”

Boy, do Mexicans know how to party! El Colmillo bar off Paseo de la Reforma 
welcomed us with open arms and DJs spinning everything from techno to acid 
house to Latin jazz. Yilena dropped the baton when she got talking to a local 
boy. Initially, I was filled with anxiety and resentment but, before I knew it, 
I was picked up by Javi, a barista from Madrid. The party continued into the 
early hours. Javi tapped me on the shoulder as the lights came on: “In three 
hours I take the bus down south to the Pacific coast – come with me, amigo.”

Sleepless and pissed, Javi and I set off on an 18-hour bus journey. San José 
del Pacífico is a misty, mountainous hamlet that attracts wanderers from all 
around Latin America for itshongos (magic mushrooms). There, I met Kim Selznick 
from New York. Kim sings the blues and treated me to a sultry cover of 
Gershwin’s Summertime, Ella Fitzgerald-style, while we watched the clouds 
shifting shapes above the forest canopy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fblind-backpacker-allan-hennessy-mexico-central-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccd8a58db081036fc639f210fa7939852d23561a%2F169_0_2176_3264%2F2176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%2C%20grace%20and%20kindness%3A%20a%20blind%20backpacker%20in%20Central%20America%20and%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fblind-backpacker-allan-hennessy-mexico-central-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%2C%20grace%20and%20kindness%3A%20a%20blind%20backpacker%20in%20Central%20America%20and%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fblind-backpacker-allan-hennessy-mexico-central-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccd8a58db081036fc639f210fa7939852d23561a%2F169_0_2176_3264%2F2176.jpg>
 Allan, with braids, in Belize 
I travelled for eight wonderful weeks. First, I went down through Belize for 
lobster, rum punch and sandy islands; then a caving expedition in Guatemala; El 
Salvador, where I tried my hand at surfing; Nicaragua, where I climbed a 
volcano with royal blood (Augusta was related to the Queen); and Costa Rica, 
where I went zipwiring.

By the time I was looking out on to the runway in Panama City airport, I no 
longer felt like a baton.I was an Olympic torch – treated with care, love, 
grace, integrity and kindness by backpackers from all over the world. Granted, 
not everyone was a saint: a taxi driver abandoned me on a runway in Mexico and 
a mob chased me home in Costa Rica. They reminded me of the shortcomings of 
human nature.

But the beautiful souls I met restored my ebbing faith in humanity. They held 
my hand as we snorkelled, hiked volcanoes, climbed mountains, trekked through 
forests, sailed boats, caught fish, played chess for hours on end, got merry in 
dingy hostels, complained about bed bugs, laughed at my attempts to speak 
Spanish, endured chicken buses, surfed in tropical seas, swam in lakes, got 
braids, got ripped off, almost got arrested, cried or simply had a gin-soaked 
chat full of dirty jokes.
 