
Guardian Travel playlists - Love Saves The Day's festival mix for Bristol 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/GuardianTravel/guardian-travel-playlists-love-saves-the-days-festival-mix-for-bristol/?utm_source=widget&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=base_links&utm_term=resource_link>
 byGuardian Travel 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/GuardianTravel/?utm_source=widget&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=base_links&utm_term=profile_link>
 on Mixcloud 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/?utm_source=widget&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=base_links&utm_term=homepage_link>

Everybody Dance – Chic

Chic and Nile Rodgers are absolutely massive. Rodgers has had a hand in some 
of the greatest moments in popular music. The Chic back catalogue is crammed 
full of classics and when you go beyond that and look at the rest of his work, 
it really is incredible. You can expect to hear a selection of Chic hits and 
more on Sunday. With Rodgers flying high on theDaft Punk hype 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/may/19/daft-punk-release-a-new-album> 
wave at the moment, we expect this to be electric.

Cirrus - Bonobo

This is our Saturday night headliner and an old friend of the family. We've 
been booking Simon Green (aka Bonobo) for events in Bristol for years – the 
first time we put him on was at theThekla <http://www.theklabristol.co.uk>, 
which has a capacity of about 450. He's back with another top drawer album, 
with this, the lead single, causing a bit of a stir.

Mirror Song – Kowtown/Bashmore

What can you say about Bashmore 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2010/nov/17/scene-heard-mutant-house>
 that hasn't already been said? He's shot to stardom and delivered a couple of 
the biggest tunes of the last two years, withAu Seve 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BnigNbYVQJE> played everywhere last summer. 
He's a huge Bristol success story. Check out this track, where he links up with 
one of the city's more underground producersJoe Kowton 
<http://crackmagazine.net/music/kowton/>.

Get a life – Soul II Soul 

A massive part of the soundtrack to our youth, Soul II Soul were a real 
melting pot of styles and sounds. They turned a lot of us on to a whole bunch 
of music that we had no idea about before. Club Classics Vol 1 is such a 
brilliant and seminal album. It's really exciting to bring them back to 
Bristol, where they have a strong tie due to their link-ups with theWild Bunch 
<http://www.red-lines.co.uk/thewildbunch.html> in the late 80s and early 90s. 

Tone Music – Eats Everything

Bang up to date and riding high on a wave of well-deserved hype, Dan Pearce 
(aka Eats Everything) is a seriously talented producer. But what really sets 
him apart are his incredible DJ sets, which are technically jaw dropping.

Stupid – Redlight

One of the Team Love <https://www.facebook.com/teamlove4eva/timeline> family 
and a big part of Bristol's recent musical story, Redlight (Hugh Pescod) has 
played for us since we started doing festivals, always making an appearance at 
Glastonbury, and famously donating his fee forSt Paul's Carnival 
<http://www.stpaulscarnival.co.uk> to the cause. This is one of our faves from 
a few years back.

Repatriation – Jah Shaka

Jah Shaka is one of the UK's real dub legends, not a term we'd use lightly. 
Dub, reggae and roots are a huge part of the Bristol music scene, so it's a 
great to be able to have one of the top sounds in the country joining us on the 
Sunday. I remember getting taken to a Jah Shaka night at the Marcus Garvey 
Centre in Nottingham in the 90s, and it was heavy – the first time I'd heard 
bass like that outside a jungle rave! We're hoping for more of the same in 
Castle Park – and in the sunshine hopefully!

One Time – Jus Now

Creating soca-inspired bass music from Bristol via Glastonbury via Trinidad, 
Sam Interface has been around doing his thing in the city and beyond for years. 
His latest project, Jus Now, has been inspired by his new partnership with 
Trinidadian producer Laza Beam. This has been getting a lot of love on Die's new
Gutterfunk <> label, just another part of Bristol's musical cross-pollination.

• Tickets are still available for Love Saves Sunday, £19.50, £25, £29.50 + 
booking fee atlovesavestheday.org <http://www.lovesavestheday.org>
 