
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> put little 
emphasis on a transition effort during his idiosyncratic campaign for the White 
House, as even campaign insiders expected him to lose. Nonetheless, his win now 
presents an opportunity for a cadre of loyalists, many of whom backed him when 
few others would, to become some of the highest-ranking officials in the US 
government.

Trump is still an ideological blank slate in many ways, having shifted 
positions on virtually every issue. Personnel could effectively become policy. 
Cabinet secretaries and executive officials are likely to have a surprising 
amount of latitude in an administration led by a president who has shown very 
little interest in policy nuances.

Photographers on their best Trump shot: 'I think he's a damaged person'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/10/photographers-best-trump-shot>
Reports widely tip Reince Priebus, the Republican National Committee chair who 
has stood behind Trump since he gained the nomination, as favourite to be White 
House chief of staff.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Floyalists-and-rivals-tipped-for-powerful-roles-in-trump-cabinet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F201778981047ceb943d495b800693b1f0b9ee27d%2F0_256_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Loyalists%20and%20rivals%20tipped%20for%20powerful%20roles%20in%20Trump's%20cabinet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Floyalists-and-rivals-tipped-for-powerful-roles-in-trump-cabinet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Loyalists%20and%20rivals%20tipped%20for%20powerful%20roles%20in%20Trump%27s%20cabinet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Floyalists-and-rivals-tipped-for-powerful-roles-in-trump-cabinet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F201778981047ceb943d495b800693b1f0b9ee27d%2F0_256_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Reince Priebus (right) with Donald Trump on election night. Photograph: Jim 
Watson/AFP/Getty Images 
In Trump’s victory speech on Wednesday, he mentioned three former rivals: the 
New Jersey governor,Chris Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chris-christie>, the former Arkansas 
governor Mike Huckabee and the neurosurgeon Ben Carson. All could get major 
roles. Christie even appeared on stage with Trump, where he was notably the 
person closest to the president-elect outside his family.

Although Christie has been tainted by his proximity to the Bridgegate scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/chris-christie-bridgegate-george-washington-bridge-lane-closures>
, his appearance was a clear signal that Trump would not be deterred by the 
investigation that has led to the convictions of four top aides, for shutting 
down lanes on the George Washington Bridge for political reasons.

The vice-president-elect, Mike Pence, is likely to have a major portfolio. It 
was reported over the summer that Donald Trump Jr had reached out to the 
governor of Ohio, John Kasich, and offered to make him the most powerful 
vice-president in history. Now that role may fall to Pence, an ardent social 
conservative who served as governor of Indiana.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Floyalists-and-rivals-tipped-for-powerful-roles-in-trump-cabinet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b0db001ee1c10b6ec9b4e9ac777790635cff061%2F162_103_4081_2449%2F4081.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Loyalists%20and%20rivals%20tipped%20for%20powerful%20roles%20in%20Trump's%20cabinet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Floyalists-and-rivals-tipped-for-powerful-roles-in-trump-cabinet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Loyalists%20and%20rivals%20tipped%20for%20powerful%20roles%20in%20Trump%27s%20cabinet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Floyalists-and-rivals-tipped-for-powerful-roles-in-trump-cabinet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b0db001ee1c10b6ec9b4e9ac777790635cff061%2F162_103_4081_2449%2F4081.jpg>
 Sarah Palin took an opposite path to Trump, but could be on the way back. 
Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
Another figure who is likely to take a major role in a Trump administration is 
the former House speakerNewt Gingrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/newt-gingrich>. A long-time advocate for 
Trump and, along with Christie, one of the final candidates to be running mate, 
Gingrich has been widely reported to be a contender to become secretary of 
state.


Meet the Trumps: a look at America's new first family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/meet-the-trumps-melania-ivanka-americas-first-family-election>
Trump is also likely to look to the business world. Steven Mnuchin, a former 
Goldman Sachs banker who oversaw Trump’s finance efforts, is well positioned to 
be treasury secretary. Other potential cabinet figures from the business world 
include fracking mogul Harold Hamm.

The president-elect has floated the idea of giving 2008 VP nominee Sarah Palin 
a cabinet position. The Alaskan could become secretary of the interior or 
secretary of energy. Her own transition from politics to reality television 
prefigured Trump taking the opposite path. Now she may follow him back to the 
fray.
 