
On 25 May 1976, an exhibition opened at the Museum of Modern Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/moma> in New York that blew apart 
American photography. Curated by long-term director John Szarkowski, it 
contained around 75 prints by an artist in his mid-30s based in Memphis, 
Tennessee, self-taught and barely known outside the in-crowd. His name was
William Eggleston <http://www.egglestontrust.com/moma76.html>.

Unseen William Eggleston portraits to appear in London exhibition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/unseen-william-eggleston-portraits-to-appear-in-london-exhibition>
The reaction was immediate, and incandescent. The Village Voice claimed that 
“some sort of con had been worked”;the New York Times diagnosed 
<http://londonist.com/2010/01/art_review_william_eggleston_21st_c> “a case, if 
not of the blind leading the blind, at least the banal leading the banal”. 
Eggleston’s affectless, snapshot-like scenes of worn-out plantations and 
suburban driveways – southern life at its mostblandly nondescript 
<http://dispara.org/tienda/en/libros/49-william-eggleston-s-guide-.html> – were 
partly responsible. But what most riled the reviewers was that he had dared to 
print these images in colour. Colour, as everyone knew, was vulgar, garish, 
trashy. The New York Times later dubbed the exhibition “the most hated show of 
the year”.

With impeccable timing, 40 years on, Eggleston returns with another major 
retrospective at another major museum, theNational Portrait Gallery 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/whatson/eggleston/visit.php> – a sign, perhaps, that 
Eggleston is now part of the establishment. Colour photography is mainstream; 
mobile phones and social media have made snapshots the most natural visual 
language of all. Once reviled, Eggleston himself is now revered, and 
correspondingly expensive – prints now sell for £350,000-plus.

Yet to encounter his photographs is still to revel in their strange wonder, 
their droll and sphinx-like resistance to interpretation. Critics falter when 
they try to place him: a reworker of theDuchampian readymade 
<http://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/la-dispute/arts-plastiques-william-eggleston-et-marcel-duchamp>
? A chronicler of southern gothic? Eggleston, forgivably wary of those who 
presume to pin down his work, prefers to let the pictures do the talking. And 
what they say remains peculiar enough.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F427a8a07b95b90b5fb302a37d17e0913010a6f41%2F0_0_3500_2299%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Made%20in%20Memphis%3A%20William%20Eggleston's%20surreal%20visions%20of%20the%20American%20south&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Made%20in%20Memphis%3A%20William%20Eggleston%27s%20surreal%20visions%20of%20the%20American%20south&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F427a8a07b95b90b5fb302a37d17e0913010a6f41%2F0_0_3500_2299%2F3500.jpg>
 Eggleston’s Untitled, 1969–70, the artist’s uncle, Ayden Schuyler senior, with 
Jasper Staples, in Cassidy Bayou, Summer, Mississippi. Photograph: ©Eggleston 
Artistic Trust 
Born in Memphis in 1939, he was brought up in pampered gentility on the family 
cotton farm in Mississippi (even before his prints began to sell, money was 
never a problem). A quiet child fond of music, he was sent to toughen up at 
boarding school and detested it, later drifting through a series of educational 
establishments while neglecting to acquire a degree. One thing he did work hard 
on was his reputation as a hellraiser, in the most impeccable southern mode. 
One legend has him driving in search of late-night whiskey, ramming his 
Cadillac through locked steel gates with Bach’sMass in B Minor blaring from the 
stereo. Only when he came across a copy of Henri Cartier-Bresson’s famous book
The Decisive Moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/dec/23/henri-cartier-bresson-the-decisive-moment-reissued-photography>
, some time around 1960, did he realise that he could take photography as 
seriously as having fun.

For most viewers, Cartier-Bresson’s genius is compositional, residing in his 
matchless ability to seize crystalline form from the fast-moving muddle of the 
everyday. Eggleston, however, was more fascinated by the sophisticated tonal 
properties of the photographs inThe Decisive Moment: their interlocking play of 
light and shade, the way even the darkest shadows contained reservoirs of 
meaning. When he discovered Kodachrome film in 1967, Eggleston sensed that 
colour might do something similar for him, and went to work with his Leica and 
Canon rangefinders. He turned up later outside Szarkowski’s office at MoMA with 
a suitcase full of prints and slides.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae5b69678b0b9ed033c1e3393d0ecd880942dae0%2F0_0_3550_2400%2F3550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Made%20in%20Memphis%3A%20William%20Eggleston's%20surreal%20visions%20of%20the%20American%20south&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Made%20in%20Memphis%3A%20William%20Eggleston%27s%20surreal%20visions%20of%20the%20American%20south&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae5b69678b0b9ed033c1e3393d0ecd880942dae0%2F0_0_3550_2400%2F3550.jpg>
 Eggleston’s Untitled, 1974, Karen Chatham, left, with the artist’s cousin Lesa 
Aldridge, in Memphis, Tennessee. Photograph: © Eggleston Artistic Trust 
The infamous exhibition was not the first time that colour photographs had 
been shown at the museum. But unlike earlier colourists such as Ernst Haas and
Saul Leiter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/15/made-in-manhattan-how-saul-leiter-found-beauty-in-gothams-glass-and-grime>
, Eggleston’s images make little attempt to seduce the viewer. An image of 
someone’s front room is a study in wan light and dun soft furnishings, all 
ochres and olives and avocados, with a jigsaw puzzle lying unfinished on the 
table and the photographer’s own leg intruding.

Red is a recurrent theme. A dentist from Greenwood, Mississippi, stands naked 
in a room spattered with graffiti and splashed with bilious vermilion light. A 
skewed image of the same dentist’s ceiling – perhaps Eggleston’smost famous 
image <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Red_Ceiling> – has at its centre a 
light bulb fitting, with tendrils of white electrical wire snaking away towards 
the walls. It takes a few seconds to register the pornographic poster bottom 
right, but the gut-wrenching menace of the shot hits immediately (to call it a 
“shot” is not accidental: the photographer has a thing for antique firearms, 
and has talked approvingly of this image’s resemblance to wet blood).

So-called “dye-transfer” printing, which Eggleston discovered in the early 70s 
and permitted far greater colour intensity, allowed him to ramp up the 
melodrama. A 1984 series of photographs takeninside Graceland 
<http://www.egglestontrust.com/graceland.html> is printed with searing 
saturation. Elvis’s chocolate-fur-covered sofa, canary yellow scatter cushions, 
caramel-coloured pelmets: all are rendered with the morbid eye and lurid 
flashgun of a crime scene photographer moonlighting for an interiors magazine. 
In one, a portrait of the young Elvis pouts out from a mirror, the King of 
kitsch surveying his knock-off Versailles. It is like being trapped inside the 
funeral parlour from hell.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6623460f0af75f7da46181c9258105219c9f52c7%2F0_0_6314_4229%2F6314.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Made%20in%20Memphis%3A%20William%20Eggleston's%20surreal%20visions%20of%20the%20American%20south&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Made%20in%20Memphis%3A%20William%20Eggleston%27s%20surreal%20visions%20of%20the%20American%20south&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6623460f0af75f7da46181c9258105219c9f52c7%2F0_0_6314_4229%2F6314.jpg>
 Eggleston’s Greenwood, Mississippi, 1973. Photograph: © Eggleston Artistic 
Trust 
Given Eggleston’s skill at making dead objects come to surreal life, devoting 
an exhibition to his portraiture seems like an act of perversity. People are 
comparatively rare in his work, even as the wrack and detritus they leave 
behind looms large. His friend, the novelistEudora Welty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jul/24/guardianobituaries.books> – an 
arrestingly direct picture of whom is included in the new show – wrote 
perceptively about the atmosphere of abandonment that attends many of his 
images, their sense that human drama has just departed the frame. But, she also 
reminds us, “they always let us know that the human being is the reason they 
were made”. And, just as matronly Cadillacs and exhausted scrubland mark out 
the terrain we might call Egglestonland, so his pictures of people could surely 
be captured by no other photographer.

The well-known portraits are of women, or more accurately of their hair and 
clothes: the lacquered beehives and tailored dresses that were the uniform of 
1960s suburban America. Eggleston finds in the faces of these women both 
armoured toughness and raw vulnerability. His photographs of men are sadder 
still. Often shunning the lens as if unaware of or embarrassed by it, the 
figures are freighted with desolation. One late-middle-aged man slumps on the 
corner of a hotel bed, the severe geometry and institutional decor of the room 
giving it the atmosphere of a jail cell. A double portrait of the artist’s 
uncle and his driver is justifiably famous: the uncle’s sleek black business 
suit contrasts tellingly with the white uniform of his African American 
employee, who stands deferentially a few feet behind him. It is a study in 
colour in every sense.

Sometimes Eggleston’s camera is more directly involved, indeed unsettlingly so 
– an image of girlfriend Leigh Haizlip in tears hints that it (or he) is 
responsible for making her feel that way. But most often there is a sense of 
emotional detachment or estrangement. It is troublingly unclear whether the 
photographer knows the person well or has just strolled past them on the 
sidewalk. Eggleston has said how he prefers to “creep up” on his subjects, 
treating them almost as a piece of street furniture. Asked whether he 
photographed a human in the same way as he photographed a parking lot, the 
artist replied: “I think so, absolutely.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8301b4cc3c808ab7c7057eac7eb4ef35bffdc30%2F0_0_2994_2071%2F2994.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Made%20in%20Memphis%3A%20William%20Eggleston's%20surreal%20visions%20of%20the%20American%20south&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Made%20in%20Memphis%3A%20William%20Eggleston%27s%20surreal%20visions%20of%20the%20American%20south&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fmade-in-memphis-william-eggleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8301b4cc3c808ab7c7057eac7eb4ef35bffdc30%2F0_0_2994_2071%2F2994.jpg>
 Eggleston’s Untitled, 1974, Biloxi, Mississippi. Photograph: © Eggleston 
Artistic Trust 
What Eggleston aims to achieve with this large and expanding body of work – 
there arerumours of 1.5m negatives 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887324715704578481214024861412> – is 
the most tantalising mystery about him. Though rooted in place (the 
overwhelming majority of his images are captured in Memphis or the flatlands 
towards the Mississippi Delta), they are too fragmented to map a certifiable 
location. Eggleston has repeatedly denied that he is interested in politics, 
and has disavowed being part of a southern artistic school. And although his 
pictures are documentary – as all photography is documentarian – they have the 
aura of a world half-invented, or imagined. Called on for his explanation, he 
once said: “I think of them as parts of a novel I’m doing.”

Perhaps the astonishing thing is that, now in his late 70s, Eggleston is still 
working, and remains capable of producing images that startle. Anexhibition 
shown concurrently in London and New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jan/11/william-eggleston-21st-century-review>
 in 2010 was revelatory, showing his eye for colour to be as subtle and 
ghoulish as ever.One image 
<http://66.media.tumblr.com/6af83041fce5996c599692d258b688ed/tumblr_nh6ko2Wgm81rkoc2co1_1280.jpg>
, shot inside (of all things) a freezer in a Kentucky store, gives us a 
nightmarish winterscape of bruise-coloured ice. Another was surprisingly 
tender, even beautiful: the inside of a window spattered with fake snow, with a 
Santa sticker ascending into a powder-blue sky above a sign advertising donuts. 
Other photographers would have made this material a satire on the crassness of 
Americana; Eggleston renders it into a saintly transfiguration. The novel he’s 
writing has a few pages left to run.

• William Eggleston: Portraits is at the National Portrait Gallery, London 
WC2, 21 July to 23 October.npg.org.uk. <http://www.npg.org.uk/>
 