
A vast poll of tens of thousands of voters in all 50 American states published 
by the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/a-new-50-state-poll-shows-exactly-why-clinton-holds-the-advantage-over-trump/2016/09/05/13458832-7152-11e6-9705-23e51a2f424d_story.html?hpid=hp_hp-top-table-main_50statepoll-720a%3Ahomepage%2Fstory>
 on Tuesday showed Hillary Clinton with leads in enough states to bring her to 
the doorstep of victory – despite significant challenges in places Democrats 
have been winning for decades.

For Donald Trump, key parts of the Republican base are under threat, the poll 
suggests, even as he puts pressure on Clinton in states such as Pennsylvania, 
where she recently enjoyed anearly double-digit 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/pa/pennsylvania_trump_vs_clinton-5633.html>
 lead.

Clinton leads Trump by more than four points in 20 states plus DC, giving her 
a solid base of 244 electoral college votes, just short of the 270 needed to 
win, the poll indicates. Trump leads by more than four points in 20 states, but 
these add up to only 126 electoral college votes.


Trump's 'rigged election' rhetoric could inspire voter intimidation, say 
experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/06/donald-trump-rigged-election-voter-fraud-intimidation>
The Post poll, with its wealth of data, emerged as Trump broke a losing streak 
of40 consecutive national surveys 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/general_election_trump_vs_clinton-5491.html>
 by major pollsters showing Clinton with a lead in the presidential race. In a
CNN/Orc poll 
<http://i2.cdn.turner.com/cnn/2016/images/09/05/rel13a.-.2016.post-labor.day.pdf?platform=hootsuite>
 of registered voters published on Tuesday, Trump led Clinton by two points, 
45-43, in a race that included the Libertarian and Green party candidates, Gary 
Johnson and Jill Stein. The gap was within the poll’s margin of error.

Trump celebrated the moment on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/773140953133641729?lang=en>:
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Thank you! #AmericaFirst <https://twitter.com/hashtag/AmericaFirst?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/6v4C8ykDVl <https://t.co/6v4C8ykDVl>
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/773140953133641729> September 6, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/773140953133641729> 
The sense that the presidential race is heating up was reinforced by the end 
of the long Labor Day weekend, the reopening of schools and the renewed or 
first-time focus by voters on the choice they will make in November. 
Sixty-three days remain in the presidential race. Early voting begins in dozens 
of states later this month.

Clinton retains a lead of between two 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/general_election_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-5952.html>
 andfive 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/2016-general-election-trump-vs-clinton-vs-johnson>
 points in averages of polls of the four-way race. Here’s what the past five 
weeks look like, inRealClearPolitics’ poll average 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/general_election_trump_vs_clinton-5491.html>
:
Real Clear Politics' polling average 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/09/RCP-polling/> 
Even as the contest to succeed Barack Obama seemed to tighten, however, 
polling analysts warned that the long view was what counted. “Most bad polling 
analysis stems from people’s desire to take the most recent/most hyped poll as 
the gospel truth, instead of averaging data,” FiveThirtyEight founder Nate 
Silvertweeted 
<https://twitter.com/NateSilver538/status/773134722033737728?lang=en>.


Based on Tuesday’s new numbers, a model maintained by FiveThirtyEight that 
takes into account polling data, the economy and historical datashowed a slight 
uptick <http://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016-election-forecast/#plus> in 
Trump’s chances of winning the White House, from 30.4% to 32.5%.

If the race is tightening a bit, the Post survey, conducted by the online 
polling firm SurveyMonkey, pointed to potentially alarming weaknesses for Trump 
supporters in the real estate mogul’s candidacy.


With scant indication that Trump has expanded on 2012 Republican nominee Mitt 
Romney’s appeal among nonwhite voters, Trump’s most likely path to victory 
entails exceptionally strong support among white voters, whom Romneywon 59-39 
<http://www.cnn.com/election/2012/results/race/president/> over Obama.

Trump, however, is losing to Clinton in a majority of states among white 
voters with a college degree, according to thePost/SurveyMonkey poll 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/politics/2016-election/50-state-poll-history/>
, which was conducted online from 9 August to 1 September among 74,886 
registered voters across the country.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-tax-returns-hillary-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20'Trump%20clearly%20has%20something%20to%20hide'%20in%20tax%20returns%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-tax-returns-hillary-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20%27Trump%20clearly%20has%20something%20to%20hide%27%20in%20tax%20returns%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-tax-returns-hillary-clinton-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton: ‘Trump clearly has something to hide’ in tax returns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/06/donald-trump-tax-returns-hillary-clinton-video>
Among white college graduates, the Post found, “Clinton leads Trump in 31 of 
the 50 states, and the two are about even in six others”. Clinton’s strength 
appears to be driven by female voters with college degrees, who favor the 
Democrat in the Post’s 50-state average by 23 points.

The rare decision by the Post to poll every state has produced catnip for 
analysts curious about states that are infrequently polled because of a 
significant majority enjoyed by one party. The results are occasionally 
eyebrow-raising.

The Post poll, for example, finds a neck-and-neck race in Texas, the 
evangelically infused home state of the presidents Bush and global energy 
interests, where Republicans have reliably won since Richard Nixon (not 
counting the post-Watergate Jimmy Carter hiccup). The poll has Trump up by only 
two points in Mississippi, which might be seen as friendly territory for him, 
and which if it was going to vote for a Democrat might have voted for fellow 
southerner Bill Clinton, which itdid not 
<http://www.270towin.com/states/Mississippi>. 

In the northern battleground states of Michigan and Wisconsin, meanwhile, the 
Post poll reinforces the notion advanced by a number of parallel polls that 
Clinton may face an unexpected challenge. Both states have voted for a Democrat 
for president in each of thepast six cycles 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/05/battleground-states-map/>. 

But both states have a high majority of white voters combined with pockets of 
economic stagnation and a Republican party apparatus, especially in Scott 
Walker’s Wisconsin, that could conceivably produce a Trump surprise.

The Post poll has Clinton up by only two points in each case, compared with 
average Clinton leads of four to five points in Wisconsin and seven points in 
Michigan. The poll found Clinton ahead by only four points in Pennsylvania, 
where in August she averaged anine-point lead 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/pa/pennsylvania_trump_vs_clinton-5633.html>
.
Michigan <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=MI> 
Wisconsin <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=WI> 
The Post poll indicates, as other polls have, that Trump may fail to make good 
on his vow to win his home state of New York. Clinton is up by 22 points there,
according to 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/politics/2016-election/50-state-poll-history/>
 the Post; she leads in neighboring Connecticut by 12 points.

Detractors of the Post/Survey Monkey poll note that, for its huge sample 
sizes, the poll was conducted exclusively online, without the advantage of live 
interviews. Trump has performed relatively better in online polls than in 
live-interview polls, with adiscussion ongoing 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/live-polls-and-online-polls-tell-different-stories-about-the-election/>
 as to why that is the case.


Two additional, major polls published Tuesday – a national poll by Franklin 
Pierce University/Boston Herald, and a tracking poll by NBC/SurveyMonkey – 
showed basically no change in Clinton’s lead in the race going back months.

Polls conducted within a couple months of the election have been shown to be 
significantly more predictive than polls conducted, for example, before the 
national party conventions. More than at any time this cycle, the numbers we 
are seeing can be considered predictive of the election result. But they aren’t 
all saying the same thing.
 