
Theodula Jaramillo had kept vigil over her son’s deteriorating body for seven 
years before he died on Independence Day.

On some days, when there were no available chairs at the Sagecrest Nursing 
Center in Las Cruces, New Mexico, the 79-year-old would stand for eight hours 
at a time, watching his motionless body for signs of pain or discomfort. Only 
his eyes – and, on occasion, his mouth – were left with any movement.

Although it was a kidney infection that finally took his life three months 
ago, Theodula had no doubt who was to blame: “It was the prison,” she said in 
Spanish, her voice quivering. “They’re who triggered everything. All of this 
suffering could have been been prevented just by giving him simple medicine.”

Jose Jaramillo was 52 years old and in the middle of a three-year sentence 
when he collapsed inside his cell at the Cibola County correctional center in 
May 2008. His crime had been to illegally enter the US to reunite with his wife 
and children. Jaramillo would never regain adequate cerebral functions, as his 
impoverished family battled on his behalf, first to keep him in America and 
then to sue the prison’s private contractor, Corrections Corporation of America 
(CCA), for medical negligence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F959e717a576cf89d71d1683cb7500a221529cccd%2F39_0_1318_791%2F1318.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man's%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%27s%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F959e717a576cf89d71d1683cb7500a221529cccd%2F39_0_1318_791%2F1318.png>
 Jose Jaramillo at Sagecrest Nursing Center. Photograph: Courtesy of Lisa Curtis
The father of three, who had lived almost his entire life in the US, had been 
detained in one of the federal government’s secretive criminal alien 
requirement prisons, a network of 13 privately operated facilities dotted 
mostly around the American south, which almost exclusively detain low-risk 
inmates convicted of immigration offenses.

Just weeks after Jaramillo’s death this year, the US Department of Justice 
announced that all 13 of these private prisons would be closed followinga 
scathing audit <https://oig.justice.gov/reports/2016/e1606.pdf#page=2> that 
revealed they were markedly less safe than similar facilities run directly by 
the government. The first scheduled to close would be the one where Jaramillo 
suffered his catastrophic illness, asreports indicated 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/federal-officials-ignored-years-of-internal-warnings-about-deaths-at-private-prisons/>
 that the Cibola County prison was among the worst providers of medical care in 
this cohort of private prisons, and the DoJ found that medical complaints were 
the most frequent grievance of inmates held in the contract network.

But just as migrant rights advocates celebrated the planned closure, it was 
announced last week that the Cibola County facility would in fact remain open, 
as CCA secured a new contract with a different arm of the federal government, 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice), to turn the prison into an 
immigration detention center.

The failings in Jaramillo’s case, reported here for the first time and pieced 
together through court documents, depositions, public records and interviews, 
reveals extraordinary details of the substandard medical care given to inmates 
in this facility and, advocates warn, the likelihood of continued failure when 
the institution reopens its doors to detainees this week.

But Theodula Jaramillo knew nothing of the DoJ announcement, and took no 
solace when she was told. She stared at the floor in her small bungalow in the 
village of Hatch, where mold creeped up the woodchip walls and seams on the 
ceiling drooped from their fixings. “It makes no difference to us. It won’t 
bring him back,” she said. “Everyone involved should pay for what they did to 
him.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26a5d122562e96b4d8b181b33eb203b826fccd0e%2F0_104_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man's%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%27s%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26a5d122562e96b4d8b181b33eb203b826fccd0e%2F0_104_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Theodula Jaramillo, who looked after her son Jose for seven years before he 
died: ‘Everyone involved should pay for what they did to him.’ Photograph: 
Oliver Laughland for the Guardian 
•••

Two layers of fencing and thick rolls of razor wire separated the remaining 
inmates from the Zuni mountain range, which undulated in the distance behind 
the Cibola County correctional center’s recreation ground. The facility once 
held about 1,200 inmates but just a few hundred remained when the Guardian 
visited the grounds to photograph the prison in the last week of September. The 
prison is nestled in a corner of the tiny village of Milan, a former mining 
town with just 1,300 residents about an hour and half’s drive from Albuquerque.

Prisoners could be seen in small groups jogging and exercising next to the 
perimeter fence, dwarfed by the empty grounds. Within a minute, a patrol car 
sped along the outside road and pulled up next to the north-western guard tower.

“You can’t take pictures here,” a guard shouted. “You need to leave. Now.”

The Jaramillo family have scant memories of Jose’s time inside. They were 
never able to visit him and he rarely shared his experiences of incarceration 
with them. Occasionally he would send photographs in the mail – taken with a 
smuggled camera. One, dated February 2008, shows him crouched in snow in the 
prison’s recreation ground, smiling at dusk.

That year, an annual audit by the Federal Bureau of Prisons had found serious 
failings in the standard of medical care that CCA offered to inmates, noting: 
“Needle/syringe inventories were not accurate. Chronic care clinics’ physical 
examinations were incomplete or not performed. Annual foot exams were not 
current … Nursing care was not always in accordance with protocols and the 
State Nurse Practices Act.”

The prison was also without a physician on staff for several periods of that 
year – against the parameters of its contract with the government, while staff 
repeatedly reported serious delays in obtaining basic medication from approved 
suppliers, according to deposition testimony from multiple CCA employees.

Nonetheless, the federal government still paid the company an annual bonus 
added to its three-year, $237m baseline fee – meaning CCA was paid well in 
excess of $82,000 per inmate, per year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca8427101b556e3cf230b83b2a02888e23034efb%2F0_77_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man's%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%27s%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca8427101b556e3cf230b83b2a02888e23034efb%2F0_77_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 The Cibola County correctional center. Jose Jaramillo’s family were never able 
to visit him while he was incarcerated. Photograph: Oliver Laughland for the 
Guardian 
“In that particular facility in a remote area of New Mexico, it was always 
difficult to maintain the staffing,” conceded former Cibola County prison 
warden Walt Wells during a deposition hearing in 2013. “But we got the job 
done.”

Lawyers disagreed with Wells’s positive assessment, and argued it was this 
chronic understaffing and the poorly resourced clinic that ultimately led to 
Jaramillo’s catastrophic illness.

Private federal prisons more dangerous, damning DoJ investigation reveals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/private-federal-prisons-more-dangerous-justice-department>
The 52-year-old, a barrel-chested man who spent most of his life labouring, 
was diagnosed with diabetes by prison medical staff in 2007. Bureau of Prisons 
infectious diseases regulations –to which, lawyers argued, CCA was bound by 
contract <https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0B7woNJLKHttNNUp4NENxcTdjZ00> 
– dictated he should have received a routine pneumococcal vaccine soon after 
diagnosis; the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)recommends all 
diabetics receive the vaccine 
<http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/awardees/vaccine-management/price-list/>
 due to their substantially higher risk of pneumonia and meningitis. But no 
such vaccination was provided, and Jaramillo went unprotected from pneumonia 
and meningitis for the rest of his time inside.

“You have 1,000 men, living together in bunk beds. They have 2ft apart from 
one another, and so bacteria is everywhere,” said Lisa Curtis, a veteran 
medical malpractice attorney in Albuquerque, who took Jaramillo’s case to 
federal civil court. “For a diabetic without a vaccination, that is a death 
sentence.”

During the case CCA officials argued, however, that these Bureau of Prisons 
rules did not apply to their facilities, which, they argued, were governed by 
company rules.

CCA, which this week rebranded itself as CoreCivic, did not answer a detailed 
list of questions related to Jaramillo’s case, staffing issues at the facility 
and contractual obligations, citing “healthcare privacy considerations”.

But CoreCivic spokesman Jonathan Burns said: “Protecting the health and safety 
of those entrusted to our care is our top priority.”

Curtis, who described the case as one of the clearest violations of basic 
medical care she had ever encountered, said she believed the subtext was clear: 
“They just believed pneumococcal vaccinations were too expensive.” The CDClists 
the current price of a pneumococcal vaccination kit 
<http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/awardees/vaccine-management/price-list/>
, which contains 10 doses, at $86.71 – or $8.67 each.

Medical experts who testified on behalf of the Jaramillo family argued the 
vaccination itself would probably have prevented what happened next.

The DoJ is right to ditch private prisons. But it won't do much in practice | 
Jessica Pishko
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/doj-private-prisons-closing-treatment-percentage-in-practice>
The symptoms began in the first week of May. Pains in his throat. Earache. 
Body ache. Fever, coughing and nausea. He lined up for the prison’s sick call, 
which opened for just 45 minutes at 5am, allowing prisoners a short window to 
sign requests for medical assistance. Staffed by just one nurse, according to 
deposition testimony, the queues were so long many inmates gave up before 
receiving any attention. Between three to five nurses worked in the prison on 
each shift. Nurses estimated that they would see 400-500 patients a month.

Medical records and depositions show that Jaramillo was seen first on 8 May 
and then again on 11 May, and finally on the morning of 22 May. He told his 
family his symptoms were getting worse, that he was in pain and wanted to go to 
the hospital, but records show he was only ever given cough syrup and saltwater 
by medical staff.

He told his family his symptoms were getting worse, but records show he was 
only ever given cough syrup and saltwater

“They didn’t listen to him for weeks. He should have gone to hospital, but 
they just waited so long,” said Jaramillo’s 20-year-old daughter, Judy, who 
spoke to her father on the phone during this period.

Under CCA policy any inmate who reported sick three times with the same 
symptoms should automatically have been referred to a physician with the 
ability to prescribe medicine. But the referral never happened, according to 
the deposition of a nurse who saw Jaramillo at his last sick call.

Instead, just hours after he was examined on 22 May, Jaramillo was found 
collapsed in his cell. He was placed in a wheelchair and taken back to the 
clinic where the nurse described him now as “just flaccid”, loosely able to 
articulate intense pains in his chest. The prison finally called emergency 
services.

The undiagnosed infection had turned to sepsis and then to pneumococcal 
meningitis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79aa76321d15c9974b7a0cbbb0c1357e0f70ac4e%2F0_204_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man's%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%27s%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79aa76321d15c9974b7a0cbbb0c1357e0f70ac4e%2F0_204_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Jose Jaramillo’s daughter Judy, who spoke with him on the phone when he was 
sick: ‘They didn’t listen to him for weeks. He should have gone to hospital, 
but they just waited so long.’ Photograph: Oliver Laughland for the Guardian 
Although years later CCA began administering the pneumococcal vaccine to 
inmates at the Cibola County facility, the chronic staffing issues remained. 
During a 2012 deposition hearing, the prison’s long-serving nurse practitioner, 
June Kershner, told Curtis that once again the prison had no physician on 
staff, leaving the facility dangerously under-resourced. Inmates and staff now 
referred to her as “doctor” despite her lack of qualifications, and medication 
was prescribed by an Arizona-based doctor over the telephone.

An investigation by the Nation magazine 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/federal-officials-ignored-years-of-internal-warnings-about-deaths-at-private-prisons/>
 found that the Cibola County facility accumulated more repeat deficiencies or 
significant flaws in health provision than any other private federal prison, 
with 30 out of 34 contract citations since 2007 related to poor standards of 
medical care. The investigation also identified three deaths, not including 
Jaramillo’s, linked to questionable care at the facility by the end of 2015.

These failures, argued experts, made Ice’s decision to keep the facility open 
all the more extraordinary, particularly when the Department of Homeland 
Security is conducting its own review of its use of privatised institutions, 
following the DoJ announcement in August.

“It’s just stunning that Ice is turning around and signing a new contract 
there,” said Carl Takei, a staff attorney at the ACLU’s national prison 
project. “We have serious concerns about the medical care for Ice detainees 
being just as terrible as it was for BOP prisoners. There’s no reason to 
believe it will improve. It’s the same company and the same facility.”

On Monday, CCA chief executives formally announced the five-year contract with 
Ice, arguing: “CCA already has an experienced, well-trained workforce at the 
Cibola County corrections center which, for many years, has provided an 
exceptional level of service to the BOP, and we are proud to have the 
opportunity to extend the same level of exceptional service to another federal 
customer under this new contract.”

•••

The village of Milan, with a population of just 1,300, was caught off guard 
when the DoJ announced the closure earlier in the summer. CCA is the largest 
employer here, and also in the neighboring town of Grants, where the company 
operates acontroversial 
<https://www.abqjournal.com/144121/former-inmate-testifies-about-sexual-assault.html>
 women’s prison under a contract with the state government.

There were 245 jobs scheduled to be lost by the time the Cibola County prison 
was due to close, at the end of October. The village stood to lose a projected 
$358,000 in revenue from property taxes and gross receipts, while the county 
government would have lost $700,000 annually in taxes.

Families had already begun packing up and leaving town in September, as local 
government officials frantically pushed for solutions and endorsed CCA efforts 
to keep the prison open as it sought contracts with Ice, the US marshal service 
and the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

“It will turn this community into a ghost town,” said Marcella Sandoval, the 
Milan village manager in September. “The prison is a lifeline for us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90dfff5e256e91cdaab0f076cf443443da11e3c0%2F0_64_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man's%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%27s%20death%20hints%20at%20wretched%20medical%20care%20in%20private%20immigration%20prisons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjose-jaramillo-private-immigration-prisons-medical-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90dfff5e256e91cdaab0f076cf443443da11e3c0%2F0_64_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Marcella Sandoval and Eileen Yarborough, executive director of Cibola 
Communities Economic Development Foudation. Sandoval told the Guardian: ‘The 
prison is a lifeline for us.’ Photograph: Oliver Laughland for the Guardian 
Milan and Grants lost three-quarters of their population in the late 1990s 
after uranium mining in the region’s rich mineral belt ceased. It was around 
this time that CCA bought facilities in the area, offering a chance of 
employment to those who remained in town.

The prison drew almost instant controversy. In 2001, inmates rioted over the 
quality of food, drawing local police and outside law enforcement who used 
teargas to quell the unrest. But residents soon grew used to the prison’s 
presence. Many who spoke to the Guardian in September felt slighted by the 
federal government’s decision to close the prison. In this heavily Democratic 
county, some said the decision had been enough to make them vote Republican at 
the election in November. Sandoval said the county was given no advanced 
warning and no assistance was offered to the local economy.

Milan’s police chief, Jerry Stephens, who commands the village’s seven-strong 
police department, said just two escapes had occurred from the prison during 
his tenure as chief.

“I don’t think the community here worries about it at all,” he said. A records 
request indicated his department had attended 49 assault calls at the prison 
between 2014 and 2015.

Despite this, the Department of Justice’s inspector general found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/private-federal-prisons-more-dangerous-justice-department>
 that inmates in its contract prisons were nine times more likely to be placed 
on lockdown than in other comparable facilities, and assault rates were 28% 
higher than in federal prisons.

In an interview in October, Sandoval told the Guardian that the reopened 
facility could now eventually hold 1,400 detainees – expanding its already 
stretched capacity by 200 beds. “The decision basically saved us. They’re 
rehiring and will have even more jobs this time,” she said, relieved.

•••

Jose Jaramillo wrote a short statement after he was arrested for illegal 
re-entry in August 2006: “I know what I did is against the law and so I accept 
full responsibility for my conduct. I came back to work and be with my family.”

Jaramillo had been pulled over as he drove from the chilli fields outside of 
Roswell, where he had worked backbreaking shifts for most of his life, starting 
at 5am and finishing at sunset. A sheriff’s deputy had noticed he had a broken 
headlight, and later reported him to border patrol agents in New Mexico after 
he failed to present identification papers. Instead of running away when agents 
called to inform him he was likely to be arrested, he waited for them to arrive 
at the door that evening.

“I think that just shows you what sort of a law-abiding guy he was,” Lisa 
Curtis said.

That year over 29,000 people were convicted for illegal entry and re-entry 
<http://trac.syr.edu/immigration/reports/356/>. By 2013, that number had soared 
to just under 88,000 – meaning more than half of all federal criminal 
prosecutions that year were for unlawful border crossings. By the time the DoJ 
announced it was abandoning all contracts with these 13 private immigrant 
jails, their populations had swelled to 22,000 inmates, costing the federal 
government $600m a year.

After he stabilized in 2009, Jaramillo was moved to the nursing home in Las 
Cruces. The federal government had initially moved to deport him, but the 
family successfully appealed after arguing he would die within days if he was 
moved back to Mexico. But the brain damage was irreparable. He had no movement 
from the neck down. When he spoke it was often nonsensical. On rare occasions 
when he could muster a coherent sentence, he told his daughter Judy, born in 
the US with full citizenship, that he wanted her to finish high school and 
become a nurse.

“It was his dream,” she said.

Judy is now training to become an elementary school teacher, but visited her 
father twice a week at the nursing home until his death in July. The family, 
who settled with CCA in 2014 for an undisclosed amount with no admission of 
liability, placed the money in a trust to pay for Jaramillo’s care, but knew 
the end was coming as his health rapidly deteriorated from another infection.

“I just felt like the world was hitting me,” Judy said of the day her father 
died. “It was sadness and anger. Anger at the prison.”
 