
Manchester’s proposed £110m arts centre, the Factory, has moved a step closer 
to being built after city councillors gave planning permission for the Rem 
Koolhaas-designed building.

The Factory will be erected on the site of the former Granada Studios and is 
seen by the city council as a game changer, one which the authority’s leader, 
Sir Richard Leese, has said would “makeManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> and the wider region a genuine 
cultural counterbalance to London”.

It is a central part of the northern powerhouse project, championed by the 
former chancellor George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/george-osborne-to-chair-northern-powerhouse-partnership>
, who pledged £78m of government money in 2014, a sum which was confirmed this 
week following a Treasury review of the full business case.

The enormous and striking glass cube construction will be the first major 
public building in the UK by Dutch architectKoolhaas and his Office for 
Metropolitan Architecture (OMA) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/rem-koolhaas-wins-factory-design-project-as-manchester-goes-dutch>
 practice.
 Artist’s impression of the Factory auditorium. Photograph: OMA/Factory 
Manchester 
Ellen van Loon, the OMA partner in charge of the project, said: “From 
classical opera and ballet to large-scale performances and experimental 
productions, Factory in Manchester provides the perfect opportunity to create 
the ultimate versatile space in which art, theatre and music come together: a 
platform for a new cultural scene.”

Related: Tate to name Maria Balshaw as new director to succeed Serota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/11/tate-to-name-maria-balshaw-as-new-director-replacing-nicholas-serota>

After the vote, Leese said Factory was what Manchester and the wider arts 
world had been waiting for. “Factory isn’t going to just transform this unused 
corner of the city centre, it’s going to further transform the way we see the 
world, and the way the world sees Manchester.”

The council decision was welcomed by the culture minister, Matt Hancock, who 
said he wanted to “blast open access to the very best world-class art and 
culture we have to offer in this country”.


He said that was the reason for investing £78m, to “provide a further boost to 
the brilliant arts, culture and technology scene in the north. On top of that, 
it will also help local tourism, generate jobs and provide training 
opportunities for the next generation of British creatives”.
 The Rem Koolhaas-designed CCTV tower in Beijing. Photograph: Ullstein 
Bild/Getty Images 
After the decision it was also confirmed that the building will be operated by 
Manchester international festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/manchester-international-festival> (MIF) 
with Mark Ball, currently artistic director of theLondon international festival 
of theatre (Lift) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/feb/08/london-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup>
, joining the MIF leadership team with a focus on the Factory programme.

Speaking of the appointment, MIF’s CEO and artistic director, John McGrath, 
said: “I have been a huge admirer of Mark’s vision as a producer and programmer 
since his early days at Fierce festival, and it has been inspiring to see his 
extraordinary achievements at Lift.

“I can’t imagine a better person to join MIF at this key moment in its 
history, and to ensure an exceptional, international programme of work at 
Factory.”

Ball called Factory “undoubtedly the most exciting and ambitious new cultural 
space in the country”. Construction work is expected to begin in the spring.
 