
Last year I was awarded 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/peter-hain-gets-top-south-10564731>
 South Africa’s highest honour – theOrder of the Companions of OR Tambo 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_of_the_Companions_of_O._R._Tambo>. It was 
one of the proudest moments of my life. So why was it bitter sweet?

South African president to partly pay back cash used for home upgrade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/south-african-president-to-partly-pay-back-cash-used-for-home-upgrade>
The award was given for “an excellent contribution to the fight against the 
injustices of apartheid, and unwavering support for the South African 
liberation movement”. But the sad truth is that Nelson Mandela’s rainbow nation 
has, in just 22 years, gone from hero to zero. The country’s media castigate 
President Jacob Zuma for “looting the country”, international investors are 
jumping ship, andcriticism is everywhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/south-african-president-to-partly-pay-back-cash-used-for-home-upgrade>
.

Much of the condemnation comes from jaundiced whites – those who reluctantly 
praised the “Mandela miracle” but never accepted the consequences: the demise 
of their grotesquely privileged existence.

I can – and do – dismiss such voices. But I cannot ignore those who sacrificed 
so much for the freedom struggle, and who are now dismayed at the squandering 
of Mandela’s legacy.

Veteran activists such as Ahmed Kathrada, one of Mandela’s closest comrades on 
Robben Island. Or Barbara Hogan, a former ANC government minister who was 
tortured in an apartheid prison. Recently she broke ranks, declaring: “Zuma 
must go. This man is creating economic sabotage.” Her remarks were echoed by 
ANC struggle stalwart Denis Goldberg’s call for a “top to bottom leadership 
clearout” and an end to corruption.

Zuma has indeed allowed corruption to flourish until it poses a cancerous 
threat. Cronyism has replaced merit, not only in the public services, but in 
the parastatals. The country faces daily “load shedding” (electricity cuts); 
South African Airways is almost bankrupt, with its excellent safety record 
compromised; and the water system, once the cleanest in the world, is in 
disrepair. And yesterday, after a scandal lasting two years,Zuma agreed to pay 
back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/south-african-president-to-partly-pay-back-cash-used-for-home-upgrade>
 some of the public funds he’d used to upgrade his private mansion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmandela-rainbow-nation-jacob-zuma-south-africa-anc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc413c0e26024b5485d7357343cedabf5d9c3b00c%2F0_113_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mandela%E2%80%99s%20rainbow%20nation%20has%20gone%20from%20hero%20to%20zero.%20Can%20it%20reclaim%20his%20legacy%3F%20%7C%20Peter%20Hain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmandela-rainbow-nation-jacob-zuma-south-africa-anc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mandela%E2%80%99s%20rainbow%20nation%20has%20gone%20from%20hero%20to%20zero.%20Can%20it%20reclaim%20his%20legacy%3F%20%7C%20Peter%20Hain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmandela-rainbow-nation-jacob-zuma-south-africa-anc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc413c0e26024b5485d7357343cedabf5d9c3b00c%2F0_113_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 The image of white students in Cape Town forming a human shield to protect 
black classmates from the batons of riot police would surely have made Mandela 
smile.’ Photograph: Mike Hutchings/Retuers 
Despite spending more on education than any other developing nation and 
doubling school attendance, South Africa is ranked138 out of 140 countries by 
the World Economic Forum 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwiLrY-roN7KAhXM2xoKHVRtCiAQFggmMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww3.weforum.org%2Fdocs%2Fgcr%2F2015-2016%2FGlobal_Competitiveness_Report_2015-2016.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHprvEobTBFpsRXQv0dXPUACXdXqA&sig2=-Bz975DPLnpsFApvCe2C3g>
, below desperately poor Burundi and Mauritania.

South African schools are not short of textbooks through lack of funds, but 
because budgets are badly managed or siphoned off. Yet I have met inspirational 
teachers whose pupils achieve extraordinary exam results, often studying by 
candle light on an empty stomach. One such student now works as a gardener at 
the school where he excelled. He counts himself lucky: unemployment among black 
youth is shockingly high – as much as 65%. Mandela must be turning in his grave.

But a vibrant civil society, forged during the anti-apartheid struggle, 
continues to challenge government attempts to undermine democratic structures 
and processes. It is buttressed by a vigorously independent media and a noisy 
political opposition.

Together they have fought draconian legislation like the protection of state 
information bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/13/south-africa-secrecy-bill-un-condemnation>
, which prevents journalists from exposing corruption and state abuse. They 
have battled to safeguard institutions like the South African Broadcasting 
Corporation and directorate of public prosecutions, where top positions have 
fallen into the laps of political cronies.

When the ANC gained power in the country’s first free elections in 1994, a 
deal was struck to ensure a peaceful, economically stable transition. A black 
majority ran government but the white minority still ran the economy – albeit 
with a co-opted black, overwhelmingly ANC-aligned elite.

Now, people like ANC liberation hero Ronnie Kasrils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/24/anc-faustian-pact-mandela-fatal-error>
 see this as “the devil’s pact”: a terrible betrayal of the poorest of the 
poor. Trade union leader Zwelinzima Vavi warned in 2010: “We’re headed for a 
predator state, where a powerful, corrupt and demagogic elite of political 
hyenas is increasingly using the state to get rich.”

In 2012 the Marikana massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/03/marikana-massacre-justice-south-africa-miners>
 of 34 striking miners, at least 14 of whom were hunted down and shot from 
behind by predominantly black police, further symbolised the unresolved legacy 
of apartheid: a wealthy white-owned corporation pitted against poor, black 
migrant workers.

Thousands of South African students protest in Pretoria against tuition fees 
rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/23/south-african-students-protest-pretoria-tuition-fees-rise>
Last year, very different protests on university campuses forced Zuma to 
reverse planned fee increases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/23/south-african-students-protest-pretoria-tuition-fees-rise>
. The image of white students in Cape Town forming a human shield to protect 
black classmates from the batons of riot police would surely have made Mandela 
smile. But he would also have understood the terrible truth: two decades after 
the death of apartheid, white privilege is still alive and well.

Perhaps we expected too much. Perhaps it was naive to think that the ANC – for 
all its moral integrity and constitutionalist traditions – could be immune to 
human frailty, especially in the face of such immense social inequalities. Was 
it ever possible to launch meaningful economic reform in today’s climate of 
neoliberal globalisation? As I know only too well, it was hard enough for 
Labour in Britain.

Next week Zuma will give his annual state of the nation address. But unless 
the ANC can forge a new social compact,South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> could again become as 
ungovernable as it was during its bleakest years. Perhaps the “Born Frees” – 
those young South Africans who never knew apartheid, and who already comprise 
over 40% of the population – will reclaim Mandela’s legacy for the 21st century.

For this beautiful country remains an inspiration: marvellous to visit, and 
joyously transformed in spite of the many challenges that remain.
 