
The Whitworth Art Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/11/whitworth-art-gallery-refurbishment>
 in Manchester is exhibiting the works ofMarcantonio Raimondi 
<http://www.whitworth.manchester.ac.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/currentexhibitions/raimondiandraphael/>
 (c.1480–1534), a printmaker who collaborated closely with the great 
Renaissance artist Raphael. The reproductions of Raphael’s paintings that 
Raimondi undertook helped spread artistic knowledge across Europe. It sounds 
respectable, even staid. Yet there’s another side to this craftsman that might 
make you prick up your ears.

He helped invent pornography. Raphael, who employed Raimondi, was at the 
centre of a circle of sexual libertarians in Renaissance Rome. They hung out at 
the villa of Agostino Chigi, banker to the Vatican, who held wild parties in 
his garden by the Tiber and owned erotic art includinga lewd statue 
<http://notefield.zenfolio.com/p917912621/h100c1491#h100c1491> of the horny 
greek god Pan. Chigi was a libertarian – he apparently only married his 
mistress Francesca Ordeaschi to legitimise their four children after they’d 
lived together for years, and he also had an affair with the famous courtesan 
Imperia Cognati. The mood at his villa was hedonistic. One regular guest was 
the writerPietro Aretino 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portrait_of_Pietro_Aretino#/media/File%3ATizian_069.jpg>
, who wrote of the erotic art in the villa: “Why shouldn’t the eye see what 
delights it most?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmarcantonio-raimondi-renaissance-printer-i-modi-the-positions-porn-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91b98ec8ff54bdacecad0438873ad333a295a35a%2F0_0_5295_3695%2F5295.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marcantonio%20Raimondi%3A%20the%20Renaissance%20printer%20who%20brought%20porn%20to%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmarcantonio-raimondi-renaissance-printer-i-modi-the-positions-porn-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marcantonio%20Raimondi%3A%20the%20Renaissance%20printer%20who%20brought%20porn%20to%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmarcantonio-raimondi-renaissance-printer-i-modi-the-positions-porn-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91b98ec8ff54bdacecad0438873ad333a295a35a%2F0_0_5295_3695%2F5295.jpg>
 The Judgment of Paris by Marcantonio Raimondi (after Raphael). Photograph: 
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼The Whitworth, The University of Manchester 
In the bedroom Chigi shared with Ordeaschi, Il Sodoma – the Sodomite – painted 
a fresco of Alexander the Great going to bed with his wife Roxane. Raphael 
himself painted the most famous frescoes in the villa – today called theVilla 
Farnesina <http://www.villafarnesina.it> – but according to his biographer 
Vasari, writing in 1550, he couldn’t work properly because he was so distracted 
by the sex addiction Vasari says he suffered from. SoRaphael’s lover 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/La_Fornarina#/media/File%3AFornarina.jpg> had 
to be given a bedroom at the villa. He could paint, then go to bed with her, 
then paint a bit more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmarcantonio-raimondi-renaissance-printer-i-modi-the-positions-porn-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062a5432e3bd7c3ad484749cf49c4a1cfb2ab262%2F0_0_650_867%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marcantonio%20Raimondi%3A%20the%20Renaissance%20printer%20who%20brought%20porn%20to%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmarcantonio-raimondi-renaissance-printer-i-modi-the-positions-porn-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marcantonio%20Raimondi%3A%20the%20Renaissance%20printer%20who%20brought%20porn%20to%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmarcantonio-raimondi-renaissance-printer-i-modi-the-positions-porn-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062a5432e3bd7c3ad484749cf49c4a1cfb2ab262%2F0_0_650_867%2F650.jpg>
 Pandore from I Modi, engraved by Marcantonio Raimondi. Photograph: Public 
domain, via Wikimedia Commons 
According to Vasari, it was Raphael’s insatiable sex drive that killed him in 
1520 at the age of 37. He came home in the morning exhausted by a wild night of 
passion, fell into a fever and died.Raphael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/raphael> left his business – he’d 
employed a huge team – to his most talented assistant Giulio Romano, and he 
wondered how to use Raimondi’s printing skills. He came up with an outrageous 
idea.

Romano drew a series of explicit illustrations of sex acts and gave these to 
Marcantonio Raimondi to engrave and print in 1524 under the titleI Modi 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_Modi> – which translates as The Positions. I 
Modi takes the sensuality of Renaissance art – all thosenudes by Titian 
<http://www.uffizi.org/artworks/venus-of-urbino-by-titian/> – and turns it into 
frank pornography. The pope would probably have turned a blind eye to drawings 
being passed around in Chigi’s villa. But by printing I Modi, Raimondi made it 
popular and accessible. He was thrown into jail.

Romano, meanwhile, had left Rome and was safely ensconced as a court artist in 
Mantua. So Raimondi languished in prison by himself and his dirty book was 
seized and destroyed.

Ben Jonson mentions I Modi in Volpone. And Shakespeare names the artist who 
drew the pictures in The Winter's Tale

The outrageous writer Aretino came to the rescue. Not only did Aretino 
petition the pope to release Raimondi but after getting him out of prison wrote 
16 filthy sonnets to go with the pictures. In 1527 I Modi was reissued with 
Aretino’s licentious poems and became a bestseller all over Europe.

The English dramatist Ben Jonson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/13/ben.jonson> mentions I Modi in 
his playVolpone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/12/volpone-rsc-stratford-review>. 
His friend Shakespeare only ever names one Italian artist: it isGiulio Romano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2010/dec/10/shakespeare-dirty-pictures>
. Does Shakespeare’s name-checking Romano inThe Winter’s Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/08/the-winters-tale-review-kenneth-branagh-and-judi-dench-garrick>
 suggest he knew about the filthy pictures in I Modi?

The huge success of this scandalous creation was a fusion of erotic art – 
which has always existed – with the new invention of printing. It was the first 
printed pornographic bestseller. It opened the floodgates for porn to pour off 
the presses and, eventually, proliferate on computer screens. Who says 
Renaissance art is genteel?

 