
Margate’s Winter Gardens 
<http://www.margatewintergardens.co.uk/about-us/history/> has played host to a 
long list of variety greats from Laurel & Hardy to Morecambe & Wise but is yet 
to be filled with industrial foam by the designer Ron Arad for an immersive 
dance installation.

The unusual event, described as a multi-sensory experience involving 20 
dancers from theJasmin Vardimon company <http://jasminvardimon.com/>, will be 
unlike anything people have experienced before, the galleryTurner Contemporary 
<http://www.turnercontemporary.org/> said on Monday.

It announced details of a collaboration which has the working title Maze and 
is being funded by the National Lottery throughArts Council England’s 
exceptional award programme for ambitious one-off projects 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/apply-funding/apply-for-funding/exceptional-awards/>
.

The Winter Gardens will have its seating taken out and an enormous labyrinth 
structure made from industrial foam will be inserted by Arad, the London-based 
architect and designer. Visitors will enter the maze and have interesting and 
potentially risky choices to make, said Vardimon, who has been a major figure 
in British dance for nearly 20 years. There will be intimate encounters with 
dancers that might surprise, delight or even discomfort. “The experience won’t 
be from the normal distance of watching a show,” she said. “It will be a very 
physical experience because you will have to make a decision and potentially 
take a risk. It will be between performance, art, architecture and design... a 
very sensory experience.”

Maze will be produced over Easter and has been commissioned by Turner 
Contemporary to accompany a major exhibition it will stage later in the year 
exploring the theme of risk and art. The gallery’s director Victoria Pomery 
said the show would include works by JMW Turner, exploring the risks he took in 
terms of materials and subject matter. Other significant works will include 
Francis Alÿs’s video work Tornado 2000-10 documenting his attempts to run into 
the eye of tornados sweeping across the Mexican countryside; and Simon 
Faithful’s ESY1899, a video installation showing a figure walking onto a plane 
on fire.

There will also be works by Marina Abramovic, Gerhard Richter and Marcel 
Duchamp. As well as Risk opening in October, there will be a show exploring 
self-portraiture in January followed by a Grayson Perry exhibition over the 
summer.
 