
Margaret Thatcher’s resignation as British prime minister provoked tears in 
Washington and consternation in Moscow, according to a secret Downing Street 
file released on Friday.

Henry Kissinger rang Downing Street “in a very emotional state” saying her 
decision to resign was “worse than a death in the family”, while Thatcher’s 
closest adviser, Charles Powell, told the US national security adviser, General 
Brent Scowcroft, that her departure was “a sad commentary on standards of 
loyalty in politics”.

The Downing Street file entitled The Resignation of the Prime Minister, 
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, 
includes tributes from world leaders to Thatcher, a two-page briefing note from 
the cabinet secretary explaining why an immediate general election was not 
necessary, and a “resignation action plan” setting out a timetable for the 
fateful day of 22 November 1990.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dff93fd668c4857ede8042a982df991ecac1c6e%2F0_0_3748_2248%2F3748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Thatcher's%20resignation%20shocked%20politicians%20in%20US%20and%20USSR%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Thatcher%27s%20resignation%20shocked%20politicians%20in%20US%20and%20USSR%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dff93fd668c4857ede8042a982df991ecac1c6e%2F0_0_3748_2248%2F3748.jpg>
 Thatcher on her last day in Downing Street. Photograph: Martin Argles for the 
Guardian 
It also contains a curious 1991 rebuttal by John Wakeham, then a cabinet 
minister, of allegations in a forthcoming book by the journalist Alan Watkins 
that he had deliberately precipitated Thatcher’s downfall by initiating the 
“parade of cabinet ministers” who one by one told her she would not win a 
second round leadership ballot against Michael Heseltine.

Thatcher quit to leave the field clear for John Major and Douglas Hurd to 
fight off Heseltine, a move recorded by the Guardian that day under the 
headline: “Battle to halt the usurper.”

The cabinet files for 1989 and 1990 released at the National Archives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nationalarchives> at Kew on Friday also include 
the minutes of Thatcher’s last cabinet meeting, during which she said her 
“consultations among colleagues … had indicated that all were supportive but 
most thought that it was now unlikely she would win the ballot”. Officially the 
minutes record that the “cabinet took note, with profound sadness, of the 
statement by the prime minister”.

The files also contain papers from the October 1989 resignation of her 
chancellor, Nigel Lawson, which show Thatcher’s principal private secretary, 
Andrew Turnball, told her that she could turn his resignation to her advantage 
by exposing his policy of trying to get sterling into the European Monetary 
System by the back door by shadowing the Deutschmark despite her opposition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F965de31cdf6d5e2cf3b4ac20dfbc8f176f805eb0%2F143_354_3058_1835%2F3058.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Thatcher's%20resignation%20shocked%20politicians%20in%20US%20and%20USSR%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Thatcher%27s%20resignation%20shocked%20politicians%20in%20US%20and%20USSR%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F965de31cdf6d5e2cf3b4ac20dfbc8f176f805eb0%2F143_354_3058_1835%2F3058.jpg>
 Thatcher with Nigel Lawson. Photograph: Manchester Daily Express/SSPL via 
Getty Images 
Thatcher’s departure was partially precipitated by popular resentment over the 
poll tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/2015/mar/28/poll-tax-riots-revisited-in-pictures>
, which she championed. It was seen as an attempt to shift the burden of 
taxation from the rich to the poor and as an example of an increasingly 
authoritarian style of leadership.


Geoffrey Howe resigned as deputy prime minister at the beginning of November 
in protest over her European policies and in anagonising Commons speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/oct/10/geoffrey-howe-resignation-speech-margaret-thatcher-downfall-video>
 suggested the time had come for party colleagues to “consider their own 
response to the tragic conflict of loyalties with which I have myself wrestled 
for perhaps too long”. Michael Heseltine then challenged her for the 
Conservative party leadership, triggering a contest from which she subsequently 
withdrew.


The Downing Street papers show that while Thatcher’s resignation was regarded 
as a slow-motion car crash by those at Westminster, it was greeted with 
incomprehension in the wider world.

In Kissinger’s emotional phone call to No 10 he told Thatcher’s foreign policy 
adviser, Powell, that she had been one of the great figures of modern times and 
“nobody outside Britain – indeed nobody outside Westminster – could understand 
how your fellowConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> could have done this”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe31cf5c2716e0493d0e5d112f252972d1dd5f746%2F0_10_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Thatcher's%20resignation%20shocked%20politicians%20in%20US%20and%20USSR%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Thatcher%27s%20resignation%20shocked%20politicians%20in%20US%20and%20USSR%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe31cf5c2716e0493d0e5d112f252972d1dd5f746%2F0_10_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Henry Kissinger, the former US secretary of state. Photograph: PA 
The feeling was even more acute in Moscow. The Soviet ambassador handed over a 
personal message to “Margaret” from Mikhail Gorbachev saying there had been 
“consternation” at the turn of events: “Gorbachev had sent Shevardnadze [his 
foreign minister] out of a high level meeting in the Kremlin to telephone him, 
to find out what on earth was going on and how such a thing could be 
conceivable,” recorded Powell.

“The ambassador said that he had indeed found it very hard to explain. Indeed, 
there was a certain irony. Five years ago they had party coups in the Soviet 
Union and elections in Britain. Now it seemed to be the other way round.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadd393844a7f57d6343e9497886f8653fa424d2d%2F0_56_2565_1539%2F2565.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Thatcher's%20resignation%20shocked%20politicians%20in%20US%20and%20USSR%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Thatcher%27s%20resignation%20shocked%20politicians%20in%20US%20and%20USSR%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-resignation-shocked-us-ussr-files%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadd393844a7f57d6343e9497886f8653fa424d2d%2F0_56_2565_1539%2F2565.jpg>
 Thatcher with Mikhail Gorbachev in 1987. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
A Foreign Office review of Italian press reaction says several papers compared 
her to Queen Elizabeth I and Queen Victoria and “the general view is that she 
was a great leader brought down by her own intransigence”. One Italian weekly, 
Panorama, took the view that although the domestic economy, the poll tax and 
Europe were major factors in her increasing unpopularity “most British 
politicians found it intolerable that a woman should continue to lead them”.

The tributes are also notable for the personal messages from the heads of the 
security services. Patrick Walker of MI5 thanks her for her support, 
particularly as “the first part of the 1980s with theBettaney case 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Bettaney> and its aftermath and the 
Peter Wright saga <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spycatcher> were not easy”. 


The Downing Street file reveals that while global leaders were loudly singing 
her praises her own cabinet colleagues were notably less effusive. A collection 
among members of her last cabinet was organised by Ken Baker. It was enough to 
buy a pair of silver candlesticks. But her successor, John Major, agreed that 
the presentation should take place quietly in the lord chancellor’s lodgings at 
Westminster as “this would be both less painful for her and also attract less 
publicity than an event for this purpose in No 10”.
 