
“Places like this are the crown jewels of this country. When you see the sea, 
I want to be on that sand. Who knows what it is about human beings? But I want 
to go on it,” says Wayne Hemingway. “For 50 years, we’ve been selling off land 
that joined the public to the sea.” Hemingway has the design brief for 
Dreamland, an amusement park in Margate that is genuinely unlike anything I 
have ever seen.

The roller disco has its original ceiling, and the booths alongside it are 
decked in original Formica samples unearthed in a warehouse in Blackpool. Other 
British coastal towns have sent across their giant fibreglass clowns and 
Viking-style boat-swings. At the back of a giant ballroom, they have uncovered 
an original 1920s mural of some dogs, doing the things dogs did in that 
innocent time: wearing clothes, walking on two legs, chatting.

All the fun of Dreamland: Margate amusement park set to reopen in June
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/27/margate-dreamland-reopen-19-june-tickets-on-sale>
Dreamland’s planters are built from the timbers of the old Scenic Railway 
rollercoaster. They have been replaced, beam for beam, to build the new railway 
ride, which is not yet ready. “Eventually, we want to get tiered seating so you 
can watch the railway going round. The rattling’s going to be incredible. It’s 
almost like an art installation that you’re sat in,” Hemingway says.

His wife, Geraldine, co-founder of Red Or Dead (the fashion label that made 
their name) is hopping about in a hard hat. His son, Jack, is dodging a crane 
(“None of us have had more than three hours’ sleep for a fortnight … we really 
need him back in London, 29 is peak design age”). Hemingway’s daughter, Corey, 
is in a marquee at the back of the site, painting a teddy bear onto some MDF, 
in the pursuit of a Teddy Boy pun that either doesn’t work, or I don’t get, but 
it looks great.

Some things struck me: no way was this going to be ready by Friday night (the 
official opening of Phase One, for which 10,000 tickets had been sold by the 
time I went on Thursday morning); Dreamland walks a tightrope between an 
aesthetic event and a funfair, and for the true fair-fancier, it may tip too 
far in the scenester direction.

“An eight or nine-year-old just wants to go on a set of dodgems. If that has a 
vintage feel that appeals to hipsters, that’s not going to put off the 
eight-year-old,” says Eddie Kemsley, the 37-year-old chief executive. I agree 
with her because I always agree with people as they’re talking, and then I see 
the dodgems in question: squarish, pastel coloured, built for the slenderer 
figures of the past, so beautiful and evocative and Brighton Rock that they 
look poignant, almost vulnerable. The last thing I would want to do is smash 
into anyone in one. Exactly the opposite, in other words, to what my 
seven-year-old would want – and I very much doubt there will be speakers on the 
front playing Robin Thicke.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fmargates-dreamland-amusement-park-walks-tightrope-art-funfair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434715794780%2F94799064-c99e-4fad-bd8e-8f878adb4931-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margate's%20Dreamland%20walks%20tightrope%20between%20work%20of%20art%20and%20funfair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fmargates-dreamland-amusement-park-walks-tightrope-art-funfair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margate%27s%20Dreamland%20walks%20tightrope%20between%20work%20of%20art%20and%20funfair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fmargates-dreamland-amusement-park-walks-tightrope-art-funfair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434715794780%2F94799064-c99e-4fad-bd8e-8f878adb4931-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Workers carry out the final stages of construction to Dreamland. Photograph: 
Rob Stothard/Getty Images 
But thirdly and most importantly, it is going to incredible: in scale, in 
scope, in detail, in vision, in the radical pursuits of fun, it’s 
awe-inspiring. You think the ballroom is an impressive space, and then you see 
the dance hall (nowhere near ready). You tip your hat to the Wall of Death 
(“You have a Wall of Death!” “Well, obviously,” says Hemingway) and then you 
see the Counterculture Caterpillar, a creaking insect ride for which they’ve 
commissioned deliberately bad, seaside portraits of Lady Gaga and the Spice 
Girls, and a soundtrack from John Shuttleworth doing bossa nova tunes over the 
top.

Kent voted Europe's top family holiday destination by Lonely Planet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/17/kent-voted-europes-top-family-holiday-destination-by-lonely-planet>
“We have rides from the 20s to the present day, 1920s gallopers to the 50s 
style big wheel. They really tell the story of rides through the ages, but it 
will constantly change, we’ll have rides coming in for one season,” says 
Kemsley, going on to explain that the entire Dreamland project – at £28m – has 
cost the same as one of those modern rides for which regular theme parks are 
famous (and since Alton Towers, infamous).

Ramsgate Pete, one of the largest collectors of vintage pinball and arcade 
machines in Europe (“I’m notthe largest, no” says Pete Heath, “there’s a madman 
in Paris.”) has supplied a cavernous room with kit that you cannot believe 
still functions. “I used to just keep it in a museum in Ramsgate,” he says.

I used to walk past the museum, often (I lived round the corner). But it 
wasn’t really a museum, it was dusty and never open, and it had an eerie feel, 
as though it were a real arcade, deserted in a chemical attack. His treasured 
collection used to depress me, as the wood embodiment of seaside decline; now 
it looks like the perfect thing, arrived in the perfect place, where it will be 
appreciated for years, by hundreds of thousands of people.

It’s hard not to be won over by this, as a metaphor. Words like “regeneration” 
make me back away and “vintage” gives me the creeps. But, says Hemingway, “we 
wanted not to do a heritage theme park for the 50s and 60s. It doesn’t feel 
50s. It feels timelessly like the seaside, like a dream.”
 