
Messhams Wall of Death, a beautifully maintained, fourth generation fairground 
attraction, is rammed to its vivid rafters. Inside this huge wooden drum, 
dashing black-clad chaps on motorbikes go full throttle so they can cling to 
its vertical walls. “Look!” shouts the spieler, “side-saddle riding with no 
hands!”

At the height of its popularity in the 1960s, when it attracted more than two 
million thrill-seekers a year, Dreamland boasted a wall of death run by 
legendary stunt motorcyclist Yvonne Stagg. I never knew it firsthand, only 
through Lindsay Anderson’s unsettling 1953 documentary film, O Dreamland, with 
its terrifying animatronic electric chair and Haunted Snail ride.

The park closed, seemingly forever, in 2003, but here it is, a candy-striped 
phoenix, saved from being turned over to featureless residential properties by 
the indomitable energies of The Dreamland Trust, aided by a dramatic CPO by 
Thanet District Council and, now, private backing. The Grade II-listed scenic 
railway, devastated by an arson attack in 2008, has been rebuilt, wooden slat 
by wooden slat, back to its rickety, grinding glory. Though sadly, the 
restoration wasn’t finished quite in time for opening last weekend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-margate-kent-fairground-theme-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435063381956%2Fd31ef1a5-f277-46f4-8a8b-89899099d2ec-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margate%E2%80%99s%20Dreamland%20is%20back%20from%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-margate-kent-fairground-theme-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margate%E2%80%99s%20Dreamland%20is%20back%20from%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-margate-kent-fairground-theme-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435063381956%2Fd31ef1a5-f277-46f4-8a8b-89899099d2ec-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Defying gravity … Messhams Wall of Death provides traditional thrills 
On my first visit, I go along with Rob Ball, a photographer who has created a 
series of haunting, tintype photographs of the park during its transition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jun/08/margate-dreamland-amusement-park-tintype-photographs-in-pictures>
. He knew it in the late 1990s when it was “more like a travelling fair, 
everything seemed temporary and a bit broken. It was like Margate at the time – 
lacking any kind of energy”.

Energy it now has in spades. The staff, in their vintage Levi’s 501s, denim 
overalls and jaunty 1950s-style bandanas – are bursting with sugar-rush 
enthusiasm. Their T-shirts bellow fairground-speak: “Scream if you want to go 
faster”, “Hands in the air”, “We cater for pleasure”, a riff on the original 
strapline, Pleasure Without Measure. My first teenage, um, stirrings took place 
on the waltzers, and I’m delighted to see that the long-haired, tattooed 
ride-wrangler aesthetic is still in place, even if it’s softened by the seaside 
rock palette. More than 200 new jobs have been created, mostly for locals: 
Dreamland is already contributing significantly to Margate’s steady revival.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-amusement-park-reopens-margate-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435133956663%2FKP_322013_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margate's%20Dreamland%20returns%20in%20retro%20chic%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-amusement-park-reopens-margate-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margate%27s%20Dreamland%20returns%20in%20retro%20chic%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-amusement-park-reopens-margate-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435133956663%2FKP_322013_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The day Dreamland reopened its doors 
One entrance is via the imposing, brick-fronted building, off the seafront 
parade of arcades and pubs and the striking, fin-fronted art deco cinema. This 
brings you past The Emporium, bristling with superior souvenirs, many designed 
by local artists, such asZoe Murphy <http://www.zoemurphy.com/> and Keith 
Brymer Jones <http://www.keithbrymerjones.com/537/about-keith-brymer-jones>. 
There’s also retro furniture fromJunk Deluxe <http://junkdeluxe.co.uk/>, 
including decorative items crafted from pieces of the original scenic railway. 
You’re immediately in the heart of the hubbub: a glorious tin-tiled ceiling 
left in decoratively peeling state soars over roller-disco, bar, acres of neon 
– including a wonderful artwork by Ramsgate-based artistRachel Wilberforce 
<http://www.rachelwilberforce.com/> – and banks of original pinball machines. 
You can also go in via an entrance under the rollercoaster – I can only imagine 
how exciting this will be when the cars are rumbling above your head.

Once, Dreamland was at the cutting edge of fairground excitement. But now it 
has a whole other agenda: rather than competing with the high-tech thrills of 
Alton Towers and Thorpe Park, it offers a gentle, sweetly retro vision of 
seaside fun masterminded by designerWayne Hemingway 
<http://houseofhemingway.co.uk/hemingway-design/projects/dreamland/>. Old rides 
have been refurbished, old fairground paraphernalia upcycled. But your hair 
will still be raised: 17 rides are currently open, more than enough for a day 
out, ranging from the vintage galloper merry-go-round, its handsome, brightly 
painted steeds performing a stately dance, to the hectic, 
waltzer-meets-rollercoaster swoops of the Crazy Mouse which has us screaming 
like hopped-up teenagers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-margate-kent-fairground-theme-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435063879475%2F583de9ec-a223-453c-815f-0e2b6c5592bc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margate%E2%80%99s%20Dreamland%20is%20back%20from%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-margate-kent-fairground-theme-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margate%E2%80%99s%20Dreamland%20is%20back%20from%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-margate-kent-fairground-theme-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435063879475%2F583de9ec-a223-453c-815f-0e2b6c5592bc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dreamland is not aiming to compete with the likes of hi-tech Thorpe Park and 
Alton Towers Photograph: Dylan Martinez/Reuters 
Design is a huge part of it: you don’t need to notice that the teacups ride 
has been painted by a Wedgewood artist in classic Jasperware style – but with 
cultural icons from mods and rockers to new romantics. Or that the original 
dodgems have been repainted with David Bowie and Chuck Berry. But if you do, it 
adds an extra layer of pleasure.

It costs £14.95 for a pre-booked daily ticket (£17.95 on the day), a price 
that has caused some local chuntering. My friend Jane remembers hanging out 
there every Saturday evening when entry was free, you only had to pay for 
rides. “As a 14-year-old, it was the only place to go – in all senses.” But I 
think the pricing is fair: your daily wristband allows you to go in and out as 
you please. So you can take time out for art at theTurner Contemporary 
<https://www.turnercontemporary.org/>, or to mooch round the indie shops of the 
Old Town – some of which, like vintage clothes specialistMadam Popoff 
<http://www.madampopoff.com/>, are capitalising on Dreamland’s arrival by 
offering discounts to customers with wristbands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-margate-kent-fairground-theme-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435064172055%2F0a93940f-fbef-49d1-8c28-3ed971d8d22d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margate%E2%80%99s%20Dreamland%20is%20back%20from%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-margate-kent-fairground-theme-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margate%E2%80%99s%20Dreamland%20is%20back%20from%20the%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdreamland-margate-kent-fairground-theme-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435064172055%2F0a93940f-fbef-49d1-8c28-3ed971d8d22d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The careful restoration of old arcade games has been part of Dreamland’s 
redevelopment. Photograph: Rob Stothard/Getty Images 
The one element that’s not floating my swing boat is the food. The food court 
looks attractive, fringed by herb-filled planters made from more reclaimed 
rollercoaster. But the only local presences I detect areYama’s Thai 
<https://www.facebook.com/yamasmargate?fref=nf> (closed during our visit) and 
Proper Coffee <http://propercoffeehouse.co.uk/>. Despite being served from a 
gleaming Airstream caravan, my cheeseburger is last century in a bad way: 
greasy, a stranger to quality meat products, topped with sweaty cheese. At 
£4.50, it’s not cheap – and it nearly makes a second appearance after one too 
many turns on the dizzying Chair-O-Planes. I’m not sure, either, why the 
(expensive) ice-cream concession is by the Cotswold-basedMarshfield Farm 
<http://www.marshfield-icecream.co.uk/> when there’s the likes of Morelli’s 
<http://www.morellisgelato.com/heritage>, which was founded in Broadstairs, 
nearby. So on my second visit, I use my wristband to trot out to newly opened
Hantverk & Found <http://www.hantverk-found.co.uk/> (18 King St), a tiny 
seafood cafe and gallery, for gorgeous local seafood dishes and a clever 
winelist. It’s great to see outside tables atGB Pizza 
<http://greatbritishpizza.com/margate-contact-us/> (14A Marine Drive) and 
BeBeached <http://bebeached.co.uk/> (Harbour Arm) mobbed, too.

But this is early days, phase one of four, promising over the next couple of 
years everything from a “fine dining” restaurant to the revival of the cinema 
and ballroom. The mood is fantastic: upbeat, from a crowd of older locals 
reliving their youth to cool young thangs attracted by Margate’s burgeoning 
reputation as Dalston-sur-Mer; fiftysomething men in braces and Harringtons, 
candy-floss-chomping teens… People are picnicking on the fake lawn beside the 
hair and beauty caravan, children gyrating newly bought hula-hoops to the 
strains of I’ve Got a Lovely Bunch of Coconuts. Elsewhere, drag queens in 
Hi-de-Hi! outfits groove to Blondie by the original 1940s toy car circuit, and 
a magician enthrals a crowd by the helter-skelter. Yes, there’s still work to 
be done. And some of the attractions – that Wall of Death, for instance – may 
not be permanent. But it’s already wonderful and it’s going to get even better. 
Lucky old Margate.
 