
Margaret Atwood selects Tutul for Pen writer of courage award
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/13/margaret-atwood-selects-tutul-for-pen-writer-of-courage-award>
On Thursday, just as I am saying goodbye to Margaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood> at the end of our interview, 
I get a text message. “Oh,” I say. “Bob Dylan’s won the Nobel prize.” She is 
about to have her photograph taken, and is arranging a rakish grey felt hat 
atop her steely curls. She looks at me, opens her mouth very slightly, and 
widens her eyes. They are the faintly unrealistic blue of a Patagonian glacier.

“For what?” she says, aspirating the word “what” with devastating effect.

If Atwood herself occasionally checks her phone for missed calls from 
Stockholm on such mornings, she does not admit to it; in any case, fellow 
Canadian Alice Munro’s victory in 2013, commemorated with a generous tribute by 
Atwoodin this paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/10/alice-munro-nobel-literature-prize-margaret-atwood>
, will have queered that particular pitch for some years to come.

We are speaking at the British Library, where, later that day, the 76-year-old 
author will receive a different award: theEnglish PEN Pinter prize 
<https://www.englishpen.org/events/prizes/pen-pinter-prize/>. She will also 
bestow one, too, onAhmedur Rashid Chowdhury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/13/margaret-atwood-selects-tutul-for-pen-writer-of-courage-award>
, the Bangladeshi publisher of remarkable courage known as Tutul, who last year 
survived, in his Dhaka office, a machete-and-gun attack by Islamic extremists. 
At least nine Bangladeshi activists, writers and intellectualshave been murdered
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/30/bangladesh-islamist-attacks-murder-gay-atheist-activists-dhaka>
 since the beginning of last year.

Atwood’s PEN Pinter prize lecture, titled An Improvisation on the Theme 
of Rights, which she also delivered on Thursday, ends with a reflection on the 
dystopias of her fiction: that ofThe Handmaid’s Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/29/books-to-give-you-hope-the-handmaids-tale-by-margaret-atwood>
 (1985) and of her recentMaddAddam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/28/maddaddam-margaret-atwood-review>
 trilogy. The first describes an America transformed into a theocracy that 
treats women as mere childbearing chattels – after a state of emergency is 
declared following an assassination. (“They blamed it on the Islamic fanatics 
at the time”, the novel’s narrator explains.) The second deals with a world in 
which the planet’s resources are severely depleted. A situation, she explained 
in the lecture, that leads to civil chaos. “Then … warlords and demagogues take 
over, some people forget that all people are people, enemies are created, 
vilified and dehumanised, minorities are persecuted, and human rights as such 
are shoved to the wall.” Not so much a distant and frightening future, she 
said, as “the cusp of where we are living right now”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fmargaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F282c473a56c75e10e2e8ac01a645677738c59e5a%2F0_68_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Atwood%3A%20%E2%80%98All%20dystopias%20are%20telling%20you%20is%20to%20make%20sure%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20lot%20of%20canned%20goods%20and%20a%20gun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fmargaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Atwood%3A%20%E2%80%98All%20dystopias%20are%20telling%20you%20is%20to%20make%20sure%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20lot%20of%20canned%20goods%20and%20a%20gun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fmargaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F282c473a56c75e10e2e8ac01a645677738c59e5a%2F0_68_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
 Stephanie Marshall in the 2003 English National Opera staging of The 
Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret Atwood. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian
Readers of The Handmaid’s Tale have indeed found elements of its story looming 
alarmingly close in recent weeks. See Donald Trump’s remarks about women; see 
thevirulently anti-choice Republican vice-presidential candidate Mike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/mike-pence-republicans-defund-planned-parenthood-abortion>
. See, even, Trump’s Republican detractors, such as Mitt Romney, decrying 
his remarks on groping because they “demean our wives and daughters 
<https://twitter.com/MittRomney/status/784546373525966849>”. Are we in Gilead – 
the America of The Handmaid’s Tale? “Close, yes. For sure.” And everything in 
it, she says, was based on things that had actually happened. “Including 
everyone tugging on a rope during hangings so that no one is guilty: that’s 
from English history,” she says. “Ceaușescu in Romania forcing women to have 
children – quotas for childbirth. The fact that, in the United States, teaching 
a slave to read was against the law. And thensumptuary laws 
<http://elizabethan.org/sumptuary/> – who can wear what. Who can cover up what, 
who has to, and can, cover up what part of which bodies – that’s been a part of 
human culture for a very long time.”

She mentions an article 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/election-update-women-are-defeating-donald-trump>
 that famously accurate US psephologist Nate Silver published on his website, 
fivethirtyeight.com. (His one famous failure was in not predicting Trump’s 
victory in the Republican primaries.) Silver’s article includes a pair of maps. 
One shows how the US would look if only men voted: almost entirely red. The 
other shows how the US would look if only women voted: almost entirely blue. 
“It spawned a hashtag,” says Atwood (who is a frequent posteron Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/MargaretAtwood>) “called #Repealthe19th. The 19th 
Amendment is what gave women the vote. So there are Trump supporters who want 
to take the vote away from women. The Handmaid’s Tale, unfolding in front of 
your very eyes.” (In fact,the Washington Post pointed out 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-intersect/wp/2016/10/13/yes-repealthe19th-trended-but-not-for-the-reasons-you-think/>
 that #Repealthe19th spiked as a social media topic not only through the 
enthusiasm of Trump supporters, but through its being heartily condemned by his 
detractors; but still, there it was as a notion, red and bleeding and out 
there.)

A perfect storm: Margaret Atwood on rewriting Shakespeare’s Tempest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/24/margaret-atwood-rewriting-shakespeare-tempest-hagseed>
Her whistlestop tour through feminism goes like this: “First wave, the vote. 
Second wave, the image. Now it’s about violence and rape and death: we’ve got 
down to the nitty-gritty.” Earlier this month, when she spoke at theSouthbank 
literature festival 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/london-literature-festival?gclid=CjwKEAjwhILABRDwo8mlqt6ug38SJACNSq_kIM90R5cOL9yG603aGdq-ldofuRvvMooMmaqKp-IJiBoCwW7w_wcB>
 in London, she talked about “the most amazingly vicious online abuse” of 
women. “What century are we in?” she asked. “Apparently, the 12th.”

When The Handmaid’s Tale was published, she says, the novel was reviewed by 
British critics as an enjoyable fantasy, and by the Canadians with a certain 
anxiety (“Could it happen here?”). In America, though, there was a sense of: 
“‘How long have we got?’” She sighs. “Apparently, not as long as I thought … 
With any cultural change there is a push and a pushback. Trump has brought out 
a huge pushback that was originally against immigrants. Now it has shifted to 
being very misogynistic, partly because of Hillary Clinton. You have not seen 
anything like this since the 17th-century witchhunts, quite frankly.”

Can you understand the appeal of Trump, I ask? “He brings out the 
temper-tantrum-throwing wilful brat in all of us. ‘Why can’t I do what I want? 
Why can’t I have what I want? Those other people are stopping me. Those other 
people have a bigger lollipop that I do, I’m going to take their lollipop away 
from them.’ But on the other hand, he couples that with the most amazing 
whining.” She mentions the complaint by Trump that his microphone malfunctioned 
during the first televised presidential debate. (“Rubbish.”)

“I tell you this,” she continues. “Hillary Clinton is a better man than Trump. 
She has more connection to the traditional male virtues. She has comported 
herself in a much more manly fashion. Ask any real alpha males that you’ll know 
and they’ll say of Trump, ‘This is the guy we didn’t like at school because he 
was a bully, but as soon as anyone pushed back at him he started to whine.’”

What does she think, then, of Clinton’s campaign? “Well, it’s more of 
a campaign. Trump has taken about 10 different positions on everything, so 
there is no way of knowing what he really thinks. You actually just don’t know. 
He will adopt a position depending on what reaction is mirrored back to him. 
Basically, it’s very close to being a manifestation of a mob: burn them at the 
stake, screaming and yelling.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fmargaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59cd16e301a7d46db8f812312aa7e5e1e88a3828%2F0_0_1400_2250%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Atwood%3A%20%E2%80%98All%20dystopias%20are%20telling%20you%20is%20to%20make%20sure%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20lot%20of%20canned%20goods%20and%20a%20gun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fmargaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Atwood%3A%20%E2%80%98All%20dystopias%20are%20telling%20you%20is%20to%20make%20sure%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20lot%20of%20canned%20goods%20and%20a%20gun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fmargaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59cd16e301a7d46db8f812312aa7e5e1e88a3828%2F0_0_1400_2250%2F1400.jpg>
 Hag-Seed by Margaret Atwood, a retelling of Shakespeare’s The Tempest. 
Photograph: Penguin 
Like the Salem witch trials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/30/salem-witch-trials-american-imagination>
, then? She proceeds to talk about them: Atwood likes to take a long historical 
sweep. Her heroes of this tragic episode, dramatised by Arthur Miller in The 
Crucible, are Rebecca Nurse, who refused to admit that she was a witch and 
declined to accuse others, meaning she was hanged; and Giles Corey, who refused 
to plead at his trial, meaning that he was pressed – that is, crushed by heavy 
stones until his lungs collapsed and he died. By sacrificing himself thus, and 
not allowing his case to be tried, his family inherited his property, which 
otherwise would have been confiscated.

However, she says, after a fairly long disquisition on the legal history of 
17th-century Massachusetts, this is not at all what the Trump situation is 
like. “Salem was much more dignified … Salem at least had rules for the 
trials.” She hunts around for a better comparison. It’s likeNight of the Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/08/favourite-film-night-of-the-hunter>
, she says. “Robert Mitchum. Directed by Charles Laughton. Just a great film. 
At the end they catch this guy who’s been murdering women and has been trying 
to get hold of some children to kill them too. He is seen offby Lillian Gish 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8t-konY4cHE> playing an old lady in a rocking 
chair with a shotgun.” (A sudden vision arrives, unbidden, of Atwood in 
a rocking chair with a shotgun.) “She peppers him with shot, he gets caught and 
put in jail and there’s a mob outside who want to lynch him. So the very same 
Christian, righteous people who have played the virtuous townspeople are now 
screaming for his blood. This is what it’s like. Those mob scenes at Trump 
rallies: burn her, lock her up, kill her. They think they are at the wrestling, 
but let those people out, and you have a lynchmob.”

We turn to the scenarios she sketched in the MaddAddam trilogy: a world of 
internet insecurity, pig-human hybrids, environmental devastation, oil 
fetishists and complete corporate takeover of states. Do dystopian novels, I 
wonder, actually do anything? Can they change behaviour? They are, she says, 
more like weathervanes than guides on averting disaster. “All dystopian novels 
are telling you to do is make sure you’ve got a lot of canned goods and a gun.” 
Do you have canned goods and a gun in Toronto? “I’m too freaking old. I’m 
probably not going to make it through the zombie apocalypse anyway.”

The literary news, as we speak, has been recently all about the “unmasking” by 
an Italian investigative journalist of the real identity ofElena Ferrante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/03/the-guardian-view-on-unmasking-elena-ferrante-an-impoverishing-act>
, the pseudonymous author of the hugely popular Neapolitan novels. “She 
probably went too far in putting out a fake autobiography. Which is like an 
invitation: expose me,” says Atwood. (She is referring to Frantumaglia, which 
is about to be published in English – not an autobiography as such, but a 
collection of letters, essays, interviews and the like.) “But she’s not 
committed a crime. Nor do I feel that she was a bad person to write under a 
pseudonym. She did what she wanted to do. It worked spectacularly well, and 
then there are the books. People will read them a bit differently, that’s 
inevitable. But it doesn’t make them bad books.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fmargaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57906cd966d08edc93eb2266720a9918fdda3df9%2F0_0_4005_3080%2F4005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Atwood%3A%20%E2%80%98All%20dystopias%20are%20telling%20you%20is%20to%20make%20sure%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20lot%20of%20canned%20goods%20and%20a%20gun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fmargaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Atwood%3A%20%E2%80%98All%20dystopias%20are%20telling%20you%20is%20to%20make%20sure%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20a%20lot%20of%20canned%20goods%20and%20a%20gun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fmargaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57906cd966d08edc93eb2266720a9918fdda3df9%2F0_0_4005_3080%2F4005.jpg>
 ‘I used to go on the Greyhound bus with copies of my books in a cardboard box, 
and give readings in school gymnasiums’ … Margaret Atwood in 1972. Photograph: 
Ron Bull/Toronto Star via Getty Images 
Atwood herself published pseudonymously a bit, when she was young – in the 
student magazine, to fill the pages. And she wrote a comic strip under another 
name in the 1970s. Then there was a skittish review of one of her own books she 
wrote once, under the not-very-veiled byline of Margarets Atwood, which 
referred to certain anagrammatic figures: ethnologist Gwaemot R Dratora, the 
architect Wode M Gratataro, and the profile-writer Greta Warmodota. 
Invisibility is not her thing: especially when she, and Canadian fellow 
writers, worked so hard in the 1970s to improve their own visibility. “I don’t 
think I’m entitled to whinge too much, because it’s my fault. I used to go on 
the Greyhound bus with copies of my books in a cardboard box, and give readings 
in school gymnasiums. I’d sell my own books and collect the money, put it in a 
brown paper envelope and take it back to the publisher.” She looks at me with 
wide eyes. “What sort of a wimp are you? Have you never tramped through the 
snow with your books in a cardboard box – on a sled?”

The month in comics: Margaret Atwood unleashes an eco-friendly superhero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/12/angel-catbird-young-animal-doom-patrol>
The latest book that she is, metaphorically at least, carrying around with her 
on a sled is neither dystopian nor utopian, but a story based on The Tempest, 
calledHag-Seed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/06/hag-seed-the-tempest-retold-by-margaret-atwood>
 – part of a series of Shakespearean reworkings commissioned from writers 
including Jeanette Winterson and Anne Tyler. In her deft story, Prospero is a 
director called Felix, deposed from his position as artistic director of an 
important theatre. Bent on revenge, he stages a version of The Tempest in a 
prison, and plots his payback. I worry, though, that Prospero is a part often 
taken on by actors reaching the end of their careers. I hope there’s to be no 
talk of Atwood’sabjuring magic 
<http://www.bard.org/study-guides/but-this-rough-magic-i-here-abjure>, or any 
nonsense like that. No, she tells me. No need to fear. “The last part actors 
usually take is Lear. That really makes people cry.”

This is very Atwood: nearly everything she says is delivered precisely, and 
lightly iced with irony, whether she’s being immensely warm, or plunging her 
dagger into some unfortunate victim.

• Hag-Seed by Margaret Atwood is published by Penguin at £16.99. To order it 
for £11.99 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hag-seed.html> or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK 
p&p on online orders over £10. A £1.99 charge applies to telephone orders.
 