
The Whitworth in Manchester is one of the most important galleries in Britain, 
but until recently a would-be visitor would have been hard-pressed to notice 
it. Built from the same imposing red brick as theRoyal Infirmary 
<http://manchesterhistory.net/manchester/gone/infirmary.html> opposite , with a 
messy car park in front, it looks more like part of the Edwardian hospital 
estate than a globally significant cultural institution that started collecting 
Picassos long before the Tate caught on.

The gallery was founded in 1889 by a group of socially minded philanthropists, 
including the Manchester Guardian’s former owner John Edward Taylor, who 
bequeathed266 watercolours and drawings from the likes of Turner, Blake and 
Cozens 
<http://www.whitworth.manchester.ac.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/upcomingexhibitions/watercolours>
. Envisioned as a cultural palace for the people, free to enter, it was 
supposed to expand the minds of the city’s factory workers in their downtime.

But the imposing brickwork and gloomy galleries put off modern audiences, 
according to Maria Balshaw, who runs the gallery. “They were intimidated,” she 
says.

So, shortly after becoming director of the Whitworth in 2006, Balshaw began a 
£15m project to bring the gallery into the 21st century. After begging £8m from 
the Heritage Lottery Fund, plus millions more fromManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> University, which owns the site, 
she has overseen a significant revamp by architects MUMA.

Doubling the public space of the gallery, the redesign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/01/whitworth-gallery-manchester-muma-redesign>
 marries the Whitworth with its park setting, bringing light, air and fresh 
ideas into its expanded space. It includes a new cafe – a glass box which seems 
to levitate among the trees of Whitworth Park.

At the front of the building, where the car park once spoiled the view, a new 
sculpture garden has been created, described by landscape artist Sarah Price as 
“Japanese Zen meets English meadow”. At the back, low evergreens trimmed into 
cloud forms nestle among ribbons of English meadow, cutting through to lead you 
out towards the park.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmaria-balshaw-whitworth-manchester-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F8%2F1423408934875%2Ff4bdc625-4dae-445b-bbde-990541cb82c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20%E2%80%98Galleries%20that%20have%20collections%20like%20ours%20don%E2%80%99t%20usually%20reside%20in%20Moss%20Side%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmaria-balshaw-whitworth-manchester-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20%E2%80%98Galleries%20that%20have%20collections%20like%20ours%20don%E2%80%99t%20usually%20reside%20in%20Moss%20Side%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmaria-balshaw-whitworth-manchester-art-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F8%2F1423408934875%2Ff4bdc625-4dae-445b-bbde-990541cb82c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The promenade gallery at the Whitworth, as part of the gallery’s 
redevelopment. Photograph: Alan Williams/The Whitworth 
So close to Rusholme’s Curry Mile <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curry_Mile> 
that there is a whiff of garam masala if the wind is blowing the right way, the 
Whitworth is beside one of Manchester’s most deprived areas. “Galleries that 
have collections like ours don’t usually reside in Moss Side, which is really 
where we are,” says Balshaw.

She sees the setting as “a brilliant opportunity”, pointing out that the 
Whitworth’s textile collection has already attracted crowds from Manchester’s 
newest communities. “We’ve seen terrific spikes in our audience when we have 
done Islamic textile displays, because it has really strong resonance for 
Rusholme,” she says

The Whitworth serves two purposes, says Balshaw. “I think it has a dual 
function. It holds an internationally important collection of both historic and 
modern art and that’s very significant in terms of drawing visitors to the city 
from outside the city and country as well as people who live here,” she says. 
“But it’s also the university’s art gallery. It’s a place where you can take 
risks. It’s always shown contemporary art, always collected contemporary art. 
It’s place where you can do quite adventurous exhibitions, where the mindset is 
very open to show things you wouldn’t see anywhere else.”

The Whitworth will reopen on Valentine’s Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/25/cornelia-parker-interview-i-dont-want-to-tick-anyone-elses-boxes-whitworth-retrospective>
 with a show fromCornelia Parker 
<http://www.whitworth.manchester.ac.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/upcomingexhibitions/corneliaparker/>
, who has taken over one of the gallery’s airy new exhibition halls to produce 
The War Room, a piece made from rolls of red paper used to make Remembrance 
poppies, offcuts from the production process with ghostly negatives of the 
flowers .

She has also collaborated with Kostya Novoselov, one of two Manchester 
University scientists awarded the Nobel Prize for the discovery of graphene – 
the world’s thinnest and strongest material. For Parker’s work, Novoselov took 
microscopic samples of graphite from drawings in the Whitworth’s collection, as 
well as a pencil-written letter by Sir Ernest Rutherford, who split the atom in 
Manchester. He then made graphene from the samples, one of which Parker is 
making into a work to mark the opening of the gallery and exhibition.It is 
these collaborations which make Manchester such an exciting place to be in 
2015, says Balshaw: “Cornelia could work anywhere in the world but she chose to 
do the show here because she got to work with Kostya Novoselov.”

Over the past five years the number of visitors to the Whitworth have doubled 
to 170,000. It’s largely thanks to Balshaw, who is also in charge of Manchester
Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery in the city centre. 
She has long been tipped as the first woman director of Tate. It’s a suggestion 
she finds flattering (“Who wouldn’t, in the art sector, want that kind of 
job?”) but she insists she has unfinished business in Manchester. “I feel like 
I have three jobs as it is. So for at least a little while that will be 
enough,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmaria-balshaw-whitworth-manchester-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F8%2F1423409139769%2Fa5d91096-d8f1-4ed2-a443-de9e06acba9b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20%E2%80%98Galleries%20that%20have%20collections%20like%20ours%20don%E2%80%99t%20usually%20reside%20in%20Moss%20Side%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmaria-balshaw-whitworth-manchester-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maria%20Balshaw%3A%20%E2%80%98Galleries%20that%20have%20collections%20like%20ours%20don%E2%80%99t%20usually%20reside%20in%20Moss%20Side%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmaria-balshaw-whitworth-manchester-art-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F8%2F1423409139769%2Fa5d91096-d8f1-4ed2-a443-de9e06acba9b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 North elevation of the Whitworth, as seen from Denmark Road. Photograph: Alan 
Williams/The Whitworth 
As well as running the city’s two municipal galleries, she has been appointed 
cultural attache by Sir Howard Bernstein, the council chief executive. She 
spent part of last year having very discreet conversations with the treasury as 
she sought to persuade George Osborne to commit serious money to building the 
artistic headquarters of hisnorthern powerhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/05/george-osborne-15bn-investment-five-northern-cities>
 plan. Osborne came through in the autumn statement, pledging £78m forThe 
Factory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/05/guardian-view-manchester-cultural-space-one-kind-factory-another>
, a brand new cultural centre on the old Granada Studios site in the city’s 
Castlefield district.

Balshaw says she has never had a career plan and sees exciting opportunities 
all over the world. “But at the moment,” she said, “if you look across the UK 
there’s nowhere more exciting than Manchester.”

In April, the £25m Home will open its doors , giving Manchester the largest 
multidisciplinary artistic hub outside of London. In July, the biennial 
International Festival will take over the city, featuring Alice in Wonderland 
the Musical by Damon Albarn, as well as a contemporary ballet which brings 
together DJ Jamie XX, Mancunian choreographer Wayne McGregor and the artist, 
Olafur Eliasson. There will also be a CGI show about the night sky fronted by 
Manchester University’s ownProfessor Brian Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/nov/19/manchester-international-festival-cgi-brian-cox>
.

Just before Christmas Greater Manchester also became the first city region to 
sign a£1bn devolution deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/03/manchester-directly-elected-mayor>
 with the government, guaranteeing more autonomy in return for electing a mayor 
.

Manchester has two great strengths, believes Balshaw: Long-term, strong and 
stable leadership (the occasionally criticisedone-party Labour state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2015/jan/06/manchester-should-be-everything-london-is-not>
) and a culture of collaboration. “Manchester is small enough that all of the 
cultural leaders in the city can get together for a breakfast meeting and say: 
‘what are we going to do to make things better here?’”

That wouldn’t be possible in London, she says, where size dictates that 
projects are either “done sector by sector or little area by little area”. But, 
she says: “I think the really liberating and fantastic thing about Manchester 
in the past five years is that it’s not about competition with London any more. 
It’s just about being the best that Manchester can be and should be, which is 
qualitatively different to London.”
 