
Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, appears to have 
finally conceded that the social network is a media company, just not a 
“traditional media company”.

In a video chat with Facebook’s COO, Sheryl Sandberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sheryl-sandberg>, Zuckerberg said: 
“Facebook is a new kind of platform. It’s not a traditional technology company. 
It’s not a traditional media company. You know, we build technology and we feel 
responsible for how it’s used.


“We don’t write the news that people read on the platform. But at the same 
time we also know that we do a lot more than just distribute news, and we’re an 
important part of the public discourse.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fzuck%2Fvideos%2F10103353645165001%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fzuck%2Fvideos%2F10103353645165001%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fzuck%2Fvideos%2F10103353645165001%2F&media=>
 Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg talk about a year in Facebook. 
While commentators have long suggested Facebook is a media company, 
disseminating news and exercising editorial judgement, Zuckerberg has 
previously steadfastly stuck to a line callingFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> a technology company.

Concerns over Facebook’s influence have come into focus recently due to fake 
news appearing on the site and the suggestion that this had an impact on the US 
presidential election. Other incidents, such as the removal of a famous Vietnam 
war image have seen its decisions questioned.

Facebook recently employed editors to curate its trending news feed – a small 
box that contains headlines and a small summary of current affairs being 
discussed across the platform. Those editors, which numbered around 30, were
unceremoniously cut in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/29/facebook-fires-trending-topics-team-algorithm>
 and replaced with an algorithm after accusations of rightwing news censorship.

The algorithm failed to discern real news from fake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/29/facebook-trending-news-editors-fake-news-stories>
, amplifying false reporting to an audience of 1.79 billion monthly users. 
Around two thirds of Americans say they get news from social media.

Facebook is currently attempting to deal with the fallout. It is now working 
with fact-checking companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/15/facebook-flag-fake-news-fact-check>
 in an attempt to inhibit the flow of fake news.

Zuckerberg said: “When we think about what Facebook is doing in trying to give 
people a voice, one of the things that we are spending a lot of time reflecting 
on this year, and I think going forward, is that we have a big responsibility 
to make sure that these tools are used to create the most benefit for people 
around the world.”

 * EU charges Facebook with giving ‘misleading’ information over WhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/20/eu-facebook-misleading-information-whatsapp>
 