
There will be no red carpet, and almost certainly none of the usual glamour. 
But when Martin Scorsese’s new film, Silence, has its world premiere at the
Vatican <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vatican> on Tuesday, it will be the 
culmination of a 27-year project that the director has described as “an 
obsession”.

Pope Francis is not expected to attend the screening at the Pontifical 
Oriental Institute for the Jesuits, but Scorsese will join about 400 priests 
and other guests to watch the 159-minute movie. The director may meet the 
pontiff separately.


A two-minute trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/24/silence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
 released this week suggested a film of much anguish and violence. It has 
already been tipped as an Oscar contender, an accolade for which Scorsese has 
been nominated a dozen times and won once, in 2007 for The Departed.


Silence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence> is based on the acclaimed 
1966 novel of the same name by the Japanese author Shusaku Endo. It is the 
17th-century story of two Portuguese Jesuit missionaries, Rodrigues and Garrpe 
– played by Andrew Garfield and Adam Driver – who travel to Japan to track down 
their mentor, Father Ferreira.


Will the Catholic church ever earn women’s forgiveness? | Joanna Moorhead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/can-catholic-church-earn-womens-forgiveness-pope-francis-abortion>
At the time, Christianity <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> was 
banned in Japan, and those who practised the faith were tortured and executed. 
Faced with this, Ferreira (played by Liam Neeson) apparently renounced his 
religion through a ritual known asfumie – in which Christians were forced to 
trample over a religious icon such as a crucifix in order to prove repudiation 
of their faith.


Tens of thousands of Japanese Christians were persecuted, tortured and killed 
over the 250 years that the religion was outlawed. The ban was lifted in 1873, 
but Christians are still a tiny minority – less than 1% – in a country 
dominated by Shinto and Buddhism.


In Silence, the two priests end up in the same situation as Ferreira. 
Rodrigues is forced to choose between apostasy and death – not just his own, 
but the execution of converts. He prays for guidance but God is silent, until 
at last he hears a single word: “trample”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmartin-scorsese-silence-premiere-vatican-jesuit-missionaries-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225a80c4e528cb7bc6060df5c31f5bb130ed7f96%2F0_57_4681_2810%2F4681.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martin%20Scorsese%E2%80%99s%20Silence%20to%20premiere%20at%20the%20Vatican&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmartin-scorsese-silence-premiere-vatican-jesuit-missionaries-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martin%20Scorsese%E2%80%99s%20Silence%20to%20premiere%20at%20the%20Vatican&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmartin-scorsese-silence-premiere-vatican-jesuit-missionaries-japan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225a80c4e528cb7bc6060df5c31f5bb130ed7f96%2F0_57_4681_2810%2F4681.jpg>
 Scorsese directing Adam Garfield during the filming of Silence. Photograph: 
Paramount 
Scorsese read Endo’s novel in 1989, a year after his film The Last Temptation 
of Christ triggered a storm of controversy over a dream sequence in which Jesus 
has sex with Mary Magdalene. Religious themes and subtexts have run through 
other movies made by Scorsese, who considered the priesthood as a youngster.


The director was determined to turn the novel into a movie (a Japanese film 
version appeared in 1971, which Endo apparently considered a travesty of his 
book), but the project ran into repeated difficulties and delays. Finally, 
filming began last year in Taiwan.


Three years ago, Scorsese told the online movie magazine Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2013/04/martin-scorsese-to-make-noise-on-silence-at-cannes-emmettfurla-films-funding-the-film-479101/>
 that his quest to make the film had been an obsession. Saying he had been 
“steeped in the Roman Catholic religion” as a young man, he added: “As you get 
older, ideas come and go. Questions, answers, loss of the answer again and more 
questions, and this is what really interests me …


The nun harnessing Twitter to spread her message to the masses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/the-nun-harnessing-twitter-to-spread-her-message-to-the-masses>
“Silence is just something I’m drawn to in that way. It’s been an obsession, 
it has to be done and now is the time to do it. It’s a strong, wonderful true 
story, a thriller in a way, but it deals with those questions.”


Scorsese hired the Rev James Martin, a Jesuit priest and writer, as a 
consultant, and his stars prepared themselves for their roles by undertaking a 
seven-day silent retreat at St Beuno’s, a Jesuit spiritual centre with 
spectacular views of Snowdonia in north Wales.

“Andrew [Garfield] got to the point where he could out-Jesuit a Jesuit,” 
Martin told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/27/magazine/the-passion-of-martin-scorsese.html?_r=0>
. “There were places in the script where he would stop and say, ‘A Jesuit 
wouldn’t say that’, and we would come up with something else.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese's%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese%27s%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&media=>
Silence trailer: Martin Scorsese’s Japan-set epic starring Andrew Garfield – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/24/silence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Mark Williams, professor of Japanese studies at Leeds University and an expert 
on Endo’s novels, said the main theme of Silence was the unique nature of each 
individual’s spiritual journey. “It’s difficult to get this across in a film, 
but if anyone can do it, it’s Scorsese,” he said.


Martin Scorsese film recalls martyrdom of Japan's hidden Christians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/24/martin-scorcese-film-silence-martyrdom-japan-hidden-christians>
A key test would be how the director handled the final section of the book, 
following the climactic scene in which Rodrigues “betrays everything his life 
has stood for”. In the novel, the priest is overtaken by guilt and does not 
abandon his faith but spends the rest of his life in and out of prison.


The book had sold well in Japan, although the “hardcore Catholic community 
view it as heretical and blasphemous”, said Williams.


“Endo was persona non grata among Japanese Catholics. You can’t find the book 
in any Christian bookshops, but it’s widely talked about in Japan – and I’m 
sure the film will be popular.”


Silence opens in the US on 23 December, in the UK on 1 January and in Japan 
later that month.


It is not the first film to have a Vatican premiere. The Pope Francis biopic 
Call Me Francesco was first shown there last December 
<http://www.catholicnews.com/services/englishnews/2015/homeless-poor-get-star-treatment-at-vatican-movie-premiere.cfm>
 to an audience of refugees and homeless, and in 2006 Catherine Hardwicke’sThe 
Nativity Story had its world premiere at the Vatican 
<http://www.cbn.com/special/TheNativityMovie/articles/Vatican.aspx>.


The Vatican has also screened films of special interest to the church, 
includingAngelina Jolie’s prisoner of war movie, Unbroken 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/global/angelina-jolie-meets-pope-francis-after-vatican-screening-of-unbroken-1201395716/>
, andTom McCarthy’s film about sexual abuse by Catholic priests, Spotlight. 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/vatican-holds-private-spotlight-screening-862357>

 