
Martin Aitchison, who has died aged 96, was one of the chief illustrators of 
the Key Words Reading Scheme educational series for Ladybird Books that sold 
more than 80m copies worldwide. The books, which first appeared between 1964 
and 1967, created a snapshot of middle-class England through their depictions 
of a nuclear family of two children, Peter and Jane, and their parents. The 
images, often set around the new suburban council estates of the postwar era, 
showed the children undertaking different activities that introduced young 
readers to new words.

To comics fans, Aitchison is best remembered for Luck of the Legion, a 
flamboyant series of full-colour Foreign Legion yarns in the centre pages of 
the Eagle. Written by Geoffrey Bond and originally intended as only a 12-part 
story, the series proved so popular that it ran for almost 10 years from 1952. 
Sergeant Luck’s desert adventures were treated with both tension and humour, 
the tone affected by Aitchison’s introduction to the legion via a film he had 
watched in order to gain some references for uniforms. Sergeant Luck, Corporal 
Trenet and Legionnaire Bimberg, the strip’s heroes, became second only in 
popularity with Eagle readers to Dan Dare.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmartin-aitchison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F538ad032cd93bb5521a737c254606ffb8c5296dc%2F0_163_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martin%20Aitchison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmartin-aitchison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martin%20Aitchison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmartin-aitchison-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F538ad032cd93bb5521a737c254606ffb8c5296dc%2F0_163_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
 Martin Aitchison in 1963. Photograph: Nick Aitchison 
Born at Kings Norton, Worcestershire, Martin was the son of Leslie Aitchison, 
chief metallurgist to the Air Ministry, and his wife, Ida (nee Tilsley). At 11, 
Martin became a boarder at Ellesmere College, Shropshire, where he discovered 
that his caricatures of teachers made him popular with his classmates. His 
drawing earned a number of prizes – “some very handsome books”, said Aitchison 
– which proved to his family that “I could do something well, despite my 
deafness”, his hearing impairment being the result of an attack of German 
measles at the age of five.

From the age of 15, he spent four years studying at Birmingham College of Art 
before moving to the Slade School of Art in London. His work was exhibited at 
the Royal Academy in 1939, shortly before the Slade was evacuated to Oxford 
during the second world war. Aitchison was excluded from military service 
because of his severe hearing difficulties, and instead joined the engineering 
company Vickers in Weybridge as a technical illustrator, mostly of handbooks 
for Wellington bombers. His work was enlivened by another task he took on, 
drawing diagrams for the engineer and inventor Barnes Wallis of a new 
dam-busting bomb device.

After the war he began freelancing as an advertising and magazine illustrator 
– contributing to Picture Post, Punch, Vogue and Lilliput, among others – with 
no particular interest in cartoon strip work, although he was a follower of the 
wartime adventures of Jane in the Daily Mirror and the imported American 
strips, particularly Rip Kirby. In 1951 he was asked to assist Ray Bailey with 
his Kitty Hawke strip in Girl. The editors liked Aitchison’s work enough to 
drop the Tintin reprint strip from the comic Eagle and replace it with Luck of 
the Legion in 1952. At the same time as the weekly adventures of the legion, 
Aitchison drew the cartoon strip Artie and Crafty for Swift, also written by 
Bond, although their association ended in 1961 when Bond emigrated to Australia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmartin-aitchison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b6c0877f10ae81ba184508a296855b33d5c8e0%2F0_0_3016_835%2F3016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martin%20Aitchison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmartin-aitchison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martin%20Aitchison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmartin-aitchison-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b6c0877f10ae81ba184508a296855b33d5c8e0%2F0_0_3016_835%2F3016.jpg>
 To comics fans, Aitchison is best remembered for Luck of the Legion, a series 
of full-colour Foreign Legion yarns in the centre pages of Eagle 
Clifford Makins, who succeeded Marcus Morris as editor of Eagle, wanted to 
pursue a more modern style of strip, and Aitchison was asked to draw the James 
Bond-influenced thriller Danger Unlimited. Although the strip lasted only a 
short time, as Eagle changed hands and direction soon after, Aitchison 
continued to work for Eagle until 1963, latterly drawing adaptations of Arthur 
Conan Doyle’s The Lost World and CS Forester’s Hornblower, RN.

In 1963, via his father, who knew the company’s editorial director, Douglas 
Keen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/nov/29/3>, he was offered his 
first illustration work by Ladybird Books, for A First Book of Saints. He went 
on to produce some 80 books for Ladybird, mostly in watercolour, with each book 
taking up to three months to produce. His favourite was a larger-sized edition 
of Gulliver’s Travels (1976). In 1971, Aitchison illustrated The Story of 
Metals, written by his father, who had become professor of metallurgy at 
Birmingham University.

In an interview published on his website 
<http://www.martinaitchison.co.uk/inter.htm>, Aitchison described his work for 
Ladybird: “There was a real family feel when Douglas Keen was in charge. Work 
meetings were at his home in Stratford-upon-Avon. Later, Vernon Mills, who was 
Douglas’s successor, arranged meetings in his Beeches Road office in 
Loughborough … If it was a Peter and Jane book, Bill Murray [the creator of the 
Key Words Reading Scheme] would be there too. Then we would all go off to the 
pub for a drink and some eats.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmartin-aitchison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff9d90805f6e43b47d30153ddff910178998c30b%2F0_0_1664_2329%2F1664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martin%20Aitchison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmartin-aitchison-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martin%20Aitchison%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmartin-aitchison-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff9d90805f6e43b47d30153ddff910178998c30b%2F0_0_1664_2329%2F1664.jpg>
 A Martin Aitchison illustration for Ladybird Books (1965) 
The worst thing he did, he told the BBC2 TV show See Hear in 2012, was a 
painting showing a boy abseiling: “It was completely wrong and if anybody had 
tried to do that he would have spun off and gone down. The mountain rescue 
people in Keswick complained about it and we had to rearrange the ropes and 
reprint the book.”

In the late 1960s he also contributed illustrations to World of Wonder 
magazine. He continued to work for Ladybird Books until 1987 and then for 
others, including the Oxford University Press. Even after retiring, he 
continued to paint, finding inspiration on walks in the countryside around 
Oxford and Henley-on-Thames.

Aitchison maintained regular contact with Eagle fandom, and between 1998 and 
2004 contributed the comical adventures of Justin Tyme, Ye Hapless Highwayman 
to the pages of Eagle Times, the journal of the Eagle Society, written by his 
Luck of the Legion partner Bond, with later episodes by Bond’s son Jim.

He married a fellow Slade student, Dorothy Self, in 1943. She died in 2003. 
Aitchison is survived by their son, Nick, grandchildren, Helen and Paul, and 
great-grandchild, Edward.

• Martin Henry Hugh Aitchison, artist, born 21 November 1919; died 22 October 
2016
 