
As you head west from the mouth of the Thames Estuary into London, the 
distinctive shape of the giant quay cranes at the London Gateway Port dominate 
the horizon. They are situated close to Stanford-le-Hope, the village where
Joseph Conrad <https://www.theguardian.com/books/josephconrad> was living when 
he began writingHeart of Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/28/100-best-novels-heart-of-darkness-joseph-conrad>
(1899). The novella opens with a description of the estuary as the launching 
place of England’s great ships, where Sir Francis Drake sailed past on the 
Golden Hind, which was full of treasure, capturing the imperial ambitions of 
the nation: “What greatness had not floated on the ebb of that river into the 
mystery of an unknown earth! … The dreams of men, the seed of commonwealths, 
the germs of empires.” Further upriver, Conrad witnessed the immense energies 
of the docks: seeing London on the horizon, the world capital of industry and 
investment. In his great collection of autobiographical essaysThe Mirror of the 
Sea (1906) he describes the lower reaches in equally vivid terms, “spread out 
in the tranquil dignity of a waterway leading to the uttermost ends of the 
earth”.

Conrad’s estuary was a gateway, both into London and out to the heart of 
darkness and beyond. The mysterious atmosphere of the place he captures so well 
is also evident in HG Wells’ classic science fiction novelThe War of the Worlds
, where he imagines crowds of people fleeing a Martian invasion along the misty 
shoreline of Foulness. As they wait for a vessel to take them out to sea and 
safety, a Martian appears in the estuary, “advancing along the muddy coast” – 
then another, and another, “all stalking seaward”.

The eerie atmosphere of the Essex marshes is also evoked in Paul Gallico’s 
melancholic novella,The Snow Goose (1940), where Rhayader, a lonely hunchbacked 
artist, lives in an abandoned lighthouse. Gallico’s marshlands are a place 
where “time shifted land and water”; they become a metaphor for loss, 
loneliness and death. These themes could have been lifted straight from the 
opening pages ofGreat Expectations, where Pip first encounters Magwitch on the 
flat desolate estuary marshes in Kent. Dickens was very familiar with this 
terrain. He lived in Gads Hill towards the end of his life and walked 
extensively along the coast of the estuary. When he publishedGreat Expectations
, he rented a steamship and took journalists to visit Canvey Island, the 
setting for one of the climactic episodes of the book.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmartians-music-and-mud-how-the-thames-estuary-broadened-cultural-horizons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcedef8cef0195b6c42b38064d769c9b88100dfc6%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martians%2C%20music%20and%20mud%3A%20how%20the%20Thames%20Estuary%20broadened%20cultural%20horizons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmartians-music-and-mud-how-the-thames-estuary-broadened-cultural-horizons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martians%2C%20music%20and%20mud%3A%20how%20the%20Thames%20Estuary%20broadened%20cultural%20horizons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmartians-music-and-mud-how-the-thames-estuary-broadened-cultural-horizons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcedef8cef0195b6c42b38064d769c9b88100dfc6%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 from Yoha’s Wrecked on the Intertidal Zone Photograph: Graham Harwood 
A boat full of journalists came downriver from London once again last week – 
to visit Estuary 2016, a new biennial arts festival curated in response to the 
Thames Estuary. The festival was launched by arts organisation Metal and is 
located across various historical venues along the Essex and Kent shorelines. 
The ambitious programme of visual art, literature, film and music involves more 
than 70 artists from around the world, showing both new and existing work 
responding to this unique place. “The estuary is wilder and more unpredictable 
here,” says Metal’s artistic director, Colette Bailey, who has lived and worked 
alongside it for the past decade. “It’s not quite river, not quite open sea. 
Artists are naturally drawn to these kinds of indefinable places.”

There is a rich variety of artworks made specifically for the festival. 
Estuary World Without End (no reported incidents) is a film by New York-based 
Jem Cohen, which captures the landscape and people of south Essex. “The Thames 
Estuary and its insistent tides brought in not only nature and history, but 
prize-winning Indian curries, an encyclopedic universe of hat wear, and a 
nearly lost world of proto punk music,” says Cohen. In the work of artist Liz 
Lake, found flotsam and jetsam are cast into concrete and sliced to reveal an 
invented geology with strata of landfill, concrete, aggregate and ash.A River 
Once Ran Through My Veins is an installation in a former Port of London 
Authority office at Tilbury Cruise Terminal which imagines a future where the 
estuary landscape has long since been swallowed by silt. Louisa Fairclough 
spent a lot of time camping out in the estuary marshlands before creating her 
work: a sound installation enriched with drawings of found objects relinquished 
by the Thames. Sleeping out on the marshes enabled her to “tune in to the 
landscape and its soundscape in a heightened way”. And photographer Chloe Dewe 
Mathews documented the routines and rituals that take place at the water’s edge 
for her new series of works,Thames Log (2011 – 2016).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmartians-music-and-mud-how-the-thames-estuary-broadened-cultural-horizons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4202b164e973ad3130477b06f20882913714196%2F0_548_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martians%2C%20music%20and%20mud%3A%20how%20the%20Thames%20Estuary%20broadened%20cultural%20horizons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmartians-music-and-mud-how-the-thames-estuary-broadened-cultural-horizons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martians%2C%20music%20and%20mud%3A%20how%20the%20Thames%20Estuary%20broadened%20cultural%20horizons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmartians-music-and-mud-how-the-thames-estuary-broadened-cultural-horizons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4202b164e973ad3130477b06f20882913714196%2F0_548_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Ligeti Quartet perform Colloquy, a composition by William Frampton. 
Photograph: Nastassja Simensky 
The festival also includes the Shorelines literary programme. During the 
inaugural weekend, artists and writers spoke about how the estuarine landscape 
has influenced and inspired their work. Award-winning nature writer Julian 
Hoffman focused on the astonishing wild landscape of the Hoo Peninsula, which 
has drawn him back “like a magnet” since he first visited. Patrick Wright, 
author ofThe River: The Thames <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-thames> 
in Our Time, considered the view across the estuary from the window of the East 
German novelist Uwe Johnson, a notoriously reclusive man who settled on the 
Isle of Sheppey in 1974. Johnson took up residence on Marine Parade in 
Sheerness, where he sat gazing at the protruding masts of the SS Richard 
Montgomery, a sunken Liberty Ship that dominates the view and the imagination. 
This vista eventually became the inspiration for his Granta essay “An 
Unfathomable Ship”. Film-maker Nikolaj Larsen discussed his recent film and 
book project,Portrait of a River (for Film and Video Umbrella), which premiered 
at the Museum of London’s 2013Estuary exhibition, in which he follows the 
Thames on its widening course out to sea.

The delta on London’s doorstep: a walk around the Thames estuary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/aug/04/walk-thames-estuary-southend-sheppey>
American poet Justin Hopper performed from Public Record: Estuary, a piece of 
site-specific poetry designed to be listened to while walking around the 
fishing village of Leigh-on-Sea. The poems contain fragments of the documents 
that inspired them: late‑19th-century reports of minor shipwrecks and other 
disasters at sea. Artist Nastassja Simensky discussed her performance piece,
Colloquy, an elegy to the wreck of the HMS London, a warship that blew up in 
the estuary on 7 March 1665, killing more than 300 of her crew. Simensky 
collected historical and numeric data, as well as sonar scans and depth 
diagrams, working with composer William Frampton to produce a musical score 
from the information. Their piece was performed live by a string quartet on the 
deck of a cockle boat floating directly above the shipwreck, which still lies 
on the estuary seabed. And Stephen Turner revisited his extraordinary living 
art experiment, giving a presentation on the 36 days he spent alone in the 
derelict tower, one of the Shivering Sands sea forts, in the middle of the 
estuary. The forts are temporary anti-aircraft structures that were built in 
the Thames mouth during the second world war and have since become the source 
of much artistic inspiration.

But for me it was cultural historian and writer Ken Worpole who summed up why 
the estuary has inspired the works of so many artists and writers. Worpole has 
written extensively on this area, in books such as350 Miles: An Essex Journey 
andThe New English Landscape, in which he discusses Constable’s fascination 
with Hadleigh Castle on the Essex coast and how Turner went to Margate and 
beyond to capture the great skies and expansive vistas of the estuary. But, he 
says, “It was Conrad who first captured the ominous mystery of the place when 
empty, or at dusk. Sometimes when I look at it on an overcast day, it reminds 
me of that disturbing sea in Tarkovsky’s filmSolaris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/solaris-tarkovsky-science-fiction>
, which seemed prescient – alive almost – with the memory of everything that 
had ever happened there.”

• Rachel Lichtenstein’s Estuary: Out from London to the Sea is published by 
Hamish Hamilton. Estuary festival continues until 2 October.estuaryfestival.com 
<http://www.estuaryfestival.com/>
 