

The Decollation of St John the Baptist (pradella panel) by Masaccio. 
Photograph: Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / PA

If the world of art was stricken by the same incurable, anniversary-fixated 
old rope disease as the UK music press then, round about now, there'd be 
brainstorming editorial meetings on how best to commemorate the imminent 580th 
anniversary of the untimely death ofMasaccio 
<http://www.abcgallery.com/M/masaccio/masaccio.html> - Renaissance Italy's 
hippest young gunslinger who more or less invented painting as we know it. Cue 
"The 20 Best Masaccio works ... as voted by the stars!", "580 Reasons We Love 
Masaccio" and the obligatory "What Masaccio Means to Me", wherein vacant 
twentysomething goons line up to pay tribute to one of the founding fathers of 
western art by mumbling hollow plaudits about him being "a proper geezer and 
all that".

Saints be praised, this isn't the case. But even if an art history equivalent 
of magazines such as Mojo or Uncut existed (Fresco? Unchiselled?) they'd be 
hard pushed to do aKurt Cobain number 
<http://music.theguardian.com/rock/comment/story/0,,2016940,00.html> on 
Masaccio. For while enough major works have survived to earn him a rightful 
place in the pantheon of Renaissance masters,his biography 
<http://www.wga.hu/frames-e.html?/bio/m/masaccio/biograph.html> is the palest 
of sketches. We know, or rather we think we know, that he was born near 
Florence on December 21, 1401 and that he died, aged 26, in Rome some time in 
the latter half of 1428 (we don't even have an exact date). And that's it. 
History has failed to record whether Masaccio's fate was murder, bubonic plague 
or perhaps even suicide. All we have are the concrete facts that: a) just like 
Brian Jones, Jim Morrison, Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix and Cobain, Masaccio 
never lived to blow out the candles on his 28th birthday cake (nor his 27th for 
that matter), and b) he was a total genius.

The vague accounts of his life that exist tell us he was born Tommaso (Thomas) 
Cassai and grew to be the archetypal teenage weirdo - socially inept, moody, 
withdrawn and so preoccupied with drawing that his bedraggled appearance became 
local legend. Accordingly, he earned the affectionate nickname Masaccio - the 
15th century Tuscan equivalent of "scruffy git" (or more literally "silly 
Thomas"). By 19, he was deemed great enough to be admitted into the Florentine 
painters' guild and befriended both the sculptorDonatello 
<http://www.artchive.com/artchive/D/donatello.html> and the architect 
Brunelleschi <http://easyweb.easynet.co.uk/giorgio.vasari/brunell/brunell.htm>. 
What those men had already revolutionised in their respective fields, Masaccio 
would soon revolutionise in painting.

In rock'n'roll terms, his bequest to art was the equivalent of Elvis Presley's 
Sun recordings <http://people.howstuffworks.com/elvis-presley-biography7.htm>, 
a year zero foundation stone for future generations to develop and perfect. 
Masaccio was the first to fully master depth and perspective on a 
two-dimensional surface. Before his arrival, paintings were flat, ornamental 
images beholden to staid Gothic tradition. After him, they became windows on 
walls, peering into another universe of similar spatial dimensions to our own. 
Significantly, his frescoes were a vital influence onMichelangelo 
<http://www.michelangelo.com/buon/bio-index2.html>. The latter's close friend, 
the great Florentine biographerVasari 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giorgio_Vasari>, was still swooning over 
Masaccio's legacy 140 years after his inexplicable death. "Everything done 
before him can be described as artificial," frothed Vasari, "whereas he 
produced work that is living, realistic and natural."

It's apt that Vasari should have used "is" rather than "was". Anyone who, 
today, visits his defining masterpiece,The Holy Trinity fresco 
<http://www.verticalsurface.co.uk/images/masaccio_trinity.jpg> in the 
Florentine church ofSanta Maria Novella 
<http://www.italyguides.it/us/florence/church_santa_maria_novella.htm>, will 
understand why. Beside the pious browns, blacks and golds of the other works on 
display, the first sight of the fresco's luminous pink glow provides a Wizard 
of OzDorothy moment <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jP-5V2WDhRs>, the world 
suddenly turning from Kansas monochrome to Munchkinland technicolour. It's a 
gobsmackingly audacious piece which betrays the age of its creator; it was 
completed when Masaccio was 25 or thereabouts and seemingly desperate to show 
off his youthful genius.

The Holy Trinity's original wow factor was its re-creation of a barrel-vaulted 
ceiling retreating in perfect perspective, yet its enduring visual power goes 
far beyond technical drawing. Masaccio dares to depict God himself, looming 
over his emaciated son nailed upon the cross. Standing below on either side are 
an awestruck St John and the Virgin, her hand gesturing at the foot of Christ 
while staring at the viewer with an aggrieved look of "See what you bastards 
have done to my boy?" stamped across her face. But the crux of the painting, 
Masaccio's punchline as it were, lies at the bottom: a skeleton resting upon a 
tomb next to an inscription which translates as "I was what you are and what I 
am you shall be." Only a young man in his twenties could pull off such a bold 
existential comment on guilt, sacrifice, divinity and the certainty of death: 
five and a half centuries later, 23-year-old Ian Curtis would do something 
similar on side two ofJoy Divison's Closer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kPY5TxTdElM .>.

Within a year of completing the Holy Trinity, Masaccio left Florence for Rome, 
hoping to further his name, but succeeding only in ending his life. One popular 
conspiracy theory is that he was simply too good for his contemporaries to 
handle and was poisoned by a jealous rival. There's not a shred of evidence to 
support this, though given the Renaissance's history of hostile competition - 
Michelangelo v Leonardo, Brunelleschi v Ghiberti - it's entirely feasible. 
Nevertheless, the absence of biographical detail has spared Masaccio the 
associative stigma of amurderous Caravaggio 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/features/story/0,11710,1415968,00.html> or a 
self-mutilating Van Gogh 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/portrait/story/0,,746027,00.html>, albeit at the 
expense of celebrity: naturally, he was bypassed as a name for one of the 
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.

It seems the greatest tribute to Masaccio is that, ultimately, he needs no "
Who killed Kurt? <http://music.theguardian.com/news/story/0,,2283380,00.html>" 
coffin-raiding industry to sustain his legend. His death is forever a puzzle 
but his achievements have resonated for centuries beyond the grave. In 
rock'n'roll, those cut down in their prime are lucky to be remembered for the 
art they created. Masaccio, on the other hand, is remembered for creating art 
itself. A "proper geezer", indeed.
 