
I don’t know if I technically have a writing routine. I am not sure if it fits 
the word “routine”; it’s more a “pattern”. I have tried over the years to be 
like a proper writer, setting out a writing room for myself, a desk and a 
minimum word count. I remember that Hemingway made sure he wrote more than 100 
words a day, which seems a fairly easy target. So for a while I had that as an 
aim. It didn’t last, though. The reality is, I tend to be inconsistent. There 
can be months of floundering – or “tweeting” as it is sometimes known. Months 
of staring at a Word document, sighing, contemplating mortality, browsing 
TripAdvisor to look at nice hotels in Sri Lanka or Copenhagen, typing a 
sentence then deleting it and calling it a day’s work.

Then, at other times, I am the opposite. I am Philip K Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philipkdick>, minus the amphetamines, typing 
out paragraphs at the speed of light, and bashing out anything up to 6,000 
words a day. Some of them are occasionally quite good. If I am over the 
30,000-word mark of a first draft, with a deadline looming, I am – and I hate 
to boast – fast. This is my absolute favourite part about being a writer: when, 
in the middle of a first draft, you get into a kind of trance state where your 
fingers are trying to keep up with the story unfolding like a fever dream in 
your mind. This is a relatively rare point in the writing process. I can have, 
at best, two weeks of this before things fall apart again and I am back 
Googling the symptoms of whatever illness I worry I might have at that moment.

As I said, there are some patterns. I have known for some time I am better at 
writing in the morning than in the afternoon. If I am ever writing in the 
evening, it will probably mess about with my sleep. I am not a particularly 
good sleeper: I get to sleep OK, but I wake up early at this time of year 
before it’s light. When I wake up I typically lie awake trying to get back 
asleep, as my mind whirs away like a faulty printer, and I end up reaching for 
my laptop, lowering the brightness of the screen so I don’t wake my wife, and 
getting typing. I sometimes do more productive work between, say, seven and 
eight in the morning than I do for the rest of the day.

Then, before I get washed and ready, I go for a run. I live in Brighton, so I 
should really say I have a lovely morning beach run, but more often I walk to 
the gym next to the train station and run on a treadmill. Controversially, I 
like this kind of running. As well as a daily treadmill run being essential to 
my mental health, keeping my anxiety demons at bay, it also helps with my 
writing. The fact that it is boring is partly the point. It is a free space, 
away from a computer screen or domestic duties, where I don’t have to think 
about anything. I very often have a brainwave mid-run, solve plot problems or 
weigh up possible titles.

After the run, if I have time, I do a bit of yoga, again chiefly for mental 
health reasons (and writer’s back reasons), and then spend the rest of the 
morning writing. Although I still have a room set aside for writing, I rarely 
(never) write in it. I have long fantasised about building aRoald Dahl‑style 
writer’s shed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/may/23/writers.rooms.roald.dahl> in the 
garden but I know, deep down, I would never end up going there. So I just sit 
on the sofa in the living room and write there. I have tinnitus, so no
Franzen-style earplugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/25/jonathan-franzen-interview> for 
me. I don’t mind background noise, which is good, as we have two kids and a 
Maltese terrier who has just discovered the wondrous territorial pleasures of 
barking at postmen, and carrier bags, and just about anything.

Then, in the afternoon, I struggle on, squeezing out sentences, tweeting, 
answering emails, or just give up and spend time with the family and try to 
engage with external reality a bit. Then, at some point, I make time – usually 
after the kids are in bed – to spend some moments doing the most essential duty 
of any writer: reading.

And so, yes, there it is. A day of daydreaming and duties. A good life, all in 
all.

• Matt Haig's The Girl Who Saved Christmas is published by Canongate.. To 
order a copy for £10.65 (RRP £12.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/girl-who-saved-christmas.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 