
“Cities, like cats, will reveal themselves at night,” wrote Rupert Brooke a 
century ago. It is a claim that’s pregnant with mysterious promise, not least 
because the sentence itself has a certain feline sinuousness to it, and a 
faintly hissing tone, and I read and used it as a kind of creed when I began 
researching my book on the history of London at night. It licensed me, after 
all, to explore the nocturnal city’s uses and abuses, from the middle ages on, 
not only in the corridors and stacks of libraries but in the alleys, lanes and 
streets themselves.

Nightwalking: a subversive stroll through the city streets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/27/nightwalking-subversive-city-streets-london-matthew-beaumont>
I first learned to love London at night during my late teens and early 20s. On 
occasion, in order to avoid paying for a cab, I used to pound back home along 
the pavements to Clapham, where I’d grown up, after spending half the night at 
friends’ places north of the river. I loved the distinctive ecology of the 
nocturnal city. I liked its rhythms, so different from those of the day – the 
way in which some areas, especially the West End, became clogged with people 
congregating as aimlessly as sargassum in a sea with no current; and other 
areas became eerily empty, making it possible to tack through them unimpeded, 
propelled by an exhilarating and unfamiliar sense of freedom.

I loved the distinctive physiology of the nocturnal city too, its effect on 
one’s very bloodstream. I liked the heightened consciousness that being in 
darkened streets seemed to demand – though the palpable vulnerability of the 
single women I occasionally glimpsed taught me that this was very much a male 
privilege. I think I also relished the loneliness of the half-lit streets at 
night, in part because I was in the grip of Romantic notions – which still 
appealed to my post-adolescent sensibility – about the importance of solitary 
walking for an understanding of the self. Perhaps I’m still in the grip of 
those notions.

It was thrilling, then, to explore the night-time streets of the city more 
systematically in preparing my book, and at the same time to stray through them 
with a sort of studied purposelessness. I was interested in the continuities 
and discontinuities in the history of London at night. Of course, London after 
nightfall has changed an enormous amount over the centuries, above all as a 
result of the introduction of artificial light, began arriving in the late 17th 
century. So, obviously, there are plenty of differences between past and 
present. But the continuities seem even more striking.

This is partly because, when one walks at night, particularly in more poorly 
lit areas, one becomes aware of the city’s ancient geography. Ford Madox Ford 
lamented at the beginning of the 20th century that Londoners had forgotten that 
their city “is built upon real earth” – “hills, forgotten water courses, 
springs, and marshlands”. At night it is rather different. When one doesn’t 
have to fight against tides of commuters and shoppers, when one isn’t 
distracted by a thousand everyday demands on one’s attention, one 
re-experiences this primal topography.

Sometimes I would spend a night tracing the course of one of London’s lost 
rivers –the Tyburn <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyburn_(stream)>, the 
Westbourne <http://www.londonslostrivers.com/river-westbourne.html> – from its 
source near Hampstead Heath to its mouth by the Thames. I realised that 
hundreds of ancient road names to which I hadn’t ever given any thought were 
tributes to these underground streams that were once places of pilgrimage or 
parts of people’s working lives. Many ofthe streets of Kilburn 
<http://image.shutterstock.com/z/stock-photo-kilburn-london-uk-map-378126442.jpg>
, or Kilbourne, where I’ve lived for more than a decade, are a case in point. 
It was a rare and mysterious pleasure to track these watercourses into central 
London’s parks and to clamber over the railings and have their uncanny 
nocturnal landscapes to myself.

The continuities between London past and London present were especially 
striking, indeed shocking, of course, because of the predictable and persistent 
presence of the homeless at night. At one point in the book, in a deliberate 
provocation, I state that homelessness has no history. What I mean is that the 
basic physical and psychological experience of spending a night on the streets 
in the hopeless pursuit either of bare warmth or oblivion has scarcely changed 
since the middle ages, when vagrants were prosecuted as so-called “common 
nightwalkers”.

This was brought home to me, if that phrase isn’t in poor taste, when I walked 
from Marble Arch, the site ofthe Tyburn Tree 
<http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-NlJF_CXTBUo/UoyyNOnND8I/AAAAAAAAEj0/xnizCpVjY24/s1600/The_Manner_of_Execution_at_Tyburn.jpg>
, where until the late 18th century innumerable vagrants were hanged for petty 
crimes against property, to Newgate, the prison where they were held. The 
friend who accompanied me called it a “resurrection walk”, because we were 
reversing the route taken by the condemned to their deaths.

Nightwalking review – a nocturnal history of London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/20/nightwalking-matthew-beaumont-review-london-after-dark-chaucer-dickens>
Chillingly, I discovered a few weeks after this walk that, approximately half 
an hour after we had started to stroll up Oxford Street, a homeless man had 
been found strangled beneath the indifferent stone limbs of the Arch itself. 
This man was only one of the more recent victims of a city that, as my history 
of London at night seeks in part to demonstrate, relentlessly punishes its 
poorest inhabitants, the people who cannot make a home of it in the day.

Extract

Nightwalking, it might be said, takes place in the realm of the unnight, a 
liminal zone between the waking and sleeping city, and between the waking and 
sleeping state of mind – even between the living and the dead. In the final 
paragraph of Night Walks, Dickens refers to “the real desert region of the 
night” in which, to his persistent surprise, the “houseless wanderer” finds 
himself almost completely alone. The time of night that most accommodates the 
nightwalker, houseless as he is, and restless, is when respectable people are 
not only curtained off from the city in their more or less comfortable domestic 
interiors, their sitting rooms or bedrooms, but when they are helplessly, 
hopelessly deep in sleep. It is the time of night when the city is almost 
entirely deserted, but at the same time teems with spectres. 

More about Nightwalking

This is a book pulsing with life, just as the streets do, despite attempts to 
cut that liminal, semi-illicit life off. The foreword and afterword, byWill Self
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/willself>, beautifully bracket the book, 
reinforcing the idea that the city is layered over time, and that each layer is 
accessible, and can be made vivid in the imagination. Why Nightwalking has not 
won a major award is beyond mine.Nicholas Lezard

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/20/nightwalking-matthew-beaumont-review-london-after-dark-chaucer-dickens>
.

Buy the book

Nightwalking is published by Verso at £9.99 and is available at the Guardian 
bookshop for £7.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387765/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
.
 