

Theresa May and Enda Kenny have urged a “respectful” election campaign in 
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> after the 
collapse of the power-sharing executive triggered a snap poll.

The leaders of the UK and the Irish Republic spoke by telephone after James 
Brokenshire, the NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> 
secretary, confirmed the region will vote on 2 March amid a deepening political 
crisis.

The taoiseach’s spokesman said the pair discussed the bitter fallout and 
regretted that the Democratic Unionist party andSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> had been unable to reach 
agreement.

“They both expressed the hope that the election campaign would be respectful, 
noting that following the election the Northern Ireland parties would once 
again have to engage on the various challenges they face,” he said.

Related: Northern Ireland assembly elections announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/16/northern-ireland-assembly-elections-announced>

“The taoiseach and prime minister repeated their desire to see the 
institutions established under the Good Friday agreement operating effectively, 
and in particular to have a fully-functioning executive in place as soon as 
possible.”

Speculation has been mounting that the election campaign will be rancorous 
given the widening divergence between the two main parties at Stormont.

If a new power-sharing administration cannot be formed after the March 
elections, the region faces the prospect of yet another election or even direct 
rule being reimposed from Westminster.

May and Kenny also spoke about the prime minister’s much-anticipated speech to 
be delivered on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/theresa-may-to-confirm-uk-exit-from-eu-single-market-speech>
, which is expected to set out Britain’s Brexit plan. The taoiseach reiterated 
a number of key concerns for Ireland during the conversation, focusing on 
economic and trading relationships, the common travel area and the peace 
process, including concerns about the border.

The Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
secretary was forced to call the poll after 5pm on Monday when it became clear 
there would be no 11th-hour deal to bring the DUP and Sinn Féin together to 
save power sharing in the region.

Brokenshire was obliged by law to declare an election date after the deadline 
on Monday, after nearly a decade of cross-community coalitions between 
unionists and nationalists.


The present assembly will sit until 26 January, when it will be dissolved. The 
election takes place just 10 months after the previous poll, which resulted in 
a joint Sinn Féin-DUP government.

The devolved administration fell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/16/northern-ireland-power-sharing-government-expected-to-collapse-sinn-fein-cash-for-ash>
 after a row over a bungled green energy scheme and the DUP first minister’s 
refusal to temporarily stand down from her post.


Sinn Féin earlier on Monday refused to nominate a new deputy first minister in 
the Stormont parliament, thus triggering an election. The DUP had once again 
put forwardArlene Foster <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arlene-foster> 
as first minister.


Under the complex rules of power sharing in the province, a government could 
not survive if the main political representatives of one section of the 
community refused to participate in the administration.
 