
Faf du Plessis’s pleas of innocence over ball tampering have been met with a 
withering assessment from the MCC WorldCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Committee, with the body’s head of 
cricket, John Stephenson, saying the South Africa captain’s actions “flagrantly 
contravened the law”.

Du Plessis is seeking to have the guilty verdict handed down to him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/faf-du-plessis-to-face-icc-hearing-in-adelaide-before-third-test-with-australia>
 overturned on appeal. He was fined 100% of his match fee by the International 
Cricket Council under its code of conduct after television footage emerged from 
the second Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/south-africa-captain-faf-du-plessis-charged-with-ball-tampering>
 against Australia in Hobart last month showing him applying sugared saliva 
from a mint in his mouth to the ball in an attempt to aid swing.

MCC recommends red cards be introduced into laws of cricket
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/mcc-recommend-red-cards-sending-off-laws-of-cricket>
The 32-year-old said he had done nothing wrong, claiming there is a difference 
between ball tampering and ball shining, and has sincelodged an appeal against 
the verdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/icc-disappointed-faf-du-plessis-appealing-ball-tampering-verdict>
 with the ICC that will be heard by an independent judicial commissioner, 
Michael Beloff QC, on 19 December.

With ball shining an integral part of the game, players including Alastair 
Cook have called for greater clarity as to what is and is not acceptable given 
that taking sweets or sugary drinks on to the field of play is allowed. Other 
artificial substances such as sun cream or lip salve may also find their way on 
to the ball.

The MCC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mcc> World Cricket Committee, which 
is an independent panel that can propose changes to the laws of cricket, 
considered this topic during a two-day meeting in Mumbai and decided the rules 
relating to ball tampering – which state it is acceptable to “polish the ball 
provided no artificial substance is used” – do not need changing.

The panel, chaired by the former England captain Mike Brearely, also concluded 
no set guidelines are required, stating that “to try to be too prescriptive by 
listing banned substances would be counterproductive”.

Asked what advice he would now give to players in light of this decision, 
Stephenson said: “My advice would be not to contravene the law, which is very 
clear. I was part of that [Du Plessis] hearing and in my opinion what he did 
flagrantly contravened the laws. He put his finger straight on to the mint, 
straight on to the ball and was caught on camera. It was a clear case of ball 
tampering.

“There will be grey areas and we hope cameras don’t follow players but if you 
are not breaking the laws you don’t have anything to worry about. We are not 
trying to stop people shining the ball, we want it to swing. But it was obvious 
to me, you couldn’t argue that it went straight on to the mint and straight 
into the ball.”

Brearley said: “If you speed, you will probably get away with it but sometimes 
you are caught, and if you are caught flagrantly doing something, you deserve 
to face the penalty, which seems to me what happened with Faf du Plessis.

“The fact some people do it and get away with it, it doesn’t mean you 
shouldn’t catch the odd person that does it flagrantly.”
 