
Prominent Republicans have condemned Donald Trump over his comments about 
Khizr and Ghazala Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/31/donald-trump-father-muslim-us-soldier-khizr-khan-soul>
, the parents of an American soldier who was killed in Iraq.

John McCain defends Khizr and Ghazala Khan in Trump feud – campaign live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/aug/01/donald-trump-muslim-american-soldier-hillary-clinton-election-live>
John McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/aug/01/donald-trump-muslim-american-soldier-hillary-clinton-election-live>
, the GOP presidential nominee in 2008, challenged Trump on Monday “to set an 
example” and said: “I cannot emphasize how deeply I disagree with Mr Trump’s 
statement [about the Khans]. I hope Americans understand that the remarks do 
not represent the views of our Republican party, its officers, or candidates.”

Barack Obama, who beat McCain in the 2008 election, addressed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/01/white-house-veterans-affairs-obama-speech-homeless-healthcare>
 the annual conference of Disabled American Veterans in Atlanta on Monday. He 
did not mention Trump by name, but he expressed sharp disapproval of any 
criticism of those who serve in the military and their families.

“As commander-in-chief, I’m pretty tired of some folks trash-talking America’s 
military and troops,” the president said. “No one – no one – has given more for 
our freedom and our security than our Gold Star families [those whose family 
members died in service].

“[They] have made a sacrifice that most of us cannot even begin to imagine. 
They represent the very best of our country. They continue to inspire us every 
day, every moment. They serve as a powerful reminder of the true strength of 
America. We have to do everything we can for those families and honor them and 
be humbled by them.”

In rebuking Trump, McCain joined a growing chorus of senior Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> who have felt compelled to 
distance themselves once more from the nominee. Like other leading party 
figures, however, he did not rescind his endorsement of Trump for the 
presidency. The Arizona senator faces a tough re-election battle of his own in 
November.

Captain Humayun Khan died while protecting his army unit from a suicide 
bombing in 2004. Last Thursday,at the Democratic national convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/29/khizr-khan-democratic-convention-constitution-trump>
 in Philadelphia, his father, Khizr Khan, spoke about his opposition to Trump’s 
proposed ban on Muslim immigration.

This weekend, in an interview with ABC and on Twitter, Trump questioned the 
authorship of the speech, insisted he had made sacrifices for his country 
comparable to those of the Khans, and complained of being “viciously attacked 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/759743648573435905>” by Khizr Khan. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-khan-muslim-soldier-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fallout%20from%20Donald%20Trump's%20attack%20on%20the%20Khan%20family%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-khan-muslim-soldier-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fallout%20from%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20attack%20on%20the%20Khan%20family%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-khan-muslim-soldier-video&media=>
The fallout from Donald Trump’s attack on the Khan family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/01/donald-trump-khan-muslim-soldier-video>
The Republican nominee also questioned why Ghazala Khan, the fallen soldier’s 
mother, stood silently onstage at the DNC – insinuating that she was not 
permitted to speak because of her faith.


Khizr Khan responded in a CNN interview on Sunday, saying Trump had a “black 
soul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/31/donald-trump-father-muslim-us-soldier-khizr-khan-soul>
”. On Monday, Ghazala Khan told NBC,as she had written in the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/ghazala-khan-donald-trump-criticized-my-silence-he-knows-nothing-about-true-sacrifice/2016/07/31/c46e52ec-571c-11e6-831d-0324760ca856_story.html>
 a day before, that the reason she had remained silent on stage was that she 
was too overcome by grief over her son’s death to speak about it.

“I didn’t talk because I don’t have the heart when it comes to Humayun. I 
can’t,” she said. “I can’t talk – my words will be not that strong or I will 
start crying.”

On Monday, McCain, a decorated Vietnam veteran, thanked the Khans for coming 
to the US – they are of Pakistani heritage and their son was born in the UAE – 
and said their son’s death “was a shining example of the valor and bravery 
inculcated into our military”. While he did not revoke his support for Trump, 
who last summer mocked himfor having been a prisoner of war in Vietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/18/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-iowa-republicans>
, his criticism came with a sharp warning.

“It is time for Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
to set the example for our country and the future of the Republican party,” 
McCain said. “While our party has bestowed upon him the nomination, it is not 
accompanied by unfettered license to defame those who are the best among us.”

Other Republican senators facing re-election chimed in, but also stood by 
their endorsements.


Rob Portman, a vulnerable senator seeking to hold his seat in Ohio, issued a 
statement through a campaign spokeswoman.

“Rob does not agree with [Trump’s] remarks and believes that Captain Khan was 
an American hero who gave his life for his country,” the statement read. “As he 
has said previously many times, Rob does not agree with the idea of banning 
people from entering the country based on their religion.”

Pat Toomey, a senator locked in a close race in Pennsylvania, said: “The Khan 
family, like all Americans who lose loved ones in the defense of our country, 
deserve our gratitude and honor. Anything else is inappropriate.”

The New Hampshire senator Kelly Ayotte, one of the most endangered 
Republicans, was “appalled that Donald Trump would disparage them and that he 
had the gall to compare his own sacrifices to those of a Gold Star family. The 
Khan family deserves nothing less than our deepest support, respect and 
gratitude, and they have every right to express themselves in any way they 
choose.”

Marco Rubio told reporters on Monday he found Trump’s comments to be 
“unfortunate”.

“[Captain] Khan is a hero, for every measure,” the Florida senator, who 
decided to seek re-election to the legislature after the failure of his 
presidential campaign, said following an event in Tampa.

“I think his parents are heroes and they have a first amendment right to speak 
out on their politics, as all Americans do. Their son died for the constitution 
and I honor that.”

Rubio pointed to his praise during the presidential debates of American 
Muslims who served in the military. He nonetheless added that it was “a complex 
issue”, because Khan had “lost his life in the hands of radical jihadists”.

“They took their view of their faith and used it to justify killing innocents 
and attacking them,” he said of Khan’s killers.

Rubio, who has embraced Trump and urged voters to elect him, also echoed his 
former opponent’s call to crack down on immigration from certain regions. While 
Rubio has said he does not support a ban on all Muslims, the senator said “it’s 
very difficult to vet people from certain parts of the world where there are 
not vetted governments”.

He added: “We live in a world now where we have to know exactly who’s coming 
in, why they’re coming, who they are, and what they’re up to.”


Some on Capitol Hill declined to comment specifically, instead urging Trump to 
refrain from veering off-message. Senator Roy Blunt, who is defending his seat 
in Missouri, said: “My advice to Donald Trump has been and will continue to be 
to focus on jobs and national security and stop responding to every criticism 
whether it’s from a grieving family or Hillary Clinton.”

Other Republicans in Congress who spoke out included Adam Kinzinger, a 
representative from Illinois and Iraq veteran who said it was “wholly 
unpatriotic” to attack service members and their families.


“No one can truly understand the sacrifice a family makes when their loved one 
serves their country or the heartbreak of losing a loved one,” Kinzinger, who 
has not backed Trump, said in a statement. “There’s no greater love than a man 
who lays down his life for his friends.”

 In his appearance on NBC’s Today Show 
<http://www.today.com/video/khizr-khan-father-of-slain-soldier-condemns-donald-trump-s-ignorance-735827523597>
, Khizr Khan said he was grateful that the Senate majority leader, Mitch 
McConnell, and House speaker, Paul Ryan, had condemned Trump’s comments over 
the weekend, but suggested they were not listening to the Republican party.

“I have an email inbox full of assurance that I am right, that we are right, 
and he needs to mend his way to deserve their vote,” Khan said.


That inbox included an email from a prominent Republican, Khan said, who said 
he would not be voting in the presidential election as Trump “has not qualified 
in their judgment to be deserving of their support”.

Trump’s campaign has remained largely silent on the growing outrage, save for a
pair <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/760070280932982784> of tweets 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/760074526059270144> sent on Monday 
morning in which Trump declared that “this story is not about Mr. Khan … but 
rather RADICAL ISLAMIC TERRORISM and the U.S.” and sarcastically called Khan’s 
statements “Nice!”

But at least one senior campaign official has lifted a conspiracy theory from 
the darkest fringes of the internet to accuse Khizr Khan of being a “Muslim 
Brotherhood agent”. Veterans adviser Al Baldasaro tweetedan article published 
on Shoebat.com 
<http://shoebat.com/2016/07/31/what-the-media-is-not-telling-you-about-the-muslim-who-attacked-donald-trump-he-is-a-muslim-brotherhood-agent-who-wants-to-advance-sharia-law-and-bring-muslims-into-the-united-states/>
, a far-right conspiracy site that speculates that Humayun Khan, who emigrated 
to the United States at the age of two and was awarded the Bronze Star after 
his death, was a “Muslim martyr” who was only killed “before his Islamist 
mission was accomplished”.

At the Democratic convention, Khan waved a pocket-sized US constitution and 
questioned whether Trump had ever read it. On Monday, Khan was asked about 
Trump’s claim that the mourning father had “viciously attacked” him by doing 
so. He laughed, saying the comments proved Trump was unfamiliar with the 
first-amendment protection of freedom of speech.

“This candidate amazes me,” Khan said. “His ignorance, he can get up and 
malign the entire nation, the religions, the communities, the minorities, the 
judges – and yet a private citizen in this political process, in his candidacy 
for the stewardship of this country, I cannot say what I feel?

“That proves the point.”

John Oliver rips into 'sociopathic narcissist' Donald Trump over Khan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/01/john-oliver-rips-narcissist-donald-trump-khizr-khan>
Lindsey Graham, the former Republican presidential candidate and South 
Carolina senator, said Trump’s words were unacceptable. “This is going to a 
place where we’ve never gone before, to push back against the families of the 
fallen,” Graham, who has not endorsed Trump, toldthe New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/01/us/politics/khizr-khan-ghazala-donald-trump-muslim-soldier.html?_r=0>
.

“There used to be some things that were sacred in American politics, that you 
don’t do, like criticizing the parents of a fallen soldier, even if they 
criticize you,” Graham added. “If you’re going to be leader of the free world, 
you have to be able to accept criticism, and Mr Trump can’t.”

Trump, who as a young man obtained deferments and did not serve in Vietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/29/donald-trump-disrespect-military-veterans-appalling-unprecedented>
, also faced criticism from the families of 17 Americans who died in war, who 
in an open letter asked him to apologize to the Khans and other families of 
fallen soldiers for comments they said were “repugnant, and personally 
offensive”. TheGold Star <https://www.army.mil/goldstar/> families said Trump’s 
statements minimized the risks people take by going to war.

“When you question a mother’s pain, by implying that her religion, not her 
grief, kept her from addressing an arena of people, you are attacking us,” the 
families wrote in a letter to Trump. “When you say your job building buildings 
is akin to our sacrifice, you are attacking our sacrifice.

“You are not just attacking us, you are cheapening the sacrifice made by those 
we lost.”

 * This story was amended on 3 August 2016 to clarify that Adam Kinzinger has 
not backed Donald Trump. He said if he ever did, it would not be 
enthusiastically.  