
‘When I have fears that I may cease to be,” as the old poem goes 
<http://genius.com/John-keats-when-i-have-fears-that-i-may-cease-to-be-annotated>
, “before my pen has gleaned my teeming brain ... then on the shore / Of the 
wide world I stand alone, and think / Till Love and Fame to nothingness do 
sink.” The artist Peter Matthews has gone one step further than John Keats: 
he’s actually waded into the sea.

The 37-year-old, who hails from the stubbornly landlocked hills of Derbyshire, 
has made a career of drawing and painting in the ocean. That’s right: floating 
in the sea, using an old piece of plywood as a desk-cum-flotation aid and 
scrawling across huge sheets of paper with the charcoal pencils and gel pens 
that he keeps tucked under his hat.

“My mother’s father sold fish in Leicester, so I like to think it’s in my 
roots,” says Matthews, currently in Taiwan where he’s been bobbing about in the 
Pacific. “I’ve always had this profound fascination with the ocean.” In 2007, 
in Mexico, he experienced a “life-changing event” while out surfing. “I got hit 
by one of those rogue huge waves. It crashed over me, broke the leash 
connecting me to the board and I got a surge of primal fear. It was kind of 
epiphany; I saw life drawing to a close.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fpeter-matthews-underwater-artist--near-death-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F041d99147c82dd77bb96c9116e9a7ad16488f947%2F0_0_800_600%2Fmaster%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20underwater%20artist%20inspired%20by%20a%20near-death%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fpeter-matthews-underwater-artist--near-death-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20underwater%20artist%20inspired%20by%20a%20near-death%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fpeter-matthews-underwater-artist--near-death-experience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F041d99147c82dd77bb96c9116e9a7ad16488f947%2F0_0_800_600%2Fmaster%2F800.jpg>
 All at sea ... Matthews’ canvas Photograph: Peter Matthews 
It dawned on him afterwards, however, that waiting around in the water was 
where he was happiest: “that communion with the ocean”. And so he swapped 
surfboard for hardboard and started immersing himself in the sea, often from 
dawn until dusk, trying to capture, consciously and subconsciously, that 
strange, suspended state.

Europe's first underwater sculpture museum – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/feb/02/europes-first-underwater-sculpture-museum-in-pictures>
Looking at the resulting drawings, which Matthews often leaves in a tidepool 
overnight to work on again in the morning, it’s tempting to draw comparison to 
the scratchy, abstract works of Cy Twombly or Jasper Johns. But there is also 
something of the alchemist to Matthews – his stream-of-consciousness texts, his 
lyrical way of speaking and his frankly eccentric work practice. “Big grey 
seals often pop up,” says Matthews, who has been working for years around the 
Lizard Peninsula in Cornwall, wild-camping on the cliffs near Coverack. “When 
I’m exhausted and lie on the rocks to try and generate a bit of heat, the seals 
come up really close. Those unexpected things in nature are fascinating.”

It would be wrong to describe Matthews as a nature artist. Although his work 
is literally soaked in seawater and scattered with the imprint of small 
shellfish, he is far more interested in exploring the fluid midpoint between 
sea and land, thought and form.

“There’s a period of time in the early morning and again at twilight that’s 
beyond words,” he says, his soft Derbyshire vowels still just about detectable. 
“That’s when the scrawlings ignite. It’s almost caveman-like. Approaching the 
ocean is quite mysterious in itself: seeing it, and that visceral experience of 
listening to it, smelling it, touching it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fpeter-matthews-underwater-artist--near-death-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f493d655fee92fdf55bf0649116dbb3ef593823%2F0_0_3600_2061%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20underwater%20artist%20inspired%20by%20a%20near-death%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fpeter-matthews-underwater-artist--near-death-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20underwater%20artist%20inspired%20by%20a%20near-death%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fpeter-matthews-underwater-artist--near-death-experience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f493d655fee92fdf55bf0649116dbb3ef593823%2F0_0_3600_2061%2F3600.jpg>
 5 Hours In and With the Atlantic Ocean #2 (England) Photograph: Peter 
Matthews/Courtesy of the artist 
Of course, there are practical obstacles to working in the sea. As well as 
numb hands, the odd fall into a rockpool and concerned dogwalkers peering out 
at him on the horizon, Matthews has to contend with the unpredictability of 
waves. “There’s a romantic side to me that’s drawn to the wild, breaking white. 
But I’ve also lost quite a lot of drawings that way,” he tells me, as I try to 
picture this floating male selkie pulling pencils out of his sleeve like a 
magician. “The waves crash over, it tears off the board, and ebbs away into the 
abyss.”

Some of his works dance along the border of the brilliant and the ridiculous. 
For the piece With the Forces of the Pacific and AtlanticOceans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oceans>, Matthews rigged up a CD 
player on a floating tripod, then spent days bobbing about in the Atlantic, 
listening to a recording of the Pacific, trying to capture the watery confusion 
between the two. For A Mystical Exchange of Energies he sprayed nine litres of 
Pacific ocean, collected during typhoon Nanmodal in August 2011, into the 
Atlantic using a fire extinguisher – transferring one ocean into the other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fpeter-matthews-underwater-artist--near-death-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf7f356a1b893fa440653e3f80a1b39c10be29ba%2F0_0_800_600%2Fmaster%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20underwater%20artist%20inspired%20by%20a%20near-death%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fpeter-matthews-underwater-artist--near-death-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20underwater%20artist%20inspired%20by%20a%20near-death%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fpeter-matthews-underwater-artist--near-death-experience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf7f356a1b893fa440653e3f80a1b39c10be29ba%2F0_0_800_600%2Fmaster%2F800.jpg>
 Working flat out … Matthews with his paintings. Photograph: Peter Matthews 
It would be easy to laugh, to dismiss Matthew’s whole creative practice as the 
wishy-washy silliness of an oceanstruck romantic. But the fine, cartographic 
drawings and philosophical way he speaks about changes in form are beautiful, 
intriguing, sometimes saturated with vulnerability. Perhaps is it absurd. 
Perhaps it is dangerous. Or perhaps floating in the ocean with a huge 
sea-soaked sheet of paper is as close as Matthews can get to what Keats called 
tracing with the magic hand of chance. “I love how the sea writes itself,” says 
Matthews. “I’m just following the ocean, really.”

• Nature, Here and Now 
<http://www.wirksworthfestival.co.uk/events/nature-here-and-now> is at St 
Mary’s Church, Wirksworth, Derbyshire on 11-12 and 17-18 September, as part of 
theWirksworth festival <http://www.wirksworthfestival.co.uk/>, until 25 
September. Peter is also exhibiting at Artissima in Turin, Italy from 3-6 
November andHead Above Water: Sea Swim  
<https://www.plymouth.ac.uk/whats-on/sea-swim-and-head-above-water>continues 
its UK tour at Strange Cargo, Folkestone from 22 October to the 26 November.
 