
Southern Stars captain and cricket superstar Meg Lanning has steered her 
Melbourne Stars into cricket history as the first team to win a Women’s Big 
Bash League (WBBL) match.

Lanning sisters set to make their mark on Women's Big Bash League cricket
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/04/lanning-sisters-set-to-make-their-mark-on-womens-big-bash-league-cricket>
The Stars hosted the Brisbane Heat in a double-header at Melbourne’s Junction 
Oval and Australian captain Lanning lived up to her billing as the No.1-ranked 
batter in the world. In game one, the 23-year-old helped the Stars post an 
imposing total of 156, slamming 90 runs off 58 balls.

In reply, the Heat made 135 before being bowled out in the final over but 
their innings featured an entertaining knock from tennis convert Ash Barty, who 
made 39. Lanning conceded she was helped by conditions on a hot Melbourne 
morning. “The pitch is a road,” Lanning said. “The outfield is pretty quick too 
so it was a batters’ paradise out there.”
Isabelle Westbury (@izzywestbury) 
With scores of 90 & 75*, Meg Lanning looking more prolific at start of women's 
@BBL <https://twitter.com/BBL> than Jacques Kallis did in @IPL 
<https://twitter.com/IPL> 2010. #unleashed 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/unleashed?src=hash> #WBBL01 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/WBBL01?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/izzywestbury/status/672999590778437632> December 5, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/izzywestbury/status/672999590778437632> 
Lanning and English international Natalie Sciver, who was batting at No.3, put 
on a partnership of 65 at more than a run a ball. The Heat’s Delissa Kimmince 
was the pick of their bowlers with 3-25 off her four overs. Brisbane raced to 
1-56 by the sixth over, but their innings came unstuck thanks to some fine 
bowling from leg-spinning duo Alana King and Kristen Beams. Like its fraternal 
counterpart, the WBBL has eight teams and will play 59 matches over 51 days.

Things were just as rosy for Lanning and the Stars in the afternoon game, 
where the 23-year-old backed up with an undefeated 75 from 56 balls in 
Melbourne’s 10-run win. Lanning’s second knock including 10 fours, delighting 
the 1500-strong crowd. She was ably assisted by Katie Mack (24) and England 
star Natalie Sciver (29).

The Stars finished game two with 147 from their 20 overs and the Heat looked 
on target early in their response. But the loss of Grace Harris for 37, caught 
by Alana King off the bowling of Sciver, started their downfall and her 
Australian teammate Jess Jonassen was left to do the heavy lifting alone with 
the Heat falling 10 runs short.

Jonassen finished unbeaten on 52 from 48 balls. Former tennis pro-turned 
cricketer Ash Barty was unable to back up her impressive first match knock and 
was stumped by wicketkeeper Emma Inglis for one. Lanning was named player of 
the match in both games.

Sciver, who was on the receiving end of some Lanning brilliance in Australia’s 
Ashes series win this year, said it was much more pleasant being a teammate 
this time around. “It’s much more enjoyable not having to bowl at her,” Sciver 
said. “She’s shown her class again; being so consistent and just scoring runs 
for fun.”

Sciver said she was impressed by the composure of Lanning saying that she 
could learn from her. Apart from the flies, Sciver said her first WBBL 
experience was enjoyable. “You don’t get this many people coming to watch a 
domestic T20 game in England so it was brilliant to be part of this and I 
thought we put on quite a good performance.”

Sydney Thunder and Sydney Sixers will clash on Sunday at Howell Oval in 
Penrith.
 