
Melbourne Stars coach Stephen Fleming has backed Glenn Maxwell to shine in the 
Big Bash League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league>, hailing 
him as the sort of player who turns matches. While Maxwell’s Australian one-day 
status is uncertain, he will be one of the keys for the Stars in the upcoming 
BBL.

Maxwell was hit with a team fine and did not play in any of Australia’s three 
one dayers against New Zealand this month after pre-series comments about 
teammate Matthew Wade. He has not spoken publicly since and turned down a media 
request at a Friday lunch for the Stars and Melbourne Renegades.

Cricket Australia and players on collision course over pay deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/16/cricket-australia-and-players-on-collision-course-over-pay-deal>
But Fleming said Maxwell had enjoyed playing in a couple of BBL trial matches. 
“He seems pretty good – you can often never tell with Maxy,” Fleming said of 
the enigmatic all-rounder. “He enjoyed the run the other day, playing the two 
games, (and) we’ve got another couple of games for him to get back into some 
sort of form in the middle.”

“I have no doubt he will be ready for the first game. He’s pretty natural ... 
it doesn’t matter how much he plays.”

Fleming said Maxwell, Kevin Pietersen and Luke Wright were the sort of batsmen 
who could turn games on their own. The coach added they encouraged Maxwell to 
play the game in his own style.  “Hopefully he can win one or two for us before 
he gets picked (for Australia),” he said. “It would be unfortunate for him, (if 
he is not picked) but it would be a win for us. You want that type of player in 
your side every time.”

“Guys who can win matches are very rare and we’re fortunate enough with him, 
Pietersen and Luke Wright in the batting order, we have three who can do it on 
their own.”


Fleming said they were considering a top-three role for Maxwell in their 
batting order. Meanwhile, the Stars coach said several players will have to 
step up to fill the hole left by John Hastings. Knee surgery means Hastings 
will not play at all in the BBL this summer.

“It’s a big blow. He’s a big presence off the field as well as on (it),” 
Fleming said. “His performances internationally and domestically have been 
outstanding. It’s going to be a long road back for him, but we’ll try to get 
him involved as much as we can.”

It has been a nightmare summer for Hastings, who also was sidelined for 
several weeks with a broken finger and then was dropped from the Australian 
one-day team. “They say it happens in threes, so hopefully this is the last,” 
Fleming said. “There’s enough talent there to make us competitive, but it 
doesn’t replace the fact that we’ve lost one of our key men. Other teams will 
lose them as well, so you have to get on with it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmelbourne-stars-coach-stephen-fleming-backs-glenn-maxwell-for-big-bash-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23ba17de787c9ca53c6f06ae44f4d6ee89142a0%2F0_305_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20Stars%20coach%20Stephen%20Fleming%20backs%20Glenn%20Maxwell%20for%20Big%20Bash%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmelbourne-stars-coach-stephen-fleming-backs-glenn-maxwell-for-big-bash-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20Stars%20coach%20Stephen%20Fleming%20backs%20Glenn%20Maxwell%20for%20Big%20Bash%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmelbourne-stars-coach-stephen-fleming-backs-glenn-maxwell-for-big-bash-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23ba17de787c9ca53c6f06ae44f4d6ee89142a0%2F0_305_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Australian paceman Pat Cummins will be central to the Big Bash league chances 
of his Sydney Thunder side. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP 
With top order woes standing as a roadblock to their Big Bash League title 
defence, paceman Pat Cummins is shaping as the x-factor for the Sydney Thunder. 
Usman Khawaja will miss most of the 2016-17 campaign on national duties, 
veterans Jacques Kallis and Mike Hussey have stepped down and skipper Shane 
Watson is not expected back from a calf injury until after Christmas, so the 
reigning champs are facing an uphill slog.

That quartet together amassed 1023 last campaign, or about two thirds of 1574 
runs scored by Thunder batsmen on their run to a surprise championship. Just as 
Khawaja proved the difference last year, Cummins shapes as the ace up their 
sleeve.

Thunder quick Gurinder Sandhu has watched Cummins terrify batsmen since their 
junior days, having played junior representative cricket together. While Sandhu 
is adamant it’s not up to the bowler to carry the can, putting his faith in the 
likes of young batsmen Kurtis Patterson and Ryan Gibson, he knows Cummins can 
lend the side some authority.

“We’ve played together since we were about 15, 16, 17,” Sandhu said. “I think 
he made his debut for NSW when he was 17 in the old school T20 competition. He 
was pretty scary early on. I’ve been playing cricket with him for a long time 
now. He’s going to lead the attack with maybe myself or Andre Russell or Clint 
McKay. It’s always great to have him in your changeroom rather than playing 
against him.”

Cummins, 23, is on the comeback trail from back and leg injuries which have 
plagued him most of his career and made a successful return to the 
international arena in this month’s one-day series against New Zealand, 
including an impressive 4-41 in Canberra. He will be available for the opening 
of the tournament but is likely to be called back into the national squad for 
the five-game one-day series against Pakistan in January.

Perennial strugglers in the first four editions of the BBL, the Thunder 
shocked all comers in last year’s tournament and Sandhu insists culture and 
“knowing what winning feels like” will have more of an impact than any 
personnel changes. “I think our batters are very well equipped even though you 
mentioned some names there that are missing,” Sandhu said.

“Huss has been around talking to the younger batsmen. We were pretty blessed 
to have JK (Kallis). But I think we’ve got the arsenal to go on with the title 
defence. A couple of the younger boys, Kurtis Patterson, Ryan Gibson, if they 
get a go, they’ll be ready.”
 