
For the first part of my life I thought Wales was this magical realm with an 
otherworldly language and symbolism, whether it was Arthurian legends, elves or 
dragons. I was born in the Catskill mountains in New York state and raised on 
children’s fairytales. Growing up I was really just lost in fantasy books. In 
the early 1970s, books like Lord of the Rings and The Dark is Rising sequence 
by Susan Cooper were all the rage.

That’s what first drew me to north Wales. At first I felt the characters in 
these books had this made-up language – these strange names with double l’s and 
double d’s; later I became aware that it was actually Welsh.
 Jonathan Donahue on stage with Mercury Rev. Photograph: Andrew Benge/Redferns 
As a young kid growing up in the States, aged 9 or 10, I actually tried to 
teach myself Welsh. I didn’t know anyone from Wales. I’d never met anyone from 
Wales. I’d never even heard the language spoken. All I could find were these 
small Welsh/English dictionaries in the libraries up in the mountain towns. 
They didn’t even have pronunciation or sentences. I would just follow the lines 
and letters in the dictionary.

I’m friends with Cerys Matthews and she fills me in on Welsh pronunciation and 
sets me straight on things that I have gleaned culturally. In the beginning I 
tried out every Welsh phrase I knew when we were there … but of course everyone 
just spoke back to me in English.

The first time I visited Wales for real was on our first tour as Mercury Rev, 
in 1991. We had the day off and I began insisting to everyone else on the tour 
that we were going to stay in north Wales. I didn’t know where, I didn’t have a 
name. I just said: “Listen up. Get with the programme. We’re going to north 
Wales.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmercury-rev-donahue-north-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96c8a4ce2157ce21b6911647e06490711c42e4a4%2F0_313_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mercury%20Rev's%20Jonathan%20Donahue%20on%20the%20myth%20and%20magic%20of%20north%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmercury-rev-donahue-north-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mercury%20Rev%27s%20Jonathan%20Donahue%20on%20the%20myth%20and%20magic%20of%20north%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmercury-rev-donahue-north-wales-snowdonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96c8a4ce2157ce21b6911647e06490711c42e4a4%2F0_313_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
 ‘We stayed in this lovely little town called Llanberis.’ Photograph: Brandon 
Rosenblum/Getty Images 
We stayed in this lovely little town called Llanberis, on a beautiful lake at 
the foot of Snowdon.It’s in the centre of a county called Gwynedd, which I 
always mispronounced Gwen-idd because of the double d (it’s Gwin-eth). We were 
climbing mountains, talking to sheep and looking for swords coming out of 
lakes. It was crazy, and it sounds childish, but that was my reference.


Whenever we have a tour break in the UK now, we always head to Wales. It’s 
usually to Gwynedd, because the locations around there inspired places in some 
of these books. There’s a mountain called Cadair Idris, which plays a very 
central role in The Dark Is Rising sequence. Other places in Snowdonia, and the 
lakes, come from Arthurian legends; the Once and Future King was a favourite 
book as a child, I read it over and over again.

North Wales became a psychological safe haven for everyone in the band early 
on. We’d run there as soon as we could and a calm would descend – which 
exploded the moment we went back to the music world. We did an NME cover there 
in 1998 too, of us by waterfalls on a day off.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmercury-rev-donahue-north-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f2dc33d22e8af556854b9e34329f2b477144bc9%2F0_191_5876_3524%2F5876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mercury%20Rev's%20Jonathan%20Donahue%20on%20the%20myth%20and%20magic%20of%20north%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmercury-rev-donahue-north-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mercury%20Rev%27s%20Jonathan%20Donahue%20on%20the%20myth%20and%20magic%20of%20north%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmercury-rev-donahue-north-wales-snowdonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f2dc33d22e8af556854b9e34329f2b477144bc9%2F0_191_5876_3524%2F5876.jpg>
 Mountains of the Snowdon range. Photograph: Alamy 
I would certainly recommend visiting the isle of Anglesey – the druid’s isle. 
And when you go, go there with a child’s mind, and child’s eyes. That’s what 
really opened it up to me.

Many of the books describe the north Welsh as somewhat closed and not very 
willing to divulge all to anyone who wanders in. The idea that there were 
secrets, and that this folklore had a deep foundation to it, was amplified by 
the way people raised an eyebrow when we rolled in. That just furthered my 
interest and curiosity.

• Mercury Rev are playing at bluedot <http://www.discoverthebluedot.com/>, a 
new festival of music, science and space exploration, at Jodrell Bank, 
Cheshire, on 22-24 July
 