
The UK’s overseas intelligence agency is to recruit hundreds more staff over 
the next four years in response to the pace of change in digital technology.

MI6, which employs 2,500 people at present, deals with intelligence-gathering 
and operations abroad, whileMI5 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5> is 
responsible for security within the UK.

The government announced last year that the security services would be given 
1,900 additional staff – and MI6 is the main beneficiary. BBC’s Newsnight put 
the rise in staff forMI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> at 1,000 but it 
is believed to be fewer than that, though still substantial.

There is increasing reliance by worldwide intelligence agencies upon the 
internet, social media and changes such as facial recognition; rather than the 
running of agents as in the past.

Britain’s secret wars | Ian Cobain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/08/britains-secret-wars-oman> 
One fear is that easier access to information, tracking and cross-checking can 
also be used against MI6 operatives.

The head of MI6, Alex Younger, speaking in Washington DC on Tuesday, said: 
“The information revolution fundamentally changes our operating environment. In 
five years’ time there will be two sorts of intelligence services: those that 
understand this fact and have prospered, and those that don’t and haven’t. And 
I’m determined that MI6 will be in the former category.

“The third and most important part of British intelligence is the surveillance 
agencyGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq>, which in partnership with the 
US National Security Agency, is responsible for scooping up most of the 
intelligence through tracking phone calls, emails, chat lines and other 
communications.”

Younger expressed concern about enemies also exploiting these new 
capabilities. He said: “Our opponents, who are unconstrained by conditions of 
lawfulness or proportionality, can use these capabilities to gain increasing 
visibility of our activities which means that we have to completely change the 
way that we do stuff.”

Both the NSA and GCHQ relied heavily on cooperation from the major internet 
companies but that relation was badly damaged by therevelations of the NSA 
whistleblower Edward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-nsa-files>
 in 2013. The internet companies not only faced a backlash from customers 
concerned about their privacy but were displeased on discovering that, in spite 
of their cooperation, the agencies were accessing their information anyway 
through backdoor channels.

Younger said: “I think that the real issue for us has been the effect that 
this has had on the levels of trust between the intelligence communities 
internationally and the technology community where I think that the right and 
proper response to the common threats that face us is through community of 
effort and teamwork between those different groups. And to the extent that 
those revelations damaged and undermined the trust that needs to exist, I think 
it is highly problematic.”

Asked about the threat posed by groups such as al-Qaida and Islamic State, 
Younger said: “I would like to be optimistic about this but we have got quite a 
long experience of this phenomenon now and I see it very much as the flip-side 
to some very deep-seated global trends, not least of all globalisation: the 
reduction of barriers between us.

“It’s a function also of the information revolution and the capacity for ideas 
to travel. It is fuelled by a deepening sectarian divide in the Middle East and 
there are some deep social economic and demographic drivers to the phenomenon 
that we know as terrorism. Allied with the emergence of state failure this 
means that, regrettably, this is an enduring issue which will certainly be with 
us, I believe, for our professional lifetime.”

At the conference, staged by the Central Intelligence Agency and George 
Washington University, Younger said increased cooperation between agencies and 
improvements in the way governments tackled terror were “doing a great deal to 
mitigate the threat”.
 