
Pulitzer prize-winning American Jewish author Michael Chabon has slammed 
Israel’s occupation of thePalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories> as “the most 
grievous injustice I have ever seen in my life”.

Chabon was interviewed in East Jerusalem for American Jewish newspaper the 
Forward <http://forward.com/about-us/?attribution=home-footer-links> during a 
visit to research a book on 50 years of Israeli occupation. He said he was “not 
so worried” about alienating Jewish readers by writing about the occupation. 
“Once you see for yourself, it is pretty obvious, I think, to any human being 
with a heart and a mind, it is pretty clear what to feel about it.”

The author called the evidence of Israel’s occupation he’d seen while touring 
Hebron in the West Bank “the most grievous injustice I have ever seen in my 
life … this is the worst thing I have ever seen, just purely in terms of 
injustice. If saying that is going to lose me readers, I don’t want those 
readers. They can go away and never come back.”

Chabon and his wife, writer Ayelet Waldman, are contributing to and editing 
the as-yet-unnamed book of essays that will be published to mark the 50th 
anniversary of 1967’s six-day war, whenIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> first entered the Palestinian 
territories: the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip.

Nobel prize-winning novelist Mario Vargas Llosa, Dave Eggers, Eimear McBride, 
Hari Kunzru, Colm Tóibín and Geraldine Brooks are among the group of 
international authors travelling to Israel and Palestine for a week each, to 
write and research essays for the book. It will be published in 2017 by 
HarperCollins in the US andBooks in the Attic 
<http://www.booksintheattic.co.il/english.php> (Sifrey Aliyat Hagag) in Israel 
and is part of an initiative with the NGOBreaking the Silence 
<http://www.breakingthesilence.org.il/>, which publishes accounts by soldiers 
in Israel’s military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/08/israel-soldiers-speak-out-brutality-palestine-occupation>
 about their time serving in the Palestinian territories.
Ayelet Waldman (@ayeletw) 
This man, by a checkpoint in the Jordan Valley: "I would line you up by the 
side of the road" and shoot.#btswrites 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/btswrites?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/PQ9MRu2LDH 
<https://t.co/PQ9MRu2LDH>
 <https://twitter.com/ayeletw/status/720587394488147968> April 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ayeletw/status/720587394488147968> 
The authors’ stays in Israel and Palestine have attracted some hostile 
attention: Waldman has documented cases of the group being antagonised on 
social media, and Chabon has spoken about being followed while touring Hebron.


In the inteview with the Forward, Chabon also revealed his contribution to the 
book will be about Palestinian-American businessman Sam Bahour, who moved from 
Ohio to Ramallah to build the Palestinian economy after the Oslo peace accords.

Chabon frequently writes about Jewish themes in his fiction: his 2000 Pulitzer 
winner The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay is about two Jewish cousins 
before, during and after the second world war, while 2007’s The Yiddish 
Policemen’s Union contains an alternate history of the diaspora that sees it 
relocated to Alaska. The author told the Forward he was finishing a “a novel 
disguised as a memoir of my grandfather” that “has a lot of Jewish content” and 
will be published in November 2016.

• This article was amended on 9 May 2016. An earlier version incorrectly 
included the Golan Heights in the Palestinian territories.
 