
Directly behind the stage where 15,000 Northern Ireland fans watched their 
team contain Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-germany-euro-2016-match-report>
 to a 1-0 victory is a centre where they will count the region’s votes on 
Friday morning in theEU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>.

Northern Ireland progress after keeping Germany down to a single-goal win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-germany-euro-2016-match-report>
Like David Cameron later this week, the Northern Ireland faithful who gathered 
at the side of Belfast Lough also had an agonising wait to see if holding off 
the Germans and ending up with three points and zero goal difference would be 
enough to keep the Green and White Army like the UK still in Europe. Thanks to
Turkey’s 2-0 victory over Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/czech-republic-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>
 in Group D later in the day, it was enough – Michael O’Neill’s men are on the 
march to the last 16.

Fans leaving the Titanic Quarter right beside the production hall where the 
interior scenes of The Game of Thrones is shot were grateful to one man for 
preventing a goalmouth bloodbath worthy of the epic fantasy series. They had 
all flocked to the gates under the shadow of the two giant yellow cranes that 
mark Belfast’s skyline to praise one man – goalkeeper Michael McGovern.

Betty Adair from Newtonabbey on the northern outskirts of Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast>, said McGovern’s nine crucial, often 
point-blank saves from the German attack reminded her of Pat Jennings. “I 
thought it was going to be 3-0 the way the Germans were playing but Michael 
McGovern was amazing. He has kept us in it, I can’t believe he stopped them so 
many times. He was like big Pat Jennings out there,” she said.

Davy Wilson, who had travelled over to London to support his native team, also 
drew comparisons with Northern Ireland’s legendary keeper from the 1970s and 
80s. “You can’t blame McGovern even for the goal because it was the defenders 
who got in his way. Michael showed absolute and total commitment. I’m old 
enough to have seen big Pat in the nets and that performance tonight was of the 
same quality Jennings would show in front of goal. He was outstanding and the 
reason why we’re still in the tournament… just,” the 54-year-old said.

McGovern was born in 1982, the same year Northern Ireland qualified for the 
World Cup in Spain. One of the heroes of that campaign 34 years ago was Billy 
Hamilton, whose cross fed intoGerry Armstrong for him to score the winner 
against Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/gerry-armstrong-northern-ireland-euro-2016>
 in Valencia. Hamilton appeared on Tuesday evening out of the VIP tent to wave 
to the throng of green and white gathered down on Belfast Lough.

Euro 2016: Michael O’Neill praises Northern Ireland for making it to last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/euro-2016-northern-ireland-turkey-through-last-16>
Hamilton also played in both the 1983 and 1984 games for Northern Ireland when 
theydefeated the mighty West German team twice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/nov/13/northern-ireland-qualifying-euro-1984-european-championship>
 but still failed to qualify for the last European Championship tournament in 
France. The appearance of Hamilton in front of thousands in Belfast was not, 
though, a portent for the long since united German team that history was going 
to repeat itself. Even the most ardent supporter at the Belfast event admitted 
that O’Neill’s side had been spared much worse.

Defeat, however, did not dampen the spirits of the crowds gathered close to 
the where the Titanic was first launched into the water. As the final whistle 
blew green flares exploded and streaked across the city’s dockland skyline 
while the production company that runs the Belsonic rock concerts which 
normally take place in the Titanic Quarter blared out the Monty Python anthem: 
“Always Look On The Bright Side of Life”.

Life and death were on the minds of fans when on the 64th minute every one of 
the 15,000 strong support burst into applause to rememberRobert ‘Archie’ Rainey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/northern-ireland-fan-dies-heart-attack-ukraine-euro-2016>
, the Northern Ireland fan who died of a heart attack watching the win over 
Ukraine in Lyon last week.

The Stereophonics are playing here next Wednesday, by which time their beloved 
Wales will have played in the knockout stages. Their fans among the Green and 
White Army now also have the same reason for jubilation.
 