
On the morning of April 11 1933, the architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe turned 
up for work as normal. It was not a normal day. TheBauhaus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bauhaus>, the 20th century's greatest 
school of art, architecture and design, was closed. The building was cordoned 
off by armed police and surrounded by crowds.

Mies' pace quickened. "Stop!" he shouted at the officers. "What's the idea? 
This is my school! It belongs to me!" Not any more, said an officer: the 
Gestapo was scouring the school for a secret printing press suspected of 
publishing anti-Nazi propaganda, and documents linking Bauhaus to the Communist 
party. Mies was released after an interrogation. But the Bauhaus stayed shut.

The next day, Mies, knuckle-headed and stubborn as ever, went to the top. 
Alfred Rosenberg, the conservative minister of culture in the newly elected 
Nazi government, was renowned for his iron temperament. But then, so was Mies. 
"The Bauhaus has a certain idea," began Mies, in his nagging, methodical 
monotone, "but this idea has nothing to do with politics. Look at your writing 
table, this shabby writing table. Do you like it? I would throw it out the 
window." Mies rarely minced his words.

"That is what we at the Bauhaus want to do. We want to have good objects so 
that we do not have to throw them out of the window." Rosenberg was an 
architect himself. "Then we will understand each other," said Mies. "What do 
you expect me to do?" asked Rosenberg. "The Bauhaus is supported by forces 
fighting our forces."

"For any cultural effort," replied Mies, "one needs peace, and I would like to 
know whether we will have that peace." The Bauhaus stayed shut.

So Mies tried another route. Every other day, he marched to Gestapo 
headquarters. This time, it took him three months to get to the top. On July 
21, with the Bauhaus on the brink of bankruptcy, a letter arrived from the 
Gestapo giving permission to reopen, but only if the curriculum was rewritten 
to suit "the demands of the new State", and if two of its leftwing teachers, 
Ludwig Hilberseimer and the painter Vasili Kandinsky, were replaced with 
"individuals who guarantee to support the principles of the National Socialist 
ideology". Mies gathered his colleagues, opened the champagne, and promptly 
closed the school himself.

Mies was pathologically strong-willed, so protective of his independence that 
he would close his own school rather than submit to the demands of anyone else. 
Even the Nazis. Mies had schooled himself as modernism's cold, steely heart. He 
wasn't verbose and dilettantish like Le Corbusier. He didn't douse himself with 
sociology like Walter Gropius. He didn't dress the flamboyant dandy like Frank 
Lloyd Wright, all cape and cane. All were diversions, Mies thought. Instead, he 
presented himself as a monolithic figure, silent and sober, like a monk. He 
read St Thomas Aquinas, St Augustine, Plato and Nietzsche. He had certainty. He 
had a plan, and politics wasn't part of it.

Which was exactly why he'd ended up at the Bauhaus. By 1933, the school was a 
global cult, sending out from its converted telephone factory eager young 
missionaries to spread the modernist word: honesty of construction, death to 
decoration. Under its first director, Gropius, and its second, Hannes Meyer, 
these students were also trained in socialism - the efficient, industrial mass 
production of "good objects" for the people, which had led it into often 
violent controversy. Mies was made director to bring order and discipline, and 
above all to make the Bauhaus apolitical. In 1930s Berlin, however, the 
politics of architecture would prove impossible to ignore.

Mies believed, he said, in something more noble than politics, the ruthless 
pursuit of the perfect modern building, the true heir, he thought, to Greek 
temples and gothic cathedrals - buildings constructed on earth in order to 
escape it. These were cathedrals for the new religion, commerce and industry - 
factories, office blocks, skyscrapers and apartment towers, the modern urban 
landscape, whose architecture had yet to be invented. The form lay out there 
for him to discover. "The will of the epoch," he said, must be "translated into 
space" - as if he were just the draughtsman for a higher system, the universe's 
appointed architect.

Mies is known now for his American architecture - it was there that he was 
able to make his modern "cathedrals" a reality. But it was in Berlin, in the 
prewar years, that his ideas were formed.

Like his students, he was a convert to modernism. In Berlin's cultural 
explosion of the early 1920s, Mies, then in his mid 30s, switched lives. Out 
went the provincial name, Ludwig Mies, with its reminders of his 
lower-middle-class upbringing in the deeply conservative Catholic Rhineland. In 
came the more cosmopolitan Mies van der Rohe. Out went his conventional wife 
and children, relegated to annual visits. In came a succession of mistresses, 
and wild nights with Berlin's avant garde.

And out went Mies' formal classical design, taught to him by architects 
struggling to come to terms with the 20th century, attempting to stretch the 
styles of the past around radical new building types such as the modern 
factory. Sometimes these old styles just wouldn't fit. Modern buildings 
required a whole new architecture.

Like any eager convert, Mies took modernism to extremes. Throughout his life, 
nothing got in the way of his quest for pure form: politics, family, 
mistresses, clients, ideas that ill fitted his single-minded worldview - all 
were brushed aside. Even practicality. In the 1930s, he designed furniture that 
users "must learn to love"; and, after the war, venetian blinds on New York's 
Seagram Building that would stop only in aesthetically pleasing positions 
(backed up with contractual subclauses to ensure that nobody replaced them with 
drapes of lesser beauty); Berlin's National Gallery without walls (they might 
interrupt its vast empty space); and houses, such as the Farnsworth House in 
the US, that had a notorious aversion to ugly essentials such as plumbing, 
heating and mosquito nets. He would bully his clients to the law courts to get 
his way, the very model of the arrogant architect.

All of which would have been unforgivable were his buildings not breathtaking. 
Mies took the modern steel frame, which removed the structural need for walls, 
as far as it could then go, to create the kinds of crisp, idealised, abstract 
spaces that his contemporaries in the visual arts, Piet Mondrian and Theo van 
Doesberg, were exploring on canvas. He once built a chapel in the US so bare, 
so pure, that it had to have a sign attached - "Chapel" - to tell the visitor 
where they were. "God," he said, "is in the details." This was a man whose eye 
had been trained by chiselling headstones in his father's stonemason's yard, 
who could spend days perfecting the cross-section of a beam and weeks labouring 
over minute mathematical ratios that only he could see.

He created his masterpiece, the German Pavilion at the Barcelona Exposition, 
in 1929: a series of empty spaces, removed of every physical encumbrance that 
technology would allow. Enclosure was suggested only by a series of planes, 
arranged with formal geometry, like a Mondrian painting. Nothingness, 
transparency, was used as a kind of expression. Visitors would touch its 
floor-to-ceiling glass walls, the world's first, to see how they stood up - if 
they stood up. The whole building appeared so lightweight that it threatened to 
float away into the sky. "It contains only space," dismissed one critic. But 
that was the point. The world had seen nothing like it. We're used to open-plan 
homes and offices today, but in 1929 it was a revolution to the senses. This, 
said one newspaper report at the time, was "the modern feeling".

This was exactly why Germany's pre-Nazi Weimar Republic had chosen Mies to 
represent it. During the 1920s, it had fashioned itself into the most modernist 
of states. If you were a young designer, hungry for work, Germany - and, most 
of all, the Bauhaus - was where you came. For the Barcelona fair, the Weimar 
government wanted to project the image of a modern, progressive, peaceful 
Germany, emerging again on the world stage after the humiliations of the first 
world war. "We do not want anything but clarity, simplicity, honesty," said 
Georg von Schnitzler, commissar general of the Reich, at the official opening.

Not that Mies bought this, of course. A building, to him, was not a piece of 
propaganda, but something to escape worldly distractions such as politics. 
Still, so long as it brought in work, he was happy to play along: he didn't 
care for whom he built, so long as they had lots of money, lots of power and 
didn't get in his way.

So Mies, Weimar Germany's rising star, designed the kinds of buildings that 
his newly prosperous country would need, such as the world's first 
glass-and-steel skyscraper, a stunning shaft of quartz; the first modern office 
block, which, 50 years before the Pompidou Centre and the Lloyd's building, 
used its guts, its structure, as abstract exterior decoration; and, at 
Barcelona, the world's first truly open-plan house. He had time only to build 
the last. A few weeks after the Barcelona fair opened, stock markets across the 
world crashed. The Depression dried up his stock of wealthy German clients and 
a new kind of German politics was on the horizon. It, too, would use 
architecture as propaganda. But it wasn't Mies' kind of architecture.

It was hard for someone to ignore politics in 1930s Germany, but Mies did his 
best. To this freakishly single-minded man, the rise of nazism was like a fly 
buzzing around him while he worked, getting ever closer and increasingly 
destroying his concentration.

When the Bauhaus closed in 1933, it seemed as if Alfred Rosenberg's v√∂lkisch 
rightwing had the upper hand, with their sentimental attachment to folksy 
architecture. With them in charge, the very pitch of your roof could land you 
in trouble.

They'd had their eye on the Bauhaus's internationalist cult for years. In 
1925, the school, then led by Gropius, was forced to leave Weimar, Germany's 
intellectual heart, by the city's rightwing. It was drummed out of Dessau in 
1932, too, when local Nazis took the council. They threatened to build proper 
Teutonic pitched roofs and gables on the building's bolshevik flat roofs to 
show who was boss now.

The Nazis even found fault with Mies' thoroughly apolitical directorship when 
he moved the school to Berlin, simply for what they thought his abstract 
modernism represented. Leaving aside the school's degenerate, internationalist, 
rootless, Jewish, bolshevik membership, the newly christened International 
Style - white walls, steel and glass, and flat roofs - just wasn't German.

 Yet Hitler himself had not quite made up his mind about modern architecture. 
In the early 1930s, he was strongly influenced by propaganda minister Joseph 
Goebbels, who had recognised the progressive, symbolic power of industrial 
modernism - it might be useful. In early September 1933, Hitler spoke at a 
culture conference, fiercely criticising radical art but accepting "a 
functionalism of crystalline clarity" in design.

Like Mies, Hitler was obsessed with industrialism, the symbolism of 
technology, the theatre of getting things done. He even spoke the Bauhaus 
language: "To be German," said Hitler, "means to be logical, above all to be 
truthful." Music to Mies'ears. Industrial modernism could so easily have become 
the language of autobahns and vast Nazi meeting halls.

Starved of work, Mies tried to ingratiate himself with this new, powerful and 
rich state patron, signing a motion of support for Hitler in the August 1934 
referendum and joining Goebbels's Reichskultur-kammer, a progressive 
alternative to Rosenberg's ministry, which asked for "fresh blood" and new 
forms to give "expression to this age". Mies was shortlisted to build the 
state's new Reichsbank, with a fiercely modern, abstract design; and Goebbels 
even pressed him to design the Deutsches Volk Deutsches Arbeit exhibition. 
Things were on the up.

But in 1934, Hitler, by chance, came across Albert Speer, a young architect 
who had caught the Nazi bug. Speer had joined the party as head of its local 
Motorists' Association, and only as its head because he was the only car driver 
in his neighbourhood. There just happened to be a lot of influential Nazis at 
the Wannsee local HQ. With furious speed, Speer found himself spun from 
apprentice to chief architect for Goebbels's propaganda ministry, then to 
designer for Nazi rallies at Tempelhof Field, and then, in 1934, to Hitler's 
personal architect, designing, the F√ºhrer promised, "buildings for me such as 
haven't been built perhaps for 4,000 years". Speer never quite understood his 
luck.

All it took to end modernism, and Mies, in Germany was Hitler and Speer's 
obsessive personal relationship. Hitler was an amateur architect, a 
trainspotter - he had once been refused admission to the Viennese Academy's 
architecture school - and liked nothing better on a Sunday afternoon than to 
pore over plans with eager-to-please Speer. He would discuss the minutiae of 
cross-sections and tinker with designs, which he always referred to as "my 
building plans", as if Speer were merely the conduit for Hitler's grand visions.

But where Goebbels challenged Hitler's taste for sentimental nationalist 
architecture, Speer indulged it. Speer was a first-rate administrator, but a 
second-rate architect, a decent enough exponent of the polite classicism that 
Mies had ditched years earlier, but a dab hand at the kind of populist 
theatricality that caught the F√ºhrer's eye.

And so, by chance, it was decided that the Third Reich's landscape was not to 
be the sleek, industrial modernism of the Barcelona Pavilion, but Hansel and 
Gretel gothic, and a bombastic classicism of inflated porticoes, pediments and 
columns, with all their cheap analogies with the Roman empire. With Leni 
Riefenstahl, Speer became the Nazi's stage manager, designing ever larger, more 
extravagant stage sets, from the Nuremberg rally complex to the Cathedral of 
Light, 130 anti-aircraft searchlights shooting in the air, their thrusting 
verticality, apparently, to lead the eye away from the paunches of the marching 
party leaders.

And, of course, there was Hitler's special commission, the complete rebuilding 
of Berlin, followed by every other major German city. Hitler so adored Speer's 
vast detailed model of a Berlin reborn, complete with ambitious domes and 
giant's avenues, that he would gaze lovingly at what might have been while 
burrowed deep in his bunker in 1945, with the allies at the door.

With Speer now in charge, the conservatives extended the cultural policy of 
Gleichschaltung (bringing in line) from publishing and art to building, simply 
by controlling the planning system and making sure they had the right sort of 
people on competition juries. Hitler cancelled the Reichsbank competition on 
which Mies was depending financially. And every architect was forced to adjust 
his or her style to suit.

Except Mies. He didn't know any other way. Between 1931 and 1938, only two out 
of 12 houses were actually built. But, though politics had caught up with him, 
Mies kept ploughing on. He was even willing to bend his design to suit the 
Nazis. Slightly. His competition entry for the national pavilion at the 1935 
Brussels World's Fair was his last attempt to angle German national 
architecture towards modernism.

The abstract plan is there, only it is grander, more symmetrical than usual; 
the stark, plain walls are there, but Mies would never have added an eagle and 
swastika - decoration - in happier times. In the end, there was no money for 
the pavilion; not that he'd have won. Speer's pompous national pavilion at the 
Paris fair in 1937 was more to Nazi taste now. And how strikingly similar it 
looked, remarked Speer himself, to the Soviet pavilion sitting opposite.

Mies seemed to dislike the Nazis more for their poor taste and their starving 
him of work than for their politics. Nazi architecture, to Mies, was hardly 
architecture at all, mere stage sets, "sentimental", emotional. It was an 
aberration, something that got in the way of his ideal of pure, abstract 
modernism. He never passed comment directly on Speer, but it must have galled 
him to see this youngster succeed with so little. Designing the will of the 
epoch, the architecture for the German state, was once meant to be Mies' job. 
In this upstart's hands, it was being realised in the clumsiest of forms.

So, stubborn to the last, Mies just sat it out, waiting for change, waiting 
for the latest obstruction to shift, and damning the Nazis the way he damned 
family, lovers and everything else that got in his way: with silent withdrawal. 
More solitary than ever, and getting by on the royalties from his furniture, 
Mies spent the mid-1930s designing endless variations of prototypical, ideal 
buildings - the museum, the office, the university - each, like Erik Satie's 
Gymnopedies, variations on a theme, subtly different from the last. They 
remained on paper. He built up a backlog of fantasies that he'd build one day, 
once the Nazis had disappeared. And he had every faith that they would.

 But Mies' reluctance to condemn Nazi politics saw him attacked by many of his 
former Bauhaus colleagues, many of whom, Jewish or leftwing, had left for 
Britain and the US soon after the Nazis took power. Like many other less 
threatened German artists, such as the composer Richard Strauss, Mies hung on 
longer than he should simply because he refused to believe that Germany, once a 
hotbed of cultural invention, had suddenly become so stupid.

Mies finally decided to leave Germany while standing in a field in Wisconsin 
in late 1937. He was in the US following up one of the many offers of work from 
wealthy Americans, which had started coming his way after a star billing at the 
opening exhibition of New York's new Museum of Modern Art in 1932. Since he was 
in the neighbourhood, he decided to visit Frank Lloyd Wright, the doyen of 
American architecture, in his Wisconsin ideas factory, Taliesin West.

Mies liked the midwest, with its flat, empty, abstract fields, ripe for his 
otherworldly spaces. It suited his aesthetic. And, deep in the belly of the 
continent, far from the Nazis - far, indeed, from any interference - it suited 
his way of working. No one would disturb him here. Standing in a field outside 
Wright's studio, he shouted, "Freiheit! Es ist ein Reich!" ("Freedom! This is a 
kingdom!") Mies had packed for an overnight stay, but ended up staying a week. 
"Poor Mr Mies," said Wright. "His white shirt is quite grey!"

Mies liked America, too. After the Depression, it was becoming fat again, with 
rich capitalists ready to commission him. Mies could always sniff out where the 
money and power was. And he could smell in those fields that his future patron 
would be no government, no political system, but the economic system that was 
emerging triumphant in the US. Modernism, the International Style, would 
succeed as the landscape not of communism, bolshevism or nazism, but of 
international capitalism.

Its modern Medicis, such as Mies, weren't interested in politics. Well, not 
the politics of nationalism, just the quieter, subtler politics of making 
money. Like the Weimar government, they would commission buildings such as New 
York's Seagram tower more for their sleek, modern, sellable image, and 
efficient and highly lucrative ways of parcelling up space - "Mies means 
money," 1950s speculators chirruped - than for the perfection of their form. 
They wouldn't see God in the details, but they would leave him alone to build 
all those ideal skyscrapers, office blocks, houses, convention centres and 
apartment towers he had spent the 1930s mapping out in his head. He could 
escape politics. He could build. That was enough.

Mies' American friends told him not to return to Berlin in March 1938. They 
were right. After the Anschluss of Austria, and the previous year's Degenerate 
Art exhibition in Munich, the climate had become more conservative than ever. 
Even Mieswas under suspicion, with Nazis sniffing around his associations with 
communists and Jews in the Bauhaus. Politics had got to him at last.

For the first time, he was nervous in his own country, so nervous, in fact, 
that, to avoid meeting the Gestapo, he sent his assistant to pick up his 
emigration visa at the local police station. When the assistant returned, he 
found Mies being roughly interrogated by two officers. At the eleventh hour, 
the time had come to follow the millions before him and make his own, rather 
less noble escape from the Nazis. Mies packed what he could in a small 
suitcase, hurried on to a train to Rotterdam and took the steamer to New York

¬∑ Mies In Berlin 1905-1938 is at the Whitechapel Art Gallery, London E1 
(020-7522 7888), from December 10-March 2. Mies In Berlin, a book to accompany 
the show, edited by the exhibition's curators, Terence Riley and Barry 
Bergdoll, is published by the Museum of Modern Art, New York, at ¬£45. To order 
a copy for the special price of ¬£41, plus UK p&p, call 0870 066 7979.
 