
Mike Pompeo

CIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> director

Background

Mike Pompeo, Donald Trump’s nominee to head the Central Intelligence Agency, 
will testify before the Senate amid an escalating row between the agency and 
the incoming White House over Russian interference in the 2016 presidential 
election.

Related: Senate grills attorney general nominee Sessions on KKK, bigotry and 
'lock her up' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/jeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general>

The conservative Kansas Republican congressman and former army officer will be 
tasked with repairing a breach with Trump over the CIA’s “high confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
” that Moscow conducted a multifaceted influence operation to help Trump win 
the presidency.

Trump’s prior dismissals of the agency’s assessment – “These are the same 
people that said Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction,” Trump said in 
December – pinion Pompeo between his boss and the workforce he is nominated to 
lead. Additionally, Trump’s lack of enthusiasm for intelligence briefings 
creates an early test of Pompeo’s influence within the new administration.

While Trump’s rhetoric calmed after a Friday meeting with outgoing 
intelligence chiefs, it reignited on Tuesday following the publication of an 
incendiary and unverified dossier on his alleged ties to Russia. Likening the 
intelligence agencies to Nazi Germany, Trump incorrectly blamed the agencies 
for the document and called it a “tremendous blot on their record. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>
”

The last CIA director sent by the White House from Capitol Hill to rein 
Langley in, Porter Goss, resigned in 2006 after less than two years in the job 
and astream of leaks <http://www.salon.com/2004/11/16/cia_14/> that damaged his 
reputation.

Pompeo was elected to Congress in 2010 as part of the Tea Party wave of ardent 
conservatives. The House seat was the first elective office for the West Point 
graduate who served as an armor officer from 1986 to 1991. He used the perch to 
denounce Barack Obama’s planned closure of the Guantánamo Bay detention 
facility, nuclear diplomacy with Iran and handling of the 2012 Benghazi attacks.

Related: What you need to know: confirming Trump's cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2017/jan/06/donald-trump-cabinet-nominees-confirmation-process-senate>

Pompeo is a member of the House intelligence committee. 

Key points to watch for:

 * The Russia assessment: Pompeo has yet to issue a clear statement indicating 
his acceptance or rejection of the CIA’s view that Russia helped Trump in the 
election.

 * Reprisals: Relatedly, legislators, former agency officials and intelligence 
experts are curious to see whether Pompeo will retaliate against CIA officials 
who contributed to the Russia assessment.

 * Syria: Pompeo is said to oppose 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/trumps-cia-pick-is-seen-as-both-a-fierce-partisan-and-serious-student-of-national-security-issues/2016/11/18/5b089f0e-ad9a-11e6-8b45-f8e493f06fcd_story.html?utm_term=.99ac134e9f92>
 CIA sponsorship of Syrian rebel militias fighting dictator Bashar al-Assad, 
who has called Trump a “natural ally”.

 * Torture: Pompeo has called the CIA’s defunct post-9/11 torture program 
“within the law” and said an architect of a landmark Senate report detailing 
its brutality, Dianne Feinstein of California, had “put American lives at risk 
<http://pompeo.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=398326>”. 
Feinstein will question Pompeo at the hearing and is likely to ask about any 
intention he has of putting the CIA back in the torture business.

 * Drones: Pompeo has indicated a comfort with expanding drone strikes, an 
Obama-era counter-terrorism tactic whose scope under Trump is undefined. “I 
believe the president needs a lot of space to maneuver. He should have a lot of 
authority to make decisions about when they’ve identified someone who is trying 
to kill Americans, to be able to go in and get them,” Pompeotold 
<http://cjonline.com/state/2013-02-21/kansas-delegation-dark-us-drone-attacks> 
the Topeka Capitol-Journal in 2013.  