
Donald Trump’s running mate, Mike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence>, has forcefully batted down 
speculation that he considered dropping from the Republican ticket after video 
emerged on Friday of Trump bragging about touching women without their consent.


Pence, a family values Christian who led an anti-LGBT backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/04/mike-pence-led-anti-lgbt-backlash-trump>
 in his home state of Indiana,said 
<https://twitter.com/mike_pence/status/784799653547999234> at the weekend that 
he was “offended” byTrump’s remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 about grabbing “pussy”, that he did not “condone” the remarks and that he 
could not defend them.

But Pence told CNN this morning following the second presidential debate on 
Sunday night that being tapped by Trump had been “the greatest honor of my 
life”.

It’s absolutely false to suggest that at any point in time we considered 
dropping off this ticket. It’s the greatest honor of my life, to have been 
nominated by my party to be the next vice president of the United States of 
America.
New Day (@NewDay) 
"It's absolutely false" -- Mike Pence on reports he considered dropping out. 
Watch live:https://t.co/Tk64moV9b1 <https://t.co/Tk64moV9b1> 
https://t.co/yLa72UOaEE <https://t.co/yLa72UOaEE>
 <https://twitter.com/NewDay/status/785463104352256000> October 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NewDay/status/785463104352256000> 
And he added that he remained horrified and disgusted by Bill Clinton.
Zeke Miller (@ZekeJMiller) 
So Pence followed Trump in going there via CNN pic.twitter.com/RBfCPfuSZa 
<https://t.co/RBfCPfuSZa>
 <https://twitter.com/ZekeJMiller/status/785490040499699712> October 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ZekeJMiller/status/785490040499699712> 
Trump appeared before last night’s debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/09/donald-trump-women-bill-clinton-sex-scandal-hillary-debate>
 with Paula Jones, Juanita Broaddrick, Kathy Shelton and Kathleen Willey. Three 
of the four women have claimed inappropriate sexual contact with Bill Clinton, 
which he has denied. Shelton was the victim of a 1975 rape; Hillary Clinton was 
assigned by an Arkansas court to represent her assailant in the case.
 