
Mike Pence, running mate to Donald Trump, on Sunday hailed what he said was 
Trump’s “plainspoken way” to explain a tweet by the Republican candidate that 
drewaccusations of insensitivity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/27/donald-trump-dwyane-wade-cousin-shooting-reaction>
 following theshooting death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/26/dwyane-wade-cousin-shot-chicago> 
in Chicago of a cousin of basketball star Dwyane Wade.

Donald Trump politicizes death of Dwyane Wade's cousin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/27/donald-trump-dwyane-wade-cousin-shooting-reaction>
“Donald Trump has a plainspoken way about him,” Pence said on CNN’s State of 
the Union when asked about the tweet. “The pointDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was making as that we have a 
choice to make this fall.”

Trump reacted in a tweet Saturday morning to news that a Wade cousin, Nykea 
Aldridge, 32, had been shot dead while pushing her infant child in a stroller. 
“Dwayne [sic] Wade’s cousin was just shot and killed walking her baby in 
Chicago,” Trumptweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/769571710924263424?lang=en>. “Just 
what I have been saying. African-Americans will VOTE TRUMP!”

A second, nearly identical tweet, with the spelling of Wade’s name corrected, 
was sent soon after. Several hours later, Trump tweeted his condolences.

On Sunday, Chicago police announced that two brothers had been charged with 
first-degree murder over Aldridge’s death. More details were expected at an 
afternoon press conference.

It was not the first time that Trump’s tweeted reaction to tragedy has drawn 
criticism. In the immediate aftermath of the June mass shooting in an Orlando, 
Florida, nightclub, Trump tweeted about people congratulating him for his 
foresight.

“Appreciate the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism,” he 
wrote <https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/742034549232766976>. “I don’t 
want congrats, I want toughness & vigilance. We must be smart!”

On Sunday, Pence blamed “liberal policies that apparently have been content 
with unsafe streets” for violence in Chicago, and asserted that Trump would 
repair the situation without indicating how.
 Donald Trump’s original tweet about the shooting death of Dwyane Wade’s 
cousin. Photograph: Screengrab 
Pence was echoed by Republican national committee chair Reince Priebus, who 
said that Trump’s Wade tweet was a result of the candidate’s “frustration” with 
the inner city quandary.

“It’s frustrating to see that the Democrats go into these cities, I think take 
advantage of this vote, and provide very little leadership in return,” Priebus 
told ABC News.

In a string of recent speeches to mostly white audiences, Trump has focused on 
appealing for African American votes with a law and order message.

Speaking on Fox News Sunday, new Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway said 
that though the candidate had not yet visited or staged events in cities like 
Chicago to which he is now appealing, he would do so soon.

Asked by host Chris Wallace if it was right for Trump to have made a political 
response to a personal tragedy, Conway said she was “pleased that his next 
tweet expressed his condolences to the Wade family, about the death of his 
cousin”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fdonald-trump-comments-death-nba-dwyane-wade-cousin-political-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20comments%20on%20death%20of%20Dwyane%20Wade's%20cousin%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fdonald-trump-comments-death-nba-dwyane-wade-cousin-political-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20comments%20on%20death%20of%20Dwyane%20Wade%27s%20cousin%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fdonald-trump-comments-death-nba-dwyane-wade-cousin-political-speech-video&media=>
Donald Trump comments on death of Dwyane Wade’s cousin – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/28/donald-trump-comments-death-nba-dwyane-wade-cousin-political-speech-video>
Welcome to Iowa, where Trump's purple patch could turn a blue state red
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/28/donald-trump-iowa-republican-red-state>
Pence rejected a suggestion by CNN host Jake Tapper that lax gun safety laws 
in his own state, Indiana, may be stoking violence in Chicago. A study byThe 
Trace 
<https://mic.com/articles/127842/this-is-how-chicago-gets-flooded-with-illegal-guns#.psq1FAKJH>
 gun tracking project of firearms recovered in Chicago from 2010 to 2014 found 
that most out-of-state guns originated in Indiana, which neighbors Illinois to 
the east.

“Firearms within the hands of law-abiding citizens” increase public safety, 
Pence said.


Pence also said Trump’s message about the death of Aldridge may have been 
crimped by the confines of Twitter.

“Donald Trump is laying out in that tweet, in short form, 140 characters, that 
we have a choice to make in this country,” he said.

Trump said at a rally in Iowa Saturday that gun violence “breaks all of our 
hearts. It’s horrible, it’s horrible, and it’s only getting worse.”

On Saturday, Wade did not respond directly to Trump. Instead, among other 
messages hetweeted <https://twitter.com/DwyaneWade/status/769571168189763585>: 
“The city of Chicago is hurting. We need more help& more hands on deck. Not for 
me and my family but for the future of our world. The YOUTH!”
 