
The south-west has always been known as a region of good food: I call it 
Britain's seafood coast, as it is home to the best seafood in the world. This 
is just one reason for making the journey here, but there are many more. Many 
legendary restaurants here have left their mark – or are still making it – on 
British gastronomy: theHole in the Wall <http://www.theholeinthewall.co.uk/> in 
Bath, The Carved Angel in Dartmouth (now closed),Markwicks in Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jul/08/jay-rayner-restaurant-culinaria-bristol>
 andRick Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rick-stein>'s places are 
just a few of this generation of restaurants. All built reputations not only on 
their incredible talents but on the magnificent produce we have. From Dorset to 
Cornwall you can eat very well, with chefs such asMark Hix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2013/feb/18/mark-hix-dorset-in-pictures>
 in Lyme,Nathan Outlaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/sep/26/nathan-outlaw-fish-seafood-grill>
 in Rock and Port Isaac, and Stein in Padstow running top-class restaurants.

The cities of the south-west are all very different. I remember the opening of 
the UK's firstfarmers' market at Green Park in Bath, which still thrives today. 
Markets like these changed the way I lived: I could shop from really good 
suppliers of local produce on a Saturday morning. I used to meet up with my 
great friends Mat Prowse and Laura Cowan back when we were all living in Bath 
and we'd buy our supplies and then have a brandy and a coffee at theGreen Park 
Brasserie <http://www.greenparkbrasserie.com/> (mains from £7.95), chat with 
the kids and talk about what we were cooking. They both still work with me all 
these years later. This farmers' market is still a real hub of activity and 
centre of good food in Bath, and a place I always love to go.

Bristol, just a few miles down the road, has a great food scene: there are 
delis and restaurants galore but the two must-dos for me are theSweet Mart 
<http://www.sweetmart.co.uk/> in Easton, which is the most glorious family-run 
shop, selling just about every Indian ingredient you can imagine. It has a 
small cafe where you can enjoy good Indian home cooking.
 Bath Farmers' Market. Photograph: Alamy 
Bristol is also home to the best Chinese restaurant outside of London, the 
Mayflower <http://mayflower-bristol.co.uk/> (mains from £8). It is in an 
unlikely location (in an underpass by the bus station) but don't be put off, 
the food is amazing. My chefs go there after service, and I will drive the two 
hours from Brixham to eat there: the seafood is good, but the aubergine hotpot 
with pork and shrimps is a must.

It's worth heading out of town to some of the farm shops. South of the city, 
in Somerset, you will find a fantastic family-run farm shop,White Row 
<http://www.whiterowfarm.co.uk>, in Beckington, near Frome, where they farm 
pigs for use solely at their shop and in their cafe and restaurant.

The farm shop is also home to one of the best fishmongers in the south-west, 
theScallop Shell <http://www.thescallopshell.co.uk/>. Garry Rosser, who runs 
it, was one of my head chefs – one of the best we had – and he has carried on 
the tradition of fishmongering. He has a wealth of contacts with fishermen and 
his counter is a joy to look at. If you need cooking advice or preparation, 
just ask him. He is an awesome chef and you will get exactly what you want. He 
also has a fish and chip restaurant next door, so if you don't fancy cooking, 
choose your fish from the counter and get him to fry it. It will be one of the 
best fish meals you'll eat in the region.

Somerset is my home county and makes some of the finest ciders you will ever 
taste. At theSomerset Distillery <http://www.ciderbrandy.co.uk> in Burrow Hill, 
Julian Temperley also makes a wicked cider brandy that is a favourite of mine. 
You will pass any number of farms shops selling their own cider – the rule is 
go careful! Cider production isn't confined to Somerset and the excellent
Ashridge Cider <http://www.ashridgecider.co.uk> company near Totnes in Devon 
makes lots of old varieties that combine sweet and bittersweet flavours to make 
a drink that is proper cider.
 Crab sandwiches ahoy … Fresh From the Sea cafe in Port Isaac 
Brixham is home to our biggest fishing fleet and you can buy some of the best 
fish in the world fromfish merchants around the harbour – try Nigel Ward of 
Brixham Seafish <http://brixhamseafish.com/>. Make sure you buy some of the 
mussels caught in Elberry Cove, right in the corner of the bay (
brixhamseafarmsltd.co.uk <http://www.brixhamseafarmsltd.co.uk/>). We often find 
ourselves walking the half-mile west from the market to Churston Cove and 
cooking them on the beach with our feet in the tide, yards from where they are 
grown. It's magical, especially at sundown, when you can finish the day with a 
twilight swim.

From Brixham head towards Dartmouth, perhaps taking in a stretch of the 
coastal path to Kingswear, enjoying a pint in theShip Inn 
<http://shipinnforecast.com/> , my local, then head across the water to the 
town. A must is breakfast or lunch atAlf Resco <http://cafealfresco.co.uk>, 
a Dartmouth institution. The coast road then takes you to Salcombe – one of the 
most beautiful estuaries in Britain, and famous for its crab and lobster – via 
Blackpool Sands. Stop for coffee at theVenus cafe 
<http://www.lovingthebeach.co.uk/> right on the beach and marvel at the view, 
with your feet in the golden sand.

There are many stunning beaches nearby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/16/seaside-holidays-in-south-devon-insiders-guide>
, such asBantham <http://www.banthamdevon.co.uk/>, Bigbury, Lannacombe, 
Mothecombe, all of them great for rockpooling, swimming, fishing, surfing or 
just sitting on.

If you are self catering, order organic meat from the brilliant Well Hung Meat 
<http://www.wellhungmeat.com> company near Buckfastleigh on the edge of 
Dartmoor, or try out the farm shops you'll see along the way. If you head for 
Bigbury, don't miss theOyster Shack <http://oystershack.co.uk> to taste the 
delicious oysters (from £2 each) from the bay.
 Somerset Distillery, Burrow Hill. Photograph: Alamy 
The north and south coastlines of Cornwall are completely different but 
equally beautiful. My wife grew up in Port Isaac on the north side, so we often 
head there to enjoy some of the best crab sandwiches I've ever had atFresh from 
the Sea <http://www.freshfromthesea.co.uk/>, a small shop that sells the catch 
from owner Callum Greenhalgh's boat. His wife Tracey prepares the shellfish 
daily, and it's the best crab and lobster I've tasted in Cornwall.

Self caterers in the area should treat themselves to a meal delivery from 
Emily Scott'sHarbour Kitchen <http://www.theharbourkitchen.com> . Her excellent 
Cornish fish pie with puff pastry costs £12.50 a portion. Nathan Outlaw's 
recently openedFish Kitchen <http://www.outlaws.co.uk/fishkitchen>small plates 
from £4) is sure to make this wonderful village even more of a destination for 
seafood. Fish merchant Dennis Knight (1 Fore Street) sells fish from the local 
boats and lobster caught around the rocks off Port Isaac. And there isn't a 
finer pub than theGolden Lion <http://www.goldenlionportisaac.co.uk/> just 
across the harbour: it's the kind of place where you want to get locked in.

Dartmoor is a great place to walk and eat, and there are superb pubs on the 
moor. TheRugglestone Inn <http://rugglestoneinn.co.uk/> at Widecombe is warm 
and welcoming, with great beers and a place to chat. On the edge of the moor at 
Ugborough is the newly refurbishedAnchor Inn 
<http://www.anchorinnugborough.co.uk/> where the speciality is local steak 
cooked over charcoal (from £16). You can enjoy good ales and a decent bed for 
the night (doubles from £65 B&B).

A trip to the south-west wouldn't be complete without catching a mackerel. 
From Torquay and Brixham round to St Ives you can easily get yourself on a boat 
trip and catch your lunch. There is nothing better than fresh mackerel: 
I particularly like it poached and served just with mayonnaise and horseradish.

As I write this the sun is setting behind the fish market and the curve of 
Torbay. I can hear the water outside my window, and to my mind there is nowhere 
better on earth.
 Mitch Tonks, left, and Mat Prowse outside The Seahorse in Dartmouth. 
Photograph: Harry Borden 
• Chef Mitch Tonks <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mitch-tonks> runs 
restaurants in Bristol, Dartmouth and Plymouth, and has also devised menus for 
First Great Western's Pullman service, and the South Sands hotel and restaurant 
in Salcombe
 