
Maboe Ntsime remembers well the ordeal she used to go through to receive the 
regular treatment she and her six-year-old son, Motsamai, depend on as people 
living with HIV.

“It was exhausting because I walked,” recalled the mother, from Lesotho, where 
almost 23% of the population live with the virus 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/lesotho>. “If I left home 
at 8am I would sleep over somewhere. Otherwise I would get back after dark. I 
would walk back that distance with my son on my back.”

For Ntsime, the arduous trek she and her son were obliged to take was yet 
another painful strain on top of the condition, for which she tested positive 
when she was pregnant with Motsamai.

Now, however, a programme using mobile technology is making it easier for 
mother and son to access treatment for the virus.

Developed by Vodafone in conjunction with the Lesotho Ministry of Health, the 
programme combines the mobile money serviceM-Pesa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/08/africa-calling-mobile-phone-broadband-revolution-transform-democracies>
, which is used in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa, with a smartphone app 
designed for healthcare professionals.

Travelling clinics provide on-site HIV testing in Lesotho’s remote rural 
communities where mountainous terrain makes movement slow. Anyone who is 
identified as HIV-positive can register with M-Pesa and receive the funds 
needed to pay for transportation to a treatment centre.

Their details are also simultaneously recorded on a central database so that 
future treatment and care can be planned, recorded and accessed in the field by 
healthcare workers using an app produced by the company’s charitable arm, the 
Vodafone Foundation, and VodacomLesotho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lesotho>.

The service is oriented towards pregnant women, mothers and young children, 
who are among the most vulnerable groups in a society where as many as 5,000 
children under the age of 14 are estimated to be undiagnosed and living with 
HIV.

Andrew Dunnett, director of the Vodafone Foundation, said the programme was 
part of the company’sConnecting for Good  <http://www.connectingforgood.org/>
programme, which aims to deliver public benefit through the application of 
technology across the areas of health, education and disaster relief.

“Our initial assessment indicated that a combination of mobile technology, 
money, management and working with the right partners could deliver a 
significant impact in Lesotho, where nearly a quarter of the population is 
HIV-positive, many of whom are children,” he added.

“HIV is an immense healthcare crisis for the people of Lesotho. This 
pioneering programme will ensure that thousands of mothers and young children 
in some of the poorest communities in the world receive the care and support 
they need.”

 For mothers like Ntsime, the clinics now mean that she and her son can get 
treatment within easier reach. “I don’t need to travel far with my son. We 
visit the mobile clinic once a month. I am grateful for all that is being done. 
The nurses have really helped by coming nearer to us,” she said, adding that 
her thoughts were now very much focused on his future.

“What do I hope for him? I hope he [Motsamai] grows up and is healthy.”
 