
The living room of Tŷ Bywyd 
<http://www.living-architecture.co.uk/the-houses/LifeHouse/overview/> fills me 
with awe and terror. Awe because the room is museum-huge, with pale timber 
beams and a wall of windows overlooking picture-book Welsh hills, with bouncing 
lambs. Terror because although the furnishings are minimalist, everything – 
from the marble-topped coffee table to the draped-glass floor lamps – looks 
exquisitely breakable.

As someone who sloshes mugs of tea and spreads sticky blue ink from broken 
biros, I’m more than capable of doing serious damage here on my own. But I’ve 
got my wrecking crew with me: seven-year-old twin boys whose energetic chasing 
game in the last place we stayed ended with me writing a cheque to replace a 
shattered table.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmodernist-living-architecture-alain-de-botton-life-house-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbf29faef8ef09795db0205aee9e29687a9f6cd8%2F339_0_2468_1482%2F2468.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modernist%20living%3A%20let%20your%20mind%20wander%20at%20Alain%20de%20Botton's%20Life%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmodernist-living-architecture-alain-de-botton-life-house-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modernist%20living%3A%20let%20your%20mind%20wander%20at%20Alain%20de%20Botton%27s%20Life%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmodernist-living-architecture-alain-de-botton-life-house-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbf29faef8ef09795db0205aee9e29687a9f6cd8%2F339_0_2468_1482%2F2468.jpg>
That was a traditional holiday let: tin jugs, faux fur throws and a stack of 
board games. Tŷ Bywyd (it means Life House) is different. Designed byJohn Pawson
 <http://www.johnpawson.com/works/>, it is the latest building in the Living 
Architecture <http://www.living-architecture.co.uk/> organisation, set up six 
years ago by philosopher Alain de Botton, as a modernist answer to the Landmark 
Trust.

Instead of letting lighthouses and follies, it deals in spectacular modern 
buildings such as theBalancing Barn in Suffolk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/jun/03/holiday-homes-with-grand-designs-uk>
 andGrayson Perry’s gingerbread House for Essex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/15/grayson-perry-house-for-essex-uk-short-breaks>
.

A simple structure of black brick that merges into the dark trees around it, 
Life House is far from the flashiest of seven LivingArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> buildings around the 
country, but it has hidden charms. As I’m nervously clocking the nubuck leather 
of the elegant dining chairs, one son shouts: “Mum! Have you seen the prison?”

Let me explain. Tŷ Bywyd has two long corridors at right angles to each other, 
with rooms leading off. There’s that big kitchen/living room with beams, and 
three bedrooms, each designed for a different form of contemplation: reading, 
music and bathing. At the end of the darkest corridor a pair of tall wooden 
doors open on to a small room that’s empty but for two brick platforms and a 
stone set into the floor carved with this quotation from Pascal: “All of man’s 
misfortune comes from one thing, which is not knowing how to sit quietly in a 
room.” High above is a skylight, so that – this being Wales – you can enjoy the 
sound of rain falling as you lie on your varnished brick bunk. It feels half 
cell, half tomb.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmodernist-living-architecture-alain-de-botton-life-house-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44e439f68f301fe73cda207f12a262d6e3bdcec0%2F0_661_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modernist%20living%3A%20let%20your%20mind%20wander%20at%20Alain%20de%20Botton's%20Life%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmodernist-living-architecture-alain-de-botton-life-house-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modernist%20living%3A%20let%20your%20mind%20wander%20at%20Alain%20de%20Botton%27s%20Life%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmodernist-living-architecture-alain-de-botton-life-house-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44e439f68f301fe73cda207f12a262d6e3bdcec0%2F0_661_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
We soon make ourselves at home in the rest of the place, however. I lie in the 
bath reading a book, and listen to Kanye West’s dark twisted fantasies through 
massive sternum-thumping speakers. We watch an old Bond movie on a television 
whose picture is so pin-sharp we can count the hairs on Sean Connery’s chest. 
From white brick (Danish, handmade) walls to polished terrazzo (hand-poured, 
heated) floors, the comfortable simplicity speaks of much thought and money.

The house begins to work its magic. Removed from the messy reality of everyday 
life, I feel lighter, calmer. My obsessive mental inventory recedes – I know 
it’s vulgar to obsess over the £350 saucepans when I am meant to be 
contemplating Life – and I begin to relax. We take a walk up the hill opposite 
the house and lie in the spring sunshine, cloud spotting and watching kites 
circle. The boys dig holes, throw stones, and run higgledy-piggledy down 
tussocky slopes.

We have lunch in the friendly, faded spa town of Llandrindod Wells and are 
happy afterwards to swap its peeling 1950s shopfronts and steamy tearooms for 
our Ballardian barn. The boys play roly-poly over the modular sofa, flood the 
walk-in shower in their room and wonder at the number of dead flies. We buy 
bags of fresh, local food and cook a splendid roast (feeling slightly guilty 
about the lamb) in those fancy pans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmodernist-living-architecture-alain-de-botton-life-house-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f273357b4e36ec0c4723d94c7b8ecb84cb30565%2F0_904_2531_2529%2F2531.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modernist%20living%3A%20let%20your%20mind%20wander%20at%20Alain%20de%20Botton's%20Life%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmodernist-living-architecture-alain-de-botton-life-house-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modernist%20living%3A%20let%20your%20mind%20wander%20at%20Alain%20de%20Botton%27s%20Life%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmodernist-living-architecture-alain-de-botton-life-house-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f273357b4e36ec0c4723d94c7b8ecb84cb30565%2F0_904_2531_2529%2F2531.jpg>
For entertainment, the last place we stayed had Mrs Brown’s Boys: the 
boardgame. Tŷ Bwynd has a “conversation starter”: a sheet of lightly 
philosophical posers designed to trigger high-toned table talk. We ask the boys 
if they agree with the proposition that you are a different person in different 
places, and which most influences their everyday mood: art, literature, music 
or architecture (bit of a loaded question, Alain). It beats our usual 
dinner-table pastime of coaxing them to finish their broccoli.

One of the main draws of Tŷ Bywyd is its lonely location. But it’s easy enough 
to hire bikes or make day trips into local towns. We linger in Ludlow’s 
extraordinary church, learning about St Laurence, who was roasted on a 
gridiron, and choosing our favourite carving from the medieval mermaids and 
owls. Another day we waste a few happy hours in Hay-on-Wye, trawling bookshops 
andvintage emporiums <http://oldelectric.co.uk/>.

There’s something precious about Life House, in every sense. I can’t pretend 
that any of us really warm to Pawson’s mausoleum/wet room, but there is 
something about this architectural cross-dressing – about living, if only for a 
few days, in a house entirely different from your cluttered, inner-city home – 
that feels liberating.

On the last night, the boys pull on wellies and jumpers over their pyjamas and 
we head outside to see the stars. The air is clean, the sky unpolluted by 
orange glow. Space. That’s what Life House offers you. Space to think, to be 
someone different – to be the kind of person who reads Pascal and Thoreau, and 
doesn’t worry about how much the kettle cost.
• Accommodation was provided by Living Architecture (living-architecture.co.uk 
<http://www.living-architecture.co.uk/the-houses/LifeHouse/overview/>). Tŷ 
Bywyd sleeps six and costs from £3,200 a week
 