
England may be out of the series but they are not out of spirit. A vibrant 
display from the middle order in the positive manner that the coach, Trevor 
Bayliss, has constantly espoused enabled the tourists to finish the day on 284 
for four.

In Mumbai there was a stark reminder that a solid first day guarantees nothing 
–England were 288 for five after the first day there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/england-india-fourth-test-day-one-keaton-jennings-century-debut>
; nonetheless they have given themselves a chance of a consolation victory.

Joe Root finds frustration again in his search for Test perfection | Ali Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/16/joe-root-perfectionist-century-england-india>
To the fore was Moeen Ali <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/moeen-ali>, the 
most felicitous of strokemakers once he is established at the crease, but often 
the most fallible in his first half-hour. It is very hard to tell when Moeen 
leaves the middle whether he has been dismissed for a duck or a hundred; he is 
so imperturbable on the outside.

But here he sat unbeaten on 120, his fifth Test century, just enough to elicit 
a quiet smile. Just to confirm, Moeen was batting at No4 again in this match. 
It is not clear whether this should be his permanent post and my guess is that 
this will not be the case next summer. But once again Moeen demonstrated why 
England always want him in their XI; so do the fans for there is always a 
delicious uncertainty when he comes out to bat. Here he began batting as if he 
was a clone of Jimmy Anderson; by the end of the day he was provoking those 
comparisons with David Gower.

His most significant partnership, of 146, was with Joe Root. Most batsmen 
would secretly settle for 88, but there was no hiding Root’s frustration when 
he was dismissed by Ravindra Jadeja on that score. He has a remarkable record 
against India; in every one of his 11 Tests against them he has scored a 
half-century. However Root wants hundreds and that must be a source of 
exasperation for him in this series, in which he has now scored 485 runs and 
has always looked in exquisite form.

After Root’s departure out came Jonny Bairstow in pugnacious mood, the third 
of England’s musketeers. In his 49 there was not a single four – but there were 
three sixes all crisply struck off the spinners, all clearing very substantial 
boundaries by a distance, a sound tactic on a slow outfield.

The early signs had not been so optimistic for England even though Alastair 
Cook contrived to win his fourth toss of the series. Stuart Broad was recalled; 
Liam Dawson was given his first cap as Anderson, short of fitness, and Chris 
Woakes, short of wickets and runs, were omitted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fengland-india-moeen-ali-century-fifth-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35858436ebdd90756de77149e71bba19645caeca%2F0_124_3241_1945%2F3241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moeen%20Ali%20century%20gives%20England%20a%20strong%20platform%20against%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fengland-india-moeen-ali-century-fifth-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moeen%20Ali%20century%20gives%20England%20a%20strong%20platform%20against%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fengland-india-moeen-ali-century-fifth-test%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35858436ebdd90756de77149e71bba19645caeca%2F0_124_3241_1945%2F3241.jpg>
 India celebrate as Alastair Cook is dismissed cheaply again. Photograph: 
Danish Siddiqui/Reuters 
Batting was not easy in the first hour when – unsurprisingly – the pitch had a 
tacky feel to it. It was a minor miracle that there was any sort of pitch to 
play on or a stadium fit for purpose given the ferocity of Cyclone Vardah. 
Keaton Jennings was subdued and then dismissed by Ishant Sharma, who was 
brimful of energy either because of his recent marriage or the fact that he has 
been on the sidelines all series or perhaps a combination of both. Jennings 
drove at a wide delivery and edged to the keeper; in the ever-moving pecking 
order he is currently significantly below Haseeb Hameed.

Cook survived the seamers, but was undone yet again by Jadeja. This time he 
nudged defensively outside the off-stump and edged to Virat Kohli at slip. 
Jadeja has now dismissed the England captain five times in this series and has 
conceded only 60 runs to him. Before Friday Cook had been lbw three times 
against Jadeja and, more perversely, stumped. At the moment he cannot defend 
securely against the left-arm spinner, which is an unusual state of affairs and 
one that seems to reflect a jaded cricketer. In his past five knocks Cook has 
reached double figures without registering a half-century.

India v England: fifth Test, day one – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/16/india-v-england-fifth-test-day-one-live>
Moeen might have been out without scoring. Against Jadeja he drove and the 
ball just slipped through the outstretched fingers of KL Rahul at midwicket. 
Soon the innings was boosted when a howitzer throw from Kohli hurtled straight 
onto a helmet stationed behind the wicketkeeper, producing five penalty runs 
and a source of mirth even for Indian fielders provided they were outside their 
captain’s eyeline.

Otherwise the pattern in the morning was one of Root purring while Moeen 
stuttered.

In the afternoon Moeen found his touch, driving the spinners in the air in 
carefree manner. Root had scored quickly often through his slog-sweeps against 
Jadeja. But his last one did not work so well. There was a noise and India 
asked for a review; to Root’s horror and apparent amazement a bottom edge was 
spied.

Bairstow mixed steady defence with three spectacular strikes over the 
boundary. But like Root he was unable to go past the 1,481 runs scored by 
Michael Vaughan in a calendar year. He was furious – but only with himself – 
when a drive against Jadeja was caught at short extra cover.

While Ben Stokes dug in Moeen gave himself free rein when Sharma took the new 
ball 20 minutes from the close; the first two deliveries were caressed to the 
cover boundary and thus Moeen became the fourth Englishman to score 1,000 runs 
this calendar year, which has contained 17 matches, thereby joining Root, 
Bairstow and Cook.
 