
Moeen Ali delivered England’s best spell of spin bowling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/28/bangladesh-v-england-second-test-day-one-live>
 of the tour so far, five for 57 from 19.5 overs, which transformed the game in 
the afternoon gloaming. But you would not necessarily guess so from listening 
to him afterwards.

Most international spinners are bluffers; they look to sow doubt where there 
is none, hinting at mystery that does not really exist. The most prolific 
exponent of delivering propaganda designed to have batsmen feeling nervous at 
night was, of course, Shane Warne, who would tell us how he had invented 
devious new deliveries before every series.

Moeen Ali and Ben Stokes halt Bangladesh before England falter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/bangladesh-england-second-test-first-day-dhaka>
Even among more ordinary mortals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/bangladesh-england-second-test-first-day-dhaka>
, like modest finger spinners ,there is often a knowing nod after a batsman has 
played inside the line – “yes, of course it was the arm ball”. Anyone caught at 
mid‑on would be a victim of an oh-so-subtle change of pace. But Moeen professes 
none of these dark arts. He is probably the most self‑effacing international 
spin bowler in history.

He should bluff a little more. Spin bowlers are obliged to be a little 
dishonest. So when he was asked whether it was his “arm ball” that dismissed 
Mominul Haque on Friday he replied all too candidly: “No, it was just a normal 
ball that didn’t spin.” He did concede he was “happier about my bowling here”, 
but then he had to add: “I bowled some maidens and I don’t do that very often.” 
Not quite the self-assertive observation you expect from your premier spinner – 
even it is a correct one.

Then Moeen was asked about some of the boundaries that Tamim Iqbal hit. “They 
were off good balls” [the correct response – they were, yet Tamim was in such 
brilliant form that this could not deter him]. “So I did not get down on 
myself” [another fine reaction]. “And I get hit plenty of times anyway” [wrong 
– keep that to yourself].

One conclusion is that Moeen has become a rather better bowler than he thinks 
he is. His stock delivery is quicker than most; it carries venom; he spins the 
ball vigorously. Even he acknowledges “the pace I bowl is useful” and he is 
right especially when he is operating on the turning pitches encountered in 
Chittagong and Dhaka. He is also correct to stress the need to be more 
consistent.

Tamim Iqbal tucks in and gives spinners and Alastair Cook food for thought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/28/tamim-iqbal-england-spinners-bangladesh>
He has tormented Bangladesh’s left-handers. He is more comfortable when they 
are on strike and they have accounted for his first seven victims. On Friday he 
was better against the right-handers; he bowled exclusively around the wicket 
to them – usually the best option on a turning pitch – and his control improved 
as the match went about its metamorphosis.

Moeen is as generous about his colleagues as he is modest about his own 
efforts. He said Ben Stokes bowled “brilliantly” and that Zafar Ansari “did all 
right”, adding: “It was a very tough situation for him coming on against the 
left-handers [one of whom was Tamim in full flow].There should be time for him 
to get his rhythm in the second innings.” And he was complimentary about his 
mate, Adil Rashid.

But England’s most likely match-winner in the spin department in another 
compelling contest is, in fact, Moeen. But you’ll never get him to admit it.
 