
Monica Crowley, Donald Trump’s pick to be senior director of strategic 
communications at the National Security Council, said on Monday that she will 
not take up the job.

Related: Monica Crowley accused of plagiarism as she joins Trump team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/11/monica-crowley-accused-of-plagiarism-as-she-joins-trump-team>

It has been alleged that Crowley, a radio host, columnist and sometime 
contributor to Fox News,plagiarised parts of her PhD thesis and a 2012 book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/11/monica-crowley-accused-of-plagiarism-as-she-joins-trump-team>
.

“After much reflection I have decided to remain in New York to pursue other 
opportunities and will not be taking a position in the incoming 
administration,” she said in a statement tothe Washington Times 
<http://m.washingtontimes.com/news/2017/jan/16/crowley-forgo-post-trump-white-house/>
 on Monday.

Crowley previously worked for the conservative DC paper and was also an 
assistant toformer president Richard Nixon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2F_VUOP91jQ>.

She added: “I greatly appreciate being asked to be part of President-elect 
Trump’s team and I will continue to enthusiastically support him and his agenda 
for American renewal.”

Last week, Harper Collins removed from sale digital editions of the book, What 
the (Bleep) Just Happened. The publisher said it would not sell the volume 
until “such time as the author has the opportunity to source and revise the 
material”.

Retired Lt Gen Michael Flynn, Trump’s similarly controversial choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/mike-pence-trump-campaign-russia>
 for national security adviser, said on Monday: “The [National Security 
Council] will miss the opportunity to have Monica Crowley as part of our team. 
We wish her all the best in her future.”

The allegations of plagiarism against Crowley were made by CNN 
<http://money.cnn.com/interactive/news/kfile-trump-monica-crowley-plagiarized-multiple-sources-2012-book/?iid=EL>
 andPolitico 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2017/01/monica-crowley-plagiarism-phd-dissertation-columbia-214612>
. Crowley did not comment but the Trump transition team stood by her, praising 
her “exceptional insight and thoughtful work on how to turn this country 
around” andsaying 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/10/business/harpercollins-pulls-monica-crowley-book-for-plagiarism.html>
 the allegations were a “politically motivated attack”.
 