
We were surprised the other day to see, at the farm gate, a new notice saying: 
“Sorry, no eggs – visit of fox”. This was the farm where we had for years 
regularly picked up our freshly gathered eggs. It lies just off a little 
cul-de-sac that once formed part of the old east-west trunk route to Devon, 
which used to pass through the heart of Wincanton with its once fine coaching 
inns.

For many years now, traffic has skirted the town on the modern A303, and 
travellers seeking refreshment stop at the out of town supermarket café rather 
than at the former Greyhound Inn, where the future Queen Victoria was a guest 
in 1825.

And the current plan is for the A303 to become a “superhighway”, diving 
underground at a cost of £1.8m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/17/dan-snow-attacks-stonehenge-road-and-tunnel-plans>
 30 miles to the east of us, where the sheep graze and tourists marvel at 
Stonehenge, and near home (as elsewhere) becoming a dual rather than single 
carriageway past the air station at Yeovilton.

But, away from trunk routes, on the way to get eggs, we have passed the toll 
house of the Blackmore Vale Turnpike Trust, with its notice of charges made for 
use of the road in 1824 by coaches, curricles, barouches, wagons, landaus and 
hearses as well as horses, oxen and mules, laden or unladen (one 
penny-halfpenny).

Now that former turnpike road, winding as it does between the hedgerows and 
through narrow village streets down into Dorset, must cope, not with curricles 
and landaus, but with huge intercontinental freight carriers, tankers, cars and 
vans, coaches, giant tractors and agricultural machinery.

The volume and speed of such traffic has led to the construction of new 
traffic lights and a series of six traffic-calming chicanes in the village of 
Templecombe. We are reminded that, back in the 1960s, in the nextdoor village 
of Henstridge, we found that our front door had already been securely nailed up 
by the previous owner, as it would otherwise have opened directly into the path 
of passing traffic, unseen until too late.
 