
When an author you love writes a book you really don’t, it can feel like an 
act of personal betrayal.Michael Chabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/06/michael-chabon-witnesses-grievous-injustice-in-occupied-territories>
’s best novels –The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/oct/15/fiction.reviews1>, Wonder Boys 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wonder-boys.html> and The Yiddish Policemen’s 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/10/fiction.features3>, as 
well as his underrated debut,The Mysteries of Pittsburgh, are among the most 
luminous and finely crafted books of recent decades. He’s a writer who 
leaps nervelessly across genres and themes: from magic realism to detective 
fiction, from comic-book heroes to campusKünstlerroman. Always, though, there 
was the lightness of touch, the graceful precision of the prose, the sense that 
here was a writer whose heart was several sizes bigger than any of his peers.

In 2012, I did an event with Chabon at the Cheltenham literature festival to 
celebrate the launch ofTelegraph Avenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/05/telegraph-avenue-michael-chabon-review>
, his eighth novel. I’d finished it on the train up and it stank. I could 
scarcely look him in the eyes. It was sententious and low concept, as if 
someone had leached the joy from his world and the spark from his imagination. 
All the things I’d loved about Chabon’s early work – the surreal Bruno Schulz 
flourishes, the picturesquely neurotic characters, that radiant voice – were 
suddenly loathsome.Moonglow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/moonglow-463636.html>, his latest, landed on 
my doorstep with an ominous thud.

The truths the book tells are deeper than history, more enduring than mere 
facts

Moonglow holds itself out to the reader as the memoir of Chabon’s grandfather, 
narrated to the author on the old man’s deathbed. Like a peppy, Californian
Knausgaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/26/karl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself>
, Chabon is exploring the fertile hinterland between fact and fiction, feeding 
what David Shields calls“reality hunger” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/28/reality-hunger-book-review>. The 
first-person narrator of the book is a writer named Mike Chabon whose life, at 
least from the little we’re allowed to see of it, adheres closely to that of 
the real-life Chabon. There are footnotes, an advertisement clipped from a 
magazine, regular lists of physical objects that insist upon their place in the 
real world: all the appurtenances of the memoir genre.

The grandfather, an unnamed engineer, has lived a vivid and rambunctious life 
and now, dying of bone cancer and loose tongued from painkillers, he relates 
his history to Mike with the garrulousness of one who knows his time is short. 
The novel is structured haphazardly as far as chronology goes, leaping from the 
grandfather’s wartime exploits to his marriage to a period in jail. These jumps 
in time could be discombobulating, but we recognise a deeper logic at work in 
their construction – memory, hunting in the dark for truths and affinities 
within the seeming randomness of a life. “After I’m gone, write it down,” the 
grandfather tells Mike at one point. “Explain everything. Make it mean 
something. Use a lot of those fancy metaphors of yours. Put the whole thing in 
proper chronological order, not like this mishmash I’m making you.” The 
mishmash is important, though. It’s all part of the book’s project, its reality 
effect.

Related: ‘Based on a true story’: the fine line between fact and fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/06/based-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction>

The grandfather’s war is beautifully rendered. Just as Kavalier & Clay was 
both about the writing of superhero comics and a kind of superhero comic itself 
(albeit in prose form), here we have a rollicking story within a story full of 
doodlebugs and desperate raids that never descends into pastiche. The scenes of 
the rocket-obsessed grandfather racing through ruined, defeated Germany in 
search ofWernher von Braun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/03/germany.kateconnolly> are 
compelling. The book acknowledges its debt to that other great novel of 
ballistics, Thomas Pynchon’sGravity’s Rainbow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/07/baddies-in-books-captain-blicero-gravitys-rainbow-thomas-pynchon>
, even having Mike go to the library to reread the novel at one point. While
Gravity’s Rainbow was as sharp edged and thrusting as a futurist painting, 
Moonglow has a softer focus. The grandfather can’t forget what he witnesses at 
the liberation of KZ Dora, the concentration camp at Nordhausen where inmates 
were made to work on the V2. When the family gather round the television to 
watch the moon landing 25 years later, the grandfather, despite his rocket 
obsession, leaves the room. He recognises the cost of progress, thestain that 
spread from von Braun to the whole space programme 
<https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/vol-58-no-3/operation-paperclip-the-secret-intelligence-program-to-bring-nazi-scientists-to-america.html>
.

There is a crucial scene towards the end of the novel that seems to me to 
illustrate Chabon’s project inMoonglow. Mike and his mother are leafing through 
an old photograph album from which four photos – of the narrator’s grandmother 
– are missing. The photographs that are present are spooled through so swiftly 
that we almost don’t see them; then, over several pages, Mike and his mother 
work together to reconstruct the missing photos. This work of the imagination, 
the filling in of blanks – this is what novels can do.Moonglow is a book that 
seeks to challenge the primacy of facts, the reality fetishism that sees every 
film plastered with “based on a true story”. “Everything you’ve been telling me 
is true, though, right?” Mike asks his grandfather at one point. “Well, it’s 
all the way I remember it happening,” the grandfather replies. “Beyond that, I 
make no guarantees.” The truths the book tells are deeper than history, more 
enduring than mere facts.

Moonglow is full of the kind of prose that made me love Chabon in the first 
place. A flying bomb lies “jammed into a frozen pond like a cigar butt into the 
sand of an ashtray”; the grandfather’s schizophrenic wife sets a tree alight 
and “the hickory stood rigged in sails of fire”. The central relationship – 
between the grandparents – is depicted delicately and movingly, the war 
ever-present in the form of the damaged, dignified wife.

This is a novel that, despite its chronological lurches, feels entirely sure 
footed, propulsive, the work of a master at his very best. The brilliance of
Moonglow stands as a strident defence of the form itself, a bravura 
demonstration of the endless mutability and versatility of the novel. By the 
time I’d finished,Telegraph Avenue felt like nothing more than a brief bad 
dream.

• Moonglow by Michael Chabon is published by 4th Estate (£18.99). To order a 
copy for £15 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/moonglow-463642.html> or call 0330 333 6846. 
Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 