
Two women are holding a man down on a bed. One presses her fist against his 
head 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judith_Slaying_Holofernes_(Artemisia_Gentileschi)#/media/File%3AArtemisia_Gentileschi_-_Judith_Beheading_Holofernes_-_WGA8563.jpg>
, so he can’t raise it from the mattress, while her companion pins his torso in 
place. They are well-built with powerful arms but even so it takes their 
combined strength to keep their victim immobilised as one of them cuts through 
his throat with a gleaming sword. Blood spurts from deep red geysers as she 
saws. She won’t stop until his head is fully severed. Her victim’s eyes are 
wide open. He knows exactly what is happening to him.

The dying man is Holofernes, an enemy of the Israelites in the Old Testament, 
and the young woman beheading him is Judith, his divinely appointed assassin. 
Yet at the same time he is also an Italian painter called Agostino Tassi, while 
the woman with the sword is Artemisia Gentileschi, who painted this. It is, 
effectively, a self-portrait.

Two big, blood-drenched paintings of Judith and Holofernes by Gentileschi 
survive,one 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ee/Gentileschi_Artemisia_Judith_Beheading_Holofernes_Naples.jpg>
 in the Capodimonte in Naples,the other 
<http://www.uffizi.org/artworks/judith-and-holofernes-by-artemisia-gentileschi/>
 in the Uffizi in Florence. They are almost identical except for small details 
– in Naples Judith’s dress is blue, in Florence yellow – as if this image was a 
nightmare she kept having, the final act to a tragedy endlessly replaying in 
her head.

With words and images, she fought back against the male violence that 
dominated her world

“This is the ring you gave me and these are your promises!” yelled Gentileschi 
as she was tortured in a Rome courtroom in 1612. Ropes were wrapped around her 
fingers and pulled tight. The judge had advised moderate use of thesibille, as 
this torture was called, for she was after all 18. Across the court sat the man 
who had raped her. No one thought of torturing him. Defiantly, Gentileschi told 
him her thumbscrews were the wedding ring he’d promised. Again and again, she 
repeated that her testimony about the rape was reliable: “It is true, it is 
true, it is true, it is true.”

Gentileschi was the greatest female artist of the baroque age and one of the 
most brilliant followers of the incendiary artist Caravaggio, whose terrifying
painting of Judith and Holofernes 
<http://galleriabarberini.beniculturali.it/index.php?it/114/caravaggio-giuditta-che-taglia-la-testa-a-oloferne>
 influenced hers. She is one of the stars of Beyond Caravaggio, an epic survey 
of his rivals and disciples about to open at the National Gallery in London. 
With words and images, she fought back against the male violence that dominated 
the world she lived in.

Gentileschi achieved something so unlikely, so close to impossible, that she 
deserves to be one of the most famous artists in the world. It is not simply 
that she became a highly successful artist in an age when guilds and academies 
closed their doors to women. She also did what none of the other – rare – 
Renaissance and baroque women who made it as artists could manage: she 
communicated a powerful personal vision. Her paintings are self-evidently 
autobiographical. Like Frida Kahlo, Louise Bourgeois orTracey Emin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/emin>, she put her life into her art. 

And what a brutally damaged life it was. In the wild art world of Caravaggio’s 
Rome, artists were rich, arrogant and could do almost anything they liked so 
long as they stayed in the pope’s good books. Gentileschi must have met 
Caravaggio many times as a child: perhaps he even encouraged her to paint. Her 
father, Orazio, also a talented artist, was Caravaggio’s close friend. In 1603, 
Orazio and Caravaggio were up in court together after they scrawled libels 
about some enemy artist in the streets of Rome. In his evidence, Orazio 
casually mentioned Caravaggio coming round to his house to borrow a pair of 
angel wings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fartemisia-gentileshi-painter-beyond-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6652181d5bb98acbeab751a590cba7174657cae%2F163_166_965_1206%2F965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20savage%20than%20Caravaggio%3A%20the%20woman%20who%20took%20revenge%20in%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fartemisia-gentileshi-painter-beyond-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20savage%20than%20Caravaggio%3A%20the%20woman%20who%20took%20revenge%20in%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fartemisia-gentileshi-painter-beyond-caravaggio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6652181d5bb98acbeab751a590cba7174657cae%2F163_166_965_1206%2F965.jpg>
 Evidence of trauma … Susanna and the Elders by Gentileschi. Photograph: © The 
Burghley House Collection 
This gives us a lovely snapshot of Gentileschi’s childhood: the great 
Caravaggio popping by for props. Born in 1593, she was 10 when that happened. 
When she was 13, disaster hit Caravaggio’s circle. He was always on the edge of 
danger – he carried a sword and was ready to use it – but in 1606 he killed a 
man who had friends at the papal court. He fled. Orazio and his daughter would 
never see their inspiration again.

Being the daughter of an artist was the only way a young woman could hope to 
learn the complex skills it took to paint professionally in the baroque age. It 
seems that Orazio had ambition for his daughter – after all, he gave her a 
striking, classical name. And as her skill developed, he hired an upcoming 
artist, Agostino Tassi, to give her lessons. Then, in 1612, Orazio accused 
Tassi of raping his daughter, as well as tricking her out of a painting from 
his studio.

The resulting trial lasted seven months and shocked Rome. It made Gentileschi 
a celebrity – in the worst possible way. Amazingly, every word of this court 
case survives, in a transcript that opens a window on to the lives of artists 
in the age of Caravaggio. Gentileschi speaks to us from this 400-year-old 
document with a voice that is eloquent, courageous and compelling. It is a rare 
example of a woman in the pre-modern era taking a stance against the oppression 
that was just part of day-to-day life.

I pulled his hair, she told the court, and grabbed his penis so tight I even 
removed a piece of flesh

Tassi tricked his way into her room and started making unwanted offers of sex, 
she testified. “He then threw me on to the edge of the bed, pushing me with a 
hand on my breast, and he put a knee between my thighs to prevent me from 
closing them. Lifting my clothes, he placed a hand with a handkerchief on my 
mouth to keep me from screaming.”

She fought back. “I scratched his face,” she told the court, “and pulled his 
hair and, before he penetrated me again, I grasped his penis so tight that I 
even removed a piece of flesh.” But she couldn’t stop him. Afterwards, she 
rushed to a drawer and got out a knife. “I’d like to kill you with this knife 
because you have dishonoured me,” she shouted. He opened his coat and said: 
“Here I am.” Gentileschi threw the knife but he shielded himself. “Otherwise,” 
she said, “I might have killed him.”

The trial also featured months of meandering witness examinations. Friends, 
tenants, artists and relatives built up a picture of Gentileschi’s household. 
She is portrayed as a teenager who spent all her time painting, rarely going 
out. Her rapist, meanwhile, emerged as an even worse character than he first 
seemed. Several witnesses claimed he had murdered his wife – and he could offer 
no good defence.

Yet Gentileschi was tortured and Tassi was set free. Why? He was protected by 
the pope, because his art – forgotten today – was rated at the time. Everyone 
knew he was a villain. “Tassi is the only one of these artists who has never 
disappointed me,” said Pope Innocent X. Other artists pretended to be men of 
honour, he explained, but let him down. With the irredeemable Tassi, he knew 
where he stood.

Gentileschi, still a teenager when the trial ended, was shamed in a culture 
where honour was everything. Yet it also provided a kind of monstrous 
publicity. By the 1620s, she was a successful artist working as far from Rome 
as she could get. And she was taking revenge with the only weapon she had: a 
paintbrush. She could not write her story because, as she revealed during the 
trial, she was more or less illiterate. She could paint it, though, and change 
its ending – as her paintings of Judith and Holofernes show.

Gentileschi, however, brings out an element of the biblical story no male 
artist had ever dwelt on. In most paintings, including Caravaggio’s 
hallucinatory rendering, Judith has a servant who waits to collect the severed 
head. But Gentileschi makes the servant a strong young woman who actively 
participates in the killing. This does two things. It adds a savage realism 
that even Caravaggio never thought of – it would take two women to kill this 
brute. But it also gives the scene a revolutionary implication. “What,” wonders 
Gentileschi, “if women got together? Could we fight back against a world ruled 
by men?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fartemisia-gentileshi-painter-beyond-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1121ca2fbb8a3da4b31023228a8b325c7248f0c7%2F0_0_1498_2000%2F1498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20savage%20than%20Caravaggio%3A%20the%20woman%20who%20took%20revenge%20in%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fartemisia-gentileshi-painter-beyond-caravaggio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20savage%20than%20Caravaggio%3A%20the%20woman%20who%20took%20revenge%20in%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fartemisia-gentileshi-painter-beyond-caravaggio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1121ca2fbb8a3da4b31023228a8b325c7248f0c7%2F0_0_1498_2000%2F1498.jpg>
 Armed with a brush … Self-portrait as the Allegory of Painting, by 
Gentileschi. Photograph: Royal Collection Trust 
Beyond Caravaggio will showcase another Gentileschi work, her 1622 painting of 
Susannah and the Elders. Here, again, she uses a biblical story to dramatise 
what it was to be a woman in the 17th century. Two old men are spying on a 
young woman bathing, but Gentileschi heightens the creepiness by having the men 
come right up and openly stare, while other artists tend to show them hiding at 
a distance. Why does she show the voyeurs as totally unembarrassed, making no 
attempt to conceal their lust and intruding on Susannah’s space?

It is a disturbing effect, strangely reminiscent of her own persecution. In 
the, trial, it emerged that Tassi had an accomplice who also lusted after her. 
They both kept hanging around, bugging her, watching her, just like the voyeurs 
troubling Susannah. The trauma of Gentileschi’s rape and the trial that gave 
her no justice haunt her art. Yet she was not crushed by her suffering. On the 
contrary, the visceral power of her paintings made her one of the most famous 
artists in Europe.

Even the far-off British court had heard of her. In 1638, Charles I personally 
invited her to London to work for him. There, Gentileschi painted what may be 
her most original and important work. In her Self-Portrait as the Allegory of 
Painting – on show next month at the Queen’s Gallery in Buckingham Palace in an 
exhibition calledPortrait of the Artist 
<https://www.royalcollection.org.uk/collection/themes/exhibitions/portrait-of-the-artist/the-queens-gallery-buckingham-palace>
 – she depicts herself as a muscular, dynamic, forceful character, like the 
women who hold down Holofernes. Instead of a sword, she’s armed with a brush. 
Centuries before feminism, Gentileschi moves through space with extraordinary 
fluency, the maker of her own image, the hero of her own life.

 * Beyond Caravaggio 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/beyond-caravaggio> is 
at the National Gallery, London, 12 October to 15 January.
 