
Every night for the past year or so, Adriana and Omar Chavez have slept in an 
RV parked in East Palo Alto, a downtrodden community inSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley>.

On a recent morning before sunrise, they emerged on to the empty street. Omar 
showed his phone to his wife: 7.07am. “Shall I wake up the girls?” he said, his 
breath visible in the freezing air.

He headed inside to rouse their three daughters, huddled together in the 
low-ceilinged bed just above the driver’s cab, and ready them for school.

Related: Housing official in Silicon Valley resigns because she can't afford 
to live there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/11/silicon-valley-housing-official-resigns-california-home-prices>

In most places, the Chavez family would be an exception. But in the school 
district that includes East Palo Alto, located amid the extraordinary wealth 
generated by the tech industry, their plight is not uncommon.

Remarkably, slightly more than one-third of students – or 1,147 children – are 
defined as homeless here, mostly sharing homes with other families because 
their parents cannot afford one of their own, and also living in RVs and 
shelters. The district is being squeezed from every side: teachers, 
administrative staff and even principals have housing woes of their own.

The circumstances of the crisis are striking. Little more than a strip of 
asphalt separates East Palo Alto from Palo Alto, with its startups, venture 
capitalists, Craftsman homes and Whole Foods.

“You used to say you’re on the wrong side of the tracks. Now you’re on the 
wrong side of the freeway,” said Gloria Hernandez-Goff, the hard-charging 
superintendent of Ravenswood City school district, which has eight schools and 
a preschool.
 The Chavez family lost their home after Omar was injured, which prevented him 
from working. Photograph: Alastair Gee for the Guardian 
East Palo Alto has traditionally been a center for African American and Latino 
communities. Its suburban houses are clustered on flat land by the bay, 
sometimes with no sidewalks and few trees, but residents say the town boasts a 
strong sense of cohesion.

Yet as in the rest of Silicon Valley, the technology economy is drawing new 
inhabitants and businesses – the Facebook headquarters is within Ravenswood’s 
catchment area – and contributing to dislocation as well as the tax base.

“Now you have Caucasians moving back into the community, you have Facebookers 
and Googlers and Yahooers,” said Pastor Paul Bains, a local leader. “That’s 
what’s driven the cost back up. Before, houses were rarely over $500,000. And 
now, can you find one under $750,000? You probably could, but it’s a rare find.”

Hernandez-Goff, who worked as a community organizer and in schools in northern 
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> before becoming 
superintendent three and a half years ago, gives tech firms some credit.


Facebook recently announced 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2016/12/a-partnership-to-strengthen-our-local-community/>
 it had committed $18.5m for affordable housing in the area. Meanwhile, the 
Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative, founded by pediatrician Priscilla Chan and Facebook 
founder Mark Zuckerberg, her husband, has funded programs in the Ravenswood 
district including literacy and leadership initiatives, Hernandez-Goff said, 
adding that she meets with Chan or her staff monthly.

For all that, Hernandez-Goff thinks the systemic problems – housing shortages, 
wage stagnation, inequality – are beyond her. Her focus is on the immediate 
needs of families.

She wants to open a school parking lot to cars and RVs at night, so families 
with children can sleep without being disturbed; she thinks lack of sleep and 
stress are contributing to her district’s low test scores. And she would like 
to install washing machines in schools for those without homes.
 Gloria Hernandez-Goff thinks the systemic problems – housing shortages, wage 
stagnation, inequality – are beyond her. Photograph: Alastair Gee for the 
Guardian 
The Chavez family lost their home after Omar was injured, which prevented him 
from working – and then faced the area’s exorbitant rent costs. Average 
one-bedroom rents in East Palo Alto are above $2,200, according to the city, 
and money is tight for the couple. Adriana earns only $11 an hour at a day 
care. Their tired-looking RV, with its $1,000 price tag, seemed the most 
logical option for them and their kids.

“For them at the beginning, especially the youngest one, it was scary,” Omar 
said.

With the dawn sun only a gleam on the horizon, he turned on a generator so his 
daughters could use the lights. Soon after, a very small child came to the 
doorway. Her jacket was zipped up and she held a blue hair clip. Ariel, six, 
had been watching Zootopia on the TV inside.

The RV has almost no free space. The main cabin has two beds – one for the 
girls, and a second that converts into a table where the children do their 
homework. Omar cooks in a tiny kitchen, but because the refrigerator is broken 
there is no way to store fresh food. Bags of clothing are heaped on the floor, 
and the windows are sealed with aluminum tape for warmth. Omar sleeps in a back 
room crowded with belongings.

“The shower is here, but we turned it into a closet,” said Luna, five, 
pointing at a door. Instead, the family washes at a YMCA. They try to use the 
RV toilet as little as possible because the tank fills quickly.

The couple’s third daughter, Lannette, 15, was still in bed under some 
blankets. She was sick with what she thought was an ear infection. “It’s 
difficult,” she said of the living situation, “but at least I have somewhere to 
sleep.”

It’s difficult, but at least I have somewhere to sleep
Lannette, 15, who lives in an RV 
Several homeless families whose children attend local schools told the 
Guardian that they had considered moving to cheaper real estate markets, such 
as the agricultural Central Valley, but there were no jobs there.

One man shares a single room with three children, in a house where three other 
families each have a room. Another woman lives with her partner and five 
children in a converted garage.


Even teachers are not immune to such difficulties. Ten of the staff who work 
on early education programs – one-third of the total – commute two or more 
hours each way a day because they cannot find housing they can afford.

Amanda Kemp, 47, is the principal of an East Palo Alto school. Based on her 
income, she says she has no option but to share a home with three other 
educators. “I was done with roommates in college,” she said. “Not once did I 
even think I would live with others unless it was a significant other.”

Hernandez-Goff hopes to build apartments for staff on land owned by the school 
district. She speaks of her students and employees as an endangered species, on 
the verge of extinction.

Their predicament is not abstract to her. “I love this place,” she said. “I 
wish I could buy a house here.”
 