
Children’s authors David Almond, Michael Rosen and Meg Rosoff are among more 
than 140 writers, booksellers and librarians who have signed a letter calling 
on PenguinRandom House <https://www.theguardian.com/books/random-house> to 
reinstate relations with two trade unions after talks broke down last week.

Redundancy fears as Penguin Random House derecognises staff unions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/16/redundancy-fears-as-penguin-random-house-derecognises-staff-unions>
The move came after the publisher of George Orwell, Jamie Oliver and 
bestsellers Fifty Shades of Grey and Girl on a Train terminated its formal 
relationships with Unite and the National Union of Journalists on Friday. The 
decision affects the publisher’s London-based headquarters and includes 
editorial, production, sales, marketing and publicity staff.

The letter, seen by the Guardian and published online [PDF] 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/12/19/Untitleddocument_(1).pdf>, states 
simply: “We, the undersigned, call on Penguin Random House to reverse its 
decision to derecognise its trade unions.” Signatories also include Carnegie 
award winner Melvyn Burgess, Guardian children’s fiction prize winner Alex 
Wheatle and Queen of Teen winner Cathy Cassidy.

When the news broke on Friday, historian Antony Beevor, whose bestselling book 
Stalingrad was published by Penguin in 1998, told the Guardian: “If Penguin 
Random House is really planning to break existing agreements to reduce 
redundancy payments, especially at a time when the group is far from suffering 
financially, then this development is deeply disturbing.” Guardian columnist 
Owen Jones, whose book The Establishment was published byPenguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/penguin> in 2014, said: “Penguin: please 
urgently reconsider this decision and give the workers – who make your company 
the huge success that it is – the rights and protections that they deserve.”

Author Alan Gibbons, who organised the letter, said: “When Sir Allen Lane 
established Penguin, it was part of a democratic impulse to empower people 
through access to reasonably priced literature. The trade unions are part of 
the same democratic impulse, giving working people the right to negotiate on 
equal terms with their employer. To retreat from the idea of collective 
bargaining is a backward step.”

Citing the support she has received from Puffin, a Penguin subsidiary, Cassidy 
said: “I didn’t think twice about signing the protest letter and I urge Penguin 
Random House to overturn this decision. It’s a development that scares and 
dismays me, and I can’t help seeing it as the thin end of a very nasty wedge.”

The world’s biggest book publisher acted swiftly to play down the dispute. In 
an email to staff on Monday morning, Tom Weldon, PRH group chief executive, 
denied the decision to terminate formal union recognition was over redundancy 
terms.

“The negotiations with the unions were never about changing anybody’s terms 
and conditions,” he said. Negotiations, he said, were about the implementation 
of a single collective bargaining agreement following the£2.4bn mega-merger  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/29/penguin-random-house-book-publisher>
between Penguin and Random House, owned by German group Bertelsmann, four years 
ago.

Weldon added: “They were about achieving a new house agreement that reflected 
the combined Penguin Random House UK business (Penguin, Random House and 
Transworld) in London. This kind of agreement would have cemented the 
relationship between the unions and the company for the future.”

In a move to reassure Penguin staff, he described the unions’ claims as 
misleading. The unions had sought to extend Penguin staff’s enhanced redundancy 
terms across both sides of the business, Weldon said: “We did not accept this 
because this would have meant a broader agreement than the ones that previously 
existed. At no point did we … propose to reduce the terms and conditions of any 
employee. Our view was that an agreement could be signed without these new 
terms included.”

The unions responded with an email to staff thanking them for support and 
rejected Weldon’s comments. In a joint statement, they outlined the reasons why 
talks had broken down and said: “The union reps could not agree to remove these 
redundancy payment terms without the consent of our members, and it’s quite 
clear to us that the majority … did not want these terms to be removed.”

In response to Weldon’s claim that the door had never been closed on 
discussions, the statement added: “Yes, the door is still open for discussions, 
but only if our proposal includes the removal of the written terms of payment.”

Authors were unimpressed with PRH’s position. Michael Rosen told the Guardian: 
“Penguin is a large company concerned with the free circulation of ideas, part 
of what Émile Zola called the ‘republic of letters’. Free trade unions are part 
of the world which believes in that. If the Penguin company want to be known as 
flag-bearers within the republic of letters, they should of course allow all 
their employees to be members of trade unions and to negotiate with union 
representatives.”

Signatory Mary Hoffman, citing Robert Tressell’s The Ragged-Trousered 
Philanthropists and its theme of workers’ rights at the turn of the 20th 
century, said: “I can’t believe that workers are still having to fight the same 
battles over a century later. Ironically, the Modern Classics edition of this 
work is published by Penguin, I hope the bosses will all read it over 
Christmas.”


Penguin Random House has been contacted for comment.
 