
After this morning's Northerner post hailing Obama and Ladybird Day 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/the-northerner/2012/nov/07/blogpost-ladybirds-mathematics-dates-numbers-numerical-sequence>
, it's only right to find some consolation for Mitt Romney whose concession 
speech has been generallydescribed as gracious 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/nov/07/obama-four-more-years-america-verdict>
.

One of the interesting things about the defeated Republican was his Mormon 
religion <http://mormon.org/> which has resonances in the north of England, 
especially Lancashire which provided some of the first and most enthusiastic 
members of the church as Alan Sykes reported here earlier in the Presidential 
campaign 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/the-northerner/2012/jul/24/mitt-romney-mormons-preston-lancashire-ribble>
.
 Mitt Romney. His great-great-grandfather was from Preston. Photograph: 
Emmanuel Dunand/AFP/Getty Images 
These days, the slender spire topped by the Mormon's main angel Moroni 
<http://www.ldschurchtemples.com/preston/> at Chorley, is one of the landmarks 
of the M61 swooping north to the Lake District. It's handy for atheists and 
agnostics as well as believers if they aren't quite sure which junction they've 
got to. It's number eight.

I must add a personal interest. One of my favourite books is Riders of the 
Purple Sage by Zane Grey <http://www.zanegreyinc.com/> which includes many 
Mormons; and I've just discovered the sequelThe Rainbow Trail which does too. 
I'm just devouring the chapter about the US Supreme Court trial in Utah of 
polygamists' hidden wives.

The Mormons are in the news in northern England because their north west 
congregation is turning the site of a former student bar on Manchester's Oxford 
Road into a church and social centre. You can reada full report in the 
Manchester Evening News here 
<http://menmedia.co.uk/manchestereveningnews/news/s/1593063_mormon-church-to-be-booze-free-oasis-in-heart-of-oxford-road-student-land>
. One notable feature is that the five storey building, complete with rooftop 
basketball court, will not serve alcohol which Mormons do not take.

The church hopes that the building will help Mormon students who may feel 
isolated in a UK student culture which is often awash with drink. They're also 
looking to spread the word among worshippers' families that Manchester's 
universities will have this facility up and running from 2014.

Whatever people's views on religion, the project is another example of 
abstention's modest progress in the north and the UK more widely. Diners at 
Bradford's excellent Asian restaurants, for instance, will be familiar with the 
increasing number which do not serve alcohol and some which do not allow 
customers to bring it either.

And Jabez Tunnicliffe <http://www.hopeuk.org/about-us/band-of-hope/>, the 
founder of theBand of Hope <http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/REhope.htm> 
and a masterly populariser of temperance with an excellent sense of humour, is 
buried inBeckett Street cemetery <http://www.beckettstreetcemetery.org.uk/> in 
Leeds.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkSRaW2xvLYo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkSRaW2xvLYo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkSRaW2xvLYo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Here's a YouTube clip of Joan Crawford in another Zane Grey classic, Rebel 
Ranger, in case you have a spare 8.09 minutes and don't mind getting hooked.
 