
Thousands of people have joined protests against police abuse across Morocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco> after a fisherman was crushed to 
death in a garbage truck in an incident some are comparing to the death of a 
Tunisian vendor in 2010 that sparked the Arab spring uprisings.

According to Moroccan news website Le360.ma and magazine TelQuel, police in 
the northern town of Hoceima confiscated and destroyed swordfish belonging to a 
fisherman, Mouhcine Fikri, because it is not permitted to catch swordfish at 
this time of the year.

Morocco protests: share your photos and experiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/morocco-protests-share-your-photos-and-experiences>
Footage circulating online appears to show Fikri jumping into a garbage truck 
to retrieve his fish, before being crushed to death by the truck’s compactor.

Fikri’s death on Friday in the ethnically Berber Rif region prompted outrage 
on social media, and calls for protests in several cities over what is seen as 
police violence. King Mohammed VI called for a thorough investigation.

Fikri’s funeral in Hoceima drew large crowds on Sunday with the procession led 
by a dozen drivers in their cars – including taxis – and marchers waving Berber 
flags.
Safaa Amrani (@safamrani) 
Liberté, dignité, justice sociale #Marrakech 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Marrakech?src=hash> #Mohssin_Fikri 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Mohssin_Fikri?src=hash> #طحن_مو 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/%D8%B7%D8%AD%D9%86_%D9%85%D9%88?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/4hcwVpWsLG <https://t.co/4hcwVpWsLG>
 <https://twitter.com/safamrani/status/792885993661751296> October 31, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/safamrani/status/792885993661751296> 
Thousands of demonstrators – including activists for Berber rights – also 
gathered in the capital of Rabat, chanting “We are all Mouhcine!” while smaller 
protests were held in several other Rif towns and in the city of Marrakesh.

Political stability in Morocco cannot silence the murmurs of discontent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/09/morocco-reform-protest-arab-spring>
The general directorate for national security released a statement on Sunday 
denying its local officers were involved in Fikri’s death. Authorities have not 
commented on the circumstances of his death.

The interior ministry said in a statement on Sunday that the king asked the 
interior minister, Mohammed Hassad, to visit Fikri’s family and to ensure a 
“meticulous” investigation.

Abdelilah Benkirane, the prime minister, released a statement on Saturday 
offering his condolences over Fikri’s death, but urging members and supporters 
of his party to refrain from participating in protests.

The Moroccan Human Rights Association condemned the “heinous” incident and 
recalled another incident in Hoceima, in which five youths died during 2011 
protests by the February 20th Movement.

That movement emerged amid the Arab spring uprisings that began in Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> when vendor Mohamed Bouazizi set 
himself on fire after police confiscated his wares. Bouazizi became a symbol of 
struggle against unemployment, police abuse, corruption and authoritarian 
governments.


The slap that sparked a revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/15/arab-spring-tunisia-the-slap> 
“People are really pissed off, and can’t keep being silent anymore,” said 
Abdellah Lefnatsa, a union leader from a leftwing movement among the more than 
1,000 people protesting in front of the parliament in the capital, Rabat. He 
claimed that students, workers and activists have died because of police 
violence in recent years.

Rachid Hilali, a technology project manager at the Rabat protest, said, “To me 
what happened in Al Hoceima should not happen in 2016. This way of killing 
people by the police, our grandfathers are used to it, but we should not be 
used to this. We cannot accept this kind of treatment any more.”
 