
The government’s nominee for head of the schools watchdog, Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, has been opposed by a committee 
of MPs who said she lacked passion and leadership ability.

The decision by the Conservative-dominated education select committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/education-committee/>
 that it will not back Amanda Spielman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/amanda-spielman-next-ofsted-chief-inspector-ark-academies-ofqual>
 for the post of Her Majesty’s chief inspector of schools is believed to be 
only the second time a parliamentary committee has sought to block a government 
nominee for public office [see footnote].

Government nominees and select committees | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/08/government-nominees-and-select-committees>
The result is an embarrassment for the education secretary, Nicky Morgan, who 
selected Spielman to replace the current Ofsted head,Sir Michael Wilshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw>, and a headache for David 
Cameron, who must decide whether to expend political capital in appointing 
Spielman over the committee’s objections.

On Wednesday Morgan responded with a statement saying she was “surprised and 
disappointed” by the committee’s decision.

Morgan said: “Ms Spielman has a proven track record as a leader and huge 
experience in the education sector having helped found Ark, one of the most 
successful academy chains in the country and worked as the chair of Ofqual.

“I believe she will be a highly effective leader who will be unafraid to do 
the right thing and where necessary challenge schools, local authorities and 
government where education and social care services are not meeting the 
standards our children deserve. I will now consider [the committee’s] report 
and respond in due course.”

Next Ofsted chief defends lack of teaching experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/29/next-ofsted-chief-defends-lack-of-teaching-experience>
If No 10 chooses not to go ahead with the appointment or if Spielman 
withdraws, the DfE may reopen applications for the post and start the process 
again or appoint theother shortlisted final candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/22/hunt-for-new-ofsted-chief-inspector-of-schools-reaches-final-stage>
, Toby Salt, an academy chain head, to avoid political complications.

Spielman’s nomination received immediate criticism after it was first 
announced last month. Teaching unions said her lack of frontline training in 
teaching made her unsuitable to be inspecting schools.

But others were enthusiastic about Spielman’s calm manner in contrast to the 
more aggressive Wilshaw, and pointed to her managerial experience.


The education committee held hearings to quiz Spielman 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/education-committee/news-parliament-2015/ofsted-pre-appointment-hearing-16-17/>
, and its report concludes that she “did not demonstrate sufficient vision or 
show the leadership abilities we feel will be needed. We were concerned by the 
lack of passion she demonstrated for the job and the important contribution it 
makes to the lives of children.”

Angela Rayner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jul/05/quick-guide-shadow-education-secretary-angela-rayner-teachers>
, the shadow education secretary, said the report raised questions about 
Morgan’s judgment.

She said: “We need to get the right person in this role if our children are to 
get the education they deserve. I would urgeNicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan> to look very seriously 
again at whether Ms Spielman is the best person for this extremely important 
job.”

Neil Carmichael, the Conservative who chairs the education committee, said the 
MPs who took part in writing the report were unconvinced that Spielman was 
“prepared for the vast scope and complexity of this important role”.

He said: “Ms Spielman has experience of secondary education but she did not 
persuade that she had a clear understanding of the other aspects of the chief 
inspector’s role, including early years, primary education, further education, 
and children’s services.

“Ms Spielman’s responses on child protection were particularly troubling and 
did not inspire confidence that she grasped the importance of Ofsted’s 
inspections in preventing children being held at risk through service failure.”

Carmichael conceded it was unusual for a select committee not to support a 
government candidate. “However, it is our responsibility to hold government to 
account,” Carmichael said.

Mark Dawe, a former chief executive of the OCR examination board, disagreed 
with the committee’s conclusion. “Our view is that the government should go 
ahead with Ms Spielman’s appointment because we believe that she has done a 
very good job at Ofqual,” said Dawe, who now heads the Association of 
Employment and Learning Providers.

“As for the committee’s desire for passion, some of the previous chief 
inspectors have had this in abundance and if misdirected it’s not always a good 
thing.”

Increase teacher pay or face staff shortages, government warned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/06/increase-teacher-pay-staff-shortages-government-strb-nicky-morgan>
Spielman’s track record was bolstered by new analysis from the Sutton Trust 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/>, which placed Ark among the best multi-academy 
trusts for disadvantaged pupils. Pupils at Ark eligible for free school meals 
performed significantly above average, the research found.

The DfE’s new performance league table for academy trusts – to be first 
published on Thursday – also show Ark to be one of the best-performing 
secondary school chains in England.

Meanwhile, the government faced criticism over teachers’ pay in a report by 
the School Teachers’ Review Body 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/school-teachers-review-body-26th-report-2016>
. The independent pay review body warned that teacher shortages in England and 
Wales would worsen unless the government substantially raised pay, and 
predicted it would soon be forced to do so.

A DfE spokesperson said: “The 2016 pay deal includes a 1% uplift to pay ranges 
and allowances and highlights schools’ flexibilities around recruitment and 
retention, including offering salary advances for rental deposits.”

• This footnote was added on 10 July 2016: After this article was published, 
we received aletter from the Constitution Unit at UCL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/08/government-nominees-and-select-committees>
 that said its research had found four previous occasions when a select 
committee has recommended against appointment.
 