
Mahendra Singh Dhoni has resigned as the captain of India’s limited-overs 
sides with less than two weeks to go before their one-day international series 
against England gets under way.

Why drubbings exceed draws in Test cricket’s modern era
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/drubbings-draws-test-cricket-the-spin-andy-bull>
Dhoni, who has made himself available to face Eoin Morgan’s team, has led the 
ODI andTwenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> sides since 2007 
and steps down with an unprecedented record in both formats.

He captained India in 199 ODI matches with a national record 110 victories, 
including a career-defining2011 World Cup win on home soil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/apr/02/india-sri-lanka-cricket-world-cup>
 in which he smashed 91 not out from 79 balls in the final to lead his side to 
a six-wicket victory over Sri Lanka.

Two years later, Dhoni skippered India to an ICC Champions Trophy triumph in 
England and Wales, becoming the first captain to win all three limited-overs 
trophies, having also guided his side to World Twenty20 glory in South Africa 
in 2007.

Rahul Johri, chief executive officer of the Board of Control for Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> in India, led the tributes to 
Dhoni. “On the behalf of every Indian cricket fan and the BCCI, I would like to 
thank MS Dhoni for his outstanding contribution as the captain of the Indian 
team across all formats,” Johri said. “Under his leadership, the Indian team 
has touched new heights and his achievements will remain etched forever in the 
annals of Indian cricket.”

Dhoni, who won 41 of his 72 T20s, continued to lead the limited-overs sides 
after retiring from Test cricket in 2014. Virat Kohli took the reins in the 
longest format and, while an announcement over Dhoni’s successor has not been 
made, he will be the heavy favourite to captain all three sides. Before 
Christmas, Kohli amassed 655 runs at an impressive average of 109.16 to lead 
India toa 4-0 series victory over England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/england-india-cricket-test-series-defeat>
, who return to the subcontinent for three ODIs and three T20s.

Morgan, meanwhile, warmed up for the India series with a match-winning innings 
for Sydney Thunder against Melbourne Stars in the Big Bash. Needing five to win 
off the final ball of the match, Morgan hit Ben Hilfenhaus for six in what will 
be his final act on the pitch before he heads to India as he made 71 from 50 
balls.

The first ODI is on 15 January at Pune, with further matches at Cuttack and 
Kolkata.
 