
Kane Williamson’s excellent 104 not out led New Zealand to an unlikely 
seven-wicket victory over Bangladesh in the first Test in Wellington. However 
the result was somewhat overshadowed by Mushfiqur Rahim being taken to hospital 
after being hit on the helmet by a bouncer.

Mushfiqur took his eye off a shorter delivery from Tim Southee and was struck 
on the back of his helmet, requiring an ambulance to come onto the Basin 
Reserve pitch and take the Tigers captain away to a nearby hospital.

Related: Bangladesh open for business and ready to take on world after England 
win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/31/bangladesh-england-mushfiqur-rahim-test-win>

Mushfiqur, who had scored a superb 159 in Bangladesh’s first innings, was back 
at the ground by the end of the Test and was well enough to conduct his media 
duties at the presentation ceremony.

Mushfiqur told ESPNcricinfo: “I am feeling much better. It could have been 
worse. There is some pain and I will get through it.”

Bangladesh will hope to regroup ahead of the second and final Test, which gets 
under way on Friday in Christchurch. But the footage of Mushfiqur being carried 
off on a stretcher with looks of concern etched on the faces of several players 
was a reminder of the harrowing incident of Phillip Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/27/phillip-hughes-dies-hit-ball-cricket-match>
, who suffered a fatal blow to the neck from a bouncer in November 2014.

Mushfiqur’s departure, retired hurt for 13, left the tourists in dire straits 
as they collapsed to 160 all out in the second innings on the final day, 
leaving New Zealand a target of 217 in 57 overs.

That they won at a canter was largely down to the brilliance of Williamson, 
who raced to his 50 in only 43 balls to soothe any Kiwi nerves after Mehedi 
Hasan had accounted for both of their openers.

The New Zealand captain then brought up a chanceless hundred off 89 balls with 
his 15th four before sealing victory off the very next delivery as the Black 
Caps reached their total in 39.4 overs.

Ross Taylor provided able support in his 60 to complete a fine comeback for 
New Zealand and condemn Bangladesh to an unwanted record of scoring the most 
runs in an innings in a losing cause.

Bangladesh registered 595 for eight declared first time around before going on 
to lose - breaking a 123-year record held by Australia, who scored 586 all out 
against England in Sydney in 1894 before being beaten by 10 runs.

A top order wobble on the fourth evening saw them resume on 66 for three and 
Sabbir Rahman showed flashes of resistance with a battling 50 but it was not 
enough as Bangladesh meekly subsided.

Their plight was summed up by Sabbir taking the wicketkeeping gloves in the 
fourth innings, due to Mushfiqur’s unavailability and back-up Imrul Kayes 
nursing a hip injury.
 