
My mum, Patricia, has polycystic kidney disease (PKD), a genetic disorder that 
ends in kidney failure. We always knew she would eventually need a transplant 
and I was the only one in the family who was able to donate. My two sisters 
also have the disease and my dad has been living with cancer and receiving 
chemotherapy, on and off, for over 20 years.


'It's better than winning the lottery': readers' organ donation stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/13/its-better-than-winning-the-lottery-readers-organ-donation-stories>
Mum didn’t want to take a kidney from me, even though she was slowly dying – 
she didn’t want to put her child through surgery. We were both scared it 
wouldn’t work and what impact that could have on us emotionally.

But when her health deteriorated so much that there was a risk she would be 
too sick to receive a kidney if she waited any longer, we decided to go ahead. 
I donated my kidney in February this year.

 I was asked what I wanted to do if the surgeons found they couldn’t give my 
kidney to my mum after all. The options were to either destroy it, pop it back 
inside me or donate it to someone else who needed it desperately. The choice 
was easy. Even though my sisters have PKD and will one day need a kidney, they 
didn’t need it yet – and someone else did. I suddenly realised the significance 
of what I had to give and the difference it would make.

The transplant changed our lives – we don’t have that constant worry any more. 
We spent two years visiting the renal ward in hospital and met other patients, 
their families and friends. I spent time in recovery with some patients who had 
received an organ from a stranger. The joy and relief in these patients and 
their families is indescribable. To be able to give new life to someone makes 
organ donation something very special.

I’m a human resources consultant, and have been working with the League 
Against Cruel Sports, where chief executive Eduardo Goncalves and his team 
supported me through my recovery after the operation. I received many personal 
messages, cards and flowers from my colleagues.

Steve's story is all over tubes and buses – although he's no longer here
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jul/28/tubes-trains-buses-motor-neurone-disease-poster-campaign>
When Eduardo, who has himself donated a kidney to one of his sons, asked me to 
work with him on building awareness of organ donation, I was delighted, as I 
knew that the staff would be very engaged. They all have a passion for animal 
welfare, but also really care about people.

We wanted to encourage staff to consider joining the donor register and we did 
so by sharing our experiences of kidney donation. After telling our stories, 
and how we felt as a result, 98% of all staff at the league joined the donor 
register online.

I made a difference to my mum’s life, and to mine, when I donated my kidney. I 
made a difference by being involved in the awareness project – and thanks to 
the project, 40 people at the league will now make a difference to other 
people’s lives by being on the register.

Organ Donation Week 
<https://www.organdonation.nhs.uk/news-and-campaigns/organ-donation-week/> runs 
until 11 September.

The day I made a difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/the-day-i-made-a-difference>
 is theGuardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community - it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 