
I put my JustGiving page together one night in February, in about the time it 
takes to check Facebook after a day at work. It was easily the best 10 minutes 
I have ever spent.

As a fan of The Archers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qpgr>, I had 
listened for months as smooth-talking snake-oil merchant Rob Titchener slowly 
crushed the life out of his partner, Helen. Rob had slowly shut down every 
aspect of Helen’s life that he no longer agreed with: her friendships, her 
money, even her son, Henry; all of it nothing for her “to worry about” any 
more. The slow burn of the show made it excruciating listening: a slow-motion 
car crash was unfolding.

The Archers: call to help domestic abuse victims as Titchener trial starts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/04/the-archers-call-to-help-domestic-abuse-victims-as-titchener-trial-starts>
Helen was clearly in a lot of trouble. Why couldn’t someone – anyone – help 
her? Which is when it suddenly dawned on me one night after a particularly 
harrowing episode. Why couldn’t it be us? Why couldn’t the audience set up a 
real rescue fund for real women, on behalf of Helen Titchener?

I thought if I was really lucky and managed to get some traction on social 
media, we could, perhaps, make £1,000 over a few weeks, which would be amazing. 
I quickly set up theJustGiving page for a fictional character 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/helentitchener>, sent out a few 
speculative tweets, confessed that I may have gone a teensy bit mad to my 
friends on Facebook – and sat back.

As notifications for the first £10 or £20 started to flow in almost straight 
away, I stared at them in astonishment. By the time I went to bed just after 
midnight, I had already hit the original target, just three hours after I 
launched it. I poured myself a stiff drink to celebrate and put the target up 
to £3,000. Later the next day, we hit that too.

For at least the first month the campaign (as it quickly became) took over my 
life. I was constantly checking my phone, which was constantly beeping with 
notifications of new donations, retweets and media enquiries.

My wife, family (and employers) all had to put up with me being less than 
“present” through at least the first six weeks and I couldn’t have done any of 
it without their support. It was exhausting and exhilarating, but a day spent 
with the brilliant team at Refuge HQ in London left me determined to keep the 
fund going. There I learned that if my final target of £150,000 is reached, and 
along with the gift aid, it will fund nearly 3,000 nights in a refuge for a 
family.

So far, in just eight months, the Helen Titchener Rescue Fund has channelled a 
gobsmacking £135,000 and vast reserves of goodwill in the direction one of the 
country’s great unsung charities. It’s become part of a national conversation 
about domestic abuse and attracted support from everyone from Sir Patrick 
Stewart to Jo Brand to Frank Cottrell-Boyce.
Jo Brand (@iamjobrand) 
Please help @RefugeCharity <https://twitter.com/RefugeCharity> & @paultrueman74
 <https://twitter.com/paultrueman74> support women escaping #domesticviolence 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/domesticviolence?src=hash> https://t.co/AmXnSwAmnv 
<https://t.co/AmXnSwAmnv> #TheArchers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/TheArchers?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/iamjobrand/status/695615968379326464> February 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/iamjobrand/status/695615968379326464> 
Honestly though? Before this I had no real knowledge of domestic abuse. Not 
really. I was woefully ignorant about the damage being done to so many lives by 
coercive control, for example. But the comments left with each donation have 
helped educate me.

From heart-stopping testimonies from survivors to searingly painful memories 
of those who were not so fortunate, the page has collected them in their 
thousands.
Paul Trueman (@paultrueman74) 
Love this comment from a donation for @RefugeCharity 
<https://twitter.com/RefugeCharity> over the weekend at https://t.co/SgJfrRN25c 
<https://t.co/SgJfrRN25c> #thearchers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/thearchers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/FdeOq3Qipu 
<https://t.co/FdeOq3Qipu>
 <https://twitter.com/paultrueman74/status/744871905841250305> June 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/paultrueman74/status/744871905841250305> 
So many donations to the memory of friends, daughters and mothers who were in 
these kind of relationships. The real Helens. The real Henrys. Those who got 
out “in time” and those who didn’t. Those who realised and those who didn’t. 
Those who could help, and those who couldn’t.
Paul Trueman (@paultrueman74) 
To the thousands of lovely people donating to https://t.co/SgJfrRN25c 
<https://t.co/SgJfrRN25c>, here's why Refuge is so vital. #thearchers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/thearchers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/djFSYG7J6z 
<https://t.co/djFSYG7J6z>
 <https://twitter.com/paultrueman74/status/733246970551259140> May 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/paultrueman74/status/733246970551259140> 
There was the single line, left anonymously, that simply read “For our 
daughter” that hit me like a train one morning at work when I read it on my 
phone.

Or the time I was in the pub with a friend as a donation came in on Mother’s 
Day, and we both tried not to tear up as we read the anonymous words left with 
the money: “For my mum, no longer here on Mother’s Day. Sorry I wasn’t brave 
enough to let you know I was a ‘Helen’, though I think maybe you guessed. I do 
hope you somehow know I’m free now. Love you always x.”

Or this one:
Paul Trueman (@paultrueman74) 
There really is nothing I can add to this. https://t.co/SgJfrS4CWK 
<https://t.co/SgJfrS4CWK> @RefugeCharity <https://twitter.com/RefugeCharity> 
#thearchers <https://twitter.com/hashtag/thearchers?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/OvXyq3FFjq <https://t.co/OvXyq3FFjq>
 <https://twitter.com/paultrueman74/status/705379462607536129> March 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/paultrueman74/status/705379462607536129> 
The fund has had donations from a freemasons’ lodge, been given the winnings 
from a pub quiz team, and even a whip round from a group of friends who were 
out for dinner one night. We’ve had donations from £2 to £1,000 and every 
single one of the nearly 7,000 donations has meant a huge amount.

And there’s also been the wonderful Free The Blossom Hill One 
<https://www.impacttrading.co.uk/helenarcherrescuefund> merchandise organised 
so brilliantly by Michael Moran and Susan Waters (and her team) at Cotton Roots 
that has seen all the funds go to Refuge.
Lidl Kim (@lidlkim) 
My #FreeTheBlossomHillOne 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FreeTheBlossomHillOne?src=hash> bag is heavy. 
It's, like, a metaphor for Helen's burden#thearchers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/thearchers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/qhgSw7FJ61 
<https://t.co/qhgSw7FJ61>
 <https://twitter.com/lidlkim/status/731523945799815170> May 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/lidlkim/status/731523945799815170> 
And we’re not quite done. Money is still coming in from amazing people, as are 
the comments. AsThe Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> storyline reaches its 
conclusion this month, I would dearly love to hit the final target.

Helen might not be real, but thankfully the money is and so is the difference 
it will make to thousands of families.

You can donate to the Justgiving page 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/helentitchener> and also support Refuge 
bybuying Fairtrade Archers merchandise 
<https://www.impacttrading.co.uk/helenarcherrescuefund>. Keep up to date with 
the campaign by following Paul on Twitter:@paultrueman74 
<https://twitter.com/paultrueman74>. 

The day I made a difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/the-day-i-made-a-difference>
 is theGuardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community - it’s free! <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>
 