
When I saw that the local branch of a national charity was looking for 
volunteers, I applied. I had several years of experience working in PR and 
media, had some time to spare and was keen to use my communications skills to 
help a charity whose cause I felt passionately about.

After meeting with the volunteer manager and explaining my professional 
background, I didn’t hear anything back for weeks. Having been used to working 
in an environment where new jobs and contracts were agreed quickly and often 
on-the-spot, I was surprised at the lack of response. I was offering them my 
time, for free, for as long as they needed it – surely they would jump at the 
chance of help?

I work for a charity I love, but I’m still treated like a volunteer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/mar/16/work-for-charity-still-treated-as-volunteer>
I had to chase them up a few times, and when they finally got back to me, 
rather than ask for help with PR and marketing, they gave me some routine admin 
to do.

I hated to admit it, but I was sorely disappointed. The task I was doing 
wasn’t particularly pressing, and I knew I’d be better placed helping with 
communications – but I didn’t want to seem pushy or demanding by insisting that 
they put me in a particular role. After all, I wanted to help them with 
whatever they needed most, so I felt that if they really just needed someone to 
do data entry, I ought to be happy to do it.

I resigned myself to my role and helped out at the odd fundraising event where 
I could, but it was enormously frustrating. The charity’s lack of strategy with 
their communications led to so much effort being wasted, yet they weren’t 
willing or able to allow me to help them in any significant way.

I want to volunteer, but I keep being ignored
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/dec/13/i-want-to-volunteer-but-i-keep-being-ignored>
Eventually I left, the experience having put me off volunteering for a long 
time. I had gone from being full of enthusiasm and excited to help a charity I 
cared about, to frustrated and disillusioned with the whole process.

Sadly, my experience seems to be a common one. Several close friends have 
since told me that they have been put off volunteering because a charity hasn’t 
got back to them, or because when they did finally secure a volunteering role 
they were neglected or given tasks that didn’t suit their skills.

I realise that with charities so often being over-stretched and under-staffed, 
recruiting and managing volunteers can be a challenge. In my own case, perhaps 
I should have been clearer about what I wanted to do to help – after all, 
people give up their time for many reasons, whether that’s to use existing 
skills, to learn new ones, or just to become part of a community.

But whatever the motivation, it’s a charity’s job to ensure that both 
potential and existing volunteers feel valued, recognised and useful. In a 
climate where charities need all the help they can get, finding and keeping 
enthusiastic, dedicated volunteers should be a priority.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary 
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary> and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 