
Railway arches, Thai restaurants, swimming pools, vintage clothes shops – our 
irregular Birmingham club event, Below, throws parties in the strangest of 
locations. Usually on a Sunday, too.

But before it's time to party, visiting crate-diggers should head for Morris 
Hunting's legendary vinyl treasure trove,The Diskery (99-102 Bromsgrove Street, 
diskery.com <http://www.diskery.com/>). It's been there for years and it sells 
everything: jazz, swing, 1950s stuff, limited-edition picture discs, up to 
1990s rock and pop.

For menswear, I love sister stores A Too (9-11 Ethel Street, atoo.co.uk 
<http://www.atoo.co.uk/>) and Autograph (15-17 Ethel Street, 
autographmenswear.com <http://www.autographmenswear.com/>). They are my 
favourite shops in the world. In A Too, you've got high-end clothing, your 
Dries Van Noten and Vivienne Westwood, and in Autograph, more urban labels like 
Folk. I also likeIdeal, which is a skate shop at the Custard Factory (18-20 
Gibb Square,idealbirmingham.co.uk <http://www.idealbirmingham.co.uk/>) in 
Digbeth.

In and around the Custard Factory (Gibb Street, custardfactory.co.uk 
<http://www.custardfactory.co.uk/>) you'll find cool clothes and vintage shops, 
cafes, creative businesses and exhibitions. My mates and I rate Birmingham's 
contemporary art gallery,Ikon (1 Oozells Square, Brindleyplace, 
ikon-gallery.co.uk <http://www.ikon-gallery.co.uk/>), which has a second 
gallery, Eastside, in Digbeth.

My top eating places include South American bar-canteen Bodega (12 Bennetts 
Hill, 0121-448 4267,bodegabirmingham.co.uk <http://bodegabirmingham.co.uk/>), 
Pasta di Piazza (11 Brook Street, 0121-236 5858, pastadipiazza.com 
<http://pastadipiazza.com/>), which is a lovely little independent Italian, and 
French bistroChez Jules (5a Ethel Street, 0121-633 4664, chezjules.co.uk 
<http://chezjules.co.uk/>). For a cheap fill-up, our regular pit-stop is Soya 
(Unit 2, Upper Dean Street,cafesoya.co.uk <http://cafesoya.co.uk>). It's a 
little Vietnamese cafe. £5-£8 for a noodle soup.

For a drink I'm a great fan of the Lord Clifden (34 Great Hampton Street, 
Hockley,thelordclifden.com <http://thelordclifden.com>), a modish reinvention 
of the traditional pub, where you'll find Camra-approved real ales and plenty 
of street art. The garden's got lots of funny memorabilia in it: fluorescent 
pink post boxes, random lights and signs. It's really nice, and great for 
Sunday lunch.

For a night out, intimate bar-venue the Yardbird Jazz Club (Paradise Place, 
myspace.com/theyardbirdbirmingham <http://livebrum.co.uk/venues/the-yardbird>), 
and cool indie bar theSunflower Lounge (76 Smallbrook Queensway, 
thesunflowerlounge.co.uk <http://thesunflowerlounge.co.uk/>), are recommended 
city-centre haunts. To be a bit different head out through the trendy suburb of 
Moseley to theHare & Hounds in King's Heath (106 High Street, 
hareandhoundskingsheath.co.uk <http://hareandhoundskingsheath.co.uk/>). It's a 
combined pub-live entertainment venue and they really push independent artists.

But there's nowhere like The Rainbow (160 Digbeth High Street, 
therainbowvenues.co.uk) <http://therainbowvenues.co.uk/>, which I co-own with 
my Below partner, Lee McDonald. It's a Victorian pub and, last year, we 
converted the cellar into a 250-capacity club. The main feature has always been 
the warehouse-style covered courtyard. It's really easygoing: the crowd, the 
dress code, the door staff. The variety of events we've done – reggae, hip-hop, 
house, live bands, art-based graffiti shows – has brought a fusion of different 
crowds who all get along.

Adam Shelton is co-promoter of music venue Below and runs One Records 
<http://www.onerec.net/>

Interview by Tony Naylor
 