
Graduating from medical school and becoming a doctor was an unforgettable 
experience. I remember transitioning from theory to practice, books to reality, 
hypothetical exam scenarios played by actors to real-life stories of patients. 
During my initial years as a junior doctor, I thought I knew it all and was 
mastering the skill of empathising with patients. Little was I aware that I 
myself, the doctor, would soon be dealing with the gripping sense of loss and 
grief that many of my patients were all too familiar with.

 It was a summer evening and I was driving back home with an uncomfortable 
feeling in my stomach. My mum had travelled to Sri Lanka to help take care of 
her elder sister and had fallen ill withdengue fever 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/dengue/Pages/Introduction.aspx>. She was due to 
be discharged that weekend and Dad had decided to fly over to accompany her 
back home. Despite this, something made me feel nauseous that night. I put it 
down to irrational worry and long hours at work. I got home and soon fell 
asleep, a routine I was all too familiar with being a junior doctor.

 The next thing I remember is being woken up at 2.30am by the ringing of my 
dad’s phone. I hurried into his room as an uncomfortable feeling came crashing 
down on me. I saw my dad in floods of tears and instantly realised that my life 
had changed forever. My mum had passed away and my world was falling apart. An 
overwhelming feeling of numbness took hold of me for weeks on end. I had 
expected relentless pain and to be shedding constant tears but this happened 
rarely. There were times when I was desperate to cry but failed miserably. I 
often asked myself how much I cared – did I not love my mum enough? Surely I 
should be crying all day and night? With time, the numbness transformed into 
the feeling of grief and reality soon dawned on me.

I'm a depressed clinical psychologist but I daren't tell colleagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/jul/04/depressed-clinical-pyschologist-darent-tell-colleagues>
 I changed jobs and started working on a cancer ward. A powerful memory from 
this job is that of a young boy peacefully asleep at the foot of his father’s 
bed. The young dad had an inoperable cancer and we had earlier informed the 
family of his poor prognosis. The strength and graciousness with which they 
took the news still bewilders me. I was moved when I asked the little boy what 
he aspired to be and he replied, “My dad”. The innocence of the child, the 
integrity of the family and the strength of the patient made me realise how 
unbelievably resilient people can be at the worst of times.

 I had to break the news to a teenage girl that her mum was dying and was 
unlikely to make it through the weekend. I watched helplessly as she broke down 
and kept screaming for her mum. I struggled to hold back tears as the young 
girl inside me started calling out for my own mum. I felt about two feet small 
for thinking that I understood what suffering was. I remember being taught 
about bereavement and the various steps of the grieving process at medical 
school. But none of this prepared me for what I had to deal with that day. 
Being able to share the young girl’s grief had humbled me in a way that no 
formal medical education could have.

Many times during the job, the only thing I could do was to hold a hand or 
provide a shoulder to cry on. One thing I learned from losing my mum is that no 
amount of verbal consolation can lighten people’s suffering. Instead, just 
simply being present at someone’s side can be enough. I am thankful to all the 
patients and their loved ones for teaching me how to feel, how to ache and 
eventually, how to heal.


If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 