
Technology could prevent mental health waiting times
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/apr/02/technology-mental-health-waiting-times>
When he was five years old, my son Leif lost his sight in one eye. Leif was 
having quite regular eye tests and was passing all of them but, watching him 
play, my wife felt that something was not right and decided to take him for a 
more in-depth test. Her instinct was right – his doctors discovered that Leif 
had suffered spontaneousretinal detachment 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Retinal-detachment/Pages/Introduction.aspx> six 
months earlier. As his retina had been detached for a while, there were limited 
options as to what could be done and, sadly, surgery was unsuccessful at 
restoring Leif’s full sight.


Perhaps the most distressing part was knowing that this loss might have been 
prevented. With more thorough testing, Leif’s condition would have been 
detected and monitored and he might have retained his full sight. However, it 
is difficult to do a proper eye exam on children; understandably they don’t 
like dilation or lights shone in their eyes. Because of this, testing was 
pursued only when symptoms of a serious condition became apparent.

Given the outcome of the previous tests, we decided to have Leif’s sighted eye 
properly checked to make sure the same didn’t happen again. This required him 
to have another general anaesthetic. By this time, I had become quite the 
paranoid parent and subsequently, on quizzing the surgeon assessing my son, I 
was astounded to be told “You’ve got to understand I’m only getting a glimpse 
here”. The fact that this was the best treatment in the country, and yet they 
could still only partially see the eye in a routine examination, was 
unbelievable to me. As an industrial designer, with product development 
experience in CT scanners and ultrasound, I began to think that the whole 
process was completely unworkable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fmy-sons-blindness-inspired-me-to-save-the-sight-of-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429715191671%2F2b69d1be-1deb-422b-9c81-e809e572cd2a-880x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20son%E2%80%99s%20blindness%20inspired%20me%20to%20save%20the%20sight%20of%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fmy-sons-blindness-inspired-me-to-save-the-sight-of-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20son%E2%80%99s%20blindness%20inspired%20me%20to%20save%20the%20sight%20of%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fmy-sons-blindness-inspired-me-to-save-the-sight-of-others%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429715191671%2F2b69d1be-1deb-422b-9c81-e809e572cd2a-880x1020.jpeg>
 ‘Our scanner captures more of the retina in a single shot than any other 
technology.’ Photograph: Optos 
The examination of Leif’s good eye showed that it was also at high risk. He 
had prophylactic surgery to change the shape of his eye and reduce tension. In 
the years following this, he had lots of follow-up checks, each of which 
reinforced my feeling that the techniques being used were inconsistent and 
limiting. Compared with advances in other areas of medicine such as cardiology, 
ophthalmology was a technological backwater, based on diagnostic techniques 
developed 100 years before.


I knew that millions of patients were receiving only cursory eye tests, and 
the practice of waiting until a disease manifested itself before acting meant 
it was often too late to save a person’s sight. The whole approach seemed 
geared towards treatment rather than prevention.

So I set about developing a new product. I wanted to create a fast, 
non-intrusive, whole-retina scanner designed to be patient-friendly enough to 
be used on a five year old. While it sounds simple, this is actually a very 
demanding specification. In many ways it was also an unbackable proposition for 
an investor, as we didn’t have a technology. We were turned down by every 
investor we approached.

Thankfully, some private funders helped to support us and we managed to raise 
several million pounds to get the project off the ground. The equipment we 
eventually developed was still expensive, prohibitively so for some NHS trusts. 
But then someone suggested an alternative model – we would give the machines 
away and charge patients a small fee per use, like a subscription. This was 
what really made the retinal imaging devices a success as it made it affordable 
for professionals to use better equipment.

Being diagnosed with Parkinson's at 13 made me an expert in self-care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/feb/19/being-diagnosed-with-parkinsons-at-13-has-made-me-an-expert-in-selfcare>
Today, 7,500 of our systems have scanned 50 million patients worldwide. Our 
scanner captures more of the retina in a single shot than any other technology 
and is 66% more effective at identifying disorders of the eye than traditional 
methods.

In 2006, we won the Royal Academy of Engineering MacRobert Award 
<http://www.raeng.org.uk/grants-and-prizes/prizes-and-medals/other-awards/the-macrobert-award>
, the UK’s most prestigious engineering prize, for the development of the 
technology. The same award, which recognises both the commercial success and 
social impact of engineering innovation, went to Sir Godfrey Hounsfield back in 
1972 for his invention of the CT scanner. Given my background in that area, 
winning the MacRobert Award was the ultimate honour – I can only hope that my 
invention has a similar impact to Hounsfield’s.

The prophylactic surgery on Leif’s good eye lasted 15 years but when he turned 
21, he went blind in this eye too. When we went to hospital for a final test, 
they had one of our scanners. The device showed that Leif had macular 
detachment, which required a terrifying six-hour operation that held a 
significant risk of collapsing the eye. Thankfully, the surgery was a success 
and, even though it has not been plain sailing, Leif still has sight in that 
eye in his thirties. And I am proud to say that it is thanks in part to theOptos
 <http://www.optos.com/en-gb/> scanning machine.
 