
Cindy Sherman <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/cindy-sherman> is 
ordinary. ‘I’m terribly average,’ she says. It’s true; she looks like someone 
whose idea of excitement is to swap brands of washing powder. But there is an 
unexpected B-side to her shopping list. ‘I buy my tits and asses from the same 
store as my noses. Now I think I have every kind of fake breast and backside 
available.’


Using this arsenal of appendages, she performs dextrous surgery on her own 
non- descript self then photographs the results. Her repertoire is a freak-show 
of invention; she can do an effortless corpse, a convincing Louis XIV, a 
wild-eyed toothless lunatic or a Virgin Mary with a sling-around plastic 
mammary ripe for suckling. ‘I know a picture works when I don’t recognise 
myself at all. When I look like a dead body or another person entirely.’


Or a pig. She likes herself best as a grotesque, rheumy eyed pig. ‘It’s sad in 
a tender sort of way,’ she says. It’s also repellent in the nightmare mode. I 
challenge anyone to entertain the idea of sleep with those porcine pupils 
peering down from the wall at bed time.


Sherman was keen to provoke just this sort of discomfort when she progressed, 
in 1981, from photographing herself for a series of black and white ‘film 
stills’ as a variously torpedo breasted and be- sweatered Fifties starlet, to 
images hinting at traumatic sexual violation and which portrayed death and 
decomposition in vibrant, unforgiving technicolour.


‘The more horrific works came out of a feeling that everyone accepted my stuff 
too easily. I was deliberately trying to be antagonistic towards collectors and 
critics. I thought; right, let’s see if they want to shell out money for this.’ 
Success is a bitch, right?


As it turned out, all of New York’s art world wanted to shell out and cash in 
on Cindy Sherman. Short of bottling and selling her dirty bath water, they were 
happy to pay for anything in her orbit.

In his book Nothing If Not Critical Robert Hughes wrote that Sherman is 
‘Probably the only American artist of this generation who managed to introduce 
a real shudder of feeling into media-based work . . . enacting her parade of 
gender caricatures, bad dreams and grotesqueries for the camera.’

Inspired by her versatility, Andy Warhol once said: ‘She’s good enough to be a 
real actress,’ but Sherman thinks not. She prefers mute self-representation and 
enjoys almost reclusive solitude. She gave up trying to work with other people 
after she was commissioned by French Vogue to shoot a set of fashion 
photographs.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcindy-sherman-interview-photography-1991%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6928cbf563c05aa401ab63094a74be0c57d1e7c%2F0_0_3400_1700%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20vile%20bodies%3A%20Cindy%20Sherman%20interview%20-%20archive%2C%2010%20January%201991&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcindy-sherman-interview-photography-1991%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20vile%20bodies%3A%20Cindy%20Sherman%20interview%20-%20archive%2C%2010%20January%201991&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcindy-sherman-interview-photography-1991%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6928cbf563c05aa401ab63094a74be0c57d1e7c%2F0_0_3400_1700%2F3400.jpg>
 Cindy Sherman, Untitled #92, 1981. Photograph: Courtesy of the artist and 
Metro Pictures 
Her idea of an interesting picture was to black out the models eyes and teeth 
and make them look as ugly and unappetising as possible. The fierce fashion 
police at Vogue weren’t best pleased with the unorthodox toothless hag effect 
she’d achieved. From then on she resolved to control all her work herself. She 
would be photographer, model, muse, costume designer and makeup artist 
simultaneously.


But now she is tiring of the gimmick. ‘People are finding it too 
entertaining,’ she says. A dose of gloom is on the horizon just to keep us on 
our toes.


She is considering the idea of a new series where she will not feature. 
Instead, dismembered limbs will better convey the horror of ‘futuristic post- 
holocaustal decomposition.’ Rotting potatoes, pools of vomit and putrid flesh 
notwithstanding, Sherman is a mild-mannered, cheerful sort. Although her 
endorsement of this fact is a touch unconvincing. ‘I’m happy enough not to want 
to kill myself.’

Large numbers of New York art critics, usually called Arthur, regularly 
wrestle with earnest, meandering 8,000 word essays in their attempts to dissect 
the deeply disturbed character that must surely lurk behind these photographic 
cries-for-help.


Sherman thinks Arthur must be confused by the self-portrait label used to 
describe her photos. ‘People assume that a self-portrait is narcissistic and 
you’re trying to reveal something about yourself; fantasies or autobiographical 
information. In fact none of my work is about me or my private life.’ Shame. 
She doesn’t have sex while wearing a pig snout after all. There is no rotting 
corpse in the spare bedroom, no nipple clamps in the cutlery drawer. Instead 
she watches telly and stays in a lot. She is not, she says with some pride, In 
Therapy even. ‘Maybe I am well-adjusted because I live out my neuroses on film 
instead.’


An exhibition of Cindy Sherman’s photographs opens at the Saatchi Collection 
<https://www.saatchigallery.com/aipe/cindy_sherman.htm>, 98A, Boundary Road, 
NW8, on January 11.

 