
In the past nine months my bicycle has become my most important possession, 
taking me to work but also enabling me to get away from home in my spare time.

As part of my no spend challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2015/nov/26/black-friday-buy-nothing-day>
 I cut my travel budget to zero. As I usually rode to work I didn’t think 
tacking on a few extra miles each week would make much difference, but I hadn’t 
factored in the extra miles I would have to do to be part of events and to 
spend time with friends and family.


This summer has seen me riding to the New Forest (125 miles each way) for a 
friend’s wedding, climbing Ditchling Beacon en route to Brighton and pedalling 
35 miles each way to my brother’s house to meet my new niece. (Add to that 
another 100 miles to raise money for Mind.)

All the rides were worth it but the fact they happened within a short space of 
time has been exhausting. And it’s not just me who’s tired, my bike is looking 
a bit worse for wear as well. In fact, I thought I would have to put my hand in 
my pocket for the first time since November and shell out for new brake pads as 
mine were dangerously close to the end of their life.

That was until a conversation on Twitter ended with a kind Glaswegian called 
Bean sending me some new brake pads with an order to “pay it forward” when I 
asked what I could do in return. It was such a generous gesture, but 
unfortunately they got lost in the post. Luckily, a cycle geek friend with a 
house full of bike parts then came to my rescue with some pre-used pads that 
he’d stripped off one of his many bikes, and I’m safely still on the road.

But getting hold of brake pads was only half the job, I also had to fit them. 
Despite cycling for a few years I’d never bothered to learn how to fix my bike, 
instead taking it to a local bike shop for repairs. Not any more.

Being forced to take care of my bicycle has given me so much more confidence 
when it comes to repairs. I was able to fix a problem with my derailleur early 
in the year thanks togreat tutorial recommendations from Guardian readers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/02/my-year-of-buying-nothing-six-months-in>
 and I’d recommend anyone London-based who wants to learn more about their bike 
gets to know DIY bike workshopLondon Bike Kitchen <http://www.lbk.org.uk/>.

The fact that I could fix the basics meant I felt confident taking my creaking 
bike on holiday. Along with my husband, I spent six days cycling around the 
Suffolk and Norfolk coastline, camping on beaches and in forests.

Although wild camping is not allowed outside of Scotland and some areas of 
England, you can camp with permission from land owners.

We loaded up our bikes with a tent, sleeping bags, clothes and as much food as 
we could carry, and headed out on an adventure. Other than plotting a rough 
route and checking Google maps for deserted places we had to leave most of the 
trip to chance.


It was such a departure from the holidays I usually take, where I’d jump on a 
budget flight to drink beer in a different city and tick off a list of must-see 
museums and monuments.

Six days out in the wilds of Norfolk was something I hadn’t done since I was a 
kid. Being in the middle of nowhere with nothing to do and no phone signal 
meant we had no choice but to relax, something that I find hard to do, and 
enjoy the scenery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fno-spending-best-holiday-cycling-norfolk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F152d29e533752b475262960933325099988b3107%2F0_742_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20year%20of%20no%20spending%3A%20I've%20been%20on%20one%20of%20the%20best%20holidays%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fno-spending-best-holiday-cycling-norfolk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20year%20of%20no%20spending%3A%20I%27ve%20been%20on%20one%20of%20the%20best%20holidays%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fno-spending-best-holiday-cycling-norfolk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F152d29e533752b475262960933325099988b3107%2F0_742_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Winterton, Norfolk: ‘Being in the middle of nowhere with nothing to do meant 
we had no choice but to relax and enjoy the scenery.’ Photograph: Michelle 
McGagh 
It was one of the best holidays I have ever had. Of course, it wasn’t without 
its struggles, including the lack of facilities that meant washing in the 
freezing sea and emergency dashes around town to find public toilets. Eating 
was also problematic as we couldn’t nip into a pub for lunch, instead we had to 
rely on what we had brought with us (mostly peanut butter and banana bread) and 
food from shops that don’t stock the best selection unless you want to live on 
crisps.

The choice was so limited in one village, where pork pies reigned supreme, 
that I bought a portion of chips – the only hot food we ate and the first time 
I’ve bought food from anywhere but a supermarket in nine months.

After 370 miles of cycling our holiday was complete and we arrived home 
bedraggled and with the most ridiculous tan lines. I’m already planning another 
camping and cycling holiday next year when my challenge is over, meaning next 
time I’ll be able to enjoy the pubs en route as well as the scenery.

If anyone has any tips for cycle and camping holidays I would love to know 
where your favourite spots are.
 