
Aung Kyaw Min Tun has lived in Myanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> for all of his 24 years, his native 
tongue is Burmese, and his parents and grandparents were born here. But he is 
not officially a citizen of the country and has no idea if he ever will be.

The problem is that he is a Tamil Hindu, an ethnicity that does not fit neatly 
into the country’s complex citizenship law, in which nationality is based on 
membership of one of135 “national races” 
<http://dspace.lib.niigata-u.ac.jp/dspace/bitstream/10191/6399/1/01_0053.pdf> 
that supposedly lived within the country’s boundaries before the British 
invaded in 1824. The law, created byMyanmar’s military dictatorship in 1982 
<https://www.hrw.org/reports/2000/burma/burm005-02.htm>, excludes others from 
full citizenship, but allows them to apply for two lower tiers with fewer 
rights.

‘My father punched me and tore at my clothes’: confronting rape in Myanmar | 
Charlotte England and Joshua Carroll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/26/myanmar-rape-sexual-violencxe-draft-law-my-father-punched-me-tore-my-clothes>
The law’s heavy emphasis on ethnicity has led rights groups to call it 
discriminatory. The legislation has also been enforced selectively, with 
multiple layers of bureaucracy and endemic corruption.

The result can be years of waiting for those who do not fit obviously into the 
list of national races, including ethnic Chinese, Indians, Nepalese, many 
Muslims, and people with a foreign parent or grandparent.

“The citizenship process has been a shambles, at least since the military took 
power in 1962,” said Ronan Lee, a political consultant and PhD candidate at 
Deakin University in Melbourne who has studied the issue.

Aung Kyaw Min Tun’s family exemplifies the chaos. His father holds a 
citizenship card that he obtained before the 1982 law, while his brother paid a 
bribe of about $300 (£245) for one in the early 2000s. His mother and older 
sister only have residency permits, and he and his younger sister have been 
unable to obtain any documents even though they are technically eligible to be 
second-class “associate citizens”.

He said two-thirds of his community in Yangon faced the same problems – mostly 
those too poor to pay large, informal fees. Without citizenship documents, he 
said, he cannot travel freely within the country, obtain a passport, or buy 
property. “If someone tried to kick us out, we’d have to go, because we have no 
documents. It’s scary,” he said. “I was born here and will die here, so I 
should have documents to show that.”

Most talk of citizenship is focused on the Rohingyas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/21/aung-san-suu-kyi-tells-un-that-the-term-rohingya-will-be-avoided>
, a stateless Muslim minority of about 1 million people living in Rakhine 
state, on the border with Bangladesh.

They fall outside the list of national ethnicities and live under an 
apartheid-like system that restricts their ability to move around for 
employment or other reasons, and severely limits their access to healthcare and 
education. They have suffered from bouts of communal violence, and almost 
120,000 remain in squalid camps after being driven from their homes in 2012.

The plight of the Rohingyas seems unlikely to improve without an overhaul of 
the citizenship law.

The Seagull Foundation, a human rights organisation, recently surveyed 100 
religious or ethnic minorities in Mandalay and found that almost all had 
problems obtaining a national registration card. Many said they were told they 
had to change their ethnicity or religion to fit into a prescribed category to 
receive the document.

Respondents also reported paying bribes of up to 500,000 kyat (£315) and said 
their children were being excluded from programmes issuing national 
registration cards in schools. Several people, particularly Muslims, said they 
were forced to accept third-tier “naturalised citizen” status in order to get 
their documentation.

'No Muslims allowed': how nationalism is rising in Aung San Suu Kyi's Myanmar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-muslims-allowed-how-nationalism-is-rising-in-aung-san-suu-kyis-myanmar>
Myint Kyaing, permanent secretary at Myanmar’s ministry of immigration, said 
the government was trying to combat such corruption by conducting spot checks 
in local immigration offices and promptly investigating complaints. He declined 
to comment on broader problems with the citizenship law.

But for Harry Myo Lin, the head of the Seagull Foundation, fundamental reform 
is necessary, in addition to more stringent anti-corruption efforts. “Ethnicity 
and religion should not be on ID cards,” he said. “An immigration system should 
have citizens and non-citizens.”


Given the unrest in Rakhine and elsewhere, as well as a resurgence in Buddhist 
nationalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-muslims-allowed-how-nationalism-is-rising-in-aung-san-suu-kyis-myanmar>
, it is not surprising Muslims have often borne the brunt of this corruption.


Lee said that even Muslims who qualified as citizens under the 1982 law had 
experienced problems asserting their rights. “Travel restrictions in Rakhine 
state seem to be enforced based on religion and skin tone rather than whether 
people have the correct documents,” he said.

Among the victims is Phwey Phwe New, 26, an ethnic Kaman woman who has been 
stuck in That Kay Pyin camp in Sittwe, the capital of Rakhine state, since the 
2012 violence. Kaman Muslims are on the list of national ethnicities yet suffer 
similar treatment as the Rohingyas. Before 2012, it had never occurred to her 
that she might need a citizenship card. She had taken her status for granted 
and travelled freely.

She set out to obtain documentation, but said it took two years. “When I went 
to the office, they asked for bribes,” she said. “I spent a lot of money.”

Despite receiving her identity card in 2015, she cannot leave the camp because 
her husband, also a Kaman, is still waiting for his card.

As for the Rohingyas, efforts to normalise their situation have stalled. This 
is not only due to animosity from nationalist Buddhists but also because of the 
Rohingyas’ mistrust of the government.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmyanmar-casts-minorities-to-margins-citizenship-law-denies-legal-identity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bb20b4afab594dec07904065bf50175f7aa227b%2F0_495_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Myanmar%20casts%20minorities%20to%20the%20margins%20as%20citizenship%20law%20denies%20legal%20identity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmyanmar-casts-minorities-to-margins-citizenship-law-denies-legal-identity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Myanmar%20casts%20minorities%20to%20the%20margins%20as%20citizenship%20law%20denies%20legal%20identity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmyanmar-casts-minorities-to-margins-citizenship-law-denies-legal-identity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bb20b4afab594dec07904065bf50175f7aa227b%2F0_495_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Muslim Rohingyas in the courtyard of a school sheltering displaced people in 
the village of Theik Kayk Pyim, on the outskirts of Sittwe, capital of 
Myanmar’s Rakhine state. Photograph: Christophe Archambault/AFP/Getty Images 
Many Burmese consider the Rohingyas interlopers from Bangladesh despite the 
fact that some families have been in Myanmar for generations.

A pilot citizenship verification programme launched in 2014 under the former 
military-backed government failed because the Rohingyas were forced to list 
their ethnicity as Bengali, implying they were immigrants from Bangladesh. This 
year, the newly elected government, led by Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League 
for Democracy party, attempted to avoid the issue by allowing Rohingyas to 
register without listing any ethnicity or religion. But this option has also 
proved unpopular.


Shom Shul Alom, a Rohingya man living in the Maw Thi Nyar displaced persons 
camp, said ethnicity was so important to the social and political fabric of 
Myanmar that he would refuse to accept any identity document that did not 
identify him as aRohingya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya>. “If you 
try to distribute identity cards but you do not put race or religion, it 
wouldn’t work. We will not accept it,” he said.

 * This article originally appeared in Irin 
<https://www.irinnews.org/feature/2016/10/31/bribes-and-bureaucracy-myanmar%E2%80%99s-chaotic-citizenship-system>
 