
My great nan Elsie was a big part of Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> in our family. She loved 
this time of year.

As the nights drew in we would make Christmas fairies together and decorate 
the trees at her sheltered accommodation. On Christmas Day itself she would be 
with us, exchanging gifts, serving up the dinner, playing games and bringing 
the love and laughter that made it so special.

The thing Nan taught me above all was: 'remember there is always someone, 
somewhere, you can help'

But in 2012 Nan became ill and as December approached her health was 
deteriorating. When I realised that she would be spending Christmas in 
hospital, instead of at home with us, I was devastated. So I decided that if 
Nan couldn’t come to us for Christmas, we would take Christmas to her. With my 
pocket money I went out to buy gifts and decorations to take to the hospital.

Over the course of our visits, it struck me how many others would be spending 
Christmas away from their loved ones. I began taking in presents for them too. 
With the help of my family and the support of people in the local area we 
collected around 250 presents – including toys, toiletries and games – which we 
gave to the children’s wards and a local care home. Nan was someone people 
would turn to for help, and I felt happy that we’d been able to help so many 
others enjoy Christmas too.

Nan sadly passed away in March 2013. That was her last Christmas. The thing 
she taught me above all was: “Always remember that there is always someone, 
somewhere, you can help. Give them your time and, especially at Christmas, give 
them love and kindness.”

A few months after she died, I launched a Charity Secret Santa 
<https://twitter.com/santacharity> campaign in her memory. I started a social 
media page <https://www.facebook.com/charitysecretsanta/?fref=ts>, spoke to 
local radio stations, collected donations in supermarkets and got schools and 
the community involved. We collected 650 gifts that year which we gave to 
charities, hospices and care homes. It was as if Nan was still with us.

The appeal has been getting bigger ever since. In 2014 we delivered more than 
2,000 gifts and hosted a tea party for the elderly at Nan’s old flats. Last 
year we handed out 4,000 presents, distributed food parcels for the homeless 
and delivered emergency care packages for a women’s refuge.

Volunteering is what Christmas is really about
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/dec/22/volunteering-what-christmas-is-really-about-faith>
Since my last Christmas with Nan, I have met some amazing and inspiring people 
with wonderful stories to tell. Hopefully I have helped make Christmas a little 
bit merrier for them. This is what Christmas means to me now. It’s about giving 
your time and compassion as well as your money.

It’s why I was so excited to be this year’s #givingtuesday champion 
<http://www.givingtuesday.org.uk/meet-2016-givingtuesday-champion/>. Doing 
something good doesn’t have to be a grand expensive gesture. It can be 
something as simple as popping round for a cup of tea with someone who has been 
ill, or spending an hour or two volunteering at your local care home. There are 
hundreds of ways to do something good on #givingtuesday. As Nan would say: 
“There is always someone, somewhere, you can help”.

 * #givingtuesday <http://www.givingtuesday.org.uk/> is led in the UK by the 
Charities Aid Foundation. It takes place on the Tuesday in November after Black 
Friday. This year more than 1,500 UK charities and businesses took part.

The day I made a difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/series/the-day-i-made-a-difference>
 is theGuardian Voluntary Sector Network’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> series that showcases 
the work of people involved with charities. If you have a story you want to 
share, emailvoluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com> with a short summary of your 
experience.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 