
“Ah, that’s it, got it moving now,” Derek Bell said in satisfaction, as he and 
Arianna Bernucci delicately dragged off the leg of one of the most famous 
horses in history. The crude iron bars and rusted bolts were exposed, which for 
almost two centuries have been holding together the skeleton of Napoleon’s 
little grey Arab stallion, Marengo.

The skeleton of the horse that repeatedly carried Napoleon into victory in 
battle, and finally into the last defeat at Waterloo in 1815, is being taken 
apart by Bell, an expert on prop making and conservation, and Bernucci, a 
senior conservator who has been recruited from the Natural History Museum to 
help with a unique project. In a studio in old farm buildings in Essex, they 
are dismantling, conserving and reconstructing Marengo for theNational Army 
Museum <http://www.nam.ac.uk/>, which will reopen on its Chelsea site in spring 
2017 after a three-year closure for a major rebuild.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fnapoleons-warhorse-marengo-gets-ready-to-ride-out-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59e1fcd5c5f076b16996aff3fa5401521d83e0d3%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Napoleon's%20warhorse%20Marengo%20gets%20ready%20to%20ride%20out%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fnapoleons-warhorse-marengo-gets-ready-to-ride-out-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Napoleon%27s%20warhorse%20Marengo%20gets%20ready%20to%20ride%20out%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fnapoleons-warhorse-marengo-gets-ready-to-ride-out-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59e1fcd5c5f076b16996aff3fa5401521d83e0d3%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 Arianna Bernucci, a conservator from the Natural History Museum, working on 
remounting the skeleton of Marengo. Photograph: Natural History Museum 
According to a tiny silver plaque on one of the bones, the skeleton was 
originally mounted on its iron frame at the London Hospital by somebody called 
Willmott. Willmott was presumably one of the craftsmen more used to preparing 
human medical specimens for the teaching hospital’s museum, and didn’t cope 
very well with a horse.

“One of the reasons for remounting the skeleton is to make poor Marengo look 
more like a horse. The drooping head, and the peculiar stiff position of the 
legs made him look more like a mule,” Sophie Stathie, a curator at the museum, 
said. “He was one of the most loved objects in the old museum, but every time I 
came into the gallery I always thought there was something sad about him.”


Many contemporary images show Napoleon on his horse, the master’s arm raised 
brandishing a sabre, the horse rearing and snorting in excitement at the 
prospect of battle. He was probably about seven when Napoleon acquired him in 
1799, and named him the following year after his famous victory over the 
Austrians at the battle of Marengo. He rode him at Austerlitz, the “battle of 
the three emperors” where he defeated the far larger combined forces of Austria 
and Russia, and at several other engagements. In the Peninsular wars, Marengo 
was also said to have regularly covered the 80-mile distance between Valladolid 
and Burgos in five hours.

The horse was left behind at Waterloo when Napoleon fled. The French emperor 
made it back to Paris, formally abdicated, surrendered to the British, and was 
sent into exile on the remote island of St Helena, where he died in 1821.


Marengo long outlived him. He was captured by the Grenadier Guards and brought 
to England, bought by Lt Col John Julius Angerstein, and spent a peaceful old 
age after an unsuccessful attempt to breed from him. He died in 1831, reputedly 
aged 38.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fnapoleons-warhorse-marengo-gets-ready-to-ride-out-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F427556766ca3a9a4a69b32ac8a69a5c7738476f9%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Napoleon's%20warhorse%20Marengo%20gets%20ready%20to%20ride%20out%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fnapoleons-warhorse-marengo-gets-ready-to-ride-out-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Napoleon%27s%20warhorse%20Marengo%20gets%20ready%20to%20ride%20out%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fnapoleons-warhorse-marengo-gets-ready-to-ride-out-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F427556766ca3a9a4a69b32ac8a69a5c7738476f9%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Marengo’s skull. Photograph: Natural History Museum 
Angerstein gave the skeleton – and possibly originally the grey hide, though 
the records are very sketchy – to the museum of the Royal United Services 
Institute, where by 1865 he was listed in a guide book as one of its principal 
attractions. In the 1960s, Marengo was given with other Waterloo material to 
the then new National Army Museum.

The Duke of Wellington’s equally famous but much younger Waterloo horse, 
Copenhagen, died in 1836, aged 28 – reportedly accelerated by his fondness for 
sugar buns – and was buried at the duke’s Stratfield Saye estate. A marble 
headstone was later added, including the lines “God’s humbler instrument though 
meaner clay/ Should share the glory of that glorious day”.

The duke was apparently enraged at a suggestion from the museum that he dig 
him up to display beside Marengo. The two horses starred in afantasy love 
affair conducted by letter 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/1110207/warhorses-of-letters/>, serialised on 
Radio 4, with Stephen Fry as the voice of Marengo.

All this time poor Marengo has been standing on only two feet. Replacements 
will be made for the missing hooves: one survives, silver mounted as a souvenir 
inkwell, on loan to the Household Cavalry, and the other probably suffered the 
same fate.

In the new displays Marengo will be reunited with other relics from Waterloo, 
including weapons, uniforms, and Napoleon’s own ornate silver gilt coffee urn, 
abandoned like his horse when he fled the battlefield.


“He was a remarkable animal, and he deserves for us to do better by him,” 
Stathie said.
 