
Nearly 20 years after its engineers began construction, Nasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> began testing this week on the 
largest space telescope ever built, a 21ft arrangement of mirrors and 
instruments that is meant to succeed the Hubble telescope and look through 13bn 
years of space.

Nasa administrator Charles Bolden announced that the agency had finished 
construction earlier this week on the James WebbSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Telescope, an $8.8bn giant whose 18 
gold-coated, hexagonal plates that span the length of a tennis court and which, 
from bottom to top, is as tall as a three-storey building.

“We’ve done two decades of innovation and hard work, and this is the result,” 
project scientist John Mather said at a press conference on Wednesday. “We’re 
opening up a whole new territory of astronomy.”

Hubble at 25: the best images from the space telescope - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2015/apr/21/hubble-at-25-the-best-images-from-the-space-telescope>
The telescope is designed to be far more powerful than Nasa’s famous but aging 
Hubble telescope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2015/apr/21/hubble-at-25-the-best-images-from-the-space-telescope>
, which hasfor 26 years  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/20/twenty-five-years-on-hubbles-unsung-heroes>
revealedauroras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/jul/05/jupiters-luminous-auroras-revealed-by-hubble-telescope-video>
 andsupernovas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/22/supernova-shockwave-seen-with-visible-light-for-first-time>
,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/mar/01/hubble-space-telescope-at-25-years-anniversary-universe>
mappedthe sky for dark matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2008/jan/11/mapping.dark.matter>, and 
discoveredbillions of stars, galaxies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/23/the-hubble-space-telescope-its-a-terrific-comeback-story>
 andplanets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/24/proxima-b-will-be-our-prime-laboratory-in-the-search-for-extraterrestrial-life>
, including those in habitable zones.

The James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) has a giant sunshield that divides the 
craft in two: one side facing the sun, which will power the device, and another 
to keep the instruments at an operating temperature of -220C, cold enough to 
minimize the effect of the telescope’s own heat on its observations. The 
telescope has a primary mirror more than five times larger than Hubble’s, 
meaning the JWST will be able to spot fainter, more distant objects.

The JWST’s greater power will also mean that it can see planets in greater 
detail, letting scientists look for atmospheres, seasons and even weather or 
signs of life. Mather said the telescope will have “seven times the collecting 
area” of Hubble, and enough power to detect the body heat of a bumblebee on the 
moon.

“We’d like to know if another planet out there has enough water to have an 
ocean, and we think we can do that,” Mather said.

The new telescope will have infrared instruments, to reflect and collect 
infrared wavelengths, meaning it can look farther back in time – at the stars 
and galaxies hurtling away into the expanding reaches of the universe, from 
where it takes light billions of years to reach the Earth. Those stars’ light 
has stretched into wavelengths so red (“redshifted”) it has entered the 
infrared spectrum, past the range of Hubble’s view.

The telescope will now be subjected to two years of tests before its planned 
launch in 2018. Unlike Hubble, it will be sent far from where astronauts could 
repair it, and Nasa said it will first test the JWST for the “violent sound and 
vibration environments” of a rocket launch, including tests of forces 10 times 
stronger than gravity and blasts of sound to mimic rocket explosions. Then they 
will test for the conditions the JWST will face during two weeks of delicate 
unfurling in space and years in orbit.

In February, the scientists will send it to a chamber at the Johnson Space 
Center that can be lowered to -220C (about -370F), and Bolden said it is 
designed to survive collisions with space debris and small holes in its 
mirrors, and that the telescope will need six months in space before it’s ready 
for work.

To Mars and boldly beyond: space missions to look out for
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/17/mars-space-missions-exomars-esa-solar-orbiter>
He added that scientists need to “get it right here on the ground” to avoid 
finding, “as we did with Hubble, that we don’t have the ability to do what we 
thought it was going to be able to do”.

The JWST was originally meant to launch in 2014, but the project was nearly 
canceled by Congress in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/jul/09/nasa-james-webb-space-telescope>
 due to delays and budget problems.

“Our lessons learned from the Hubble were, if you really care about something, 
you’ve got to measure it at least twice,” Mather added, alluding to repairs 
astronauts had to make after launch.

Bolden said the telescope will help scientists see stars and planets from the 
earliest epoch of the universe. “Nasa has always sought to unravel the 
mysteries of our universe; to find out where we come from, where we are going, 
and whether we are alone in the universe,” he said in a later statement. “We 
are building the James Webb Space Telescope to answer these age-old questions.”
 