
The New Horizons spacecraft has nearly finished its 16-month dispatches from 
Pluto <https://www.theguardian.com/science/pluto>, Nasa scientists said on 
Tuesday, as they unveiled new hints of clouds and the craft’s next destination 
in the distant ring of the solar system.

Researchers had found last year that Pluto has layers of strange hazes towering
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/24/pluto-nitrogen-ice-flows-atmosphere-collapse-red-haze>
 half a million feet (200km) in the sky, but saw none of the swirling storms 
that cover gas giants or the wisps of condensation that gather in Mars’ thin 
atmosphere. On Tuesday, at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical 
Society’s planetary scientists, principal researcher Alan Stern presented new 
evidence that clouds may form at dusk and dawn on Pluto.

Nasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> had found seven candidates for 
clouds, Stern said, each “quite suggestive of possible but rare condensation 
clouds on Pluto”. He cautioned, however, that “none of them can be confirmed as 
clouds because all of them are very low lying, close to the surface” – and 
outside the reach of New Horizons’ instruments.

The cloud candidates were not decked or layered like those on Earth, he added, 
but rather suggest a sky “like it is in the western United States”. That sky 
would be “99% free of clouds”, he said, but it would suggest “weather on Pluto 
is even more complex than we imagined.”

Pluto's perplexing polygonal patterns caused by convection, scientists suggest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/01/plutos-perplexing-polygonal-patterns-caused-by-convection-scientists-suggest-sputnik-planum>
Clouds have a specific definition, he added: “discrete features that are 
optically thick and therefore would block the surface below them”. Stern said 
that, if confirmed, the clouds might be like a fog made of uncommon gases, like 
ethane, acetylene or possibly methane, that condense at dawn and dusk of 
Pluto’s long days – each one lasts 6.4 days on Earth.

“The first flyby has given us a fantastic taste of a very dynamic and changing 
environment, but it’s not enough,” Stern said. “In order to confirm we would 
have to go back with more instrumentation and more time.”

New Horizons is already well past Pluto and on its way toward a new 
destination, itself a billion miles beyond the dwarf planet. Stern said Nasa 
was only in the earliest stages of talks for a follow-up mission to Pluto, and 
that any mission would take time. “Although New Horizons was the fastest 
spacecraft ever launched, it still took it nine and a half years.”

The spacecraft already has sent an enormous amount of data back to scientists, 
who will finish the download from Pluto’s flyby on Sunday, nearly a year and a 
half after New Horizons became the first manmade object ever to visit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/17/pluto-pictures-high-resolution-image-delights-intrigues-scientists>
the dwarf planet. Analysis of some of that data, Nasa scientist Bonnie Buratti 
told reporters on Tuesday, showed Pluto’s giant, heart-shaped region is one of 
the most reflective places in the solar system.

Pluto’s icy surface varies in its brightness, from nearly 100% at the heart to 
only 8% in other regions. Buratti said that intense brightness, like “freshly 
fallen snow”, suggests intense activity akin to that on Enceladus, the frozen 
moon of Saturnwhere scientists have seen plumes erupting from a saltwater ocean 
beneath the ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/30/nasa-cassini-images-enceladus-saturn-moon>
.

The body that Pluto looks like, it turns out, is Iapetus, a “strange, very 
weird moon of Saturn,” Buratti said, calling the moon “this world where half is 
very dark, sweeping up dark particles from the Phoebe ring [the largest ring of 
Saturn], and the other half is bright, not as bright as Pluto.”

She said these clues suggest similar activity on Eris, another dwarf planet in 
the Kuiper belt, the distant ring of the solar system where Pluto orbits.

New Horizons is now on its way to MU69, another object in the belt, and 
scheduled to come within 3,000km of it around New Years Day 2019. Researcher 
Amanda Zangari said that MU69 could provide a look at “one of the ancient 
building blocks of the planets”, since the belt contains the “primordial 
remnants of the disc that formed the planets” about four billion years ago.

Stern refused to speculate on what New Horizons would find there. “We’ve never 
been to something like MU69,” he said. “I don’t make predictions because 
they’re so often wrong.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fpluto-images-atmospheric-haze-nasa-new-horizons-mission-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F25%2F1437823671775%2FPluto-haze-004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pluto%20images%20reveal%20luminous%20haze%20around%20planet%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fpluto-images-atmospheric-haze-nasa-new-horizons-mission-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pluto%20images%20reveal%20luminous%20haze%20around%20planet%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fpluto-images-atmospheric-haze-nasa-new-horizons-mission-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F25%2F1437823671775%2FPluto-haze-004.jpg>
Pluto images reveal luminous haze around planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2015/jul/25/pluto-images-atmospheric-haze-nasa-new-horizons-mission-video> 