
The Fermi paradox, named for the physicist Enrico Fermi, goes something like 
this: given how big and old the universe apparently is, there is bound to be 
alien life out there somewhere. But given that the universe is so big and so 
old, if there's alien life out there, why haven't we earthlings encountered it 
yet? The experiment certainly has run its course for long enough now.

The paradox may play in the mind of anyone who catches an astounding image 
released this week by Nasa of … the entire universe. The full-size image (and 
what warrants full size as much as an image of the universe?)is here 
<http://www.nasa.gov/images/content/630303main_pia15481c-full_full.jpg>.

The image is actually a mosaic of the images covering the entire sky as 
observed by the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (Wise). Wies is an unmanned 
satellite carrying an infrared-sensitive telescope. As with a flat map of the 
Earth's surface, the right and left edges of this oval shape are the same 
location in the sky. The bright belt is the Milky Way galaxy.Nasa explains 
<http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/WISE/multimedia/pia15481.html>:

The Milky Way is shaped like a disc and the solar system is located in that 
disc about two-thirds of the way out from the centre. So we see the Milky Way 
as a band running through the sky. As we look toward the centre of the Galaxy 
we are looking through more of the disc than when we are looking at large 
angles away from the centre, and you can see a noticeable increase in stars 
(coloured blue-green) toward the centre of the image … Residuals of the planets 
Saturn, Mars, and Jupiter are visible in this image as bright red spots off the 
plane of the galaxy at the 1.00, 2.00 and 7.00 positions, respectively.

The Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley has helpfully labeled some of the 
heavenly bodies visible in the image. Our favorites include Andromeda Galaxy, 
The Pleiades, Sombrero Galaxy, Heart and Soul Nebula and, of course, the Fornax 
Cluster. Just look at that up there. Look at that 
<http://wise.ssl.berkeley.edu/gallery_images/WISE2012-003-A-annotated.jpg>.
 