
Yesterday, while the French far-right leader Marine Le Pen was sipping coffee 
at Trump Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/marine-le-pen-donald-trump-tower-new-york>
, volunteers gathered at a converted factory building in Queens to put the 
finishing touches on theNasty Women <http://nastywomenexhibition.org/> 
installation, an art exhibit staged as a visual protest. More than 700 
female-identifying artists contributed works to the show, which was named after 
the slur thatTrump called Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/20/nasty-woman-insult-hillary-clinton>
 in the third presidential debate. It’s a powerful callback to the misogynistic 
messaging of Trump’s campaign, and a demonstration of solidarity among artists 
worldwide.

Related: Gee Vaucher’s Oh America: hip-hop artwork turned anti-Trump meme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/13/gee-vaucher-oh-america-hip-hop-artwork-turned-anti-trump-meme>

The project came into being several days after the presidential election, when 
the Brooklyn-based sculptorRoxanne Jackson <http://www.roxannejackson.com/> 
posted a Facebook status that went viral. It read: “Hello female 
artists/curators! lets organize a NASTY WOMEN group show!!! Who’s interested??? 
We need a venue!!!!!”Jessamyn Fiore <http://jessamynfiore.com/>, a curator on 
the advisory board at the Knockdown Center, eagerly joined in to plan the 
ambitious, cross-country recruitment effort and, finally, on-site installation.

“This exhibition has been put together in a kind of egalitarian spirit,” Fiore 
explained. It was an open submission process, and 100% of the money raised is 
going toPlanned Parenthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood>. The organizers are 
proud to feature artists’ works from 40 different countries and over 42 states.

One issue the organizers came up against was the lack of wall space in the 
venue, which is sprawling but has more windows than solid walls. They enlisted 
the help ofClive Murphy <http://clivemurphyart.com/home.html>, an artist friend 
who devised a plan wherein ten 12ft-tall letters spelling out N-A-S-T-Y 
W-O-M-A-N would serve as the structural supports for hundreds of artworks. As 
Fiore explained: “We didn’t have to put emphasis on individual pieces, because 
no matter what it is, when they’re hung together, they are given equal weight 
and are unified, which I love.”
 Nasty Woman. Photograph: Naoko Tadotsu 
After painting the letters purple, Murphy and his team wrapped cross-sections 
in a mesh material from which they could hang embroidered Polaroids and 
evocative word collages. Also on view: video projections, freestanding objects 
and first-edition signed photographs. On shelves built to host 
three-dimensional works, there is a vagina dentata-like sculpture; a glossy 
pink, anthropomorphic blob; a carved hand recalling a Louise Bourgeois 
sculpture; and underwear stitched together from discarded cat food wrappers. 
The wildly eclectic artworks, all priced at $100 or less, are a sight to behold.

“I feel the power of our collective strength and determination and creativity 
and compassion. We will not tolerate any move backwards in time in terms of the 
policies that affect my body, my health, my quality of life, my freedom,” said 
Fiore. To Jackson, a nasty woman “does not shrink in silence to threats and 
bullying, especially from bigoted, sexist men; instead, she faces them head on. 
She fights for what she believes in – the rights of women and the rights of 
humans. And she will not stop.”

On Thursday night at the kick-off event, the core organizers sported purple 
sashes with the golden hand-painted word “NASTY” on them; volunteers wore 
black-and-white T-shirts screen-printed with “Nasty Woman”. A large disco ball 
suspended over the room radiated orbs of light and purple floodlights set the 
letters aglow. “Letter attendants”, as they were called, directed eager buyers 
with “dance cards” to various stations with stickers and stamps to lay claim to 
works that, within an hour, were nearly all snatched up.
 Ungrabbable. Photograph: Priscilla Stadler 
Katie Holten <http://www.katieholten.com/>, a mixed-media artist who 
volunteered with the installation team, said that the intent of the show was to 
“take the word ‘nasty’ back, flip it, and run with it. We can’t take the power 
of words for granted.” As she explained: “I’ve been so frustrated with language 
that I’ve started making my own alphabets. Words are failing us, or we have 
failed them.” Her contribution was Pussy Alphabet, a black-and-white drawing of 
nude figures forming all 26 letters of the alphabet.

DJ sets, a tattoo session, panel discussions, a comedy show and a sign-making 
workshop will all be held at the Knockdown Center over the course of the 
weekend. Protesters looking for sign slogans for the Woman’s March can take 
cues from several especially memorable artworks that exclaim: “Power to the 
Girls”, “Ungrabbable” and, in the fierce spirit of resistance, “F U”.

 * The Nasty Women Art Exhibition <http://nastywomenexhibition.org/> runs from 
12-15 January at the Knockdown Center in Queens, New York. OtherNasty Women 
shows <http://nastywomenexhibition.org/other-nasty-venues/> are being held 
around the country and abroad this spring.
 