
The long happy marriage and the very separate bedrooms of Vita Sackville-West 
and her husband, Harold Nicolson, will be celebrated at their Kent home as the 
National Trust turns its attention for the first time to the gay history locked 
within the walls of many of its properties.

The Nicolsons were a famously devoted couple, and had two sons, the writer and 
publisher Nigel and art historian Benedict, but both also had passionate 
relationships with partners of the same sex.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fnational-trust-prepares-to-celebrate-its-gay-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff03b51dcb1fce37e17edebd03ca0690448da75bd%2F0_170_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=National%20Trust%20prepares%20to%20celebrate%20its%20gay%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fnational-trust-prepares-to-celebrate-its-gay-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=National%20Trust%20prepares%20to%20celebrate%20its%20gay%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fnational-trust-prepares-to-celebrate-its-gay-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff03b51dcb1fce37e17edebd03ca0690448da75bd%2F0_170_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
 The gardens at Sissinghurst Castle. Photograph: Alamy 
Their book-lined cottage home still full of their possessions, surrounded by 
the idyllic gardens they created atSissinghurst Castle 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/sissinghurst-castle-garden/features/the-south-cottage-opens-at-sissinghurst-castle-garden->
 in Kent, has rarely been seen by the public because it was maintained by the 
family as a writer’s retreat, but it will now be on view by timed ticket every 
day the gardens are open.

Sackville-West’s relationship with Virginia Woolf inspired her novel Orlando, 
following a gender-changing hero across centuries at Knole, the palatial 
ancestral home Sackville-West adored but could not as a daughter inherit, and 
so had to leave while a male cousin moved in.Knole 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/knole> is also now a National Trust property. 
This month the trust bought a first edition presentation copy of the book, 
inscribed by Woolf to Edward Sackville-West, the cousin who inherited the 
property.

The trust will publish a new guidebook next year telling the LGBTQ history of 
some of its properties, and put on a range of events under the headline 
Prejudice and Pride, including Sutton House Queered, a year-long programme at 
the property in Hackney built as a Tudor merchant’s mansion and which by the 
1980s had become a heavily graffitied anarchist squat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fnational-trust-prepares-to-celebrate-its-gay-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F052e8fb20c0a7f6fd18c459f5a432f85940d7b46%2F0_20_1728_1037%2F1728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=National%20Trust%20prepares%20to%20celebrate%20its%20gay%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fnational-trust-prepares-to-celebrate-its-gay-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=National%20Trust%20prepares%20to%20celebrate%20its%20gay%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fnational-trust-prepares-to-celebrate-its-gay-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F052e8fb20c0a7f6fd18c459f5a432f85940d7b46%2F0_20_1728_1037%2F1728.jpg>
 Sutton House, Hackney, London. Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Sarah Waters, author of the bestselling historical novel Tipping the Velvet, 
who is working with the trust on the project, said: “These days we can all be a 
bit bolder about exploring and enjoying the UK’s rich heritage of sex and 
gender diversity. And I’d argue that without an awareness of that heritage our 
experience of certain National Trust properties is incomplete.”


Displays at Smallhythe Place in Kent will focus not on the glamorous Victorian 
actor Ellen Terry but on the women her daughter, Edy Craig, shared her life and 
home with. In June there will be performances of The Boy, a dramatisation of De 
Profundis, the anguished letter Oscar Wilde wrote to his lover Bosie from 
Reading jail.


Simon Murray, director of the National Trust, said the year’s programme – on 
which it is working with Leicester University – was only the beginning of its 
efforts to tackle more complex aspects of its history, including women’s 
suffrage in 2018 and the bicentenary of the Peterloo Massacre in 2019.

“Over the next few years we will be exploring some of the complex and often 
more difficult aspects of the history of our places, stories we have perhaps 
shied away from, but which are important to our understanding of their 
history,” he said.
 