
I was amused recently by a neighbour who described her love-affair with a 
robin called “Robbie” – a decade-long passion that’s probably three times the 
average robin’s life. Since both robin sexes sing and cannot always tell each 
other apart, my neighbour may actually have loved many Robbies over the years. 
Yet no matter, her love is true.

It’s interesting to compare my neighbour’s engagement with nature to the 
public responses at Lough Beg in County Derry, Northern Ireland, which I 
visited recently. Lough Beg is part of“Seamus Heaney Country” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/02/seamus-heaney-homeplace-review-bellaghy-co-down>
, the landscape central to the Nobel laureate’s magnificent poetry. A proposed 
four-lane highway would violate Heaney’s heartland and wildlife areas protected 
by numerous international designations. Yet, in the absence of protest from 
more mainstream NGOs (such as the RSPB and Ulster Wildlife Trust), a friend is 
fighting alone legal battle, supported by his own money and crowd sourcing 
<https://www.change.org/p/save-the-seamus-heaney-landscape-saveheaneycountry>.

One in 10 UK wildlife species faces extinction, major report shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/one-in-10-uk-wildlife-species-faces-extinction-major-report-shows>
On Kent’s Hoo Peninsula 
<http://www.kent-life.co.uk/out-about/discover_the_hoo_peninsula_1_4435822>, 
meanwhile, there is another contest tosave Lodge Hill 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/community/getinvolved/b/specialplaces/archive/2016/10/17/lodge-hill-the-campaign-so-far.aspx>
, a woodland that is home to about 90 nightingale pairs, as well as a host of 
other wildlife that justifies its statutory protection as a SSSI. Yet the 
Ministry of Defence wants to build 5,000 homes there. More parochially, the 
University of East Anglia in Norfolk wants to site a300-vehicle carpark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/06/uea-car-park-threat-crickets-norwich-uea-country-diary>
 on the last really important habitat at the heart of Norwich.

What these stories reflect is a situation painstakingly described in two State 
of Nature Reports published in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/21/uk-species-struggling-wildlife>
 and 2016. The documents catalogue how nature is undergoing systemic decline in 
our country. In the three cases named the supporters of development – including 
all political parties in Northern Ireland, the MoD in Kent and the university 
authorities here in Norfolk – seem to see nature as an abstract idea, a 
theoretical resource, which can withstand any amount of imposition.

Somehow they fail to see that nature is, in truth, that marsh, that wood, this 
particular field and even this individual bird. They could all learn much from 
my neighbour, who sees nature as the robin singing directly to her. What she 
values is the lived encounter. For the robin as idea is a trifle that can so 
easily be turned from vague abstraction into mere memory.


Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>




 