
The ultimate dirty weekend, Brighton

The Pelirocco offers more than a naughty weekend: it offers one that is 
bordering on the filthy. The regency townhouse on a Brighton seafront square 
serves up a smorgasbord of funky themed rooms, including a boudoir dedicated to 
1950s bombshell Betty Page. But the plum for this particular break has to be 
its burlesque kitsch flagship suite. The Play Room has an eight-foot circular 
bed beneath a mirrored canopy, a pole dancing area – lessons and first aid kit 
available – and a giant plunge bath and double shower with monsoon heads. 
Couples' massages are available. Don't forget your handcuffs.
• A two-night B&B weekend break in the Play Room (01273 327055, 
hotelpelirocco.co.uk <http://hotelpelirocco.co.uk/>) costs £549 B&B

Drink the Lakes dry, Cumbria


It's the call of the mild. And bitter. And lager. A ramble around the 
sensational Cumbrian pubs inThe Inn Way… to the English Lake District 
<http://www.innway.co.uk/the-inn-way-walking-books/the-inn-way-to-the-english-lake-district.html>
 (£10.95, innway.co.uk) is a true liver'n'legs marathon. You probably won't 
sample all 44 boozers and 90 miles, but a few days' hiking will inevitably 
involve exotic brews like Sneck Lifter, wonderful historic hostelries where 
Wordsworth and Coleridge supped the amber nectar, along with demonic sheep and 
artery-numbing fry-ups. Its circular route – from Ambleside, north to 
Braithwaite and south to Broughton-in-Furness – provides a constantly cracking 
backdrop of peaks, lakes and fells.
• The Britannia (britinn.net <http://britinn.net/>), doubles from £80; 
Langstrath Inn (thelangstrath.com) <http://thelangstrath.com/>, doubles from 
£94; Manor Arms (manorarmsthesquare.co.uk), doubles from £67

Lobster hunting, Cornwall


Addicted to seafood? The Lugger Hotel, on south Cornwall's ridiculously 
picturesque Portloe harbour, serves some of the finest fresh fish around, 
including divine oyster-topped chowder. But on this escape you don't just eat, 
you also get to morph into a hunter-gatherer, checking lobster pots out at sea 
with local fisherman James Brown and casting lures for bass, mackerel and 
pollack. They're the raw material for the Lugger's acclaimed head chef, who 
then reveals the secrets of the perfect lobster thermidor – and the most 
satisfying supper of your life.
• Catch-and-cook breaks at the Lugger (01872 501322, luggerhotel.com 
<http://www.luggerhotel.com/>) from £220pp including two nights' stay, dinner, 
fishing trip and cooking class meal with wine

Whisky galore, Speyside


To drench, or perhaps fully immerse, yourself in Scotland's most famous 
export, head north-east to the hotels and glens of Speyside. The famous malt 
whisky trail takes in eight renowned distilleries, from small boutique 
Benromach to historic Cardhu and Dallas Dhu, iconic Glenfiddich, wild, remote 
Glenlivet, and Speyside, the UK's only working cooperage. If you need a break 
from the hard stuff, check out the bottlenose dolphins in the Moray Firth or 
recharge your liver with a walk on theSpeyside Way footpath 
<http://www.moray.gov.uk/area/speyway/webpages/swhome.htm>. 
• maltwhiskytrail.com <http://www.maltwhiskytrail.com/>; Knockside B&B in 
Aberlour (01340 881561,speyside.moray.org <http://www.speyside.moray.org/>) 
from £30pp per night

Brunchtime binge, London

 Sunday brunch at the Landmark Hotel, London 
Gluttony. It's a sin. And your point is? Occasionally it's rather pleasant to 
fill the tank to overflowing, and there are few better opportunities than at 
the legendary, all-you-can-eat Sunday Brunch at London's Landmark Hotel. 
Running from 12.30 to 3pm, its untrammelled access to cooked breakfasts is 
merely an amuse bouche for what follows: all the roasts, sushi and charcuterie 
you can neck, along with salads – treat with caution – and cake and chocolate 
fountain lunacy, all washed down with unlimited champers. Oh yes, and a pianist 
guarantees the most tuneful indigestion of your life.
• 020-7 631 8000, landmarklondon.co.uk 
<http://www.wintergarden-london.com/champagne_brunch.html>; Sunday Brunch £80; 
doubles from £159 (book 35 days in advance)

Hand-rolled Havana heaven, London

Whether your poison's a Montecristo Sublime or a Cohiba Esplendido, the 
experts at the boutique London hotel Number Ten Manchester Street can cut and 
light you a big 'un and advise on matching drinks. There's a funky all-weather 
cigar terrace and walk-in humidor, and the hotel has just launched a champagne 
and canapé menu. And there are occasional cigar tasting and cocktail 
masterclasses too.
• tenmanchesterstreethotel. com <http://www.tenmanchesterstreethotel.com/>, 
020- 7317 5900, doubles from £179

Chocotherapy, South Wales


After fresh air and exercise? The Vale Resort, set in over 650 acres near 
Cardiff, has two championship golf courses and top-notch fitness facilities. 
You, however, are more obsessed with Green & Black's than sand-wedges, which is 
rather handy because the hotel offers an extraordinary Chocolate Indulgence 
break. Along with a night's accommodation, you get a half-day chocolate-making 
course, including tasting, recipes and hand-rolling truffles – and take 30 away 
to scoff in bed. There's also some sweet pampering in Wales's biggest spa, 
offering massages with warm, runny chocolate. White clothing not recommended.
• Chocolate Indulgence Break (01443 667800, vale-hotel.com 
<http://vale-hotel.com/Special-Offers/Speciality-Breaks/Chocolate-Breaks-Wales>
), £155pp or £99 without the spa treatment

Wine weekends, Hampshire

 t 
For the Grand Cru of weekend wine escapes head to the New Forest 
<http://www.thenewforest.co.uk/>. The 11-room TerraVina Hotel has a fine 
vintage, as plonk buffs like to say. It sports an amazing cellar to go with its 
excellent scoff. Of course you'll want to indulge outside meal times (don't 
worry, no one's looking) and it offers private two-person tastings, at a price 
dependent on your wine choice. If you can start your weekend early, try the 
Friday lunchtime wine courses starting in September, for £49.50pp including 
lunch.
• 023-8029 3784, hotelterravina.co.uk <http://www.hotelterravina.co.uk/>, 
doubles from £155 room only (minimum two-night weekends)

Party house, The Cotswolds

Live like a Lord – or, given Elkstones' Cotswold location, a Tory grandee – 
from £75pp per night. The five-bedroom mansion near Chipping Camden delivers 
serious bling for your bucks with a home cinema, indoor pool and sauna, along 
with a baby grand, original art and huge designer chandelier. All rooms sport 
decadent bespoke furnishings and TV/DVD combos while the master suite has a 
king-sized four-poster, freestanding two-person oval bath with dreamy views and 
double drench shower. To really splurge, use Elkstones' concierge for private 
yoga sessions and spa treatments as well as wine tasting, piano recitals and 
private chefs.
• Four nights from £3,000 for up to 10 guests through Simon Escapes (01244 
784152,simonescapes.com 
<http://simonescapes.com/our-portfolio/elkstones/default.htm>)

All bets are on, Edinburgh

If you're feeling lucky but sick of the Lottery, hit the Scottish capital for 
a weekend on the racecourse turf and casino baize. Travel six miles east of 
Edinburgh to Musselburgh Races (musselburgh-racecourse.co.uk 
<http://www.musselburgh-racecourse.co.uk/>), which holds the Betfair Scottish 
Champions Day on Saturday 3 September and the Royal Scots Family Day on Sunday 
25 September. Now you've a crisp wedge of notes in your hand, try the Circus 
Casino (gentingcasinos.co.uk <http://www.gentingcasinos.co.uk/genting/>) for 
three-card poker, roulette, blackjack and the works. It could get messy, so 
guarantee a decent night's kip at Channing's (0131-315 2226,channings.co.uk 
<http://channings.co.uk/>) with doubles from £115 a night.
 