
Design for older people might conjure images of clunky beige mobility aids, 
kitchen gadgets with oversized rubbery grips and those glamorous unisex Velcro 
shoes long advertised in the back of Sunday supplements. But, as a new 
exhibition at London’sDesign Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/10/design-museum-review-kensington-london-commonwealth-institute-john-pawson>
 shows, it doesn’t have to be like this. The future of ageing is more likely to 
involve robotic underwear, sentient digital companions and fridges that stock 
themselves, if a new generation of inventors have their way.

Thirty years ago, when the Design Museum began in the boiler house of the V&A, 
one of its first exhibitions was New Design for Old, curated by designer Helen 
Hamlyn to showcase products designed to help older people stay independent in 
the home. The futuristic projects included a radical design for a bedside table 
by a young Sebastian Conran, which was adjustable in height and – gasp! – 
incorporated a clip-on telephone attachment and a reading light. Three decades 
on, the 60-year-old Conran is back with another bedside table. This time, it is 
a piece of smart furniture developed in collaboration withSheffield Robotics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/20/icub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog>
, which follows you around the room, responds to voice commands and can even 
communicate with a wearable device that alerts relativesif you have a fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/06/robot-could-be-grandmas-new-care-assistant>
. And when you’re sick of its obsequious interfering, you can just tell it to 
go away.
 The Aura Powered Suit by Superflex. Photograph: Getty Images 
“Our way of thinking about the elderly has shifted radically,” says the 
curator of theNew Old 
<https://designmuseum.org/things-to-do/talks-and-events/pop-up-exhibitions/new-old>
 exhibition Jeremy Myerson, who for the last 16 years headed theHelen Hamlyn 
Centre <https://www.rca.ac.uk/research-innovation/helen-hamlyn-centre/> at the 
Royal College of Art, a research group focused on design for our future selves. 
“The change is not just in terms of what’s possible technologically, but how we 
now think about ageing. People are staying active in society and the workplace 
for much longer, and it’s about time our products and services caught up.”

The world is getting older, fast. At the turn of the millennium, there were 
more people in Europe aged over 60 than under 16 for the first time. In just 
over a decade, half of the UK population will be over 50, and there are already 
more than 500,000 people aged over 90. The “new old” are tech savvy, mobile, 
often still in work, and simply won’t put up with clumsy plastic loo seats and 
excessively padded shoes any more. “This is the rock’n’roll generation,” says 
Myerson. “They know about design and they’re demanding more.”

The exhibition covers a broad spectrum of innovations, from practical things 
that are already in production, to speculative future-looking scenarios and 
inventions of questionable benevolence.
 An infographic in the New Old exhibition at the Design Museum. Photograph: 
Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
Silicon Valley poster boy Yves Béhar <https://fuseproject.com/> has two 
projects in the show that ooze can-do Bay Area futurism. One isa fantastical 
undergarment 
<https://fuseproject.com/work/superflex/aura-powered-suit/?focus=overview> that 
uses military technology designed to help soldiers carry heavy loads in the 
battlefield: it gives you a boost when you try to stand up or sit down. 
Developed in collaboration with robotics startupSuperflex 
<https://www.sri.com/newsroom/press-releases/sri-international-spins-superflex-inc-help-people-achieve-their-physical>
, it incorporates pods packed with sensors and little motors that pull cords in 
the fabric to give you extra support, reacting to the body’s movements and 
adding muscle power to complement the wearer’s strength.

As well as these power pants, Béhar has developed an emotionally intelligent 
digital companion, with Intuition Robotics, that’s designed to tackle 
loneliness among older people. Looking a bit like a drunken coffee maker, the
ElliQ 
<https://www.dezeen.com/2017/01/11/elliq-robot-yves-behar-fuseproject-helps-older-adults-stay-connected-world-design-technology/>
 lolls its head to and fro, blinking its cyclopian eye and alerting you when 
members of your family have posted a picture on social media that you might 
like to see, or suggesting activities to keep you busy. It might not seem like 
much of a substitute for a human companion, but a survey commissioned for the 
exhibition surprisingly reveals that a quarter of us would prefer to be cared 
for by robots in old age rather than by people – a proportion that rises to a 
third among young people.
 The Scooter for Life in action. Photograph: PriestmanGoode 
Does Generation Z really feel closer to its smartphones than its fellow 
humans? Design and innovation consultancyIdeo <https://www.ideo.com/eu/> has 
extrapolated our automated, screen-focused, algorithm-driven world to a 
dystopian extreme, presenting an ageing scenario worthy of an episode of Black 
Mirror. It imagines what might happen if digital assistants, such asApple’s Siri
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/12/siri-real-voices-apple-ios-assistant-jon-briggs-susan-bennett-karen-jacobsen>
 and Microsoft’s Cortana, became even more sophisticated, entering our 
bloodstream in the form of nanobots and helping to guide personal 
decision-making for our entire lives.

“It would discern how our friends, family and colleagues keep us socially 
connected, mentally stimulated and physically active as we get older,” says 
Ideo’s blurb, explaining how “Spirit” would ultimately direct you to meet 
people who would be good for you, by constantly monitoring your emotional 
reactions and comparing your profile with others. “What if your instincts could 
objectively be right?” they ask. “What if they could act in your physical, 
mental and emotional best interests, supercharged by powerfully accurate AI?” 
Run a mile, I’d suggest, before their facial recognition software ensnares you.

Next door, minimalist industrial designers Sam Hecht and Kim Colin 
<http://www.industrialfacility.co.uk/> have conjured a physical mock-up of what 
such an algorithmically driven home might look like. After trying to help his 
87-year-old father order a replacement tumble dryer – and quickly discovering 
that our appliance supply and installation system isn’t very 
octogenarian-friendly – Hecht started to imagine what it might be like if a 
company like Amazon became a property developer and turned its hand to 
supplying and maintaining domestic products and services.

He describes older people of the future as a demographic that’s already 
comfortable banking, communicating and managing healthcare online. “So,” he 
says, “it is not a far stretch to imagine communities of people relinquishing 
the servicing and procurement of their domesticity to a technology company.” 
You surrender all your data – the contents of your fridge, the frequency of 
your washing cycles – to them, and they maintain your daily life in return, 
robotically servicing your appliances from cavities behind your walls. “It 
doesn’t become a question of when something breaks,” says Hecht. “It is 
invisibly fixed before you even realise it is broken, without someone even 
entering your home.” With Google-owned Nest already peddling connected smart 
appliances, andFacebook turning its hand to property development 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/facebooks-answer-to-silicon-valley-housing-crunch-build-apartments-1469534402>
, it’s a scenario that’s already tangible.

Related: Design Museum review – temple to design gets the space it deserves at 
last 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/10/design-museum-review-kensington-london-commonwealth-institute-john-pawson>

Elsewhere there are driverless cars, clever responsive insoles 
<http://www.walkwithpath.com> to help people who have problems keeping a steady 
gait, and BMW factories with adjustable seats on cushioned floors – as well as 
a genius new three-wheeled mobility scooter by corporate giant PriestmanGoode, 
which also designs aeroplane cabins and tube trains. The love child of a kid’s 
microscooter and a granny’s wheelie shopping trolley, itsScooter for Life 
<https://www.designweek.co.uk/issues/9-15-january-2017/new-smart-scooter-concept-aims-to-keep-older-people-healthy/>
 combines active mobility with storage and compact efficiency. It is designed 
to keep people agile and fit for longer.

“Inclusive design is thankfully becoming like sustainable design,” says 
Myerson. “It should be a given for everything, not a specialist niche.” This 
engaging and provocative exhibition gives comfort that our future selves are in 
capable hands – but also cautions us to question where those hands are coming 
from and what they’re really after.

• New Old: Designing for our Future Selves 
<https://designmuseum.org/things-to-do/talks-and-events/pop-up-exhibitions/new-old>
 is at the Design Museum, London, until 19 February.
 