
From the tracks of the High Line – the derelict elevated railway on New York’s 
Lower West Side currently being transformed into a mile-and-a-half-long “park 
in the sky” – this most bustling of cities seems suddenly quiet and still. 
Three storeys above the hubbub of Chelsea – where a few days earlier people had 
queued round the block to vote forBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/barackobama> – even the perpetual horns of 
taxi cabs seem muted, and the only human voices heard are the occasional shouts 
from workmen. The Hudson river flows gently out towards the skyscrapers of 
Jersey City. Golfers thwack balls towards the huge nets of Chelsea Piers.

Up on the tracks, the concrete path that will form the backbone of the new 
park splits off in places to weave between seed beds, recalling the plant life 
that sprang up between the tracks during nearly 30 years of disuse. Elsewhere, 
between new wooden benches and young beech and pine trees, stretches of the 
steel track have been restored to their original positions. At two points 
during this first section of the line – due to open in spring – the route ducks 
right through huge gaps in private buildings where goods trains used to deliver 
directly to the upper floors of warehouses. The park will end at a new public 
plaza in the fashionable Meatpacking District, overlooked by a new outpost of 
the Whitney Museum of American Art.

Gallery: The High Line in New York
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2008/oct/27/heritage-newyork> 
The High Line has attracted embarrassingly lavish praise since the project to 
save and renovate it began almost a decade ago. In 2001,Adam Gopnik of the New 
Yorker wrote <http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2001/05/21/010521fa_fact_gopnik> 
of the then-overgrown and under-threat tracks: “The High Line does not offer a 
God’s-eye view of the city, exactly, but something rarer, the view of a lesser 
angel: of a cupid in a Renaissance painting, of the putti looking down on the 
Nativity manger.” But Friends of the High Line, the campaign group that saved 
the line from demolition and is now in charge of rebuilding it, seems to be 
seeking a simpler reaction from the public, something closer to photographer
Joel Sternfield 
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/388243726X/ref=cm_cmu_pg__header>’s verdict 
upon seeing the tracks for the first time: “It’s green! It’s a railroad! It’s 
rural! Where am I?”

The High Line was constructed in the early 1930s as part of New York’s West 
Side railway. Train tracks had originally been built at ground level along the 
middle of 10th Avenue, but this proved so dangerous that the stretch became 
known as “Death Avenue”, and trains had to be preceded by a man on horseback, 
nicknamed the West Side Cowboy, waving a red flag as a warning to pedestrians.

The High Line was the solution. A mile and a half long and 30ft above street 
level at its highest point, it stretched from the Meatpacking District on the 
Lower West Side up to West 34th Street, level with the Empire State Building, 
covering 22 blocks in total. At certain points the tracks disappeared into the 
upper floors of warehouse buildings in order to deliver meat, milk or 
manufactured goods, reappearing again on the other side.

But as the freight industry switched from rail to road, use of the High Line 
declined. Part of it was pulled down in the 1960s, and the last train ran in 
1980, carrying “three boxcars full of frozen turkeys” for Thanksgiving, 
according to actor Ethan Hawke, who narratesa video about the line 
<http://www.thehighline.org/about/highlinefilm.html> on the Friends of the High 
Line website.

In the years that followed, residents and businesses in Chelsea lobbied for 
the disused tracks – now overgrown with weeds and plants – to be torn down. In 
1999, two locals, Joshua David and Robert Hammond, met at a community meeting 
and formed the idea of trying to save the High Line and turn it into a “park in 
the sky”. “We looked for other organisations working to save the structure but 
nobody was,” says David.

A former magazine writer, David was working on an article about the changing 
face of Chelsea when he first noticed the line. “It just captured my 
imagination. It seemed like an amazing opportunity to create something that 
would allow people to experience the city in an utterly new way. To go and tear 
it down without considering how we could use it seemed a waste to me.”

After forming Friends of the High Line, David and Hammond persuaded the rail 
company that then owned the site to take them up on to the tracks. “It was 
extremely exciting,” says David. “We went up through one of the old factory 
buildings. I remember stepping out on to the tracks, and there’s an incredible 
13-block-long stretch immediately: this incredible vista of wild grasses and 
flowers. It took my breath away.”

With the help of celebrity backers such as Hawke, fellow actor Edward Norton, 
and designer Diane von Fürstenberg, FHL managed to overturn mayor Rudy 
Giuliani’s demolition orders and get the new administration of Michael 
Bloomberg behind the project.

The group held a design competition for the refurbishment or reuse of the 
tracks, and proposals – including a rollercoaster and a mile-and-a-half-long
swimming pool <http://images.nymag.com/news/features/timeline070507_2_198.jpg> 
– were publicly displayed at Grand Central station. The winning design, by 
Field Operations and Diller Scofidio + Renfro, was chosen in 2004, and 
resembles a long walkway above the streets, flanked by lawns, flowers and 
trees, with numerous benches and access points via stairs and escalators.

The model seems to be the Promenade Plantée in Paris 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promenade_plantee>, another elevated railway that 
has been remade as a long, overhead public park. Also similar isnorth London’s 
Parkland Walk <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parkland_Walk>, a trail following 
the line of a former train track from Finsbury Park to Alexandra Palace.

Groundbreaking for the new High Line took place in April 2006, with Bloomberg 
in attendance as well asNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
senators Hillary Clinton and Chuck Schumer, and the first stretch of the line 
is set to be completed early next year, with the second finished in 2010.

The line runs through former industrial neighbourhoods now defined by flats, 
restaurants, nightclubs, art, and fashion, and this area is being transformed 
by the project. The 2005 re-zoning that approved the park also allowed for new 
construction alongside the track and last yearNew York magazine identified an 
already-emerging “High Line neighbourhood” 
<http://nymag.com/news/features/31273/>, complete with “glittering retail 
spaces and restaurants and condos”, as well as High Line-themed restaurants and 
festivals.

In what may be a sign of things to come, in September Calvin Klein celebrated 
its 40th anniversary bybuilding a temporary structure leading up to a section 
of the line 
<http://images.nymag.com/images/2/daily/fashion/08/09/20080908_party_560x375.jpg>
 and throwing a party up there featuring actors Halle Berry, Claire Danes and 
Jared Leto, among others. A couple of streets up from thenew Whitney outpost 
<http://www.whitney.org/www/downtown_building_project/index.jsp>, LA’s 
celebrity-friendlyStandard hotel <http://www.standardhotels.com/new-york-city/> 
is set to open a branch above the line between 12th and 13th Streets.

David says the credit crunch has had some impact on all this building work. 
“There was a flurry of building starts at the time the High Line was approved; 
there are certainly fewer things starting now. But there is still an 
extraordinary amount of activity: cranes all over the place and numerous 
buildings under construction.

“We hoped it would attract architects and developers who would create 
extraordinary and original buildings along it – and that’s really come to 
pass.” David hopes the High Line will not only be used by people strolling to 
work or eating lunch, but will also become “a real destination for visitors to 
New York … a cultural destination”. Craig Schwitter of Buro Happold, the lead 
engineer on the project, suggests it could host open-air markets, concerts and 
other artistic events.

The project that began with an attempt to save the elevated wilderness that 
Alan Weisman, in his book The World Without Us, identified as an example of 
nature taking back the urban landscape has now morphed into something rather 
different: a regeneration project for an entire neighbourhood. But David is 
happy with that. “It’s at once a preservation project about the city’s past and 
a construction project about the city’s future,” he says. “The High Line has 
always evoked the passage of time, with the incredible landscape that has 
sprung up on top of it.”

He had wanted the new design to retain some of that original, unique 
landscape, “but there was no way it could be walked on without being destroyed. 
The challenge for the design team was to do that and allow the public to come 
up in a safe and accessible way.” To that end, the plan uses plant material 
“pushing up through walkways” and reintroduces railway tracks in a number of 
locations. At two locations the new High Line will go through “doughnut holes” 
in private buildings, just like the old freight trains did when the buildings 
were warehouses. “It will be quite clear to visitors how it worked,” says David.

David, 45, and Hammond, 39, a former painter and consultant, now run Friends 
of the High Line full-time. The group, which has a staff of 16, is itself now 
transforming – into a “conservancy”, an organisation that will manage and 
maintain the park in partnership with New York City council. David and Hammond 
are currently trying to raise both the $50m to build the park ($22m has been 
raised already) and an unspecified sum to maintain it and pay for staff once it 
has been completed.

Yet above 30th Street, where the line snakes around the West Side rail yards, 
FHL is still the campaigning group it once was. This section of the line is 
still under threat and could be torn down as part of the redevelopment of that 
area. “That’s something we are fighting very strongly,” says David. That part 
of the line has not yet been designed, although the basic plan is to connect it 
to the Hudson River Park at 34th Street.

New York is a city of spectacular views from towering vantage points. But 
according to David the High Line is different. “It’s called the High Line, but 
it’s not that high. It’s three storeys off the ground. I think that’s what’s so 
special. It’s not that experience on top of the Empire State Building where 
everybody is like ants or little toys. You can shout down to people on the 
street. It’s connected to street life but at a distance. There’s a sense of 
remove.”

“There used to be a lot of elevated rail in the city,” notes Schwitter, “but 
that was all removed after world war two.” The High Line restores that 
perspective, he says. “A quieter perspective, somewhere to walk quietly, and 
observe the city.”

Gallery: The High Line, past, present and future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2008/oct/27/heritage-newyork>
 