
A farmer and construction workers in China have discovered the remains of a 
new species of bird-like dinosaur that appears to have died after getting stuck 
in the mud. The find, experts say, adds weight to the idea that such animals 
were thriving shortly before the mass extinction 66 million years ago.

Around the size of a sheep, with a beak, wings and a crest on its head, the 
flightless creature is thought to be a species of oviraptorosaur - a group of 
bird-like, feathered, toothless and short-skulled non-avian dinosaurs that were 
roaming the land in the period shortly before anasteroid slammed into Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/14/asteroid-killed-dinosaurs-by-setting-oil-alight-and-spreading-soot-says-study>
 off the coast of Mexico, triggering the annihilation of swaths of life.


“If you saw it alive you would just think it was a weird bird,” said Stephen 
Brusatte, a palaeontologist at the University of Edinburgh who, with colleagues 
in China, co-authored the research published in the journalScientific Reports 
<http://%20http//nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/srep35780>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnew-species-of-weird-bird-like-dinosaur-discovered-in-china-tongtianlong-limosus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0881e422edf990ea94b19b8dea37c1bb6734878a%2F0_0_2332_995%2F2332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20species%20of%20'weird%20bird'-like%20dinosaur%20discovered%20in%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnew-species-of-weird-bird-like-dinosaur-discovered-in-china-tongtianlong-limosus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20species%20of%20%27weird%20bird%27-like%20dinosaur%20discovered%20in%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnew-species-of-weird-bird-like-dinosaur-discovered-in-china-tongtianlong-limosus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0881e422edf990ea94b19b8dea37c1bb6734878a%2F0_0_2332_995%2F2332.jpg>
 The remains ofTongtianlong limosus, discovered by a farmer and construction 
workers in China. Photograph: Junchang Lu 
But the newly discovered dinosaur appears to have suffered an untimely demise. 
“It looked like it got trapped in mud, and that’s how it died,” said Brusatte. 
“The neck is arched, the head is raised up, like it’s sticking its head above 
something, and both of the arms are outstretched and to the sides of the body, 
and so it’s like it’s trying to free itself.”

Named Tongtianlong limosus - “muddy dragon on the road to heaven” - the 
dinosaur’s fossilised remains were discovered on the building site of a high 
school near Ganxian, in the Jiangxi Province of southern China. The fossils 
were unearthed by construction workers who were using TNT to blast away rocks - 
an activity which, while unexpectedly bringing the dinosaur’s remains to light, 
also appears to have blown away parts of the fossil, including sections of its 
arms and tail and its right hind leg.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnew-species-of-weird-bird-like-dinosaur-discovered-in-china-tongtianlong-limosus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e6aa1c8576bfb17f39be8bf8fcead9fa94f0f70%2F0_0_1649_1237%2F1649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20species%20of%20'weird%20bird'-like%20dinosaur%20discovered%20in%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnew-species-of-weird-bird-like-dinosaur-discovered-in-china-tongtianlong-limosus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20species%20of%20%27weird%20bird%27-like%20dinosaur%20discovered%20in%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnew-species-of-weird-bird-like-dinosaur-discovered-in-china-tongtianlong-limosus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e6aa1c8576bfb17f39be8bf8fcead9fa94f0f70%2F0_0_1649_1237%2F1649.jpg>
 A conservator works alongside the new find. Photograph: Junchang Lu 
Thought to have lived between 72 million and 66 million years ago, the newly 
discovered dinosaur sheds light on the ecosystem just before the fateful 
asteroid struck. “Not only were there still a lot of dinosaurs, but they were 
still actively diversifying - there were still many new species that were 
coming about,” said Brusatte.

Brusatte adds that the new discovery joins a number of recent oviraptorosaur 
finds from southern China, suggesting that such bird-like omnivores were on the 
rise before falling foul of the mass extinction. “What it is looking like is 
that these things were probably pretty common parts of the dinosaur ecosystem,” 
he said. “This really was probably the last wave of dinosaur diversification 
before the asteroid came.”


Paul Upchurch, professor of palaeobiology at University College London who was 
not involved in the research, said that while the posture of the dinosaur was 
unusual, there was little to be gleaned from the pose. “No-one knows what it 
means,” he said. “It’s an odd quirk, but scientifically it doesn’t take us 
anywhere.”

But, he added, the discovery of a new species of oviraptorosaur adds weight to 
the argument that rather than beingin decline before the mass extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/18/dinosaurs-in-decline-long-before-asteroid-catastrophe-study-reveals>
, dinosaurs might have been flourishing. “It doesn’t win the argument one way 
or the other, but it is another point in favour, perhaps, of suggesting that 
there were certainly some places in the world where they were doing absolutely 
fine,” he said.
 