
The Black Panther Party for Self-Defense was founded in Oakland, California, 
in 1966 by Bobby Seale and Huey Newton, two activists with southern roots who 
had both been involved with the civil rights movement. The pair’s political 
leanings allied more with the militancy of Malcolm X than the nonviolent 
methods of Martin Luther King, and a central pillar of their ideology, outlined 
in anambitious 10-point program 
<http://zinnedproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/bpp10.jpg>, was the 
necessity for their community to defend itself, bearing arms, against 
harassment and brutality by the city’s predominantly white police force.

Though the Panthers launched as a local concern, chapters soon sprang up 
nationwide against the backdrop of the era’s burgeoning countercultural 
politics (Vietnam, the student movement); a global confluence of anti-colonial 
movements; and the toxic social and economic results of de facto segregation. 
The Panthers offered young, disenfranchised African Americans a sense of refuge 
and communal purpose.

If you want to be in a gang, why not be part of a gang that’s taking on the 
biggest bullies on the block?
Jamal Joseph 
Jamal Joseph, who joined the New York chapter at the age of 15, recently told 
me over the phone: “For anyone that wanted to be in a gang, the Panthers were 
there to say: ‘Well, if you want to be in a gang, why not be part of a gang 
that’s taking on the biggest bullies on the block? The United States 
government. The police.’”

Rocking an eye-catching uniform of leather jackets, afros and berets, the 
Panthers introduced new methods of community activism – most famously their 
Free Breakfast for Children programs – but terrified the white establishment 
and faced a tough clampdown. Newton was arrested for allegedly killing a 
policeman in October 1967 (he spent time in jail, but was later acquitted). In 
1968, Seale was also imprisoned in Chicago, while the FBI director, J Edgar 
Hoover, dubbed the Panthers “the greatest threat to internal security of the 
country”, and engaged in a campaign of extreme surveillance under the 
Cointelpro banner.

That same year, the party’s inaugural recruit, 17-year-old Bobby Hutton, was 
killed in a shootout with Oakland police. In 1969, the charismatic 21-year-old 
deputy chair of the Illinois chapter, Fred Hampton, was murdered in his 
apartment by the police in a late-night raid. The party became riddled with 
informants, was subjected to constant harassment under the aegis of Hoover and 
incoming president Richard Nixon, and eventually became consumed by internal 
strife. Joseph argues that the party’s embrace of cross-racial class struggle 
was central to its downfall: “It got us wiped out, like Dr King andMalcolm X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/malcolm-x> – they were both assassinated 
at the point that they were both talking about capitalism, class struggle, and
all people coming together.” By 1980 its membership had dwindled to a desultory 
27.

For such a complex, confrontational and camera-friendly outfit, the Panthers 
have been surprisingly under-represented on film. Yet intriguing portraits do 
exist. The great French experimental film-maker Agnès Varda was living in 
California when Newton was first arrested. His trial was ongoing in 1968, which 
prompted her to make two nonfiction films about the demonstrations organized in 
his support.Huey <http://www.eastofborneo.org/archives/agnes-varda-huey-1968> 
captures the militant, celebrity-studded atmosphere of the “Free Huey!” 
campaign, whileBlack Panthers <https://vimeo.com/28062577> intimately 
investigates the local dynamics of the party’s Oakland branch.

While in Algiers to film the Pan-African Cultural Festival in 1969, avant 
garde artist William Klein madeEldridge Cleaver, Black Panther 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oveOiKSj7Jo>, a record of the party’s then 
exiled, perma-controversial minister of information (who later went on to 
design a luxury apron-cum-codpiece entitled theCleaver Sleeve 
<http://1.bp.blogspot.com/_c8LNGp0k9_c/RvrZ39dpiFI/AAAAAAAABE0/mOE2WWSlE6o/s400/cleaver.jpg>
, and concocted his own religious group, “the Guardians of the Sperm”.) Another 
documentarian, Chicago-based Howard Alk, made 1969’s American Revolution 2, 
about the 1968 Democratic National Convention, and the formation of an unlikely 
alliance between the Black Panther Party and the Young Patriots Organization; 
and the rivetingThe Murder Of Fred Hampton 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gyMbFBebUE4> (1971), which follows the 
21-year-old until his unexpected death, at which it point transmogrifies into a 
furious exposé of police corruption.

How Black Panthers turned to North Korea in fight against US imperialism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/19/black-panthers-north-korea-us-imperialism>
More recently, Goran Hugo Olsson’s The Black Power Mixtape 1967-75 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/oct/20/black-power-mixtape-film-review> 
(2011), offered a stylish marriage of newsreel footage plundered from Swedish 
archives and present-day observations from the likes of Seale and poet Sonia 
Sanchez.

The sole major fictional film to address the group’s legend is the 
entertaining, underrated epic Panther (1995), by Mario van Peebles, featuring a 
screenplay by Mario’s father, Melvin, from his novel of the same name. Melvin 
had previously directed the grungy Blaxploitation classic Sweet Sweetback’s 
Baadasssss Song (1971), of which Huey Newton was a vocal supporter: “[It is] 
the first truly revolutionary Black film ever made … presented to us by a Black 
man,” he remarked, enthralled by its evocation of black self-reliance and 
swaggering masculinity.

But the Panthers, easily circumscribed by their stylized appearance and 
unavoidably controversial facets, have more frequently been utilized as 
thematic punctuation marks in historical documentaries; or reduced to agitprop 
punchlines in mainstream fare such asLee Daniels’ The Butler  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/17/forest-whitaker-the-butler-lee-daniels>
(2013), in which the briefly glimpsed Panther character (played by Yaya 
DaCosta) is portrayed as little more than a petulant poseur with explosively 
violent tendencies.

A new film, The Black Panthers: Vanguard of the Revolution, aims to provide a 
more considered account of the party’s stunningly rapid rise and fall. Directed 
by veteran African American documentarian Stanley Nelson (The Murder of Emmett 
Till, We Shall Remain), it was made over seven years, and partially funded by a 
successful Kickstarter campaign.

“I was 15 years old when the Panthers came into being,” Nelson told me. “I was 
at just the right age and the Panthers were talking about things that were of 
concern to me in New York, and in my generation. Plus, they had a whole 
different look from what we’d seen before. As a film-maker, I just thought that 
this incredible story – of young people seizing the moment – hadn’t been told.” 
The Panthers’ extreme youth, at their height, is one of the tale’s most 
staggering aspects: “Even the people I looked up to as the older brothers and 
sisters were 19, 20, 21 years old,” says Jamal Joseph. “The average age of 
someone in the party was probably 20 years old.”

In order to tell the story, Nelson adopts a fairly conventional style 
comprising chronological narrative, a sharp assemblage of well-researched 
archive footage, and a vast range of “talking head” interviewees. Though the 
film exhibits an undeniably pro-Panther stance, Nelson’s inclusion of 
contributions from historians, journalists and even white former cops helps to 
foster a rich sense of depth, and adds a measure of objectivity.

Life with the Black Panthers | Sean O'Hagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/oct/25/black-panthers-photographs-howard-bingham>
One notable absentee is Bobby Seale, who remains a political activist at the 
age of 78. Nelson told me that he repeatedly reached out to Seale to request 
his participation, but was rebuffed each time. Another surprising omission is 
Angela Davis, who was never an official Panther, but kept close ties with the 
party (“She had her moment, in Shola Lynch’s 2013 film Free Angela and All 
Political Prisoners,” says Nelson by way of explanation.)

Although the film underplays, or simply ignores some of the Panthers’ less 
savoury activities – like the 1969 torture and murder of suspected informant 
Alex Rackley by three members of the New Haven chapter – it is no hagiography. 
Former Panther organizer Kathleen Cleaver is circumspect in her interview about 
the party’s open-door recruitment policy and consequent lack of quality control 
(“We had no idea who these people were!”). Another past member, Ronald Freeman, 
is wryly ambivalent about the celebrity fans that the party attracted: “Them 
stars,” he says, referring to the likes of Jane Fonda, “they loved that shit. 
They ate that shit up.”

The film also candidly addresses the party’s chauvinism, which was persistent 
and insidious even though the majority of the rank and file were women. “We 
didn’t get these men from revolutionary heaven,” says former leader Elaine 
Brown. (Incidentally, Brown has since come out against the film. In anangry 
tirade for the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/07/03/ex-black-panther-leader-elaine-brown-slams-stanley-nelson-s-condemnable-documentary.html>
, she takes issue with its critical portrayal of Newton – who emerges late as 
the crazed, drug-addled villain of the piece – labels it a “piece of 
provocative propaganda worthy of the FBI itself”, and concludes with a stinging 
rejoinder for the director: “My consolation lies in knowing that … history will 
not remember Stanley Nelson at all.”)

And yet, such hotly contested subject matter was always likely to engender 
fierce debate. It is, however, unarguable that Nelson’s film arrives at an 
irresistibly resonant time. The director is keenly aware of how events in 
Ferguson and Baltimore – and the recent police-related deaths of African 
Americans likeSamuel DuBose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/30/samuel-dubose-killing-officer-pleads-not-guilty-ryan-tensing>
 andSandra Bland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/25/sandra-bland-suspicion-mistrust-official-inconsistencies>
 – has shifted the context of how his film will be viewed. “A year and a half 
ago, it might have been easier for critics to say, ‘Oh, these guys [the 
Panthers] look crazy, how could they do this?’, and not take it seriously. But 
I think now they’ll understand – or a lot of people will understand – that the 
magnitude of police mistreatment of African Americans is real and it’s been 
going on for a long time.”

The film also works as a powerful thematic companion to a host of recent 
cultural touchstones. Nelson confesses to being awestruck by the serendipitous 
timing – one month before his film’s Sundance premiere in January 2015 – of the 
release ofBlack Messiah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/15/dangelo-black-messiah-first-listen-review-investing-vintage-soul-with-a-fresh-lustre>
, the comeback LP by D’Angelo and the Vanguard. In the film, interviewees 
repeatedly state that the FBI were hellbent on preventing the rise of a new 
“Black Messiah”, an impulse which ultimately accounted for the preternaturally 
commanding Fred Hampton.

Straight Outta Compton: hit biopic raps up NWA story cleanly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/02/straight-outta-compton-reel-history-nwa-eazy-e-ice-cube-dr-dre>
It also shares DNA with the NWA biopic Straight Outta Compton which, despite 
itsindefensibly spineless oversights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/19/straight-outta-compton-ignores-dr-dre-abuse-of-women-say-two-former-victims>
, offers an uncompromising depiction of the corporeal and psychological 
realities of racist police brutality; and Ta-Nehisi Coates’ bleak, critically 
acclaimed bookBetween The World and Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/14/between-the-world-and-me-ta-nehisi-coates-review>
 (“I’m waiting for my turn to read it,” says Nelson. “My father got it for his 
99th birthday, and I gave it to my son, who’s 16. It’s being passed around the 
house.”)

But does the film have the power to transcend the realms of entertaining and 
informative? Dr Althea Legal-Miller, Teaching Fellow at UCL-Institute of the 
Americas, thinks so, and sees it as a potential blueprint for contemporary 
young activists: “Nelson’s film serves as a powerful reminder that building a 
movement requires sustainable organisational coordination that negotiates the 
intersections of reform, militancy and radicalism. Today, young activists are 
relentlessly rebuilding a Black liberation movement, and it is no accident that 
– like the Panthers before them – they are simultaneously community building 
through free programmes like Hands Up United’s ‘Books and Breakfast’ programme 
in Ferguson and Newark, New Jersey.”

Nelson, for his part, is warily optimistic that his film can have a positive 
impact: “The Panthers story has some pretty clear ‘dos and don’ts’ – I hope 
that people will understand these and use whatever lessons they can find to 
help make their movements flower.”

The Black Panthers: Vanguard of the Revolution is on nationwide release in the 
US from Friday 4 September
 