
New Zealand pulled off a stunning victory over Pakistan in Hamilton, taking 
nine wickets in the final session of the match for a 138-run win and a 2-0 win 
in the series. The tourists were set 369 to win on the final day and lost just 
one wicket in the first two sessions. However, from 158-1 at tea they lost 
their last nine wickets for 72 runs to crash to an ignominious defeat.

Alastair Cook endures a day to forget after India twist the knife | Ali Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/28/alastair-cook-india-england-third-test-cricket>
Neil Wagner took the final three wickets in seven balls to end the innings 
with nine overs to spare. The win ensured New Zealand’s first series victory 
over Pakistan since 1985 and a rise in the Test rankings to six, while Pakistan 
drop from second to fourth.

Pakistan, starting with one run on the board, didn’t lose a wicket in the 
morning session but after lunch it seemed they would start blazing. However, 
Azhar Ali’s second wind up could only get an inside edge on to his stumps to go 
for 58. It ended Pakistan’s second longest opening stand, lasting 360 balls. 

The second wicket, of Babar Azam (16) after the tea break, was much the same, 
an inside edge going onto the off stump. Sami Aslam was third to fall, for 91, 
when he slapped one from Tim Southee to Kane Williamson at mid off to fall nine 
short of a maiden hundred.

Sarfraz Ahmed (19) was run out going for a second run on the arm of Colin de 
Grandhomme from deep backward square and the Seddon Park pitch, which had 
played well for two days, suddenly became a minefield when the second new ball 
was taken and it started to seam and kick off.

Matt Henry got his first wicket of the match when a leading edge from Asad 
Shafiq (0) flew to Henry Nicholls at backward point. Younis Khan, on his 39th 
birthday, then inexplicably left a ball from Southee that hit him on the front 
pad. Umpire Sundaram Ravi initially gave it not out but a DRS review showed it 
would have hit the stumps, and Younis was out for 11.

Sohail Khan (8) then spooned another catch to Nicholls in the covers and 
Mohammad Amir lasted just two balls before being caught behind off Wagner and 
Wahab Riaz suffered a similar fate in the same over.


Imran Khan was the last man out, falling to a diving catch by Tom Latham at 
short leg. Mohammad Rizwan, who scored a golden duck on debut in the first 
innings, was not out 13 while Wagner finished with figures of 3-57, Southee 
2-60, Santner 2-49, Henry 1-38 and de Grandhomme 1-17.
 