
If there is one city in the UK that's benefited from a cultural renaissance, 
it is undoubtedly Newcastle. The Lonely Planet Guide now urges its readers to 
visit a city where the Baltic, Sage, Live theatre,Seven Stories 
<http://www.sevenstories.org.uk/>, Dance City, Northern Stage 
<http://www.northernstage.co.uk/> and other arts organisations have transformed 
the landscape.

But, like many councils around the country, Newcastle is facing tough choices. 
Followingthe example of Somerset 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/sep/16/arts-council-cuts-how-deep>, 
which has already implemented 100% cuts to its arts budget, Newcastle is 
proposing to do the same because of cuts to its own grant from central 
government.

Lee Hall's eloquent and moving letter 
<http://artsfunding.ning.com/profiles/blogs/lee-hall-letter-about-proposed-newcastle-library-closures>
 to the leader of Newcastle's city council, urging him and councillors to 
reconsider the recently announcedprogramme of library closures 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/nov/21/newcastle-library-closure-plans-outrage-writers>
, points out that libraries are central to our lives, a notion that "survived 
two world wars, the Great Depression and Thatcher". Hall also writes that 
culture helped Newcastle survive the death of heavy industry, and in so doing 
found a "pride and prosperity that seemed obscure and unthinkable only a few 
years ago".

Newcastle is not the only city to benefit from the positive changes culture 
can bring. As artistic director of Sheffield Theatres, Daniel Evans pointed out 
at a recent conference on regional theatre, the arts have played a major role 
in making the city a vibrant and inspiring place to live. But for all its 
support for the arts, Sheffield is facing the same hard choices. We've talked 
before in this space about how, between London and the rest of the country,arts 
funding is not a level playing field 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/theatreblog/2012/aug/30/major-theatre-institutions-die>
. But then, neither are grants between the regions: over the past two years, 
subsidies to Sheffield have been reduced by £137 per resident, in Surrey to 
just £15.

Newcastle and Sheffield both recognise the value of culture – and so does 
Birmingham, which isbuilding a new library and home for Birmingham Rep 
<http://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk/about/our-change-of-scenery/> that includes a 
new 300-seat studio. But the Rep's artistic director Roxana Silbert fears the 
studio won't open if it can't replace the money lost from council funding. "I'm 
not crying wolf," she says, and I believe her. It's hard for arts organisations 
outside London, particularly those working directly with local communities, to 
attract thephilanthropic support 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/charlottehigginsblog+society/philanthropy> 
that culture secretary Maria Miller and the government so favour.As Nicholas 
Hytner points out 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/nov/18/nicholas-hytner-cuts-regional-theatres>
, philanthropic money follows central and local government investment. Some of 
the Newcastle arts organisations facing a 100% cut in government funding are 
likely to find it hard to retain Arts Council funding too – as the latter won't 
support organisations that aren't financially viable.

If Newcastle goes ahead with its cuts, it's likely that others will follow. 
The result may well be a cultural apartheid, in which Londoners enjoy a 
plethora of arts activities and those living elsewhere lose nearly all access 
to culture, with its ability to transform lives and open doors. The councils 
will have saved money in the short term, but we may never be able tomeasure the 
enormity of what has been lost 
<http://culturalvalueinitiative.org/2012/11/09/disvalue-an-illichian-case-for-a-cultural-value-discourse-by-simon-ravenscroft/>
.
 