
The votes are in. They have been counted. It was close. Very close. 

But before we get there, the question again:

Two closed boxes, A and B, are on a table in front of you. A contains £1,000. 
B contains either nothing or £1 million. You don’t know which. You have two 
options:

 * Take both boxes.

 * Take box B only.

You keep the contents of the box/boxes you take, and your aim is to get the 
most money.

But here’s the thing. The test was set by a Super-Intelligent Being, who has 
already made a prediction about what you will do. If Her prediction was that 
you would take both boxes, She left B empty. If Her prediction was that you 
would take B only, She put a ₤1 million cheque in it.

Before making your decision, you do your due diligence, and discover that the 
Super-Intelligent Being has never made a bad prediction. She has correctly 
predicted things you and others have done, including in situations just like 
this one, never once getting it wrong. It’s a remarkable track-record. So, what 
do you choose? Both boxes or just box B?

The original post was viewed more than 200,000 times, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland/2016/nov/28/newcombs-problem-divides-philosophers-which-side-are-you-on>
 with well over a thousand comments. We tallied 31,854 votes before we closed 
submissions. And the results are:

 * I choose box B: 53.5 per cent

 * I choose both boxes: 46.5 per cent

This is very close - an almost Brexit-like split down the middle of the voting 
public. And like Brexit, some families were deeply divided. Mine was anyway: I 
chose box B, while my wife chose both boxes. Arguing about it just entrenched 
our positions.

In the only other mass survey on Newcomb’s Problem 
<http://www.philosophyexperiments.com/>, the results were similar: 55 per cent 
chose box B, and 45 per cent both boxes.

So many excellent comments were made on the original piece that I will not 
attempt to summarise them. I do, however, want to add some background. The 
question is named after William A Newcomb, an American physicist who thought it 
up when thinking about another famous problem, theprisoner’s dilemma. 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner's_dilemma> But it was only when the 
American philosopher Robert Nozick wrote about the puzzle in 1970 that it 
became well known.

In the original post, I asked two philosophers to argue each position. 
One-boxer Arif Ahmed of Cambridge University and two-boxer David Edmonds of
Philosophy247 <http://www.philosophy247.org/>.

Responding to his side’s victory, Dr Ahmed said that those who chose two boxes 
may criticise him as being irrational. “But if Newcomb’s problem is a choice 
between being rational and being rich then I’ll take the money every time, 
thank you.”

He added: “I was gratified and enlightened to read so many and such insightful 
comments. One common theme was that the problem was in some way silly or not 
worth any thought, because it involves determinism and so excludes free will. 
Setting aside the vexed question of whether or not determinism rules out free 
choice (or how randomness somehow supports it), the problem in no way 
presupposes determinism. After all, the predictor need not be infallible. As 
long as She is *likely* to be right, the same problem arises (and the same 
solution applies).

“Other inessential features of the problem also seemed to attract attention. 
The problem need not involve money - we could replace that with anything else 
that you value - and it needn’t involve genuine prediction - we could replace 
that with any appropriate correlation. That is why the problem has real 
versions in political science, in AI, in quantum theory and elsewhere.”

Meanwhile, Dr Edmonds said: “2016 will be remembered as the year in which 
democracy threw up some entirely unexpected results. First Brexit, then Trump, 
and, perhaps most surprising of all, Newcomb’s Box. This is such a teasing 
conundrum, that I’m not surprised it received such an overwhelming response. 
That I foresaw. But my crystal ball gazing let me down in one way. I had 
predicted that people would be more rational. Nonetheless, after discussions 
with my legal team, I have decided not to demand a recount.

“There were many great comments from readers. The comments and result will be 
of interest to experimental philosophers – philosophers who make use of 
empirical data to cast new light on philosophical questions – even though 
Guardian readers may not be entirely representative of the world as a whole. 
Still, it would be fascinating to be able to delve a bit deeper. For example, 
to what extent is there a correlation between selecting just Box B and a belief 
in God? How do views about free-will affect the choice people make? Were there 
significant gender, age, regional or class differences (this I doubt).

“One man tweeted me that the Brexit option would be to choose Box A alone. No 
comment.”

If you would like to find out more, you could try the original paper by Robert 
Nozick <http://philpapers.org/rec/NOZNPA>, Arif Ahmed’s book Evidence, Decision 
and Causality 
<http://www.cambridge.org/gb/academic/subjects/philosophy/philosophy-science/evidence-decision-and-causality?format=AR&isbn=9781316056073>
, in which he argues for the one box answer, James M Joyce’sThe Foundations of 
Causal Decision Theory 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/the-foundations-of-causal-decision-theory/068BC033D4D8245FCF607904CC4DB730>
, in which he argues against the one box answer, or Robert Grafstein’s book
Choice-Free Rationality 
<https://www.press.umich.edu/15988/choice_free_rationality>, in which he 
discusses applications of the problem in political science.

Thanks again to everyone who took part.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Falexs-adventures-in-numberland%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fnewcombs-problem-which-side-won-the-guardians-philosophy-poll%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e053d19d26ad5fdb78374ffd961eb5a85bec96f%2F0_0_1843_2409%2F1843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newcomb's%20problem%3A%20which%20side%20won%20the%20Guardian's%20philosophy%20poll%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Falexs-adventures-in-numberland%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fnewcombs-problem-which-side-won-the-guardians-philosophy-poll%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newcomb%27s%20problem%3A%20which%20side%20won%20the%20Guardian%27s%20philosophy%20poll%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Falexs-adventures-in-numberland%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fnewcombs-problem-which-side-won-the-guardians-philosophy-poll%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e053d19d26ad5fdb78374ffd961eb5a85bec96f%2F0_0_1843_2409%2F1843.jpg>
 Photograph: Guardian Faber 
I’m the author of several books of popular mathematics, most recently Can You 
Solve My Problems? A Casebook of Ingenious, Perplexing and Totally Satisfying 
Puzzles.Available from the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/can-you-solve-my-problems.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 andother retailers <http://amzn.to/2fFUeCA>.

You can check me out on Twitter <https://twitter.com/alexbellos>, Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Alex-Bellos/326738482347?ref=bookmarks>, Google+
 <https://plus.google.com/u/0/100349853927591455618/posts>, my personal website 
<http://www.alexbellos.com/> or my Guardian puzzle blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/series/alex-bellos-monday-puzzle>, in 
which I set a puzzle every other Monday.
 