
Two boxes or not two boxes? That is the question.

For almost half a century Newcomb’s problem has been one of the most 
contentious conundrums in philosophy, with ramifications in economics, politics 
and computer science.

Vast amounts have been written about it, yet thinkers cannot agree on the 
right answer. Rather uncharacteristically for the gentle and cerebral world of 
philosophy, here is a debate in which each side is extremely confident they are 
correct and that the other side is wrong.

On which side do you sit? Read the problem and submit your decision below. In 
order to help you make up your mind, I’ve enlisted two philosophers with 
opposing views to persuade you as to the most sensible course of action.

The problem

Two closed boxes, A and B, are on a table in front of you. A contains £1,000. 
B contains either nothing or £1 million. You don’t know which. You have two 
options:

 * Take both boxes.

 * Take box B only.

You keep the contents of the box/boxes you take, and your aim is to get the 
most money.

But here’s the thing. The test was set by a Super-Intelligent Being, who has 
already made a prediction about what you will do. If Her prediction was that 
you would take both boxes, She left B empty. If Her prediction was that you 
would take B only, She put a ₤1 million cheque in it.

Before making your decision, you do your due diligence, and discover that the 
Super-Intelligent Being has never made a bad prediction. She predicted 
Leicester would win the Premier League, the victories of Brexit and Trump, and 
that Ed Balls would be eliminated yesterday from Strictly Come Dancing. She has 
correctly predicted things you and others have done, including in situations 
just like this one, never once getting it wrong. It’s a remarkable 
track-record. So, what do you choose? Both boxes or just box B?

Why you should take B only.

By Dr Arif Ahmed, Reader in Philosophy at Cambridge university and a Fellow of 
Gonville and Caius College. His most recent book isEvidence, Decision and 
Causality <http://amzn.to/2giJk3x>.

You know that the Super-Intelligent Being is always right. So whatever you do, 
She will have predicted it! If you take box B only, She will have predicted 
that and you will get £1 million. If you take both boxes for any reason – for 
instance, because of what David is about to say – She will have predicted that 
and you will get only £1,000. Clearly, you should take box B only.

Why you should take both boxes.


By Dr David Edmonds, author and editor of several books on philosophy, most 
recently,Philosophers Take On The World <http://amzn.to/2g6Pg03>. He co-runs 
the Philosophy Bites podcast, and has just startedPhilosophy 247 
<http://www.philosophy247.org>.

The Super-Intelligent Being has already made Her prediction before you make 
your decision. So, she has either put £1 million in Box B or not. What do you 
have to lose by choosing both boxes? You cannot influence a decision made in 
the past by a decision made in the present! Think of it this way. Suppose box B 
has transparent glass on the far side – the side I can’t see. And suppose I 
have a friend who can see through that glass side, and knows whether or not the 
£1 million is there. If my friend were allowed to communicate with me, what 
would his advice be? Surely it would be to take both boxes. If the £1 million 
is there, it is not going to disappear in a puff of smoke by my decision to 
take both boxes. Taking both boxes will always enrich me by an extra £1,000 in 
comparison to taking B only.

Now it’s your turn. What will you do?
 Newcomb’s Problem: You decide! 
I’ll be back later with the results of the decisions you made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland/2016/nov/30/newcombs-problem-which-side-won-the-guardians-philosophy-poll>
, and a further discussion of this problem.

Meanwhile, I encourage fierce debate – a boxing match? - below the line about 
the pros and cons of each of the choices. Explain why you chose what you did.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Falexs-adventures-in-numberland%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fnewcombs-problem-divides-philosophers-which-side-are-you-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e053d19d26ad5fdb78374ffd961eb5a85bec96f%2F0_0_1843_2409%2F1843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newcomb's%20problem%20divides%20philosophers.%20Which%20side%20are%20you%20on%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Falexs-adventures-in-numberland%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fnewcombs-problem-divides-philosophers-which-side-are-you-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newcomb%27s%20problem%20divides%20philosophers.%20Which%20side%20are%20you%20on%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Falexs-adventures-in-numberland%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fnewcombs-problem-divides-philosophers-which-side-are-you-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e053d19d26ad5fdb78374ffd961eb5a85bec96f%2F0_0_1843_2409%2F1843.jpg>
If you like questions with less contentious answers, you may enjoy my latest 
book.Can You Solve My Problems? A Casebook of Ingenious, Perplexing and Totally 
Satisfying Puzzles contains my favourite puzzles from the last 2000 years, 
along with historical, biographical and mathematical background. Available from
the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/can-you-solve-my-problems.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 andother retailers <http://amzn.to/2fFUeCA>.

You can check me out on Twitter <https://twitter.com/alexbellos>, Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Alex-Bellos/326738482347?ref=bookmarks>, Google+
 <https://plus.google.com/u/0/100349853927591455618/posts>, my personal website 
<http://www.alexbellos.com/> or my Guardian puzzle blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/series/alex-bellos-monday-puzzle>, in 
which I set a puzzle every other Monday.
 