
An extraordinary row has broken out between the Van Gogh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/van-gogh> Museum in Amsterdam and an 
academic who claims to have found more than 60 drawings made by the artist at 
the height of his powers.

Bogomila Welsh-Ovcharov, a professor at the University of Toronto in Canada, 
and her publishers called a press conference on Tuesday to unveil an accounts 
ledger that she said was used as a sketchbook by Vincent Van Gogh as he 
travelled round the Provençal countryside in 1888.

The ledger’s veracity is backed by the respected Van Gogh scholar Ronald 
Pickvance, who called it “the most revolutionary discovery in the entire 
history of Van Gogh’s oeuvre”.

But within minutes of the press conference starting, the Van Gogh Museum, the 
world’s leading authority on the artist, released a statement saying the 
drawings were categorically not by Van Gogh, but instead “imitations”.

Welsh-Ovcharov, who has curated several important Van Gogh exhibitions, is 
sticking to her claims.

Vincent van Gogh: myths, madness and a new way of painting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/05/vincent-van-gogh-myths-madness-and-a-new-way-of-painting>
She says she was tipped off about the ledger in 2013 and recalls her initial 
shock at seeing the first page – a drawing of cypresses.

“You know they say you have an ‘oh my God’ moment … I had an OMG. I said, it’s 
not possible! I knew straight away, I was a little thrown but I knew ... and it 
was frightening.”

The precise history of the ledger is hazy. Its owner – who wishes to remain 
anonymous – was given it by her mother more than 50 years ago and says she had 
no inkling of its claimed links to Van Gogh. To her, it was “a pretty album of 
drawings” that reminded her of her mother, Welsh-Ovcharov said.

In a testimony published in a new book about the drawings, the owner explains 
that her mother came across it, along with a handwritten journal, towards the 
end of the second world war following bombing of Arles and the surrounding area 
by allied planes.

She writes: “Following the destruction, my mother found a collection of 
archival materials in a separate room, including the large book of drawings and 
the small handwritten notebook that accompanied it. Knowing nothing about art, 
and with no artistic education, she had no idea of the importance of this 
discovery. She gave it to me as a present on my 20th birthday, and it was put 
away in a cupboard.”

There it would have remained, but a friend of the woman suggested she show it 
the art historian Franck Baille, who lived in the area. He had a hunch and 
called in his friend, Welsh-Ovcharov.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fnewly-discovered-van-gogh-drawings-labelled-imitations-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff05084bb2e039dbe28f23ea293248bbab71b133c%2F0_1068_1463_878%2F1463.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newly%20discovered%20'Van%20Gogh'%20drawings%20labelled%20imitations%20by%20museum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fnewly-discovered-van-gogh-drawings-labelled-imitations-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newly%20discovered%20%27Van%20Gogh%27%20drawings%20labelled%20imitations%20by%20museum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fnewly-discovered-van-gogh-drawings-labelled-imitations-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff05084bb2e039dbe28f23ea293248bbab71b133c%2F0_1068_1463_878%2F1463.jpg>
 Bogomila Welsh-Ovcharov at press conference about the sketchbook. Photograph: 
Jacky Naegelen/Reuters 
She claims Van Gogh was given the ledger by Joseph and Marie Ginoux, the 
owners of the Cafe de la Gare in Arles, where the artist stayed from May to 
September 1888. Given the high quality of the paper it is likely he would have 
leapt at the opportunity to use it.

The claim is that Van Gogh used it as he toured the Provençal countryside, 
drawing things which became some of his most recognisable subjects. There are 
previously unseen drawings of haystacks and sunflowers and a remarkable 
apparent self-portrait of a sunburned Van Gogh in his tatty straw hat.

Welsh-Ovcharov has spent the last three years working “like a scientist” on 
the ledger and believes she has overwhelming evidence of its true nature. She 
said of her detractors: “You’re bringing out such a revolutionary discovery 
there’s bound to be people giving their opinion. There are going to be 
different views and dialogues.”

Give me Van Gogh’s ear over Damien Hirst’s luxury basement any day | Jonathan 
Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/van-goghs-ear-damien-hurst-painter-art-money-success>
The statement from the Van Gogh Museum was unequivocal. It said it had been 
aware of the claims for some time and, on the basis of looking at 56 high 
quality photographs, researchers and curators had agreed the drawings could not 
be attributed to Van Gogh.

“Their opinion, based on years of research on Van Gogh’s drawings in the 
museum’s own collection and elsewhere – the Van Gogh Museum holds about 500
drawings by Van Gogh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2013/sep/09/vincent-van-gogh-newly-discovered-work-unveiled-amsterdam-video>
 and four of his sketchbooks – is that these album drawings are imitations of 
Van Gogh’s drawings.

“The experts examined its style, technique and iconography, and among their 
conclusions were that it contains distinctive topographical errors and that its 
maker based it on discoloured drawings by Van Gogh.”


If they were genuine, the drawings would shine light on some of Van Gogh’s 
most famous paintings such as the Yellow House,the Night Cafe 
<http://www.vangoghgallery.com/painting/night-cafe.html> and the Starry Night 
<https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/vincent-van-gogh-the-starry-night-1889>
.

They would provide fascinating insights into Van Gogh’s summer of 1888, a 
largely happy time for an artist who suffered with so many demons. 
Welsh-Ovcharov said Van Gogh arrived in Arles “very tired, very disillusioned, 
very sick having drunk a lot in Paris”.

Van Gogh worked hard over the summer but by the end of 1888 his mental state 
had deteriorated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/christmas-charity-appeal-2014-blog/2015/jan/13/-sp-a-short-history-of-mental-illness-in-art>
. He fell out catastrophically with his friend Paul Gauguin and in December cut 
off his ear. In 1890 he killed himself.

“In 1888, he comes to Provence looking for respite. He came with optimism that 
he would find something in the countryside which would renew and resuscitate 
him.”
 