
The biggest crisis facing the NHS is that, no matter how high or low the 
funding, transformational change fails to happen. It is easy to justify why 
reform is so slow and patchy currently, but neither did it happen in the years 
following the NHS Plan in 2000, when theannual real funding increases 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/blog/2016/05/how-does-this-years-nhs-budget-compare-historically>
 were among the highest in NHS history.


The same promises were made – risk stratified prevention, involving people in 
their own care, a digital revolution, a massive expansion of primary care. 
Waiting lists tumbled, A&E treatment times were slashed and there was huge 
capital investment, but the underlying shape of the service remained largely 
unchanged.

That history is one reason why the Treasury is so resistant to injecting more 
cash. After the NHS England chief executive, Simon Stevens, appeared in front 
of the Commons public accounts committee this weekformer permanent secretary 
Nick Macpherson tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/nickmacpherson2/status/819285952094998528>: “NHS 
bottomless pit. Money should be linked to reform.”

In other parts of the public sector, the current “burning platform” of 
sustained and substantial real-term funding cuts has driven major 
restructuring. Councils have been merging management teams and back-office 
systems, selling buildings and consolidating staff in fewer centres and 
engaging with the public online rather than face-to-face. This is been 
delivered by facing up to tough decisions and planning ahead, knowing that they 
have to break even each year.

But there is a difference between tight control of public spending and setting 
the NHS up to fail. Undermining prevention by cutting public health budgets, 
driving people to A&E through inadequate primary care, and stopping hospital 
patients returning home byeating away at real-term social services spending for 
seven years 
<http://www.content.digital.nhs.uk/catalogue/PUB22240/pss-exp-eng-15-16-fin-rep.pdf>
 is a triple assault on the NHS that is overwhelming the system. Add in the 
efficiencies – cuts – being driven through the payment system and the pressures 
become intolerable.

Related: Our NHS trust is close to a tipping point – and we are not alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2017/jan/11/our-nhs-trust-is-close-to-a-tipping-point-and-we-are-not-alone>

Our health spending as a proportion of our national wealth has always been 
low. According to the Health Foundation, we would need to increase our spending 
as a proportion of GDPby around 10% 
<http://www.health.org.uk/blog/accounting-care-0> to catch up with France and 
Germany. Health spending should be seen as an investment. Mental health 
services in particular have a direct economic benefit.

More cash is needed to break the vicious circle. The vortex of acute sector 
deficits is sucking in funds from the rest of the system, undermining precisely 
the developments that can help to avoid emergency admissions. It has swallowed 
up virtually all the money intended for service transformation. Beyond this, 
cuts to local government funding for social care and public health need to be 
reversed.

Leaving aside the politics of the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, trying to 
wriggle off the four-hour A&E target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/labour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time>
 by applying it only to the most serious cases, it is the right move for the 
health service. When the entire system is under such pressure there is no sense 
in prioritising rapid treatment of minor ailments.

Related: This isn’t a freak day – this is winter in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2017/jan/09/this-isnt-a-freak-day-this-is-winter-in-the-nhs>

But Nick Macpherson is right. More money has to be linked to reform. Numerous 
hospitals are still failing on basics such as effective management of patient 
flows through the hospital, driving efficiencies in A&E and on wards, managing 
their estates and driving down the cost of back-office systems – including by 
outsourcing.

Too few managers and clinicians have the skills to design and implement 
improvements to care pathways. Simple ideas that have been around for years 
such associal workers stationed in A&E 
<http://oup.silverchair-cdn.com/oup/backfile/Content_public/Journal/bjsw/33/6/10.1093/bjsw/33.6.787/2/330787.pdf?Expires=1484645150&Signature=hCPCHgzAmDWdPZGlas0~ZbYdm3uesNKdV6VJryssGY1oX~5iVfjFgPYxEUaBdALme~zCd3BAiGSg5W~CxiIrVNwXr7cH3mfF90glnBf5Qv-cXEb967pDg76369IuzkB5518SL~7DncoAFabV1T5nwxXO8rf3usLIOrxrrKzz4WNAEkFanNDPHxuMBVXvY70DPRyod3vpck-bmsc-uNkjCU~8iw~CIGcsq-Mhg3O4vVSiGPrUWkR1E53Otfc5~EsqWBQepDhgZsvOjkKCJAj~4tNJxLR16t6pCL1KYwQ3iI~HEVoVWGVEAHXMafDHv2chtFP4P1MMt-AA5sKzwka44A__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIUCZBIA4LVPAVW3Q>
 to divert older people from hospital admissions are still under-exploited.

The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and the rest of the health 
and care system desperately needs more cash, but this cannot be swallowed up in 
funding business as usual. Firm commitments need to be made and kept across the 
hospital sector to ensure organisations are as lean and efficient as possible. 
That is the only way to ensure the endlessly discussed investments in primary, 
community and mental health care are finally delivered.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 