
Outside the family home – a two-storey, whitewashed compound in the Tunisian 
town of M’saken – Monthir Bouhlel was at a loss to understand how his son could 
have taken such a wrong turn.

As a boy, Mohamed Lahouaiej-Bouhlel had been troubled and often violent. His 
father remembered him as being “always alone, always depressed”. But he 
insisted the teenager had shown no jihadi tendencies, only self-destructive 
ones. “He would become angry and he shouted,” Bouhlel said. “He would break 
anything he saw in front of him.”

Nothing, however, in that stormy adolescence could have prepared his family 
for what Lahouaiej-Bouhlel did inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> on Thursday night. Their shock was 
profound when news broke early Friday that his identity card had been found in 
the truck he used to kill 84 men, women and children on the Promenade des 
Anglais in Nice.

Indeed, the shock verged on denial. Repeated phone calls to Lahouaiej-Bouhlel 
from relatives in M’saken went unanswered. “Why would my brother do something 
like this?” his brother Jabeur told Reuters. “We’ve been calling him since 
yesterday evening but he’s not responding.”


Nothing in Lahouaiej-Bouhlel’s upbringing suggested a militant path, with 
neighbours in Tunisia and France saying he preferred women and drinking to 
religion, rarely visiting a mosque. The family lived a regular life in what is 
a prosperous part ofTunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia>.

Once a small town, M’saken has in recent years been swallowed up by the 
expanding Sousse coastal conurbation, its wealth fuelled by miles of hotels 
along glittering beaches. The town has handsome cafes and wide boulevards, its 
prosperity underlined by a shiny Renault dealership on the main street.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbastille-day-lorry-attack-what-happened-in-nice-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bastille%20Day%20truck%20attack%3A%20what%20happened%20in%20Nice%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbastille-day-lorry-attack-what-happened-in-nice-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bastille%20Day%20truck%20attack%3A%20what%20happened%20in%20Nice%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbastille-day-lorry-attack-what-happened-in-nice-video&media=>
Bastille Day truck attack: what happened in Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/15/bastille-day-lorry-attack-what-happened-in-nice-video>
“This is not a terrorist town, people here make money, we are not radical,” 
said Mejad, a local government official. “People like to drink, they like to 
socialise.”


Islamic State claims responsibility for Nice truck attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/islamic-state-claims-responsibility-for-nice-truck-attack>
The family had seen no indication that their son had any radical tendencies. 
It is still unclear whether he had any involvement in a terrorist organisation. 
Although the news agency affiliated with Islamic State claimed 
Lahouaiej-Bouhlel as one of their fighters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/islamic-state-claims-responsibility-for-nice-truck-attack>
 on Saturday, he was not known to French or Tunisian intelligence services. 
Prosecutors said on Friday they had not found any links to Isis or other groups.

The picture that emerges of Lahouaiej-Bouhlel from M’saken is of a handsome, 
healthy boy who had a mental breakdown at 17, which his family said lasted two 
years. His father showed the BBC a doctor’s report from 2004, which appeared to 
show that his son had taken prescription medication for mental illness.

By 2005, said his family, his breakdown was behind him and Lahouaiej-Bouhlel 
left for France. The former colonial power is a popular destination for 
Tunisians, with more than 40,000 living in Nice. Within the city lives a tight 
community from M’saken.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnice-attack-bewilders-mohamed-lahouaiej-bouhlel-relatives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6bbbfd13970989bbf17697783df740e045a7a01%2F0_125_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nice%20attack%20bewilders%20Mohamed%20Lahouaiej-Bouhlel's%20relatives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnice-attack-bewilders-mohamed-lahouaiej-bouhlel-relatives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nice%20attack%20bewilders%20Mohamed%20Lahouaiej-Bouhlel%27s%20relatives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnice-attack-bewilders-mohamed-lahouaiej-bouhlel-relatives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6bbbfd13970989bbf17697783df740e045a7a01%2F0_125_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Tributes to victims near the scene of the attack in Nice. Photograph: Eric 
Gaillard/Reuters 
Dotted among the busy traffic on M’saken’s wide central boulevard are 
French-registered cars bearing the number six licence plate of Alpes Maritimes, 
the Nicedépartement, driven by people who work in the French city but spend 
their summers in Tunisia.

The family had hoped that, in Nice, Lahouaiej-Bouhlel would connect with a 
diaspora of local families who could support him. At first, the move seemed to 
work. He got a job as a delivery driver and married a French-Tunisian woman. 
They had three children, aged 18 months, three and five.

But his family say he made infrequent trips home, the last, for his sister’s 
wedding, in 2012. In France his violent temperament resurfaced.

Two years ago, he separated from his wife. She and the three children stayed 
in their apartment in the Abattoirs district of Nice, with Lahouaiej-Bouhlel 
moving to a cramped, one-room apartment elsewhere in the city. Neighbours 
described him as solitary, even threatening, and earlier this year his violent 
personality got him in trouble with police.

Who were the Nice attack victims?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/who-were-the-nice-attack-victims-bastille-day-dead>
A fight with another driver earned him a six-month suspended sentence in 
March, according to the French justice minister, Jean-Jacques Urvoas. “There 
was an altercation between him and another driver and he hurled a wooden pallet 
at the man,” Urvoas said on Friday.

French media reported that by then Lahouaiej-Bouhlel had already been sacked 
by his company after falling asleep at the wheel of a delivery van in January.

One question for security forces will be whether he made contact with any of 
the radical cells which have made Nice their home in recent years.

Radical recruiters have set up networks in the Riviera city, most prominently 
followers of Omar Omsen, also known as Oumar Diaby, who is high on France’s 
most-wanted list. After producing online propaganda videos, Omsen moved to 
Syria in 2013.

Back in M’saken, many worry about the damage that the Nice attack will do to 
Tunisia’s already tarnished reputation.After last summer’s beach massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/tunisia-massacre-anniversary-families-uk-government-staff-soussehttps://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/tunisia-massacre-anniversary-families-uk-government-staff-soussehttps://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/tunisia-massacre-anniversary-families-uk-government-staff-sousse>
 near Sousse, which left 38 tourists dead, the country has been connected to a 
second atrocity in just over 12 months. “People when they think of Tunisia, 
they will think of terrorism, but that is not the truth,” Mejad said.
 