
Nick Dougherty is at least spared the question of “Whatever happened to?” His 
prominence as an excellent television analyst means he remains part of golf’s 
consciousness.

Oakmont test can provide Spieth with a major reason to forget his travails | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/11/oakmont-test-jordan-spieth-us-open-golf>
There was a spell when the Englishman was in the limelight for different 
reasons. He was the interviewee rather than the interviewer. That time will hit 
the 34-year-old with full force when he arrives at Oakmont Country Club for 
this week’sUS Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usopengolf>.

In 2007 Dougherty took to Oakmont when in the form of his life. He justified 
that not only by leading witha first-round 68 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jun/14/golf.usopengolf2007> but by 
holing a 15ft putt on the 72nd green for a closing share of seventh, which was 
sufficient to earn the Englishman a Masters debut the following year.

“That week was groundbreaking for me in a few ways,” Dougherty says. “You know 
that if you are not going in there with your game intact, you are making up the 
numbers. You can’t hide at a US Open.

“I had heard all the stories about Oakmont, thought: ‘Yeah, yeah,’ then played 
practice rounds and it was unbelievably difficult. If I had been keeping score, 
it would have been in the 80s. I thought: ‘Oh my God, this is terrifying.’ Even 
though I was playing well, my expectations totally dropped because I didn’t 
even know what a good score was around that course.

“It was all about expectation. If I was playing well in practice, it tended 
not to be a good sign because I started thinking: ‘I can win this.’ That would 
bang around my head for the whole week. I would make mistakes because of 
pushing too hard. Instead, there I thought just about hanging on for dear life 
and seeing what happened.”

At the time Dougherty branded Oakmont “barbaric”. Not that he was complaining. 
“I love golf on the edge. Not all the time but four times a year I could handle 
it. You were a small error away from absolute disaster and I liked that.”

Expectation played a part in Dougherty’s second-round 77. Disappointment was 
soon offset by fairytale; Dougherty was to partner Tiger Woods in round three. 
“People ask about my best day in golf. It wasn’t any of the wins,” he says. 
“That was my best day in golf; playing withTiger Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods>, third round of the US Open. 
People win, someone wins every week, whereas playing with a bit of history … 
That was better than leading the US Open.

“He hit 13/14 fairways. He hit 17/18 greens. It was picture perfect; fading it 
to right flags, drawing it to left flags. The American coverage that night was 
speaking about one of the greatest ever major championship rounds. He was only 
one shot under that day because he missed everything. He didn’t putt badly but 
kept grazing the hole. He could have shot 64. Tiger Woods is a superstar to me 
on the course. That’s why I don’t particularly like watching what has happened 
to his golf.”

Dougherty was so drained by his third-round experience he fell asleep at the 
dinner table. He had finished double bogey, bogey for a 74. “I was still super 
proud of what I had done but if I had finished par, par I would have had a 
great chance.”

Dougherty’s subsequent path was a tragic one. He closed 2007 inside the top 50 
in the world. The magical moment of putting out on the final green on Masters 
Sunday in April 2008 was even more special for Dougherty, with his family, 
including his mother, Ennis, in clear sight. Ennis was to die, at the age of 
61, having suffered a heart attack the following week.

Imagine being grateful for running out of balls because it saved embarrassment?

In the midst of an emotional tailspin, Dougherty put his heart and soul into 
qualifying for the 2008 Ryder Cup. He came within a back nine of doing that but 
now admits the “obsession” based on somehow offsetting his mother’s death was a 
“stupid” one. Things changed; even when he won the 2009 BMW International Open, 
Dougherty did not sample typical levels of satisfaction. “I was hollow that 
night, actually quite deflated,” he says. “I was super proud of the victory but 
empty.”

That was Dougherty’s last top-10 finish, astonishingly for someone of his 
talent. While suffering “paralysis by analysis” Dougherty sought insight from 
almost every top coach in golf but his game collapsed. Advice and support was 
regularly forthcoming – from Nick Faldo, Darren Clarke and Miguel Ángel Jiménez 
– on the simple basis that Dougherty is immensely popular. Golf’s collective 
willed him on.

Yet, there was no dramatic upturn. So surely such a close watching brief of 
the summit of golf triggers jealousy? “Remembering what I used to be able to do 
makes me think those things,” he says. “But then I remember, golf isn’t like 
that for me any more. It is hard to get around in my mind. The last five years 
have been pretty scarring in what I have watched, I have had some horrible 
experiences; running out of balls in Africa and being grateful at not having to 
sign for more than 90. Imagine being grateful for running out of balls because 
it saved embarrassment?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fnick-dougherty-best-day-golf-tiger-woods-us-open-oakmont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb82c73766e4c0d8204a4a1f3913c9cfce427e1f%2F57_232_3121_1873%2F3121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Dougherty%3A%20my%20best%20day%20in%20golf%20was%20playing%20with%20Tiger%20Woods%20at%20US%20Open&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fnick-dougherty-best-day-golf-tiger-woods-us-open-oakmont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Dougherty%3A%20my%20best%20day%20in%20golf%20was%20playing%20with%20Tiger%20Woods%20at%20US%20Open&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fnick-dougherty-best-day-golf-tiger-woods-us-open-oakmont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb82c73766e4c0d8204a4a1f3913c9cfce427e1f%2F57_232_3121_1873%2F3121.jpg>
 Tiger Woods lines up a putt watched by Nick Dougherty in the US Open at 
Oakmont in 2007. Photograph: Ross Kinnaird/Getty Images 
“I have made peace with it. When I was in it, it brought me to tears. I don’t 
doubt people will think: ‘Get a grip, mate, you play golf for a living.’ True, 
true but when you are in it, there is no escape. It was my living and I had 
worked so hard.

“I haven’t shut the door on playing golf. If I get to the end of the year and 
just feel like I’m using up someone’s spot, I think then I may make a decision. 
I will always play but it is whether or not I can compete. It is a weird time 
for me.”

Dougherty attempted to qualify for Oakmont. “It was always going to be very 
hard for me to get there but if there was one more major I was going to play … 
” Television work it is, then. “I am excited to go back because it will remind 
me what I used to play golf like. I think I was quite good but that has been 
hard to remember sometimes.”

If this week offers others a chance to recall Dougherty’s promise, the US Open 
will be all the better for it. If it provides necessary incentive for a 
comeback, Dougherty will not be lacking in plaudits.
 