
The sun has set on day three of the Democratic national convention in 
Philadelphia. Here’s what happened:


 * In a wildly applauded appearance interrupted a couple of times by various 
people shouting “four more years!”,Barack Obama took the stage to ask the 
country to “do for Hillary Clinton what you did for me”. 
 * At the end of the speech,  Clinton joined the president onstage – her first 
appearance in person at the convention. The two hugged and the audience cheered 
a lot. 
 * Obama said he disagreed with a pessimistic vision of the country’s 
prospects laid out at the Republican convention last week. He framed Donald 
Trump as neither a Republican nor a conservative but as a throwback to 
political doomsayers of old. 
 * In listing threats to the country, Obama put alongside fascists, communists 
and jihadists“homegrown demagogues”, certainly a reference to Trump, whom the 
president said was “not really a facts guy”.

 * “Does anyone really believe that a guy who’s spent his 70 years on this 
Earth showing no regard for working people is suddenly going to be your 
champion?” Obama said. 
 * Senator Tim Kaine, Clinton’s running mate, introduced himself to the 
country and tried out a Trump impression with the refrain: “Believe me!” 
Everybody said it wasn’t that good but seemed to forgive him for it. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ftim-kaine-tries-out-his-donald-trump-impression-at-dnc-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Kaine%20tries%20out%20his%20Donald%20Trump%20impression%20at%20DNC%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ftim-kaine-tries-out-his-donald-trump-impression-at-dnc-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Kaine%20tries%20out%20his%20Donald%20Trump%20impression%20at%20DNC%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ftim-kaine-tries-out-his-donald-trump-impression-at-dnc-video&media=>
Tim Kaine tries out his Donald Trump impression at DNC – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/28/tim-kaine-tries-out-his-donald-trump-impression-at-dnc-video>
Megan Carpentier (@megancarpentier) 
LET HE WHO HAS NOT DONE A TERRIBLE IMPRESSION OF DONALD TRUMP CAST THE FIRST 
STONE.
 <https://twitter.com/megancarpentier/status/758491623424716801> July 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/megancarpentier/status/758491623424716801> 
 * Vice-President Joe Biden made a case that Trump wouldn’t look out for the 
middle class: “He’s trying to tell us he cares about the middle class. Give me 
a break. That’s a bunch of malarkey!”

 * A few unruly delegates remained. People chanted “no more war” as former 
defense secretary Leon Panetta spoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/leon-panetta-anti-war-protesters-democratic-convention>
. But when Obama tipped his hat to Bernie Sanders, no hand was left unclapped. 
 * The night saw wrenching testimony from families of victims of gun violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/gun-control-democratic-convention-orlando-charleston-sandy-hook>
, from Newtown to Orlando. Gabby Giffords gave a heartily cheered speech. 
 * The night featured Republican criticism of Trump – eg video of Mitt Romney 
– and a well-received speech from Republican-turned-independent Michael 
Bloomberg, who told the world that Trump is a con man. 
 * Multiple speakers hit Trump for asking earlier in the day for Russia to 
hack Clinton’s emails, in an extraordinary press conference summarized here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-vladimir-putin-hillary-clinton-emails>
. 
 * Award for surprisingly strong performance goes to former candidate Martin 
O’Malley, who said: “It’s time to put a bully in his place, and a tough woman 
in hers [pause] – the White House!” 
 * (He used to write them): John Podhoretz (@jpodhoretz) 
Take about five paragraphs out of that Obama speech and it could have been a 
Reagan speech. Trust me. I know.
 <https://twitter.com/jpodhoretz/status/758516128561917953> July 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jpodhoretz/status/758516128561917953>  