
It’s 11pm on a Friday night and I’m sitting at the bar of Glasgow’s delicately 
named drinking spot, Nice ‘N’ Sleazy, with Dominic Flannigan and Clair Stirling 
- AKADJ Eclair Fifi <https://soundcloud.com/eclairfifi> - of the city’s 
trendsetting record label and art collectiveLuckyMe <http://thisisluckyme.com/>.

Dominic - who had previously been making excuses for not wanting to go too 
crazy that evening - has just placed a round of Buckfast in front of us. Barely 
a sip later and Clair has already knocked hers over. “Now that’s a blessing in 
disguise,” she says. “I think that’s what you’d call a Freudian slip.”

Glasgow’s nightlife - and the city in general - may have a raucous reputation, 
fuelled by a heady mix of cold air, fried food and tonic wine, but it’s also 
one of the most creative, friendly and witty scenes in the country. The 
sprawling industrial town, which has been tirelessly regenerating itself over 
the past three decades, seems to produce an endless stream of forward-thinking 
musicians, artists and designers that spiral out of its live music venues, pubs 
and clubs - often via a stint in the effortlessly cool Glasgow School of Art.

In many ways LuckyMe epitomises all this. Created in 2007, the collective has 
seen one of its founding members,Hudson Mohawke 
<https://soundcloud.com/hudsonmohawke>, rise from being an underground beat 
juggler to producing tunes with Kanye West, while helping other Glaswegian 
producers such asRustie <https://soundcloud.com/rustie> to receive 
international acclaim for his ground-breaking “aquacrunk” tunes. Dominic, 
LuckyMe’s co-founder and creative director, and Clair agreed to be my “spirit 
guides” for the evening, and take me on a night out in the city that made them.

We met much, much earlier in Glasgow’s Merchant City 
<http://www.merchantcityglasgow.com/> area, an old part of town that’s become 
known for its high density of galleries and bars. In Glasgow, strict licencing 
laws requiring pubs to stop serving at midnight and clubs at 3am, mean that if 
you’re planning a big one you’ve got to start early.
 LuckyMe resident Eclair Fifi made a name for herself after becoming the first 
DJ to make Hudson Mohawke "bounce" Photograph: Photograph: Calum Head/Lucky Me 
But it’s not just the threat of the music stopping that has helped develop the 
intense character of Glasgow’s nightlife. The scene is intertwined with a mix 
of art, radical politics, rave culture and rock. Record labels such asChemikal 
Underground <http://www.chemikal.co.uk/> (The Delgados, Arab Strap, Mogwai) 
have helped define Glasgow’s post-punk sound - most recently playing a role in 
the city’s regeneration by programmingEast End Social 
<http://www.eastendsocial.com/>, a series of cultural events across the city’s 
underdeveloped east this summer. Meanwhile Glasgow’s legendary and 
“charismatic” clubnightOptimo <http://www.optimo.co.uk/home/>, (“all things to 
all people,” says Dom) continues to bridge the gap between genres with its 
eclectic sound policy ranging from techno to rock and roll. The city’s other 
big clubnightNumbers <http://nmbrs.net/> has gone on to release records from 
the likes of Jamie XX and SBTRKT, and there’s always a “young team” coming 
through with fresh ideas, such as recently established labelAll Caps 
<https://soundcloud.com/allcaps_glasgow>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406216541242%2Fcbb153b5-cbd7-467e-a842-8b98baa3224f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406216541242%2Fcbb153b5-cbd7-467e-a842-8b98baa3224f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Optimo DJs JD Twitch and JG Wilkes are renowned for their genre-hopping style. 
Photograph: David Moffat/Optimo 
The first venue we visit, Mono <http://www.monocafebar.com/>, a vegan cafe, 
microbrewery and gig venue founded over a decade ago, is like a subculture HQ. 
Sharing a roof withMonorail <http://www.monorailmusic.com/> record store (owned 
by Stephen Pastel of Glasgow’s long-time indie rockersThe Pastels 
<http://www.thepastels.org/>) and the Good Press Gallery 
<http://goodpressgallery.co.uk/> (a zine store and show space) it remains an 
important stage for new bands to cut their teeth on. As well as paying host to 
the likes of Belle and Sebastian and Franz Ferdinand – the city’s original art 
school rockers – it’s the venue where LuckyMe first started putting on shows. 
“If you’re a band that’s half decent, Mono is the place where you’ll start to 
play,” says Dom.
 Bar and music venue 13th Note and South Block Studios in Glasgow's Merchant 
City. Photograph: /South Block 
Leaving Mono, we pass another important independent music venue ... and vegan 
cafe,13th Note <http://13thnote.co.uk/>, and duck into an opening at South 
Block Studios <http://www.southblock.co.uk/> just next door, not least to take 
advantage of the free scotch lined up for the taking from a table in the corner.
 Upstairs at Nice 'N' Sleazy. Photograph: http://www.nicensleazy.com/gallery 
Once in the centre of town we reach Nice ‘N’ Sleazy 
<http://www.nicensleazy.com/> – a venue with a reputation as one of the 
stand-out indie clubs in the city – for that obligatory glass of Buckfast. In a 
shadowy corner a gothic looking girl plays garage rock from her stool behind 
the decks. In the basement metallic chords and screams filter out everytime the 
door opens. Outside the pavement is busy with young smokers. Popular with 
students, Sleazy’s – which opens till 3am seven days a week – has entertainment 
almost every evening. As they proudly put it: “we don’t have TVs and we don’t 
show football”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406217436013%2F3627278c-06c0-4b08-8161-ff691dd31cc6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406217436013%2F3627278c-06c0-4b08-8161-ff691dd31cc6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Saramago Cafe holds regular DJ nights in its modern courtyard. Photograph: 
/CCA 
Accross the road Dom swings his hand over at Pomme Frites 
<https://www.facebook.com/pommesfritesuk> - the snack shop formerly know as Mr 
Chips, and a poignant symbol of the change Glasgow is going through (in Glasgow 
fried food shops are a big deal) - and we head further down Sauchiehall Street 
to another, slicker venue, theCentre for Contemporary Arts 
<http://www.cca-glasgow.com/saramago-caf/saramago-caf-bar>. Its cooly designed 
Saramago Cafe Bar sits at the bottom of a modern courtyard and hosts regular 
free nights such as Blue Sunshine which has resident DJ Plasmatron, from 
Mogwai, selecting the tunes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406217588312%2F2d9de93b-e632-4b87-a2fa-2cbcf593093a-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406217588312%2F2d9de93b-e632-4b87-a2fa-2cbcf593093a-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Art School has played a definitive role in Glasgow's music scene. 
Photograph: The Art School 
Behind is The Art School <http://www.theartschool.co.uk/> – or the GSA 
Students Association – still overlooked by the burnt-out shell of the 
Mackintosh Building, which wasdestroyed in a fire this May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/23/charles-rennie-mackintosh-library-feared-lost-glasgow-school-of-art-blaze>
. “The relationship between the art school and the music scene is really strong 
– the Union is still the main spot for new bands” says Dom, looking up at the 
building, which reopened in January following an ambitious refurbishment.
 Horse Meat Disco kicking things off in The Berkeley Suite. Photograph: 
Michael James/The Berkeley Suite 
As it reaches midnight we walk up and over the roaring M8 motorway and down 
into the discreet entrance of theBerkeley Suite <http://www.berkeleysuite.com/>
, whereDavid Barbarossa <https://soundcloud.com/davidbarbarossa> is playing 
selections from his discerning disco collection. There’s a dreamy David 
Lynchesque feel to the bar and “ballroom” that fills a former Victorian pub. 
Art-deco chandeliers, matched with dim, red lighting, a smoke machine haze and 
a central, retro-looking DJ booth make the club feel almost like Glasgow’s 
answer to Paris’Silencio <http://silencio-club.com/en> – albeit without the icy 
door staff and extortionate prices. It’s a strangely sophisticated space where 
you can expect to see anyone from local dub soundsystemMungo’s Hi Fi 
<http://www.mungoshifi.net/> to DFA’s James Murphy behind the decks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406218247456%2F3be9a3db-0a42-4740-abb7-36736d856b5d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406218247456%2F3be9a3db-0a42-4740-abb7-36736d856b5d-1020x612.jpeg>
 Getting sweaty: basement club La Cheetah, beneath Max's Bar. Photograph: La 
Cheetah 
Other late night options in Glasgow include La Cheetah 
<http://www.maxsbar.co.uk/> - a tiny club with a big Funktion-One soundsystem 
in the basement of Max’s Bar, which you can expect to find crammed full of 
people dancing with the kind of energy that makes Glasgow’s nightlife scene 
special. In the West End there’sSWG3 <http://www.swg3.tv/>, an art space and 
venue that hosts big dance nights in its raw warehouse space, whileClub 69 - 
way out west in the suburb of Paisley - remains a pioneering institution for 
Scotland’s technoheads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406218348012%2F803de9ee-dba5-47f6-bfbe-d4be65e51c1e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Glasgow%E2%80%99s%20bars%20and%20clubs%20with%20the%20Lucky%20Me%20crew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F25%2F-sp-nightlife-reports-tour-glasgow-bars-clubs-lucky-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F24%2F1406218348012%2F803de9ee-dba5-47f6-bfbe-d4be65e51c1e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The view from the booth at Glasgow's historic venue, Subclub. Photograph: 
Subclub 
But after Berkeley’s we head back across town to Glasgow’s historic clubbing 
venueSubclub <http://subclub.co.uk/> - where Numbers are celebrating their 11th 
birthday. Needless to say there’s a queue outside. We head down below Jamaica 
Street and into the club, which has been a seminal fixture in the city since it 
opened way back in 1987. With its low ceiling, wall of speakers and bodysonic 
dance floor, the hot air inside is literally tingling with vibrations. Add to 
this 400 people going nuts to house legendPaul Johnson 
<https://www.facebook.com/DJPaulJohnson>, throwing their tops in the air, 
slapping the roof and chanting along to dance music melodies and it’s easy to 
see why the club has earned its electrifying reputation.

As the night draws to a close we head back up to street level. At least one 
topless man strides past and crowds gather outside McDonald’s. In the smoking 
area groups are plotting their next move - quite possibly to one of the city’s 
notorious after parties. Beneath us, even though it’s almost over, the pace in 
the club is still going full blast. “In Europe people don’t get it,” says 
Clair. “The clubs go on till nine in the morning. Here you’re always left 
wanting more. But that’s what makes it exciting.”

• Travel between London and Glasgow was provided by Virgin Trains (
virgintrains.com <http://www.virgintrains.com>), advance single fares start at 
£21. Accommodation was provided by Citizen M (citizenm.com 
<http://www.citizenm.com>) in the centre of Glasgow: rooms start at £69
 