
Thus finishes the second day of the Democratic national convention. Here’s 
what happened:


 * The Democratic party nominated Hillary Clinton for president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/hillary-clinton-presidential-nomination-democratic-convention>
. Bernie Sanders played a prominent role, stepping in at the end of a roll call 
vote of states to ask for nomination by unanimous acclamation. 
 * While some Sanders backers left the hall, the room bore only traces of the 
painfully audible Clinton v Sanders split that defined day one. 
 * With the nomination official, the party and the campaign embraced Clinton’s 
historic stature asthe first female presidential nominee from a major party and 
possibly first female president. 
 * The foregrounding of the here-comes-the-first-woman-president narrative 
representeda reversal from Clinton’s 2008 primary run, when she faced an 
equally historic opponent. 
 * The narrative culminated with a slideshow of US presidents, ending with an 
impressive animation of shattering glass – and there, suddenly, wasClinton, 
addressing the convention by video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fhillary-clinton-breaks-through-glass-ceiling-on-stage-at-dnc-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%20'breaks%20through%20glass%20ceiling'%20on%20stage%20at%20DNC%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fhillary-clinton-breaks-through-glass-ceiling-on-stage-at-dnc-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%20%27breaks%20through%20glass%20ceiling%27%20on%20stage%20at%20DNC%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fhillary-clinton-breaks-through-glass-ceiling-on-stage-at-dnc-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton ‘breaks through glass ceiling’ on stage at DNC – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/27/hillary-clinton-breaks-through-glass-ceiling-on-stage-at-dnc-video>
 * The crowd really enjoyed all of the aforementioned. 
 * Clinton said, in part: “And if there are any little girls out there who 
stayed up late to watch, let me just say:I may become the first woman president 
but one of you is next.” 

 * Former president Bill Clinton delivered a keynote speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/bill-clinton-democration-convention-speech-hillary-clinton>
 in which he told the story of falling in love with Hillary Clinton and how 
amazed he was at her industriousness and commitment to improving other people’s 
lives. 
 * Bill Clinton, seeking to turn the Republican argument that Hillary has been 
around too long lead the country in a new direction, branded her“the 
change-maker”. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fbill-clinton-speech-democratic-convention-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Clinton%20at%20Democratic%20convention%20tells%20story%20of%20meeting%20Hillary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fbill-clinton-speech-democratic-convention-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Clinton%20at%20Democratic%20convention%20tells%20story%20of%20meeting%20Hillary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fbill-clinton-speech-democratic-convention-video&media=>
Bill Clinton at Democratic convention tells story of meeting Hillary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/26/bill-clinton-speech-democratic-convention-video>
 * Sanders’ brother, Larry Sanders, appeared with the Democrats Abroad 
delegation andtearfully said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/26/bernie-sanders-brother-larry-democratic-convention-video>
 their parents would have been proud of Sanders’ accomplishment. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fbernie-sanders-brother-larry-democratic-convention-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders'%20brother%20gives%20tearful%20tribute%3A%20%E2%80%98Our%20parents%20would%20be%20proud%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fbernie-sanders-brother-larry-democratic-convention-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%27%20brother%20gives%20tearful%20tribute%3A%20%E2%80%98Our%20parents%20would%20be%20proud%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fbernie-sanders-brother-larry-democratic-convention-video&media=>
Bernie Sanders’ brother gives tearful tribute: ‘Our parents would be proud’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/26/bernie-sanders-brother-larry-democratic-convention-video>
 * Speakers from former secretary of state Madeleine Albright to Girls star 
Lena Dunham to Planned Parenthood president Cecile Richards emphasized the role 
that female voters could play in electing president Hillary Clinton.

 * The Republicans released a statement that said in part: “Tonight Democrats 
formally nominated the most scandal-plagued and disliked candidate in the 
history of their party.”  