
Nina Simone’s album Black Gold 
<https://play.spotify.com/album/6cbqf84EsLlPeu72H2Al0H?play=true&utm_source=open.spotify.com&utm_medium=open>
, recorded at New York’s Philharmonic Hall on 26 October 1969, concludes with a 
deeply moving performance of To Be Young, Gifted and Black. The song took its 
name from a hit play aboutLorraine Hansberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/apr/23/artsfeatures.stage>, the 
celebrated playwright who had converted Simone to political activism before 
dying young in 1965. As she spoke about Hansberry, Simone’s voice creaked with 
emotion. “I think that very soon now, maybe four or five weeks, I won’t be able 
to sing it anymore because each time I do it she comes a little bit closer and 
I miss her a little bit more.”

In Liz Garbus’s new Netflix documentary What Happened, Miss Simone? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/23/sundance-2015-first-look-review-what-happened-miss-simone-liz-garbus-nina-simone>
 we see rows of black students enraptured by the song she called “the Black 
national anthem”, her biggest hit sinceI Loves You, Porgy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ewNw78TpRPk> a decade earlier. It had the 
pride and optimism of the cover versions she had alchemised into civil rights 
anthems: Feeling Good, I Wish I Knew How It Would Feel to Be Free, Ain’t Got 
No/I Got Life. But her Philharmonic performance revealed the undercurrents of 
pain and loss that were slowly dragging her under.

The tremendous power of Simone’s music has entranced the likes of Kanye West, 
Antony, Laura Mvula and Lauryn Hill. In 2008, President Obama named her version 
of Sinnerman as one of his 10 favourite songs. She sang in an almost 
androgynous baritone that she said ranged from “gravel” to “coffee and cream”, 
played piano like a virtuoso and interpreted material with power and 
imagination. When she covered a song it stayed covered, although it’s ironic 
that her career was revived in 1987 thanks to a perfume commercial that 
featured 1958’s My Baby Just Cares for Me because that perky jazz standard 
(which she once called “a piece of shit”) told listeners nothing about who she 
really was.

There was always something regal about the “High Priestess of Soul” who, at 
one point, claimed to be a reincarnated Egyptian queen:Nadine Cohodas’s 
excellent biography is called Princess Noire 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ewNw78TpRPk>. “She is loved or feared, adored 
or disliked, but few who have met her music or glimpsed her soul react with 
moderation,” Maya Angelou wrote in the 1970 magazine article that gives 
Garbus’s film its name. “She is an extremist, extremely realised.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Fnina-simone-documentary-what-happened-miss-simone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F22%2F1434989662374%2Fc0e02075-3bff-4d45-ae40-8e36793c01fe-2060x1592.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nina%20Simone%3A%20'Are%20you%20ready%20to%20burn%20buildings%3F'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Fnina-simone-documentary-what-happened-miss-simone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nina%20Simone%3A%20%27Are%20you%20ready%20to%20burn%20buildings%3F%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Fnina-simone-documentary-what-happened-miss-simone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F22%2F1434989662374%2Fc0e02075-3bff-4d45-ae40-8e36793c01fe-2060x1592.jpeg>
 Simone in 1969 Photograph: Jack Robinson/Getty Images 
What Happened, Miss Simone? makes the case that Simone was not only one of the 
most talented musicians of the 20th century but one of the most troubled and 
unlucky. It shows how she always felt she had been denied her true calling; how 
she never achieved the success that prettier, more biddable singers enjoyed; 
how she invested so much of herself in the civil rights movement that she was 
shattered when it faltered; how she suffered physical abuse from her husband 
and manager Andrew Stroud and inflicted it on her daughter Lisa; how her 
bipolar condition was only diagnosed in the 1980s, long after her volatility 
had inflicted irreparable damage. She was an outcast who only briefly found 
safe harbour — first as a wife and mother, then as an activist – before it was 
snatched away. Not fitting in made her great, but it also made her angry and 
very lonely.

Nina Simone <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nina-simone> was born in Tryon, 
North Carolina, in 1933. As young Eunice Waymon, playing piano in church, she 
felt that “I was a black girl and I knew about it.” After high school, the 
Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia rejected her application because, she 
believed with good reason, she was black. “I never really got over that jolt of 
racism,” she said.

With her dream of becoming America’s first black, female concert pianist 
crushed, Simone turned to performing in bars to earn a living, a job she 
regarded as such a humiliating defeat that one reason she assumed a stage name 
was so that her mother wouldn’t find out what she was up to. Neither jazz nor 
blues nor folk nor soul, she became a musical anomaly, perhaps because all 
along she would rather have been playing Bach. Decades later she said: “I think 
I would have been happier. I’m not happy now.” She defined her indefinable 
style as “African-rooted classical music”.

I Loves You, Porgy launched her career. She shared bills with Miles Davis and 
Bill Cosby and fulfilled a long-held dream of playing Carnegie Hall, although 
she always had a reputation for being temperamental. In 1961, she settled in 
Mount Vernon, New York, with Andrew Stroud and gave birth to Lisa. “The good, 
sweet days,” she called them. But she needed more and she found it when 
Lorraine Hansberry, who lived nearby, encouraged her to join the civil rights 
movement. Hansberry’s words were nagging at her on 15 September 1963 when a 
bomb planted by a white supremacist killed four black schoolgirls in 
Birmingham, Alabama. Her first instinct, she recalled in her memoirI Put a 
Spell on You 
<http://jazztimes.com/articles/14350-i-put-a-spell-on-you-nina-simone-with-stephen-cleary>
, was to build a gun and shoot the first white person she saw. Stroud told her 
to write a song instead.The furious, darkly playfulMississippi Goddam 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fVQjGGJVSXc> sprang from her like a bullet, 
expressing black anger in a way that never had been heard in American music 
before. “We all wanted to say it,” comedian and activist Dick Gregory says in 
the film. “She said it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfVQjGGJVSXc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfVQjGGJVSXc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfVQjGGJVSXc&media=>
Two years later, she performed it during Martin Luther King’s famous march 
from Selma to Montgomery. Simone befriended such towering figures as King,
Malcolm X <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/malcolm-x>, James Baldwin, 
Stokely Carmichael and Langston Hughes. Singing for the movement filled the 
hole in her heart and playing protest songs like Hughes’s Backlash Blues and 
her own controversial Four Women took her to “a state of grace” after a decade 
spent in the “nothing world” of pop. “I was needed,” she said later. “I could 
sing to help my people and that became the mainstay of my life.” In the film, 
Lisa Kelly Simone says, “I think my mom’s anger is what sustained her.”

Stroud, who thought politics was bad for business, thought she was becoming a 
“barking dog” but as a girl she had been taught to be silent for 
self-preservation and she wasn’t going back there. “All my life I’ve wanted to 
shout out my feeling of being imprisoned,” she said in 1967. “I’ve known about 
the silence that makes that prison, as any Negro does.” At a time when black 
artists weren’t supposed to mention racism, she was as militant as Public 
Enemy. She described American society as “nothing but a cancer” and treated one 
black audience to a poem by David Nelson of the Last Poets: “Are you ready to 
smash things and burn buildings?” This surging radicalism coincided with the 
first signs of serious mental illness, including violent furies, blackouts and 
hallucinations. “I had visions of laser beams and heaven, with skin – always 
skin – involved in there somewhere,” she wrote.
 The cover of Nina Simone’s tribute to Martin Luther King, Why? (The King of 
Love Is Dead) Photograph: PR 
One of Simone’s most powerful concerts, captured on the ’Nuff Said! album, 
took place at Westbury Music Fair on 7 April 1968, three days after Dr King was 
shot dead. She grieved on a brand-new song calledWhy? (The King of Love Is Dead)
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Uy8cyVWU2A>, then raged on a white-knuckle 
version of Mississippi Goddam. “The king of love is dead,” she said. “I ain’t 
‘bout to be nonviolent, honey!”

Simone was now less a musician who cared about politics than an activist who 
sang <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9IFWgK046jU>. Her music was by, about and 
for black people. She would scan the crowd for black faces and tell them, “I’m 
singing only to you. I don’t care about the others.” White fans, she said, were 
“accidental and incidental”. She could not ignore the fact “that I was a 
black-skinned woman in a country where you could be killed because of that one 
fact.” No wonder there has beencontroversy over the casting of beautiful, 
light-skinned Zoe Saldana in the long-delayed biopic Nina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/12/five-ethnically-insensitive-casting-decisions>
.

Although she was outwardly still engaged, Simone claimed she lost faith in 
activism in 1970, when the movement fractured and the revolution didn’t come. 
“Optimists talked about the advances we had made, but all I saw were lost 
opportunities,” she wrote. Some of that energy was redirected into a new kind 
of music. Simone lived on stage and didn’t care much for albums. Leftover songs 
from the 1971 RCA sessions that produced theHere Comes the Sun album 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/albumreviews/here-comes-the-sun-19710805> 
were later cut-and-shut with live recordings, often overdubbed with applause to 
conceal the joins. No longer writing, she expressed a potent personal vision 
entirely through diverse cover versions. There is nothing to connect the 
slow-burning soul of Steppenwolf’s The Pusher, the polyrythmic frenzy of Ike 
and Tina Turner’s Funkier Than a Mosquito Tweeter and the desolate, 
barely-there jazz-folk of Fairport Convention’s Who Knows Where the Time Goes? 
except Simone’s formidable conviction.

During an antiwar show at Fort Dix, New Jersey in November 1971, she fused 
George Harrison’s My Sweet Lord and David Nelson’s poem Today Is a Killer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L2m6IsVvj5c> into a jawdropping gospel 
rollercoaster that concluded with a blasphemous cry of: “Who are you, Lord? You 
are a killer!” Included on Emergency Ward! (1972), My Sweet Lord made good on 
her promise “to shake people up so bad that when they leave a nightclub where I 
performed I just want them to be in pieces.” Sick of America, on the ominously 
titled It Is Finished (1974) she explored African percussion, sitars and the 
strange, chilling visions of the maverick Bahamian musicianExuma 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exuma_%28musician%29>.

These albums sold poorly and didn’t even rate a mention in her memoir, but 
they leave you salivating at the thought of what she might have done next had 
she not abandoned activism, the music industry (“the dirtiest and most immoral 
business in the world”) and the “United Snakes of America” to spend two years 
in exile in Liberia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Fnina-simone-documentary-what-happened-miss-simone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F22%2F1434986843058%2Fd40178f8-fe96-4673-9d03-ae56028d3bd6-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nina%20Simone%3A%20'Are%20you%20ready%20to%20burn%20buildings%3F'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Fnina-simone-documentary-what-happened-miss-simone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nina%20Simone%3A%20%27Are%20you%20ready%20to%20burn%20buildings%3F%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Fnina-simone-documentary-what-happened-miss-simone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F22%2F1434986843058%2Fd40178f8-fe96-4673-9d03-ae56028d3bd6-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Nina Simone and her daughter Lisa in 1965. Photograph: AP 
When Simone returned to the stage, all the solidarity and hope of the movement 
had been burned away, leaving only rage and resentment that was intensified by 
her illness. Garbus’s film shows her hostile, imperious comeback show at the 
1976 Montreux Jazz festival but not the time she told an audience at the music 
industry conference Midem, “You are all crooks!”, nor the calamity in Pamplona 
where she told the crowd: “I don’t sing for bastards. I don’t like white 
people.” She didn’t just rock the boat; she tried to sink it.

By the decade’s end, her finances were such a wreck that when she returned to 
the US to stand trial for tax evasion she couldn’t even pay her hotel bill. At 
another bad show, in New York, the audience cried: “We love you Nina!” She 
snapped back: “Loving me is not enough. I want my money.” Her 1978 album 
Baltimore was solid but a long way from the thrilling ferment of It Is 
Finished. When interviewers asked her about politics, she sounded bitter and 
bereft. “There’s no civil rights movement. Everyone has gone.” She reflected 
that “artists who don’t get involved in preaching messages are probably 
happier”.

In the 25 years before her death in 2003, at the age of 70, Simone was 
relatively stable and prolific. She didn’t experience the triumphant comeback 
that she deserved, but this was as happy an ending as could be expected from 
someone who had once appeared to be waging a one-woman war against everything.

As she left the stage after a disastrous show at the Royal Albert Hall in 
1978, Simone declared: “I am not of this planet. I do not come from you. I am 
not like you.” She was in a terrible state, but on that point she was 
absolutely right. For good and for ill, Nina Simone stood alone.

• What Happened, Miss Simone? is available on Netflix from 26 June.
 