
“I want to be absolutely clear with our people and the world. The United 
States does not torture,” said George W Bush on 6 September 2006.

Bush was, for the first time, acknowledging the existence of the program that 
Senate intelligence committee staff investigator Daniel Jones would later 
expose as taking power drills to the heads of captured men; making them stand 
with their arms stretched above their heads for days at a time; leaving at 
least one of them naked until he froze to death; waterboarding them to the 
point of catatonia as bubbles rose from their open mouths; and inserting pureed 
food into their rectums while claiming it was necessary for delivering 
nutrients.

Details of those procedures were outlined in the 525 pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/09/cia-torture-report-released> 
which CIA director John Brennan, Barack Obama and White House chief of staff 
Denis McDonough allowed to become public.

The CIA’s response to Jones’s report was split into two corps, one official 
and one not. The agency itselfwould no longer defend torture outright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/10/because-it-might-work-the-cia-rationale-for-torture>
 because that would contradict the Obama White House’s position on the 
unacceptability of torture. Instead, the agency would say that tortured men 
produced valuable intelligence, just not necessarily as theresult of torture, 
and that the Senate could not definitively prove the torture didnot produce 
valuable intelligence.

Brennan gave a press conference following the release of the report in 
December 2014. It began with him spending five minutes reciting the unfolding 
developments of the 9/11 terrorist attacks and crescendoed with him calling the 
relationship between torture and useful intelligence “unknowable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/11/john-brennan-defends-cia-torture-report>
”. Jones’ boss, the driving force behind the report, California Democratic 
Senator Dianne Feinstein unexpectedly live-tweeted responses to Brennan’s press 
conference as it progressed, creating the hashtag #ReadTheReport.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjohn-brennan-cia-torture-report-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418331552117%2FCIA-Director-John-Brennan-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=CIA%20director%20John%20Brennan%20reacts%20to%20the%20Senate%20torture%20report%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjohn-brennan-cia-torture-report-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=CIA%20director%20John%20Brennan%20reacts%20to%20the%20Senate%20torture%20report%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjohn-brennan-cia-torture-report-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418331552117%2FCIA-Director-John-Brennan-001.jpg>
CIA director John Brennan reacts to the Senate torture report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2014/dec/11/john-brennan-cia-torture-report-video>
The second corps consisted of retired CIA directors, a group known 
colloquially as the “Formers”. They laid into the Senate committee with a vigor 
that Brennan, who still had to answer to it, could not. The Formers, who would 
in September 2015 attack the report in a book calledRebuttal 
<https://www.amazon.com/Rebuttal-Intelligence-Committees-Detention-Interrogation/dp/1591145872/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1471570496&sr=8-1&keywords=rebuttal>
, called the committee’s work a partisan hit job. They disdained it for not 
interviewing CIA officials involved in the program – all the while ignoring the 
fact that committee Republicans and Obama’s justice department prevented Jones 
from conducting those interviews. Theyreiterated the insistence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/10/former-cia-leadership-fight-back-torture-report>
 that torture yielded a wealth of intelligence and derided the Senate report 
for what they called its leaps in logic. One of them was former acting director 
Michael Morell, a frequent television guest, who would publish amemoir 
<https://www.amazon.com/Great-War-Our-Time-Terrorism/dp/1455585661> in May 2015 
recapitulating much of the standard CIA line.

“Morell, he presents himself as this thoughtful guy, who’s really in the weeds 
and knows things, but he went out and talked about how the report was 
inaccurate, he wrote a book with inaccuracies. He stated publicly that he had 
only read 300 pages of the executive summary and told Feinstein he hadn’t read 
the full report,” Jones said.


“It was the same problem with the agency, over and over again. Either you are 
knowingly spreading inaccurate information, which is pretty terrible, or you 
just don’t want to know, and you take a briefing with inaccurate information 
and you just repeat it.”

CIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> spokesman Ryan Trapani said that 
the agency did not coordinate its response with the Formers. The Senate 
committee “withdrew its approval to let former officers read the executive 
summary prior to its release to the public, so some were not able to read or 
prepare responses to the accusations until [the committee] released its 
executive summary to the public,” Trapani said.

Glenn Carle was a CIA officer from 1985 to 2007. He knew Brennan while at the 
agency and respects the director’s “subtle and fair mind”. After 9/11, Carle 
was called upon to interrogate a terrorism suspecthe now believes is innocent 
<https://www.wired.com/2011/07/am-i-a-torturer/>. Although he did not use the 
brutal techniques called out in the Senate report, the experience deeply 
affected Carle, who has become a vocal critic of the agency’s post-9/11 torture.

While Carle said the CIA often holds a legitimate feeling of besiegement 
against outside criticism – “We’re always the ones left holding the bag after 
we’re asked to mine the harbors or overthrow the government,” he noted – the 
fury of the CIA reactions to the Senate troubled him.

“I was dismayed by the response, which I thought was in parts intellectually 
shoddy, simple-minded, unnecessarily defensive, circle-the-wagons reactive and 
wrong and harmful,” Carle said.

He continued: “We were well outside of the bounds, and it was obvious. And 
part of the defense the agency used, the Bush administration used, defenders, 
proponents, Republicans use, is that ‘You have to understand the context of the 
times, we were all afraid there was going to be another attack, we had to act.’ 
That’s all bullshit. No, you cannot do that. Our job is not to react 
emotionally, and in fear, and reflexively, which is what that is a 
justification for doing. Our job is to get it right. Our job is to see through 
that and have the courage to act correctly.”

The CIA was not alone in attacking the report. The Senate committee’s 
Republicans, who had pulled out of the inquiry in September 2009, savaged it as 
a Democratic witchhunt – a critical boost for a CIA that wanted to avoid the 
narrative that it was pitted against the Senate.

While in 2009 the committee Republicans had urged the CIA not to grant 
interviews while a parallel justice department inquiry unfolded, now they 
attacked their Democratic colleagues for not renewing a request once the DoJ 
inquiry was concluded in 2012: “The committee had a window of opportunity to 
invite these relevant witnesses in for interviews, but apparently decided 
against that course of action.”

Jones said: “The Republicans were never supportive of interviews. Period. They 
just played games with this.”

As the CIA’s rebuttal strategy began to unfold, Democrat Mark Udall took to 
the Senate floor. Udall was less constrained than any intelligence committee 
member. He had lost his re-election campaign and had only weeks remaining in 
the chamber. Udall had earlier flirted with reading the entire report into the 
Senate record and daring the administration to prosecute him. Instead, he 
excoriated the White House for aligning with the “flippant and dismissive” CIA 
against the Senate.


“While the study clearly shows that the CIA’s detention and interrogation 
program itself was deeply flawed, the deeper, more endemic problem lies in a 
CIA, assisted by a White House, that continues to try to cover up the truth,” 
Udall said on 10 December 2014. He accused the White House of “letting the CIA 
do whatever it likes, even if its efforts are aimed at actively undermining the 
president’s stated [torture] policies.”

Udall continued: “Director Brennan and the CIA today are continuing to 
willfully provide inaccurate information and misrepresent the efficacy of 
torture. In other words, the CIA is lying. This is not a problem of the past.”

The report was the result of six years of Jones’s work. The seventh year was 
consumed by two tasks: defending the torture report against its CIA and 
Republican critics; and attempting to entrench its purpose – preventing torture 
– into law. Success would vary.

Jones still wasn’t speaking in public. He was a Senate committee staffer, 
although he recognized, now that North Carolina Republican Richard Burr was 
chairman, his position on the committee was untenable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd66c8937f54c93a1d96d1c359d356df37af1649%2F0_0_5080_3053%2F5080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20looking%20back%3A%20the%20CIA%20torture%20report's%20aftermath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20looking%20back%3A%20the%20CIA%20torture%20report%27s%20aftermath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd66c8937f54c93a1d96d1c359d356df37af1649%2F0_0_5080_3053%2F5080.jpg>
 Photograph: Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP 
In his first month in office, Burr took an extraordinary step. The Senate had 
delivered copies of the classified report across the executive branch to the 
various agencies – the justice department, the Pentagon, and so forth – with 
equities in it. Burr, in his first month as chairman, formally requested the 
copies back. Burr’s home-state newspaper, the Raleigh News & Observer,
editorialized 
<http://www.newsobserver.com/opinion/editorials/article44569983.html#storylink=cpy>
 that the senator preferred “to hide the misdeeds of the CIA’s secret prisons 
rather than have others in government review what happened”.

The ACLU, which had sued for disclosure of the document, filed an emergency 
motion to block Burr. In response, the administration pledged to “preserve the 
status quo”, meaning that it wouldn’t give the classified report back. If there 
was an opportunity to learn lessons from careful, private reading of the full 
report, the agencies did not take it –they did not even remove the 6,700-page 
classified report from its packaging 
<https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/1507956/ssci-foia-gov-mtd.txt> – an 
issue complicated by freedom of information lawsuits that mired the documents 
in bureaucratic limbo. The report’s advocates considered that a final gut punch 
from the administration: “The point is to learn from it,” Jones noted.

Ron Wyden, the Oregon Democrat and intelligence committee member, has not 
given up. “I want the full report out, with necessary redactions,” he said.

Carl Levin, a recently retired Michigan Democratic senator whose chairmanship 
of the armed services committee made him a non-voting member of the 
intelligence panel, considered it a legacy issue for Obama.


“The president ended the CIA program by executive order in January 2009, as 
one of his first actions in office. By distributing the classified Senate study 
throughout the executive branch as appropriate before he leaves office, he’ll 
be making it less likely that his executive order will be rescinded by a future 
president,” Levin said.

As the public attacks on the report compounded through 2015, Feinstein opted 
to wage a continuous response. Jones’s new job was to pore over each criticism 
from the CIA Formers or other prominent surrogates and rebut them in statements 
Feinstein would send to reporters and place on her website. The task was not 
much different from how he had spent the previous six years.

The first major salvo came in the name of former Indiana Democratic senator 
Evan Bayh, himself a former intelligence committee member, barely a month after 
the Senate report was published.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1d2d72433dc21b6af91a134b9d026edb69b2b8a%2F0_45_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20looking%20back%3A%20the%20CIA%20torture%20report's%20aftermath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20looking%20back%3A%20the%20CIA%20torture%20report%27s%20aftermath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1d2d72433dc21b6af91a134b9d026edb69b2b8a%2F0_45_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Photograph: Win McNamee/Getty Images 
After the inspector general had taken the agency to task for breaching the 
network firewall, Brennan asked Bayh to convene an “accountability board” to 
review the episode. As Bayh already served on the CIA’s advisory board, his 
report, unsurprisingly, exculpated Brennan, walked back the inspector general’s 
denouncement of the network breach, said the five CIA officials involved in the 
breach acted reasonably, and criticized the committee.

Bayh’s account, issued in January 2015, prominently reiterated that that the 
CIA and Senate lacked a “signed memorandum of understanding” limiting the 
agency’s role on the network – despite the sheaves of agreements in May and 
June 2009 between Panetta and Feinstein explicitly laying that out – and noted 
that the login screen on RDINet referenced the prospect of monitoring and 
warned of a lack of privacy expectation. Still, even Bayh found the CIA had 
“improper access” to the Senate files.

Jones, who said – improbably – that he doesn’t remember seeing the warning 
message at login, expressed exasperation with Bayh’s defense. “We went back and 
forth, months and months, up to the principals level, where Feinstein’s sitting 
across the table from Panetta … and they’re demanding these things happen, and 
we’re exchanging letters and we’re saying: ‘OK, we’ve reached agreement.’ It 
would just be absolutely ridiculous to think that after all those months of 
negotiations saying the CIA wouldn’t have access to our computers that we would 
go in there and every time we log on we’d just erase the decision that was made 
between the director of the Central Intelligence Agency and the chair and the 
vice-chair of the Senate intelligence committee.”

Unusually, Bayh’s panel was mostly anonymous. It had five members. The only 
other named member was Bob Bauer, the former White House counsel who had 
vouchsafed for the CIA no longer removing torture documents after it was caught 
taking 900 of them from the Senate in 2010. The other three, CIA officials, 
were never revealed, not even to the Senate. It is unknown if they played any 
role in the torture program; the CIA did not answer that question when the 
Guardian asked.

“The information released with regard to this matter was extraordinary. 
Nonetheless, some information was appropriately redacted or withheld,” said the 
CIA’s Trapani, citing alegal provision 
<http://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/CIA49.pdf> that affords the CIA leverage to 
withhold its officials’ identity.

Bayh has won the Democratic nomination for Senate in Indiana and is currently 
running to reclaim his old seat. He did not respond to a request for comment.

“Regarding the CIA’s search of Senate computer files and their going into the 
emails of Senate staff, I don’t know what to say,” said former Senate 
intelligence committee chairman Jay Rockefeller.

“You either have oversight and separation of powers with the checks and 
balances that come with that, or you don’t. It’s amazing that, once again, no 
one at the CIA was held accountable.”

Feinstein told the Guardian that she is not currently inclined to “rehash 
every interaction” in the years-long fight over her report. Instead, she 
pointed to the CIA’s response as an inadvertent testimony to its rigor.

“While the report has been relentlessly attacked by the CIA and former agency 
officials, no factual errors have been found,” she said.

“Continued efforts to obfuscate the report’s findings and justify a very dark 
chapter in our nation’s history do not change the facts, which stand without 
correction. By contrast, the CIA itself has acknowledged numerous factual 
errors, not only in its representations about the program but in its 2013 
response to the report.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdaniel-jones-senate-staffer-cia-spying-interview-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Jones%3A%20the%20Senate%20staffer%20spied%20on%20by%20the%20CIA%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdaniel-jones-senate-staffer-cia-spying-interview-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Jones%3A%20the%20Senate%20staffer%20spied%20on%20by%20the%20CIA%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fdaniel-jones-senate-staffer-cia-spying-interview-video&media=>
Daniel Jones: the Senate staffer spied on by the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/09/daniel-jones-senate-staffer-cia-spying-interview-video>
As consuming as the rear-guard defense of the torture report was, Feinstein, 
no longer in possession of a gavel, pivoted to legislating the lesson that 
motivated it. In June 2015, by a wide bipartisan margin of 78 to 21, Feinstein 
and John McCain successfully passed an amendment to the annual defense 
authorization bill prohibiting the CIA from engaging in interrogations more 
brutal than an army field manual authorized. Obama signed the bill, giving the 
force of law to his 2009 executive order ending torture.

“Implementing all of the reforms needed to address the problems the report 
exposed is most important to me,” Feinstein told the Guardian, “and I am 
continually looking at ways to do that.”

In December 2015, Jones left the Senate. Feinstein read a tribute to Jones 
into the record. He joined aWashington consulting firm led by Tom Daschle 
<http://www.daschlegroup.com/>, Reid’s predecessor as Senate Democratic leader, 
and started a firm, thePenn Quarter Group <http://thepqg.com/>, to advise 
businesses and nonprofits on research and investigations.

“It was obvious I needed to leave the committee,” Jones said. While he said 
senators encouraged him to push back against torture in public, “I needed a 
break. It’s hard to describe how much of my life…” Jones trailed off.

“I was gone from the world for a number of years. It’s a bit of an adjustment 
to being a normal person.”

Rockefeller, the former senator and intelligence committee chairman who hired 
Jones in late 2006, said: “We were lucky to have him leading our 
investigations. He and others devoted so much of their lives to making sure 
this Senate study got done – and was done right.”

“Dan and his team worked under considerable pressure for more than seven years 
to complete the full 6,700-page classified report on the CIA program,” added 
Levin.

“He and his colleagues always comported themselves in a professional manner, 
were diligent, and maintained the highest of ethical standards throughout this 
ordeal, despite all of the challenges they faced.”

Jones has regrets about the way the declassified report turned out. Most 
prominently, Jones wishes he had gotten declassified the nearly 100-page table 
of contents for the full 6,700-page torture report, so readers could understand 
from the headings and subheadings just what the full contours of the torture 
was: “It has an incident on a particular day of someone’s detention, and there 
might be 10 pages on it. Or there might be 50 pages on it. It just shows the 
level of detail and how these 500 pages is just scratching the surface.”


Still, Jones considers the inquiry a success, one he attributes to the 
senators who took real political risks to back him and his team against the CIA.

“For those who worry that Congress is only dysfunctional, this is exhibit A to 
the contrary,” he said.

“This was a serious and high-stakes battle between two branches of government. 
And the legislative branch, in my view, ultimately won. I think our founding 
fathers would be very proud of Senator Feinstein and the others who worked to 
get this investigation completed and released.”

I was gone from the world for a number of years. It’s a bit of an adjustment 
to being a normal person
Dan Jones 
As the torture report receded into memory, Donald Trump won the Republican 
nomination, and presented an enthusiasm for torture uninterested in grappling 
with any critique around its immorality or ineffectiveness. Trump has pledged 
to bring back waterboarding “and a hell of a lot worse”.

The anti-torture law Feinstein and McCain passed is one impediment to CIA 
torture. But before 9/11, US laws were unequivocally against torture as well, 
and the adoption of torture arose due to political will driving creative 
lawyering. Brennan in April this year said he would refuse an order to bring 
back waterboarding, and in July said he would have to be fired rather than 
implement it. But he indicated that his departure would not necessarily be an 
impediment to a return to torture.

“If a president were to order the agency to carry out waterboarding or 
something else, it’ll be up to the director of CIA and others within CIA to 
decide whether or not that, that direction and order is something that they can 
carry out in good conscience,” hetold 
<https://www.brookings.edu/events/cias-strategy-in-the-face-of-emerging-challenges/>
 the Brookings Institution.

The CIA’s clash with the Senate committee has faded. So has Brennan’s summer 
2014 contrition, delivered to Feinstein, about spying on Jones and the 
committee staff. Brennan’s ire at the torture report has not.

On 9 February 2016, Brennan had a heated exchange 
<https://www.c-span.org/video/?c4579908/sen-ron-wyden-questions-cia-director-brennan>
 with Wyden, who asked about the network search during an unrelated committee 
hearing. Brennan defended the agency’s actions and again implied that Jones had 
himself hacked the CIA: “Separation of powers between the executive and 
legislative branches, Senator, goes both ways.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoUEidBI-zjs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoUEidBI-zjs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoUEidBI-zjs&media=>
 February 2016: CIA director John Brennan refuses to admit CIA unauthorized 
search of Senate files was improper 
Speaking on 19 July to a friendly audience, the Intelligence and National 
Security Alliance, Brennanwent further 
<http://www.insaonline.org/i/z/docs/2016_BrennanDinner_Transcript.aspx>: “When 
I look at the Senate’s report on the detention interrogation program, it makes 
my blood boil, because although there’s a lot of things in there that were 
accurate, it really just focused on the shortcomings of the agency during that 
period in time.”

He continued: “If it was done in a more objective, nonpartisan and fair 
fashion, it would have put those shortcomings in better context. I fervently 
believe there was no agency more responsible for preventing a recurrence of 
9/11 than the CIA. Unfortunately, that report I think misrepresented the 
totality of the worth of that program.”

Brennan has told colleagues that he wishes to remain CIA director 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2016-08-03/obama-s-cia-director-wants-to-stick-around-for-clinton>
 under Hillary Clinton. In August, Morell published a New York Times op-ed
excoriating Trump and endorsing Clinton 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/05/opinion/campaign-stops/i-ran-the-cia-now-im-endorsing-hillary-clinton.html>
, which intelligence observers understood as an audition to run Langley. For 
Jones, their apparent eagerness to lead the CIA is a reminder of a lack of 
accountability for torture and what he calls a “failed coverup” by CIA 
officials, aided by both the Bush and Obama administrations.


“Both Morell and Brennan are unfit to be CIA directors based off their 
response to the report, the way they responded to the Senate, how they view 
oversight. Under Brennan and Morell, the CIA is defending rectal rehydration as 
a ‘well-acknowledged medical technique’ – nothing to see here,” he said.

Wyden, speaking to the Guardian, said: “I’m exceptionally troubled by Director 
Brennan’s extraordinary efforts to resist vigorous congressional oversight. I 
certainly do not have confidence in the director.”

Obama has retained Brennan without a word of public criticism. He has kept his 
job despite the clash with his Senate overseers, just as CIA officials involved 
in the torture program and its misrepresentation to Congress, the Bush and 
Obama administrations, and the public still work at Langley.

“People who played a significant role in this program, who are in the report, 
continue to play significant roles in sensitive programs at the agency,” said 
Jones.

Carle, the former CIA officer and torture critic, disagrees that the agency 
needed to fire officials involved in torture to hold them accountable.

“I do know a number of officers whose careers were certainly impacted, if not 
derailed, as the result of all this stuff,” he said.

Speaking of Brennan’s reaction to the Senate report, Carle continued: “I know 
John. This was his least impressive moment. I and colleagues have been somewhat 
mystified that such an intelligent, subtle and open-minded man, on this point, 
reacted like Jose Rodriguez,” the retired CIA official and torture advocate 
whose destruction of videotaped interrogations began the Senate inquiry.

People who played a significant role in this program … continue to play 
significant roles in sensitive programs
Dan Jones 
Udall, who had called for Brennan’s job in 2014, told the Guardian that he was 
“not aware that there has been accountability for what Director Brennan calls 
CIA’s ‘bad mistakes’.” But, he said, the CIA as a whole ought not to bear the 
blame for torture.

“We shouldn’t ascribe the bad behavior of some to all the employees of the CIA 
or of the intelligence community,” Udall said.

“The CIA writ large wasn’t responsible for developing, implementing and 
misrepresenting the truth about the CIA’s detention and interrogation program. 
In fact, a small number of CIA officers were largely responsible. It is 
unfortunate that the refusal of the CIA’s leadership to pursue accountability 
and tell the truth continues to tar the agency as a whole.”

Obama is more instinctively skeptical of the intelligence agencies than his 
potential successors, but the president who banned torture helped CIA officials 
implicated in torture endure at the agency. Obama’s deep relationship with 
Brennan and his early commitment not to “look backward” had profound 
consequences that will outlast his presidency.

“They avoided all the necessary reforms that have to happen at the CIA,” Jones 
said.

“To me, it’s a huge lost opportunity. Here’s an administration that came in 
and did all the right things within a few days, shutting down the program. But 
they didn’t want the independent commission. They said the Senate intelligence 
committee was the right place to do this. And to me, we were just never given a 
fair airing. No one from the White House would be briefed by us. They were 
briefed by the CIA.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1550e86d1449a7b1c7ebaddee978e8f40989fc26%2F0_74_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20looking%20back%3A%20the%20CIA%20torture%20report's%20aftermath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20looking%20back%3A%20the%20CIA%20torture%20report%27s%20aftermath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1550e86d1449a7b1c7ebaddee978e8f40989fc26%2F0_74_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Delivering a speech on the ‘war on terror’ on 6 September 2006. Photograph: 
MCT via Getty Images 
Udall agreed: “It is incumbent on the next administration to acknowledge these 
mistakes and institute the necessary reforms to restore the CIA’s reputation 
for integrity and analytical rigor.”

Carle is a rare former CIA official willing to praise the Senate torture 
report. “It captures exactly – exactly – the culture, reality, conversations, 
pressures, silences, actions, doubts, arguments that I lived. Absolutely, 
completely accurate.”

Asked if torture has left the CIA damaged, Carle said: “The CIA exists to go 
to the limit of what is acceptable. That’s part of what defines our raison 
d’être. That said, I think we did lasting harm to ourselves as an institution 
and as a country.”

The Senate investigation Feinstein led and Jones conducted into CIA torture is 
believed to be the largest in the legislative body’s 227-year history. In May 
2016, the CIA inspector general’s office destroyed its only copy of the 
classified torture report. The agency, Yahooreported 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/senate-report-on-cia-torture-1429636113023030.html>
, claims the destruction was accidental and that a copy of the report is held 
elsewhere at Langley. Referring to the ongoing transparency lawsuit, CIA 
spokesman Trapani said the agency will retain a copy “pending the final result 
of the litigation”.

Classified copies of the report, as well as the printed portions of the 
Panetta Review which Jones took in the fateful summer of 2013, remained in the 
Senate committee’s safe as of December 2015.


“It is my firm believe that the report will stand the test of time,” Feinstein 
told the Guardian, “and I am hopeful future administrations take the 
opportunity to learn from its conclusions.”

 * Support the Guardian’s fearless, independent journalism by making a 
contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/home?INTCMP=co_us_editorial_footer_spencercia3>
 orbecoming a member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/us/supporter?INTCMP=co_us_article_spencer_footer> 