
When the ex-IRA prisoners Gerard Hodgins and Richard O’Rawe last passed 
through the gates of Belfast’s Crumlin Road jail their city was in a state of 
war and their one thought on entering the Victorian prison was to escape.

They entered a regime of beatings at the hands of some prison staff, 
cockroach-infested cells, frequent clashes with their Ulster loyalist enemies 
and having to “slop out” in the morning if they went to the toilet during the 
nightly lock-up.

Deal could have ended IRA hunger strike, says former press officer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/dec/30/deal-ira-hunger-strike-press> 
Decades later, with the peace process entrenched and the prison now a tourist 
attraction, Hodgins, a former hunger striker, and O’Rawe, the IRA prisoners’ 
press officer during the 1981 death fast, have returned to Crumlin Road to 
sample the gourmet food on offer in the jail’s newly opened restaurant, Cuffs.

As they tucked into chicken liver pâté and smoked salmon starters in what was 
once the main kitchen for feeding the prison, Hodgins and O’Rawe both used the 
same word to sum up their journey back to the jail: surreal.

“It’s the first time I’ve been back here and to be truthful I hoped I’d never 
be back … at least if it was still a real jail,” O’Rawe said as he sipped a 
glass of Chilean red at a table beside a cell door.

Crumlin Road jail casts a long shadow over O’Rawe’s family. His father and his 
uncle Albert were both incarcerated there in the 1940s for IRA activities. His 
uncle was sentenced to be flogged 12 times with a cat-o’-nine-tails at the age 
of 17.

“I remember my father telling me that after Albert was flogged he asked him 
how hard the screws [prison officers] had beaten him,” he said. “Albert called 
back from cell, ‘Sure my dad has given me worse beatings.’ I arrived here in 
1974 during the early Troubles and so I kept up the family tradition of 
resistance and republican struggle, and ended up here in the Crum as well.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fbelfast-ex-ira-richard-orawe-gerard-hodgins-cuffs-restaurant-crumlin-road-jail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3db3abf9085cfff9aba60432dba7344d2f6372fd%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20porridge%20on%20offer%20at%20former%20Crumlin%20Road%20jail%20in%20Belfast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fbelfast-ex-ira-richard-orawe-gerard-hodgins-cuffs-restaurant-crumlin-road-jail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20porridge%20on%20offer%20at%20former%20Crumlin%20Road%20jail%20in%20Belfast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fbelfast-ex-ira-richard-orawe-gerard-hodgins-cuffs-restaurant-crumlin-road-jail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3db3abf9085cfff9aba60432dba7344d2f6372fd%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Hodgins and O’Rawe outside Cuffs. Photograph: Paul McErlane for the Guardian 
Hodgins, who like O’Rawe was a friend and prison comrade of Bobby Sands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/may/06/bobby-sands-hunger-strikers-ira>
, the first IRA hunger striker to die in the 1981 fast, said he had a flashback 
to the first time he walked through the gates of Crumlin Road in 1976. “When I 
first went through, that gateway was bristling with barbed wire and aggressive 
screws calling you a ‘Fenian bastard’, slapping you about – stuff you took for 
normal back in the 70s and even the 90s,” he said. “But coming through there 
again for the first time today it was totally different, it was the same 
architecture but it’s brightened up a bit and you get a pleasant welcome at the 
door.”

The Cuffs menu is a far cry from what used to come out of the prison kitchen. 
“They always gave us fish on Fridays, probably because they thought we were all 
good Catholic boys and had to abstain from meat on that day. Actually the fish 
they served up was huge and I always looked forward to it,” said O’Rawe. “In 
fact the food in general in this jail was far better than the cold slop they 
often gave you in the H-Blocks [Maze prison], which sometimes would be 
adulterated – especially during the blanket [and] dirty protest when we refused 
to wear prison clothes and smeared our cells with our excrement in our campaign 
for political status. But in fairness the food was far better in here inside 
the Crum.”

The tea was not good, said Hodgins. “You got it in big urns and it really was 
rotten,” he said.

Melanie McFadyean on the legacy of the hunger strikes in Northern Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/mar/04/northernireland.northernireland>
O’Rawe said: “Maybe because of the bromide they put in the tea – that was to 
stop sexual urges, Gerard! They did that during Victorian times and I don’t 
think their mentality about controlling prisoners had changed even by the 70s.”

As both men recalled, food could also be the trigger for clashes between IRA 
inmates and their loyalist rivals.

“Political status for all prisoners was withdrawn in March 1976 and afterwards 
there was an uneasy truce in the jail until July of that year, the 12th of July 
[Orangemen’s Day] to be precise,” Hodgins said. “We were in the canteen and the 
loyalists were watching a news programme that included a local musician, Bobbie 
Hanvey, playing an Orange song for the 12th of July and a loyalist got up and 
did this swaggering show-off John Wayne-style walk. For a laugh an IRA comrade 
of mine hit him on the head with a bun and that was the spark which kicked off 
trouble with the loyalists, with everybody lifting chairs, smashing them over 
each other. A bun fight became a real fight.”

Even the music that greeted Hodgins and O’Rawe as they ordered pre-lunch 
drinks – including Irish whiskey (the jail will soon be home to a new Belfast 
distillery of its own) – seemed weirdly appropriate. It was the Eagles’ song 
Hotel California, the last verse of which contains the lines: “You can check 
out any time you like / But you can never leave”

O’Rawe and Hodgson, however, were eventually able to leave and gave the thumbs 
up for Cuffs’ new “prison food”, which will cater for the thousands of 
visitors, including some other former inmates of the jail, on “terror tours” 
around Belfast.

• Cuffs Bar & Grill <http://www.crumlinroadgaol.com/news_post/1398/> opens 
seven days a week and takes bookings from 12pm to 10pm
 