
Nobel prize winner Svetlana Alexievich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/svetlana-alexievich> has quit the Russian 
PEN centre to protest against the expulsion of journalist and activist Sergey 
Parkhomenko, joining 30 other writers including novelist Boris Akunin and poet 
Lev Rubinstein leaving the organisation.

Alexievich, who withdrew from the organisation on 11 January, wrote in a 
statement: “My comment on Parkhomenko’s exclusion [from PEN] can only be my 
application to leave the Russian PEN, whose founding ideals were cravenly 
violated. In the perestroika years we took pride in our PEN but now we are 
ashamed of it. Russian writers acted as subserviently and outrageously only 
during the Stalinist period. But Putin will go, whereas this shameful page from 
the history ofPEN <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pen> will stay. And the 
names will stay, too. We now live through times when we cannot win over evil, 
we are powerless before the ‘red man’. But he cannot stop time. I believe in 
that.”

Thirty writers have now left Russian PEN, with many publishing their 
withdrawal letters online 
<https://russianpenmembers.wordpress.com/2017/01/12/%D0%B7%D0%B0%D1%8F%D0%B2%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%B8%D1%8F-%D1%87%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%B2-%D1%80%D1%83%D1%81%D1%81%D0%BA%D0%BE%D0%B3%D0%BE-%D0%BF%D0%B5%D0%BD-%D1%86%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%82%D1%80%D0%B0/>
. Akunin – one of Russia’s most widely read contemporary authors of detective 
fiction – withdrew the day before Alexievich. Akunin said that he felt Russian 
PEN did not stand for freedom of speech, that it failed to defend persecuted 
writers and therefore has “nothing in common” with the global network of PEN 
centres. There are 145 PEN centres in more than 100 countries, working with the 
core mission “to defend and promote freedom of expression, and to remove 
barriers to literature”.

The Russian PEN Centre expelled Parkhomenko 
<http://echo.msk.ru/blog/echomsk/1907522-echo/> for “provocative activity” and 
“for trying to destroy the organisation from within”. According to their 
minutes from the 28 December meeting, all 15 members of the board unanimously 
voted for the journalist’s expulsion.

Parkhomenko said that his expulsion was a punishment for a Facebook post, 
reported on radio station Echo Moskvy’s website 
<https://www.facebook.com/serguei.parkhomenko/posts/10211473796550022?pnref=story>
, where he criticised Russian PEN Centre’s chiefs for refusing to support 
Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov, who is serving 20 years in prison after being 
convicted in a Russian court for “terrorist activity”.

Related: Russian court jails Ukrainian film-maker for 20 years over terror 
offences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/25/russian-court-jails-ukrainian-filmmaker-oleg-sentsov-for-20-years-over-terror-offences>

Sentsov was arrested in 2014 and found guilty the following year of planning 
terrorist acts in Crimea, including setting fire to the offices of a political 
party in Simferopol, Crimea’s regional capital, and attempting to explode a 
statue of Lenin. The court ruling was widely criticised as unfounded, with 
Amnesty International declaring it “redolent of Stalinist-era show trials”. 
After having spent three years in a Russian prison, he revealed in 2016 in a 
smuggled letter that he was now in a Siberian penal colony. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/oleg-sentsov-jailed-ukrainian-film-maker-letter-siberian-prison-putin>

Parkhomenko is known as a dissent figure in Russia. He was a key leader in 
Russia’s protest movement in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2011/dec/10/russia-elections-putin-protest>
, which gathered more thant 60,000 people in Moscow and St Petersburg to 
challenge the presidential election results that gave Vladimir Putin his third 
term in office. In 2012, he co-founded the League of Voters, which carried 
lawsuits against the government’s election fraud. In 2014, he participated in 
the Congress “Ukraine – Russia: A Dialogue”, organised by Ukrainian 
civil-society organisations and the former head of the Yukos oil company 
Mikhail Khodorkovsky. The conference aimed to bring Russian and Ukrainian 
intellectuals, journalists, writers and politicians together to find solutions 
to the crisis in Ukraine.

In a statement to the Guardian, PEN International executive director Carles 
Torner said: “We are aware of conflict between the writers at Russian PEN and 
while all centres are independent they must abide by the principles of the PEN 
Charter. With this in mind we are monitoring the situation closely and are in 
touch with all the parties concerned.”
 