
Women from Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
who travel to England to terminate pregnancies are being treated as 
“second-class citizens” by the NHS, the supreme court has been told.

The health service’s refusal to fund abortions for Northern Irish women is a 
breach of their human rights andNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
guidelines, the panel of five justices at the UK’s highest court heard on 
Wednesday.

The barrister was opening a legal challenge brought on behalf of a woman , 
identified only as A , who travelled to Manchester in 2012 aged 15, at a cost 
of £300, and was required to pay £600 for an abortion .


Abortion is only available in Northern I rish hospitals when there is a direct 
threat to the mother’s life if the pregnancy continues. In all other cases,
abortion is illegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/northern-ireland-abortion-survey-decriminalised-amnesty-international>
.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F4%2F1451907768025%2FKP_1197437_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abortion%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%3A%20'Why%20don't%20we%20trust%20women%20to%20make%20the%20right%20choice%3F'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abortion%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%3A%20%27Why%20don%27t%20we%20trust%20women%20to%20make%20the%20right%20choice%3F%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F4%2F1451907768025%2FKP_1197437_crop_640x480.jpg>
Abortion in Northern Ireland: ‘Why don’t we trust women to make the right 
choice?’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/06/abortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video>
An estimated 2,000 women travel to English hospitals and clinics from Northern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> every year for 
terminations. All of them have to find enough money to go to private clinics in 
England .

Stephen Cragg QC, representing A and her mother, told the court: “When it 
comes to abortion services , women from Northern Ireland are essentially 
second-class citizens.

“Criminal penalties are still imposed on those who seek access to abortion 
services in Northern Ireland. Life imprisonment is still on the statute books. 
The most recent penalty was a three-month suspended sentence for a woman who
accessed [abortion] drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/northern-ireland-women-ask-to-be-prosecuted-for-taking-abortion-pills>
 via the internet .


“It’s not surprising that, as the mother explains in this case, this was far 
more stressful and humiliating for a 15-year-old girl than it needs to be.”

One of the justices, Lord Reed, questioned whether the case could set a 
broader precedent across the devolved regions by making other services, such as 
university, free for all UK citizens. Cragg said this was not the desired 
outcome of the claim.

Northern Ireland woman takes NHS to court over abortion law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/northern-ireland-nhs-abortions-supreme-court-law>
“The law governing abortion in Northern Ireland is one of the most restrictive 
in both the European Union and [within] theCouncil of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/council-of-europe>,” he argued in a written 
submission. “The maximum criminal penalty imposed – life imprisonment for both 
the woman undergoing the abortion and for an individual who assists her – is 
the harshest in Europe and among the harshest in the world.”

Reproductive rights organisations including the Alliance for Choice, the 
British Pregnancy Advisory Service, Birthrights, the Family Planning 
Association and theAbortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> 
Support Network have intervened in the case.

In submissions on their behalf, Helen Mountfield QC argued that the 2006 
NationalHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Services Act 
required the UK to “make universal non-discriminatory provision which supports 
women so as to enable them to exercise dignity and autonomy over their 
reproductive health, in a way which is practical and effective.

“Once a woman is within the country’s jurisdiction for the purposes of 
protecting her fundamental rights, then as a matter of international law, these 
must be protected on a non-discriminatory basis.”

But Jason Coppel QC, for the government, said it was not irrational for the 
provision of non-emergency healthcare to be divided between the different 
countries of the UK according to the place of residence of the patient.

If there were any discrimination, he argued, then it was “plainly justified”.

“A devolved, residence-based system for allocation of certain health services, 
including abortion services, [allows for] fair and efficient allocation of 
responsibility for provision of health services among authorities in England 
and other countries of the UK,” Coppel said.

Judgment in the case has been reserved.

 