
Northern Ireland’s attorney general has lodged an appeal against a legal 
judgement which found the near total ban on abortion in the region breached the 
human rights of women and girls including rape victims.

John Larkin QC confirmed on Monday that his office has launched an appeal to 
overturn the ruling by Mr Justice Horner which was made back in November.

The judge found that the almost blanket ban on terminations in the province’s 
hospitals was incompatible with human rights law.

Northern Ireland law on abortion ruled 'incompatible with human rights'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/30/northern-ireland-law-on-abortion-ruled-as-incompatible-with-human-rights>
In his ruling and referring to cases of rape, incest and fatal foetal 
abnormality, Horner told the high court in Belfast on 30 November: “In the 
circumstances, given this issue is unlikely to be grasped by the legislature in 
the foreseeable future, and the entitlement of citizens of Northern Ireland to 
have their convention rights protected by the courts, I conclude that the 
article eight rights of women inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> who are pregnant with fatal 
foetal abnormalities or who are pregnant as a result of sexual crime are 
breached by the impugned provisions.”

Following the judgment, Larkin – who holds strong anti-abortion views – vowed 
to appeal against the Horner ruling describing it as “profoundly disappointing.”

At present, under a 19th-century law, local medical teams could be jailed for 
life for carrying out abortions even under these circumstances. Unlike the rest 
of the UK, theAbortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Act 1967 
has never applied to Northern Ireland and since devolution was restored, the 
Stormont assembly has resisted any attempt to relax the near-total ban on 
terminations in local hospitals.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F4%2F1451907768025%2FKP_1197437_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abortion%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%3A%20'Why%20don't%20we%20trust%20women%20to%20make%20the%20right%20choice%3F'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abortion%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%3A%20%27Why%20don%27t%20we%20trust%20women%20to%20make%20the%20right%20choice%3F%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F4%2F1451907768025%2FKP_1197437_crop_640x480.jpg>
 ‘Why don’t we trust women to make the right choice? – video 
Abortions are only permitted in the region’s health service if the life of a 
mother is directly under threat or in cases in which there would be lasting 
long-term negative effects on her health by continuing with the pregnancy.

Amnesty International, which has backed a campaign to reform abortion law in 
Northern Ireland, vowed on Monday night to resist any attempt by the region’s 
chief law officer to overturn the Horner decision.

Patrick Corrigan, the human rights group’s director in Northern Ireland, said: 
“The high court made a very clear ruling that laws governing abortion in 
Northern Ireland breach the human rights of women and girls. That important 
ruling stands and we stand ready to resist any attempt to overturn it.

“It is notable that the Department of Justice, which was the respondent in 
this case, does not appear to be appealing the court’s decision. The minister 
clearly recognises that our abortion law must be changed.”

Corrigan also challenged the region’s political leaders to liberalise the 
abortion laws.

No extending abortion act to Northern Ireland, first female leader says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/no-extending-abortion-act-to-northern-ireland-first-female-premier-arlene-foster-court-ruling-rape>
He said: “The Northern Ireland executive must now take a lead in introducing 
changes to abortion law to ensure that women are able to access fully their 
human right to healthcare, as directed by the high court. The Assembly must 
bring Northern Ireland’s abortion laws into the 21st century and into line with 
international law as a matter of urgency.”

Three years ago the attorney general came under sustained criticism from 
pro-choice campaigners when he called for a Stormont investigation into the 
opening of the Marie Stopes Clinic.

He even offered politicians advice on how to ensure no kind of termination was 
carried out by the clinic’s Belfast office. His intervention prompted claims 
that he was overstepping his role as a lawmaker in the province.
 