
A new father has died from gunshot wounds in north Belfast, the Police Service 
ofNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> has 
confirmed.

Michael McGibbon, 33, who was married with a young family, died in hospital 
overnight after being found wounded in the republican Ardoyne district of the 
city. He was shot three times in the leg in an alleyway at Butler Place near 
Elmfield Street at about 10.05pm on Friday, police said.

Officers revealed on Saturday that the victim had refused to leave his home on 
Thursday evening after two armed and masked men arrived at the house and 
ordered him to come outside.

The armed men then told McGibbon they would be back, according to PSNI Det 
Supt John McVea. The senior PSNI officer said the killing “had all the 
hallmarks of paramilitary murder”.

PSNI commander Insp James Murphy said: “We are keen to hear from witnesses or 
anyone with information regarding this heinous crime.”

Sinn Féin’s Gerry Kelly blamed an “armed gang” for the murder – a common 
euphemism for one of the dissident republican terror groups.

“This killing has shocked the local community in north Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast>. This is the second such killing 
carried out in this area in the last six months by an armed gang which is 
clearly at war with the local community.,” he said.

The centrist Alliance party condemned those behind the killing. 

Nuala McAllister, a councillor, said: “There can never be any excuse for 
carrying out such a heinous act and I utterly condemn the thugs behind it. 
Thanks to them, there is now a man lying dead and a family plunged into 
mourning.

“Violent attacks and murder have no place in our society. This was a brutal 
crime and those behind it need taken off our streets. Our entire community must 
unite against those who seek to drag us back to the bloody days of the past.
“I would urge anyone with any information at all to contact police 
immediately.”
 