
What's new?

We're opening a cycle centre, Sutton Bank Bikes 
<http://www.northyorkmoors.org.uk/visiting/visitor-centres/sutton-bank-national-park-centre>
 in partnership with Pace Cycles this autumn at Sutton Bank, near Thirsk. We've 
created a family-friendly circular ride that takes about an hour, with views of 
Lake Gormire and the Vale of Mowbray. Longer bridleway routes run through 
stunning countryside. There'll be a full hire service, including tandems, 
electric bikes and trailers and tag-a-long bikes for children. It'll also offer 
tuition, a purpose built skills area, bike wash, repair and servicing, as well 
as bikes and gear for sale.

Park highlights

One of the best ways to get to know the North York Moors is by bike. 
Landscapes range from moor to coast, forest to dale, and nothing beats a decent 
downhill stretch, with the wind in your hair and the national park stretched 
out before you. The Moor to Sea Cycle Network covers 150 miles on 11 linked 
routes, following quiet roads, woodland tracks and bridleways.

Or head to the coast for a paddle at gorgeous Runswick Bay. For cyclists or 
walkers, theCinder Track 
<http://www.coolplaces.co.uk/places/uk/england/north-yorkshire/whitby/7214-the-cinder-track>
 is a 21-mile route that follows the old Scarborough to Whitby railway line. 
Find a map atgatewaywhitby.co.uk 
<http://www.gatewaywhitby.co.uk/projects+and+developments/the+cinder+track>. 
You take in spectacular coastal views, the hidden cove at Hayburn Wyke and get 
to pedal over the 13 arches that make upLarpool Viaduct 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Larpool_Viaduct>, near Whitby.

There's also great woodland in the park. One of the best things I've done 
recently is to head out at dusk in summer to hear thenightjars 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/wildlife/birdguide/name/n/nightjar/index.aspx> 
churring. And don't forget at this time of year that our moors will soon be a 
magnificent purple blaze.

Where to eat/drink/sleep
 The Black Swan 
The Inn at Hawnby <http://www.innathawnby.co.uk/> serves local ales and local 
food, such as warm pigeon breast with Yorkshire Blue, baby pear and quail's 
egg. The Michelin-starredThe Black Swan at Oldstead 
<http://blackswanoldstead.co.uk/> is run by the Banks family, who have farmed 
there for generations. Both pubs have accommodation, from £99.

My favourite spots

If you head on to the Hambleton Drove Road 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/clevelandway/site.asp?PageId=50&SiteId=147&c=20>
 there is a dale whose contours on a map make the outline of a shark … well 
they do to me! If you can work out where it is, you can discover this magical 
place for yourself.

My best wildlife encounter

While riding my mountain bike at the highest point on the moors, I saw a 
largish bird approaching over Bilsdale, silhouetted against the sun. As it 
soared around and passed, the sun was behind me and I got fantastic views of 
the unmistakable silvery white- and black-tipped wings of a malehen harrier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/oct/18/hen-harriers-grouse-moors?CMP=twt_gu>
.

• northyorkmoors.org.uk <http://www.northyorkmoors.org.uk/>
 