
North Korea’s self-proclaimed successful testing of a hydrogen bomb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/north-korean-nuclear-test-suspected-as-artificial-earthquake-detected>
 has succeeded in uniting the bifurcated field of Republican presidential 
candidates against a common enemy: Barack Obama.

By the time the world’s great powers joined together in universal condemnation 
of the hermit kingdom’s latest nuclear provocation at a UN security council 
meeting on Wednesday morning, more than half a dozen contenders for the 
Republican nomination had issued statements decrying Obama’s “weakness”, which 
they see as facilitating North Korea’s nuclear ambitions.

Senator Marco Rubio of Florida led the charge with a late-night tweetstorm 
<https://twitter.com/marcorubio/status/684597059039674368> following news of 
the test, calling the detonation “just the latest example of the failed 
Obama-Clinton foreign policy”.

“I have been warning throughout this campaign that North Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> is run by a lunatic who has 
been expanding his nuclear arsenal while President Obama has stood idly by,” 
Rubio said in a statement. “Our enemies around the world are taking advantage 
of Obama’s weakness. We need new leadership that will stand up to people like 
Kim Jong-un and ensure our country has the capabilities necessary to keep 
America safe.”

Rubio’s critique was echoed by New Jersey governor Chris Christie, who decried 
Obama’s “weak response” to North Korean nuclear aggressions under his watch. 
“Three out of the four nuclear detonations that the North Koreans have done 
have happened under Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton’s watch,” Christiesaid 
<https://twitter.com/foxandfriends/status/684715974247854080> during an 
appearance on Fox and Friends. “They have just not acted strongly at all around 
the world. This is just another example, piled on top of Iran, on top of Syria, 
on top Crimea and Ukraine ... this is what weak American leadership gets you.”

On CNN 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/world/2016/01/06/rand-paul-north-korea-economy-newday.cnn>
, Kentucky senator Rand Paul, who has been labelled a “committed isolationist 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pSlqCoM6spo>” on foreign policy by Rubio and 
other rivals for the Republican nomination, redirected the question of North 
Korean nuclear aggression to a criticism of the comprehensive deal on Iran’s 
nuclear programme.

“I would say that there are many parallels to the Iran agreement,” Paul said. 
“Many of us said that that’s the danger of the Iran agreement – once they get 
nuclear weapons, it’s hard to know what to do and how you will respond.”

The test, North Korea’s fourth since first detonating a “fizzled” atomic 
weapon in October 2006, prompted other candidates to join the coalition of the 
willing on social media:
Jeb Bush (@JebBush) 
North Korean nuke test https://t.co/zNW3xU9cZD <https://t.co/zNW3xU9cZD> shows 
danger of continuing feckless Obama/Clinton foreign policy.
 <https://twitter.com/JebBush/status/684743151509225472> January 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JebBush/status/684743151509225472> Carly Fiorina 
(@CarlyFiorina) 
North Korea is yet another Hillary Clinton foreign policy failure. America 
cannot lead from behind.https://t.co/A1819x8qVe <https://t.co/A1819x8qVe>
 <https://twitter.com/CarlyFiorina/status/684719203325231104> January 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/CarlyFiorina/status/684719203325231104> 
Largely missing from the condemnation of Obama’s perceived lack of action on 
North Korea was condemnation of North Korea itself: beyond Paul, who on CNN 
criticized the north’s “failed economic system” as indicative of the 
superiority of capitalism over “socialism”, no would-be nominee has directed 
much ire in the direction of the repressive communist autocracy responsible for 
the test itself.

Part of this may be rooted in the Republican field’s general lack of coherent 
policy on North Korea, which has taken a back seat to the Islamic State, Russia 
and the Syrian civil war in most discussions of foreign policy this cycle.

When asked for their candidate’s positions on increased sanctions, boosting US 
troop presence on the 38th parallel or other possible responses to North Korean 
aggression, for example, press representatives for candidateCarly Fiorina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/carly-fiorina> provided the Guardian with 
a copy of a speech she gave on China in July. (The word “Korea” never appears 
in the transcript.)

Obama has repeatedly imposed economic sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/02/obama-imposes-sanctions-north-korea-sony-hack-the-interview>
 on North Korea as part of a policy of “strategic patience 
<http://www.cfr.org/north-korea/us-policy-toward-north-korea/p29962>”. Yet the 
universality of Republican condemnation of Obama’s perceived “weakness” on 
North Korea was almost absolute, with the notable exception of billionaire 
frontrunner Donald Trump. The real estate tycoon, whose foreign policy bona 
fides is largely limited to his ownership of a golf course in Scotland, 
declined to pin the thermonuclear test on Obama, instead putting the lion’s 
share of the blame on China.

“China has total control, believe me,” Trump told 
<https://twitter.com/foxandfriends/status/684724333722251264> Fox and Friends 
on Wednesday. “They have total control over North Korea. Without China, they 
wouldn’t eat,” he said.
 