
On the old hillside road linking Grasmere and Ambleside, above Windermere, 
stands a gate that “time out of mind”, asWilliam Wordsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamwordsworth> put it, has been called 
the Wishing Gate.

This month, while cheering crowds below lined the route of the Tour of Britain 
cycle race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/mark-cavendish-bradley-wiggins-tour-of-britain>
, there were few tourists who made the trip up to see this unimposing wooden 
gate.

Now, in a response to the recent re-establishment of “Brontë Land” on the 
other side of the Pennines, Wordsworth is leading a comeback for Cumbrian 
literary tourism, reminding visitors that if it was not for his work, and that 
of his fellow Lakeland Poets, we might never have felt so strongly about one of 
England’s most dramatic natural landscapes.

The Wishing Gate, alongside dozens of other locations, is a key element of a 
drive to revive literary tourism in theLake District 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lake-district> by reminding visitors of the 
places that inspired Wordsworth, the area’s most famous son. His 1828 poem 
about the dreamy view from a gate on this site celebrates the superstitious 
human habit of making wishes. A troubled visiting “worldling” in search of good 
luck, he suggests, “Might stop before this favoured scene, / At Nature’s call, 
nor blush to lean /Upon the Wishing Gate …”

To pinpoint these Wordsworthian “spots in time” an online guide has been 
created <http://wordsworthcountry.org.uk> to map and explain the landmarks and 
vantage points that shaped some of the best-known verses in the English 
language. The Wordsworth Trust initiative, which boldly brings back the 
19th-century promotional phrase “Wordsworth Country”, may also help to protect 
and restore several of these literary landmarks.

“We want people to think of it as Wordsworth Country again,” said Paul Kleian, 
communications head at the trust. “After all, it was while he was here, and 
living in Grasmere in particular, that he had his incredibly productive 
eight-year period from 1799, producing and revising works like theLyrical 
Ballads, The Recluse and The Prelude.”

Before the romantic works of Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor Coleridge and Robert 
Southey had extolled the beauty of mists rolling down deserted crags, the 
uninhabited wildernesses of the north were widely regarded as grim.

“When Wordsworth came back to the Lakes to write it was at a time when the 
European grand tour had become rather too dangerous, due to the aftermath of 
revolution and the rise of Napoleon,” said Kleian. “This area was suddenly the 
best place to come for adventure.”

The trust’s new web guide puts lines of poetry alongside vintage tourist 
illustrations to celebrate 42 locations closely associated with the poet’s 
works and offers tourists fresh destinations to rival his former homes, Dove 
Cottage and Rydal Mount, or the banks of Ullswater, where he once famously 
“wandered lonely as a cloud” and saw “a host of golden daffodils”.

The app might take you, for instance, to Patterdale, where Wordsworth wrote of 
the “wild stream Of Aira”, the waterfall known as Aira Force that flows down a 
hidden ravine.

Unwanted cascades of water have been a big problem for the area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/15/after-floods-uk-tourism-lakes-york-recovery>
 in recent months and, while extensive repair work continues after last 
winter’s floods, yetanother heritage battle raged last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/national-trust-lake-district-borrowdale-sheep-farm-sale-fight>
 over whether the Lake District’s rural scenery should be held in static 
preservation for the nation, or farmed by local people.

For the team at the Wordsworth Trust, however, the most important issue is the 
preservation of public access to places that influenced the poet. Their latest 
tourist push does, all the same, coincide with final efforts to put together a 
case for World Heritage status for the region in 2017 and with preparations for 
Wordsworth’s 250th birthday celebrations in 2020, which are being supported bya 
Heritage Lottery Fund grant of almost £5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/03/william-wordsworths-daffodils-cottage-set-for-5m-improvement-grant>
.

Wordsworth, whose parents had both died by the time he was a teenager, was 
born in Cockermouth in 1770 and went to boarding school in Hawkshead. After 
university in Cambridge, he toured revolutionary Europe and then set up home 
briefly in the West Country with his sister Dorothy, where he met Coleridge, 
his collaborator on their early popular volume, theLyrical Ballads.

On a walking tour back in his native Lake District, Wordsworth stumbled across 
a former pub in Grasmere, which, renamed Dove Cottage, became a home for him, 
his sister, his wife Mary Hutchinson, and their children. The neighbouring 
building now houses the Wordsworth Trust and original manuscripts including 
Dorothy’s pivotal journal, a record of their many walks.

All the key Wordsworth buildings appear on the app, but the emphasis is on the 
landscape and the poems.

“Some of the details are still disputed,” said Jeff Cowton, the longstanding 
curator at the Wordsworth Trust, “but we welcome the debate. The old tour 
guides sometimes get it wrong. People in Hawkshead tend to believe the 
childhood boat-stealing incident recalled inThe Prelude happened at 
neighbouring Esthwaite Water, but since Wordsworth writes that he did not know 
the lake well, it may well have been Ullswater.” (“One summer evening (led by 
her) I found / A little boat tied to a willow tree / Within a rocky cove, its 
usual home. / Straight I unloosed her chain, and stepping in / Pushed from the 
shore …”)

Cowton admits there is similar disagreement about the “famous brook” mentioned 
in the same poem. Once an “unruly child of mountain birth” it has been “boxed” 
by the town and “Stripped of his voice and left to dimple down”. It is normally 
thought to be in Flag Street, Hawkshead, near Wordsworth’s lodgings, but Cowton 
suspects it was in the next village, Colthouse, where the young Wordsworth also 
stayed.

Visitors to Dove Cottage this autumn can see entertaining evidence of the 
poet’s impact on British tourism in a special exhibition. It charts the growing 
interest in the scenery of the Lakes and in the Romantic sensibility. From 1820 
Wordsworth was esteemed enough for tourists to come to the area armed with 
books of his poetry. The brazen even knocked on his door.

After his death in 1850 a popular guidebook, Through Wordsworth Country, was 
published and over the next 80 years this term, alongside “Wordsworthshire”, 
was commonly used on railway posters and road signs and in travel brochures. 
But in 1973 when the names of Cumberland and Westmorland were finally 
superseded by Cumbria, all the old signs were taken down. So the trust is keen 
to hear from anyone who has a surviving example.

If the campaign to reignite the Wordsworth flame ahead of 2020 succeeds, the 
“moss-grown bar” of Wordsworth’s Wishing Gate may soon be crowded with 
“strangers from afar”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fwordsworth-country-not-just-daffodlils-web-app%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fb606096bdb3634875d5c375f6c987b0bda69fb%2F0_441_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20just%20daffodils%20%E2%80%93%20Wordsworth%20Country%20makes%20a%20comeback%20for%20literary%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fwordsworth-country-not-just-daffodlils-web-app%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not%20just%20daffodils%20%E2%80%93%20Wordsworth%20Country%20makes%20a%20comeback%20for%20literary%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fwordsworth-country-not-just-daffodlils-web-app%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fb606096bdb3634875d5c375f6c987b0bda69fb%2F0_441_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 A view over Windermere in autumn. Photograph: Adam Burton/Getty Images/Robert 
Harding World Imagery 
SOURCES OF INSPIRATION

Esthwaite Water
Wordsworth went to school in Hawkshead near this lake and went there before 
lessons: “Morning walks/Were early before the hours of school/I travelled round 
our little lake, five miles/Of pleasant wandering.”

Windermere
The lake appears often in his work. In The Prelude he writes: “When summer 
came,/Our pastime was, on bright halfholidays,/To sweep along the plain of 
Windermere/With rival oars ...”

Grasmere
The location of Dove Cottage. He rhapsodises about it in The Recluse: “On 
Nature’s invitation do I come,/By Reason sanctioned. Can the choice 
mislead,/That made the calmest, fairest spot on earth,/With all its 
unappropriated good,/My own.”

Skiddaw
A Wordsworth sonnet is addressed to Skiddaw and in his poem At the Grave of 
Burns, Wordsworth says: “Huge Criffel’s hoary top ascends/By Skiddaw 
seen,/Neighbours we were, and loving friends/We might have been.”

Emma’s Dell
A favourite haunt described in Poems on the Naming of Places. Of these lines 
the poet wrote:“This poem was suggested on the banks of the brook that runs 
through Easdale, which is in some parts of its course as wild and beautiful as 
brook can be. I have composed thousands of verses by the side of it.”

Rydal Water
A view from the southeastern end of the lake shows the island, site of The 
Wild Duck’s Nest, Nab Cottage and the path over White Moss Common by the Leech 
Gatherer’s pool to Grasmere. “Like a fair sister of the sky,/Unruffled doth the 
blue lake lie,/The mountains looking on.”

The Swan Inn, Grasmere
Wordsworth, Southey, and Sir Walter Scott climbed Helvellyn together from here.
“The place to Benjamin right well/Is known, and by as strong a spell/As used to 
be that sign of love/And hope – the Olive-Bough and Dove;/He knows it to his 
cost, good Man!/Who does not know the famous Swan? ...”
 