
Thousands of people are expected to flood into the capital in unprecedented 
numbers to protest against the new president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/27/womens-march-on-washington-dc-guide?>
, but others are celebrating Donald Trump’s win in classic Washington DC style: 
with tuxedos and ballgowns.

Trump will attend two inauguration balls on 21 January. The inauguration week 
is like the Oscars for DC, with political organizations and state societies 
throwing black-tie events, and guest attendance possible for a few hundred 
dollars (although the most-exclusive events are often available only to the 
very wealthy and powerful).

Mormon choir member quits over Trump inauguration performance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/30/mormon-tabernacle-choir-member-quits-trump-inauguration>
Here are some of the inauguration galas with the most distinct personality.

Deplora-ball

This is one for people who have dubbed themselves Trump’s “happy warriors”, an 
inauguration ball called Deplora-ball (yes, take a moment to soak in that pun) 
hosted by a group from the so-called “alt-right” movement. OrganizersMAGA 3X 
<https://www.facebook.com/MAGA3X/?hc_ref=PAGES_TIMELINE&fref=nf> (MAGA stands 
for Make America Great Again) declare the 19 January event “the biggest meme 
ever”.

“In 2016, Americans in favor of competent, America-first leadership were 
insulted, harassed and assaulted for holding views contrary to those of the 
bicoastal, bipartisan ‘elites’,”reads the event website 
<http://deploraball.com/>.

“Despite overwhelming cultural opposition, a groundswell of Americans rose up 
together to embrace these labels (especially ‘Deplorables’) to meme our way to 
the Whitehouse and electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>,” it continues.

For a taste of what the Deplora-ball might be like, organizers have already 
engaged in public spats this week after one of them 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/12/27/nazis-vs-trumpkins-the-prom-tearing-apart-the-alt-right.html>
, Tim Treadstone (known as @BakedAlaska on Twitter) started tweeting 
antisemitic comments. Fellow organizer and alt-right voice Mike Cernovich 
kicked Treadstone out of the event, and white nationalist leader Richard 
Spencer slammed Cernovich as “alt-light”.

Milo Yiannopoulos, who got banned from Twitter for bullying comedian Leslie 
Jones and according tonew reports will receive a $250,000 book advance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/30/breitbart-milo-yiannopoulos-claims-deal-autobiography>
 from an imprint of Simon & Schuster, is expected to attend as a guest of honor.

The original site of the event, the Clarendon Ballroom, backed out after 
public criticism 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/public-safety/clarendon-ballroom-gets-threats-after-refusing-to-host-trump-deploraball/2016/12/15/d2c956e6-3d30-4a1b-b6bc-0a4ae744325f_story.html?utm_term=.c28056f634cf>
. It will now be held at the National Press Club, and the NPC released a 
statementclarifying 
<http://www.press.org/news-multimedia/president/2016/12/npc-statement-regarding-jan-19-inaugural-event>
 Deplora-ball was a private gala and “not an event sponsored or endorsed by the 
National Press Club”.

Another formal Deplora-ball event, details to still be announced, will take 
place on inauguration day itself.


Organizers are calling on Trump “deplorables” to create their own Deplora-ball 
events across the country, with supporters in 18 states already signing up (a 
map shows multiple private house parties <http://deploraball.com/deploraball50x>
, including ones in Jacksonville, Florida, and Modesto, California).

Creative Coalition’s Inaugural Ball for the Arts

For the last 20 years, the Creative Coalition 
<http://thecreativecoalition.org/> has hosted a bipartisan inauguration night 
gala fundraiser. The theme of this year’s is “the right to bear arts”.

“It does not matter whether you supported Hillary or Trump or Bernie or your 
grandmother. This is an event that supports one thing: arts in America,” said 
Robin Bronk, the organization’s CEO. Prices for the inauguration fundraiser 
gala start at two standard tickets for $5,000, or a pair of VIP tickets for 
$10,000.

Good thing it doesn’t matter who you supported, because the lineup of stars 
hosting the event – released on election day, before Trump had won – lists 
plenty of prominent Clinton backers.

Actor Tim Daly, who stars in Madame Secretary and campaigned for Clinton at 
rallies in Ohio, is the first listed host. The second, actress Connie Britton 
(Friday Night Lights, Nashville)posted a selfie on Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BFrEzYMi3hS/> in May of her and Clinton, declaring 
“#Imwithher”. The third, actor John Leguizamo,wrote an op-ed in the New York 
Times <http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/21/opinion/too-bad-youre-latin.html?_r=0> 
saying the only good thing Trump has done was inspire Latinos to rise against 
him.

When asked what the mood of the gala would be since so many Clinton backers 
would be attending an event honoring a new Republican president, Bronk declared 
it “business as usual”.

“It’s not for President Trump. It’s an event to call attention to the need for 
the arts,” she said.

The Latino Coalition

In Trump’s first speech as a presidential candidate in 2015 he called Mexican 
immigrants “rapists” and “criminals”, later promising to build a wall to stop 
undocumented Latino immigrants and to deport all undocumented migrants (a claim 
he’s now largely walked back to focus on undocumented migrants with criminal 
records). But he ended upwinning 29% of the Latino vote 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/trump-probably-did-better-with-latino-voters-than-romney-did/>
.

The invite for the event hosted by the Latino Coalition 
<http://www.thelatinocoalition.com/inaugural/>, an organization aimed at 
improving economic and business opportunities for Latinos, highlights that 
delicate balance:

Over the past of year, we have asked ourselves whether this is the best of 
times or worst of times for Hispanics in America. While the answer to that 
question has at times been mixed, we believe there is every reason to believe 
that the best of times are ahead of us!.

The Latino Coalition looks forward to working with the Trump administration 
and the new Congress to build on the considerable economic and cultural 
accomplishments of Hispanic Americans.

The coalition’s event, on 18 January at the Ronald Reagan Building and 
International Trade Center, costs $175.

The Great Gatsby Presidential Inaugural Ball 

One of the few inauguration night balls available to the public, the Great 
Gatsby Presidential Inaugural Ball 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/575416309303519/> at the National Portrait 
Gallery, is a newcomer to the scene. It’s being hosted by Dardanella, a party 
company, and founder Paul Ervin insists the ball is apolitical.

He acknowledges when the ball was announced in June, “the outlook for the 
president of the US was a little different”, said Ervin. “I think we were all 
confident in who would be elected and made moves based on that.”

After the election, 10% of partygoers sold or swapped their tickets, declaring 
themselves uninterested in attending.

“It was never about Republican or Democrat, red or blue, Hillary or Trump,” 
said Ervin. “We are adamant to ask people to leave their political views at the 
door, out in the cold, we don’t want them.”

The 1920s Depression-era event will include costumes, dance classes and 
orchestras playing (including an 11-piece all-female jazz orchestra, which 
Ervin notes “would have been beautiful for a Hillary election”).

Tickets range from $150 to $350.

Ervin says the event is “a celebration of the institution of the American 
presidency”, and he expects a wide cross-section of guests.

But, he concedes, “a large percentage coming to our event are also marching 
the next day”at the Women’s March on Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/27/womens-march-on-washington-dc-guide>
.
 