
The Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> has urged incoming 
US president Donald Trump to “reach out” to the growing faction of House 
Democrats who have pledged to boycott the presidential inauguration, as some 
representatives question Trump’s legitimacy, citing the Russian hacking scandal 
that continues to plague the transition.


Related: Mike Pence insists Trump campaign has not been in contact with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/mike-pence-trump-campaign-russia>

Twenty-three House Democrats 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/donald-trump-inauguration-boycott-democrats-whip-list>
, including civil rights leader John Lewis and John Conyers, the longest 
serving congressman currently in office, have said they will not attend 
Friday’s inauguration, marking a significant break from the tradition of 
witnessing the peaceful transition of power.

Georgia congressman Lewis, who was arrested numerous times in the 1960s civil 
rights campaigns and was beaten during the historic march over the Edmund 
Pettus bridge in Selma, Alabama in 1965,said on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-john-lewis-mlk-day-civil-rights>
 he would not attend the ceremony due to concerns over Russian interference in 
the 2016 election.

“I don’t see this president-elect as a legitimate president,” Lewis told NBC’s 
Meet the Press, citing a consensus in the US intelligence community that 
Russian hackers infiltrated the emails of a top Clinton aide and leaked 
thousands of embarrassing documents to destabilise the election.

“I think the Russians participated in helping this man get elected, and they 
helped destroy the candidacy of Hillary Clinton.”

Over the weekend, which marked the start of the Martin Luther King Jr Day 
public holiday, the president-elect used Twitter to lambast the 76-year-old 
African American, whom he said “should spend more time fixing and helping his 
district, which is in horrible shape and falling apart (not to mention crime 
infested) rather than falsely complaining about the election results.

“All talk, talk, talk – no action or results. Sad!”


Despite a slight uptick in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/rate-murder-fbi-increase>, the 
national crime rate has descended to historic lows under the Obama 
administration. Lewis’ congressional district in Atlanta includes several 
wealthy neighborhoods, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the 
Hartsfield-Jackson airport and a major hub for computer science, the Georgia 
Institute of Technology.

On Sunday, White House chief of staff Denis McDonough told CNN’s State of the 
Union Lewis’s concerns were “by no means trivial” but argued Obama believed 
that Trump was the “freely elected president”.


“My hope would be that the president-elect would reach out to somebody as 
consequential as somebody who is such a leader as John Lewis,” McDonough said.

“That would be the kind of thing that would not only send a message to the 
American people that we’re prepared to work together, but would also send a 
message to the Russians that we are united. Their efforts to divide us, to 
weaken us, to advance their own interests at the expense of ours, are going to 
fail.”

Democrat senator Bernie Sanders, who challenged Hillary Clinton for the 
party’s presidential nomination in 2016, stopped short of branding Trump’s 
presidency illegitimate, despite acknowledging his “great concerns” about 
Russian interference in the election.

“Do I think Russians supported him? Do I think they tried to get him elected? 
Do I think it worked against Clinton? I do. And that is something that has to 
be investigated.” Sanders told ABC News on Sunday, adding that describing Trump 
as illegitimate would be “just words”.

On Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/senate-intelligence-committee-trump-aides-russia-links>
 the senate intelligence committee said it planned to question senior figures 
in the incoming Trump administration as part of an inquiry into Russian hacking 
during the election.



Vice-president-elect Mike Pence indicated on Sunday that such an act of 
reconciliation between Trump and Lewis would be unlikely, telling Fox News he 
was “deeply disappointed” by Lewis’s comments.

The anger was mirrored by Trump’s pick for chief of staff, Reince Priebus, who 
branded the remarks as “incredibly disappointing” and “irresponsible” during an 
interview with ABC news on Sunday.

Lewis too seemed not to be in conciliatory mood, telling NBC that if Trump 
were to ask him to work with him, “I would say, ‘Mr President, Mr Trump, it’s 
going to be hard. It’s going to be tough.’”

Pence also offered the frankest denial yet of any contact between the Trump 
campaign and Russian authorities during the election, as was described in an 
explosive but unverified dossier authored by a former MI6 agent and published 
by BuzzFeed earlier in the week.

Pressed repeatedly, Pence eventually said: “Of course not, why would there be 
any contacts between the campaign?”

He added: “This is all a distraction, and it’s all part of a narrative to 
delegitimize the election. The American people see right through it.”

Related: Fear and loathing in Washington DC: progressives dread Trump 
inauguration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/donald-trump-inauguration-washington-progressives>

Pence had earlier caveated his response by stating he had only been part of 
the Trump campaign since July last year.

“I joined this campaign in the summer and I can tell you that all the contact 
by the Trump campaign and associates was with the American people,” he said.

The former Indiana governor also denied that phone calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/michael-flynn-russia-ambassador-trump-dossier>
 between Trump’s incoming national security adviser Mike Flynn and Russian 
ambassador to the US Sergey Kislyak, involved discussions related to President 
Obama’s sanctions against the Russian regime in response its interference in 
the election.

“I talked to General Flynn yesterday, and the conversations that took place at 
that time were not in any way related to new US sanctions against Russia and 
the expulsion of diplomats,” Pence said.

Pence did not address reports suggesting that Trump’s first foreign visit as 
president would be to Iceland for a summit with Russian president Vladimir 
Putin, who, the intelligence agencies said, approved the hacking operation.
 