
Barack Obama briefly played pundit in an interview released on Monday, 
commenting on an “untested” Bernie Sanders, the “wicked smart”Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, and an “unrecognizable” 
Republican party.

“There’s no doubt that Bernie has tapped into a running thread in Democratic 
politics,” Obama told Politico ina podcast 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/01/off-message-podcast-transcript-obama-218167>
, saying that thread asked: “Why are we still constrained by the terms of the 
debate that were set by Ronald Reagan 30 years ago?

“You know, why is it that we should be scared to challenge conventional wisdom 
and talk bluntly about inequality and, you know, be full-throated in our 
progressivism?”

But although Obama said he understood Sanders’ appeal, he downplayed any 
similarities between his upstart 2008 campaign and the 73-year-old senator’s
surprise popularity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/24/hillary-clinton-campaign-iowa-caucus-democratic-primary-bernie-sanders>
 with diverse and young voters.

“I think Bernie came in with the luxury of being a complete long shot and just 
letting loose,” Obama said.

The president was quick to heap praise on his former secretary of state, 
suggesting others made too much of the candidates’ reputations – Sanders the 
socialist dreamer and Clinton the seasoned doer.

“Hillary is really idealistic and progressive,” he said, adding that “they’re 
both passionate about giving everybody a shot” on education, and about tax 
reform that does not benefit the richest.

The president also suggested that Sanders’ success came in part from his 
newness to voters who have seen Clinton on and off for three decades.

“I know Hillary really well, and she is a good, smart, tough person who cares 
deeply about this country, and she has been in the public eye for a long time, 
and in a culture in which new is always better,” Obama said. “And, you know, 
you’re always looking at the bright, shiny object that people don’t, haven’t 
seen before. That’s a disadvantage to her.”

Obama applauded Sanders, nonetheless, and conceded he did not know the senator 
as well as Clinton. Sanders “has the virtue of saying exactly what he believes, 
and great authenticity, great passion, and is fearless”, he said. “His attitude 
is, ‘I got nothing to lose.’”

The president also recalled how quickly the tables could turn, saying he 
himself had been “some untested kid” in the eyes of skeptical voters in the 
2008 election. When interviewer Glenn Thrush suggested a similarity with a 
certain senator – “Bernie, of course, is an untested 74-year-old kid, right?” – 
Obama replied: “Yeah, yeah.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fbernie-sanders-iowa-woman-crying-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F25%2F1453746565402%2FKP_1501186_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woman%20sobs%20while%20describing%20life%20on%20minimum%20wage%20to%20Bernie%20Sanders%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fbernie-sanders-iowa-woman-crying-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woman%20sobs%20while%20describing%20life%20on%20minimum%20wage%20to%20Bernie%20Sanders%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fbernie-sanders-iowa-woman-crying-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F25%2F1453746565402%2FKP_1501186_crop_640x480.jpg>
Woman sobs while describing life on minimum wage to Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jan/25/bernie-sanders-iowa-woman-crying-video>
He also gently suggested that Clinton’s “wicked smart” mind for policy “could 
make her more cautious and her campaign more prose than poetry”. But he lauded 
her experience: “It means that she can govern and she can start here, day one, 
more experienced than any non-vice-president has ever been who aspires to this 
office.”

Obama said he had spared Clinton and Sanders his advice about how to run a 
campaign: “I have not been trying to, you know, kibitz and, you know, stick my 
nose into every aspect of their strategy.”

The president has said he will not endorse a candidate during the primary 
election, and in the interview he again said: “My number one priority is having 
a Democratic president succeed me.”

The Republican party’s vision “has moved not just to the right but has moved 
to a place that is unrecognizable”, he said, contrasting the anti-immigrant and 
anti-climate science tirades of Donald Trump and Ted Cruz with the positions of 
conservative leaders past.

“When I ran against John McCain, John McCain and I had real differences, sharp 
differences, butJohn McCain <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain> 
didn’t deny climate science,” he said. “John McCain didn’t call for banning 
Muslims from the United States.

“You know, John McCain was a conservative, but he was well within, you know, 
the mainstream of not just the Republican party but within our political 
dialogue.”

State of the Union: Obama regrets era of 'rancor' and ponders divided America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/12/obama-state-of-the-union-address-2016-partisan-poison-congress>
Echoing remarks made in his final State of the Union address, Obama said it 
was “a singular regret for me” that “our body politic has become more 
polarized, the language, the spirit has become meaner”.

Trump and Cruz are “exploiting” frustration and anger, Obama said, though he 
added that he hopes emotion will dissipate as the election moves forward.

“It’s real within the Republican party and the Republican base, but that after 
this venting, Republican voters will settle down and say: ‘Who do we want 
actually sitting behind the desk, making decisions that are critical to our 
future?’”

Obama said he has not watched the Republican debates, calling them 
“artificial” and “performance art as opposed to talking about stuff”.

But he admitted that over seven years, he realizes theater has its uses: “And 
you know what, some of the presidency is performance.”
 