
9.19pm GMT 21:19  <> 

Obama on Trump: 'I don't think he is ideological'

Question: did anything about Trump surprise you? Does anything concern you?
“We had a very cordial conversation. That didn’t surprise me... because he is 
obviously a gregarious person. He is somebody who likes to mix it up and to 
have a vigorous debate. What’s clear was that he is able to tap into yes the 
anxieties but also the enthusiasm of his voters in a way that was impressive. 
And I said so to him. Because to the extent that there were a lot of those who 
missed the Trump phenomenon... that connection that he was able to make.. that 
was impervious to events that might have sunk another candidate, that’s 
powerful stuff.

Trump, says Obama, has “Fewer set, hard and fast policy prescriptions ... I 
don’t think he is ideological. I think ultimately he is pragmatic in that way, 
and that can serve him well..”

“Do I have concerns? Absolutely. Of course I have concerns... The federal 
government and our democracy is not a speedboat, it is an ocean liner. ... It 
took a lot of hard work... even in our first two years... I advised him.. 
before he commits to certain courses of action, he’s really dug in and thought 
through... where we have a difference... and that’s the affordable care act... 
obviously this has been the holy grail for republicans.. now that has been 
taken as an article of faith, that this is terrible... but now thatRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> are in charge they’ve got to 
take a look... we’ve got 20m people who have insurance who didn’t have it 
before... health care costs have generally gone up at a comparatively slower 
rate... people who have health insurance are benefitting in ways they might not 
be aware of ... free mammograms... it’s one thing to characterize this thing as 
not working... what happens to those 20m people who have health insurance? Are 
you gonna just kick them off? ... are you gonna repeal the provision that 
ensures that... you’re not discriminated against because you’ve got a 
preexisting condition? That’s really popular?”

Obama also mentions kids staying on parents’ health insurance till age 26. 
That’s popular too.

If they can come up with something better, Obama says, “I’ll be the first one 
to say that’s great. Congratulations. If on the other hand, whatever they’re 
proposing results in millions of people losing coverage... then we’re going to 
have a problem.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd%23block-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd%23block-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd%23block-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd%23block-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd%23block-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd%23block-582a28b0e4b05c05c52f4fcd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.10pm GMT 21:10  <> 

Trump tells Putin he wants 'strong and enduring relationship'

The Trump transition team says Trump spoke with Putin who congratulated Trump. 
Trump ‘is very much looking forward to having a strong and enduring 
relationship with Russia’:

 President-elect Donald J. Trump today spoke with President Vladimir Putin, 
who called to offer his congratulations on winning a historic election. During 
the call, the two leaders discussed a range of issues including the threats and 
challenges facing the United States and Russia, strategic economic issues and 
the historical U.S.-Russia relationship that dates back over 200 years.

President-elect Trump noted to President Putin that he is very much looking 
forward to having a strong and enduring relationship with Russia and the people 
of Russia.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091%23block-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091%23block-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091%23block-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091%23block-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091%23block-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091%23block-582a280de4b0eb4ebf274091&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.07pm GMT 21:07  <> 

Obama says presidency will wake Trump up to reality 'pretty quick'

Question: You said Trump was unfit. Now how do you feel? Qualified? And what 
do you say to people concerned about Trump and supporters hostile to minorities 
-- especially Steve Bannon, a proponent of alt-right/ white nationalism?

“It would not be appropriate for me to comment on every appointment that the 
president-elect starts making... the people have spoken.Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will be the next president. 
The 45th president of the US. And it will be up to him to appoint a team to ... 
serve him well and reflect his policies.

“That’s how democracy works. That’s how this system operates. When I won there 
were a number of people who didn’t like me, annd didn’t like what I stood for...

“It takes a while for people to reconcile themselves with that new reality..

“Hopefully it’s a reminder that elections matter, and voting counts... we 
ended up having 43% of the country not voting who were eligible to vote... 
given that president Trump is now trying to balance what he said in the 
campaign with working with those who disagreed with him... I think it’s 
important to us to let him make his decisions... I think the American people 
will judge over the next couple of years whether they like what they see...

“My role is to make sure that when I hand off this White House, that it is in 
the best possible shape, and that I’ve been as helpful as I can to him in going 
forward... and my advice to the president-elect when we had our discussions is 
that campaigning is different from governing. I think he recognizes that. I 
think he’s sincere in wanting to be a successful president... I think he’s 
going to try as best he can to make sure that he delivers not only for the 
people that voted for him but for the people at large....

“It’s only been six days. I think it’s important for him... to be able for him 
to distinguish what he was campaigning on and what is practical, what he can 
achieve...

“I did say to him, as I’ve said publicly, that because of the nature of the 
campaigns, and the bitterness and the ferocity of the campaigns, that it’s 
really important to try to send some signals of unity, and to try to reach out 
to minority groups and women and others that were concerned about the tenor of 
the campaign. And I think that that’s something that he will want to do. But 
that’s all happening real fast, he’s got commitments to supporters... it’s a 
little too early to start making judgments on that.”

On qualifications:

Obama: “He mobilized a big chunk of the country... regardless of what 
experience or assumptions he brought to the office, this office has a way of 
waking you up. Those aspects of his positions or predispositions that don’t 
match up with reality he will find shaken up pretty quick, because reality has 
a way of asserting itself. Some of his gifts that allowed him to execute one of 
the biggest upsets in history, hopefully he’ll be able to put those to use...”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2%23block-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2%23block-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2%23block-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2%23block-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2%23block-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2%23block-582a2550e4b05c05c52f4fc2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.57pm GMT 20:57  <> 

Question: what’s the presidential learning curve like?

Obama: “About a week ago I started feeling pretty good.” Ha. “The learning 
curve always continues. This is a remarkable job... It is a constant flow of 
information and challenges and issues... that is truer now than it has ever 
been” because of information flow and the connectivity of the world. He says 50 
years ago Syria might be unheard of in the USA. Or a southeast Asia financial 
crisis might not impact US markets.”

“During the Bay of Pigs crisis, JFK had about two weeks before anyone reported 
on it. Imagine that.”

In talking with Trump, Obama says, he pointed out that “how you staff, 
particularly your chief of staff, national security adviser, White House 
council – a process and a system... understanding that the president is going 
to be the ultimate decision-maker, that’s got to be set up right away...

“As a consequence of that team, I’ve been able to make good decisions. And if 
you don’t have that around you, you’ll get swamped..”

They talked about the fact that “I’d been encouraged by his statements on 
election night about unity... the reset that can happen after an election, all 
those things are important... I think it’s important to give him the room and 
the space... I emphasized to him that look in an election like this... gestures 
matters, and how he reaches out to groups that may not have supported him, how 
he signals his interest in their concerns, those are the kinds of things that 
can actually set a tone...

On his personal entry in the job, 

“I didn’t really have time to worry about being at ease because we were losing 
about 800,000 jobs a month.. it’s hard to find an analogous situation...

“I was too busy to worry about how acclimated I was feeling... in this 
situation... obviously there are people out there who are feeling deeply 
disaffected... [but] the unemployment rate is as low as it’s been in eight, 
nine years... the stock market is hovering around its all-time high... we have 
challenges internationally... [but] significant progress in Iraq and Mosul is 
now increasingly being retaken by Iraqi security forces supported by us...gas 
is two bucks a gallon...

“He will have time and space to make judicious decisions.... they’ve got time 
to consider what exactly they want to achieve.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5%23block-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5%23block-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5%23block-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5%23block-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5%23block-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5%23block-582a2375e4b0364c91946ad5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.49pm GMT 20:49  <> 

Obama says Democrats must 'show up everywhere' to win

On the Democrats: “Should not waver on our core beliefs and principles... an 
economy that works for everybody... America is inclusive not exclusive... 
dignity.. of every child...” without discrimination.

“There are going to be a core set of values that shouldn’t be up for debate,” 
Obama says. “But how we organize politically is probably something we should 
spend some time thinking about...

“Good ideas don’t matter if people don’t hear them.. given population 
distribution across the country, we have to compete everywhere, we have to show 
up everywhere, we have to work at a grassroots level. I won Iowa... because I 
spent 87 days going to every small town and VFW fish fry county fair... there’s 
some counties maybe I won that people didn’t expect because people had a chance 
to see you...

“The challenge for a national party is how do you dig in there and create 
those kinds of structures so that people have a sense of what it is that you 
have to stand for.”

Can’t do it with a national press strategy especially given “splintering of 
the press,” Obama says. State and local parties, school board races, state rep 
races and city council races... “I’m optimistic that that will happen,” Obama 
says.

He reminds the press of 2005 Democratic setbacks. He says he’s optimistic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078%23block-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078%23block-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078%23block-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078%23block-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078%23block-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078%23block-582a2258e4b0eb4ebf274078&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.44pm GMT 20:44  <> 

Obama says Trump committed to Nato

Question: What will you tell world leaders about Trump? And the Democratic 
party – where now?
Obama: “One of the great things about the United States is that when it comes 
to world affairs the president obviously is the leader of the executive 
branch... but the influence and the work that we have is the result not just of 
the president... countless interaction of the military... diplomats... 
intelligence officers... development workers...

“There’s enormous continuity beneath the day-to-day news...that will continue.”

“In my conversation with the president-elect, he expressed a great interest in 
maintaining our core relationships...”

That includes Nato, Obama says.

“There is no weakening in resolve when it comes to America’s commitment to 
maintaining a strong and robust Nato relationship.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9%23block-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9%23block-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9%23block-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9%23block-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9%23block-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9%23block-582a219ee4b0364c91946ac9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.41pm GMT 20:41  <> 

Obama offers condolences to Gwen Ifill’s family, the journalist whose death 
from cancer at age 61 was just announced.

“Gwen was a friend of ours, she was an extraordinary journalist,” Obama 
begins, and goes on to read a lengthy warm and admiring statement paying 
tribute to Ifill.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6%23block-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6%23block-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6%23block-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6%23block-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6%23block-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6%23block-582a2131e4b0364c91946ac6&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.40pm GMT 20:40  <> 

Here’s Obama. He’s talking about his upcoming trip to Peru, Greece and Germany.

“I wanted to see if I could clear out some of the underbrush” of questions 
before the overseas trip, he says.

“My team stands ready to accelerate in the next steps that are required to 
ensure a smooth transition, and we are going to be staying in touch as we 
travel,” Obama says. While not prescribed explicitly in the constitution, Obama 
says, “It is one of those norms that are vital to a functioning democracy, 
similar to those norms of... tolerance...reason...facts.”

Obama says “as long as I’m president” those norms will be respected. That’s 
not very long at all now.

A not-so-subtle dig at Trump.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9%23block-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9%23block-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9%23block-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9%23block-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9%23block-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9%23block-582a205ce4b05c05c52f4fa9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.06pm GMT 20:06  <> 

Obama to speak

We’re expecting to hear from the president shortly, in Obama’s first press 
conference since Donald Trump’s election as the next US president.

Here’s a live video stream:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3%23block-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3%23block-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3%23block-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3%23block-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3%23block-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3%23block-582a18e4e4b0364c91946aa3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
8.01pm GMT 20:01  <> 

Transcript of first lady Michelle Obama’s speech at a homeless veterans’ 
organization:

MRS. OBAMA: “Thank you all so much.” (Applause.) “You all, please, please. 
Thanks so much. Welcome.”

AUDIENCE MEMBER: “Run for President!” (Laughter.) 

MRS. OBAMA: “Be quiet back there.” (Laughter.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054%23block-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054%23block-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054%23block-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054%23block-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20Trump%3A%20'This%20office%20has%20a%20way%20of%20waking%20you%20up'%20%E2%80%93%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054%23block-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054%23block-582a17c0e4b0eb4ebf274054&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
Question: did anything about Trump surprise you? Does anything concern you?
“We had a very cordial conversation. That didn’t surprise me... because he is 
obviously a gregarious person. He is somebody who likes to mix it up and to 
have a vigorous debate. What’s clear was that he is able to tap into yes the 
anxieties but also the enthusiasm of his voters in a way that was impressive. 
And I said so to him. Because to the extent that there were a lot of those who 
missed the Trump phenomenon... that connection that he was able to make.. that 
was impervious to events that might have sunk another candidate, that’s 
powerful stuff.

Trump, says Obama, has “Fewer set, hard and fast policy prescriptions ... I 
don’t think he is ideological. I think ultimately he is pragmatic in that way, 
and that can serve him well..”

“Do I have concerns? Absolutely. Of course I have concerns... The federal 
government and our democracy is not a speedboat, it is an ocean liner. ... It 
took a lot of hard work... even in our first two years... I advised him.. 
before he commits to certain courses of action, he’s really dug in and thought 
through... where we have a difference... and that’s the affordable care act... 
obviously this has been the holy grail for republicans.. now that has been 
taken as an article of faith, that this is terrible... but now thatRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> are in charge they’ve got to 
take a look... we’ve got 20m people who have insurance who didn’t have it 
before... health care costs have generally gone up at a comparatively slower 
rate... people who have health insurance are benefitting in ways they might not 
be aware of ... free mammograms... it’s one thing to characterize this thing as 
not working... what happens to those 20m people who have health insurance? Are 
you gonna just kick them off? ... are you gonna repeal the provision that 
ensures that... you’re not discriminated against because you’ve got a 
preexisting condition? That’s really popular?”

Obama also mentions kids staying on parents’ health insurance till age 26. 
That’s popular too.

If they can come up with something better, Obama says, “I’ll be the first one 
to say that’s great. Congratulations. If on the other hand, whatever they’re 
proposing results in millions of people losing coverage... then we’re going to 
have a problem.”
 
The Trump transition team says Trump spoke with Putin who congratulated Trump. 
Trump ‘is very much looking forward to having a strong and enduring 
relationship with Russia’:

 President-elect Donald J. Trump today spoke with President Vladimir Putin, 
who called to offer his congratulations on winning a historic election. During 
the call, the two leaders discussed a range of issues including the threats and 
challenges facing the United States and Russia, strategic economic issues and 
the historical U.S.-Russia relationship that dates back over 200 years.

President-elect Trump noted to President Putin that he is very much looking 
forward to having a strong and enduring relationship with Russia and the people 
of Russia.
 
Question: You said Trump was unfit. Now how do you feel? Qualified? And what 
do you say to people concerned about Trump and supporters hostile to minorities 
-- especially Steve Bannon, a proponent of alt-right/ white nationalism?

“It would not be appropriate for me to comment on every appointment that the 
president-elect starts making... the people have spoken.Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will be the next president. 
The 45th president of the US. And it will be up to him to appoint a team to ... 
serve him well and reflect his policies.

“That’s how democracy works. That’s how this system operates. When I won there 
were a number of people who didn’t like me, annd didn’t like what I stood for...

“It takes a while for people to reconcile themselves with that new reality..

“Hopefully it’s a reminder that elections matter, and voting counts... we 
ended up having 43% of the country not voting who were eligible to vote... 
given that president Trump is now trying to balance what he said in the 
campaign with working with those who disagreed with him... I think it’s 
important to us to let him make his decisions... I think the American people 
will judge over the next couple of years whether they like what they see...

“My role is to make sure that when I hand off this White House, that it is in 
the best possible shape, and that I’ve been as helpful as I can to him in going 
forward... and my advice to the president-elect when we had our discussions is 
that campaigning is different from governing. I think he recognizes that. I 
think he’s sincere in wanting to be a successful president... I think he’s 
going to try as best he can to make sure that he delivers not only for the 
people that voted for him but for the people at large....

“It’s only been six days. I think it’s important for him... to be able for him 
to distinguish what he was campaigning on and what is practical, what he can 
achieve...

“I did say to him, as I’ve said publicly, that because of the nature of the 
campaigns, and the bitterness and the ferocity of the campaigns, that it’s 
really important to try to send some signals of unity, and to try to reach out 
to minority groups and women and others that were concerned about the tenor of 
the campaign. And I think that that’s something that he will want to do. But 
that’s all happening real fast, he’s got commitments to supporters... it’s a 
little too early to start making judgments on that.”

On qualifications:

Obama: “He mobilized a big chunk of the country... regardless of what 
experience or assumptions he brought to the office, this office has a way of 
waking you up. Those aspects of his positions or predispositions that don’t 
match up with reality he will find shaken up pretty quick, because reality has 
a way of asserting itself. Some of his gifts that allowed him to execute one of 
the biggest upsets in history, hopefully he’ll be able to put those to use...”
 
Question: what’s the presidential learning curve like?

Obama: “About a week ago I started feeling pretty good.” Ha. “The learning 
curve always continues. This is a remarkable job... It is a constant flow of 
information and challenges and issues... that is truer now than it has ever 
been” because of information flow and the connectivity of the world. He says 50 
years ago Syria might be unheard of in the USA. Or a southeast Asia financial 
crisis might not impact US markets.”

“During the Bay of Pigs crisis, JFK had about two weeks before anyone reported 
on it. Imagine that.”

In talking with Trump, Obama says, he pointed out that “how you staff, 
particularly your chief of staff, national security adviser, White House 
council – a process and a system... understanding that the president is going 
to be the ultimate decision-maker, that’s got to be set up right away...

“As a consequence of that team, I’ve been able to make good decisions. And if 
you don’t have that around you, you’ll get swamped..”

They talked about the fact that “I’d been encouraged by his statements on 
election night about unity... the reset that can happen after an election, all 
those things are important... I think it’s important to give him the room and 
the space... I emphasized to him that look in an election like this... gestures 
matters, and how he reaches out to groups that may not have supported him, how 
he signals his interest in their concerns, those are the kinds of things that 
can actually set a tone...

On his personal entry in the job, 

“I didn’t really have time to worry about being at ease because we were losing 
about 800,000 jobs a month.. it’s hard to find an analogous situation...

“I was too busy to worry about how acclimated I was feeling... in this 
situation... obviously there are people out there who are feeling deeply 
disaffected... [but] the unemployment rate is as low as it’s been in eight, 
nine years... the stock market is hovering around its all-time high... we have 
challenges internationally... [but] significant progress in Iraq and Mosul is 
now increasingly being retaken by Iraqi security forces supported by us...gas 
is two bucks a gallon...

“He will have time and space to make judicious decisions.... they’ve got time 
to consider what exactly they want to achieve.”
 
On the Democrats: “Should not waver on our core beliefs and principles... an 
economy that works for everybody... America is inclusive not exclusive... 
dignity.. of every child...” without discrimination.

“There are going to be a core set of values that shouldn’t be up for debate,” 
Obama says. “But how we organize politically is probably something we should 
spend some time thinking about...

“Good ideas don’t matter if people don’t hear them.. given population 
distribution across the country, we have to compete everywhere, we have to show 
up everywhere, we have to work at a grassroots level. I won Iowa... because I 
spent 87 days going to every small town and VFW fish fry county fair... there’s 
some counties maybe I won that people didn’t expect because people had a chance 
to see you...

“The challenge for a national party is how do you dig in there and create 
those kinds of structures so that people have a sense of what it is that you 
have to stand for.”

Can’t do it with a national press strategy especially given “splintering of 
the press,” Obama says. State and local parties, school board races, state rep 
races and city council races... “I’m optimistic that that will happen,” Obama 
says.

He reminds the press of 2005 Democratic setbacks. He says he’s optimistic.
 
Question: What will you tell world leaders about Trump? And the Democratic 
party – where now?
Obama: “One of the great things about the United States is that when it comes 
to world affairs the president obviously is the leader of the executive 
branch... but the influence and the work that we have is the result not just of 
the president... countless interaction of the military... diplomats... 
intelligence officers... development workers...

“There’s enormous continuity beneath the day-to-day news...that will continue.”

“In my conversation with the president-elect, he expressed a great interest in 
maintaining our core relationships...”

That includes Nato, Obama says.

“There is no weakening in resolve when it comes to America’s commitment to 
maintaining a strong and robust Nato relationship.”
 
Obama offers condolences to Gwen Ifill’s family, the journalist whose death 
from cancer at age 61 was just announced.

“Gwen was a friend of ours, she was an extraordinary journalist,” Obama 
begins, and goes on to read a lengthy warm and admiring statement paying 
tribute to Ifill.
 
Here’s Obama. He’s talking about his upcoming trip to Peru, Greece and Germany.

“I wanted to see if I could clear out some of the underbrush” of questions 
before the overseas trip, he says.

“My team stands ready to accelerate in the next steps that are required to 
ensure a smooth transition, and we are going to be staying in touch as we 
travel,” Obama says. While not prescribed explicitly in the constitution, Obama 
says, “It is one of those norms that are vital to a functioning democracy, 
similar to those norms of... tolerance...reason...facts.”

Obama says “as long as I’m president” those norms will be respected. That’s 
not very long at all now.

A not-so-subtle dig at Trump.
 
We’re expecting to hear from the president shortly, in Obama’s first press 
conference since Donald Trump’s election as the next US president.

Here’s a live video stream:
 
Transcript of first lady Michelle Obama’s speech at a homeless veterans’ 
organization:

MRS. OBAMA: “Thank you all so much.” (Applause.) “You all, please, please. 
Thanks so much. Welcome.”

AUDIENCE MEMBER: “Run for President!” (Laughter.) 

MRS. OBAMA: “Be quiet back there.” (Laughter.)
 