
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> will not 
tighten the rules governing US drone strikes ahead of Donald Trump’s 
inauguration, the Guardian has learned.

Trump will inherit the apparatus for what Obama calls “targeted killing” – the 
so-called drones “playbook” formally known as the 22 May 2013Presidential 
Policy Guidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/06/drones-playbook-white-house-nsc-obama-clinton-trump>
 or PPG – that has turned drone strikes into Obama’s signature 
counter-terrorism tactic.

How the US justifies drone strikes: targeted killing, secrecy and the law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/targeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt>
While the White House considers its standards for drone strikes to be 
scrupulous, much of the rest of the world considers them to represent an 
arbitrary, secret and dangerous apparatus of secret killing that Trump will 
soon have at his disposal.

“Maybe on the left no one would believe that Trump has a steady hand, but 
Obama has normalized the idea that presidents get to have secret large-scale 
killing programs at their disposal,” said Naureen Shah of Amnesty International 
USA.


Begun under George W Bush, drone strikes were vastly accelerated and codified 
by Obama beyond officially declared war zones. Official estimates claim they 
have killed nearly 2,600 “terrorists”, though human rights activists consider 
that to be an undercount.

The footprint of the drones has become increasingly widespread, situated in 
airfields from Tunisia to Niger to Cameroon, they represent the outgrowth of a 
legal theory which was embraced by both presidents Bush and Obama, who 
considered the war on terrorism’s battlefield to be global.

For Obama, the drone has been a calibrated, restrained instrument of death, an 
alternative to grueling all-out war. Trump will now be the one capable of 
harnessing its power.

The process Obama set for drone strikes was codified in 2013, but the PPG was 
kept secret until Jameel Jaffer, formerly of the American Civil Liberties 
Union, and his colleagues sued to compel its disclosure. In August this year, 
the 18-page top secret document was declassified.


Jaffer, now the director of the Knight First Amendment Center at Columbia 
University, has compiled the PPG and several other once-secret documents 
relevant to Obama’s institutionalization of targeted killing into a new book, 
The Drone Memos. The Guardian is publishing three of those documents, including 
thedeclassified PPG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/15/drone-memos-documents-president-power-kill>
, as well as Jaffer’sintroduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/targeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt>
 to his book.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fobama-administration-drone-strikes-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b3b84249c60ea969a6a8d4c360d115f887e7005%2F0_0_1650_2475%2F1650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20will%20not%20restrict%20drone%20strike%20'playbook'%20before%20Trump%20takes%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fobama-administration-drone-strikes-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20will%20not%20restrict%20drone%20strike%20%27playbook%27%20before%20Trump%20takes%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fobama-administration-drone-strikes-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b3b84249c60ea969a6a8d4c360d115f887e7005%2F0_0_1650_2475%2F1650.jpg>
 Drone Memos by Jameel Jaffer. Photograph: The New Press 



The PPG instructs that lethal force against “an identified high-value 
terrorist” shall be “as discriminating and precise as reasonably possible”. In 
all but “extraordinary circumstances”, such force requires “near certainty that 
the action can be taken without injuring or killing” civilians.


A senior administration official said: “As the president has said, ‘near 
certainty’ is the ‘highest standard we can set’.”


Yet critics of targeted killinghave pointed to several other aspects of the 
document that raise alarm.


Those who implement the killings, the CIA and the military’s Joint Special 
Operation Command (JSOC), do not necessarily need to know who they kill. 
Instead, the PPG instructs: “When using lethal action, employ all reasonably 
available resources to ascertain the identity of the target.”


Similarly, the document permits killing “terrorist targets other than 
identified high-value individuals”. Should the CIA or JSOC wish to convince the 
president to do so, they must aver that they have “near certainty that the 
target is present”, civilians won’t be harmed, “capture is not feasible” and 
“no other reasonable alternatives exist”.

Drone strikes and counter-terrorism raids are supposed to occur outside the 
US, per the documents. But US citizens are not immune, despite the 
constitution’s prohibition on taking an American’s life without due process of 
law. The PPG entrusts the US justice department – soon to be in Trump’s hands – 
with performing “a legal analysis to ensure that such action may be conducted 
against the individual consistent with the laws and constitution”.

In 2011, the CIA executed a US citizen turned al-Qaida propagandist, Anwar 
al-Awlaki; it then killed his 16-year old son in what the former attorney 
general Eric Holder stated was a strike that did not “specifically 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/23/us/us-acknowledges-killing-4-americans-in-drone-strikes.html?_r=1&>
” target the teenager. The administration has confirmed killing two other 
Americans overseas in drone strikes.


No court reviews these decisions. Only “the appropriate members of the 
Congress”, an undefined term, learn of them.


A senior official told the Guardian this week that the protections for 
civilians within the PPG exceed those set by the law of armed conflict.


“We are continually working to refine, clarify and strengthen our standards 
and procedures for using force to keep the nation safe from terrorist threats,” 
said the official, who would not be quoted by name.


It is unknown whether Trump will also rely on drone strikes. On the campaign 
trail, he spoke more often about bombing “the shit” out of enemies than 
performing something more akin to assassination. “I’d blow up the pipes, I’d 
blow up the refineries, I’d blow up every single inch, there would be nothing 
left,” hetold 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/cheats/2015/11/12/trump-i-d-bomb-the-s-t-out-of-isis.html>
 an Iowa audience in November 2015.


Observers consider use of drones less significant than the codification of 
targeted killing itself, whose rules Trump is free to revise.


The Drone Memos: the documents supporting a president's power to kill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/15/drone-memos-documents-president-power-kill>
Micah Zenko of the Council on Foreign Relations, said: “Does he either 
personally allow for lowered rules of engagement and higher numbers of 
potential civilian casualties, or does he allow commanders to do that in the 
field?”

Last year, Obama claimed drone strikes had killed between 64 and 116 civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/01/obama-drones-strikes-civilian-deaths>
 in 473 drone strikes between 2009 and 2015. Human rights groups consider that 
estimate of civilian-casualty figures to be far too low. But the secrecy that 
still surrounds drone strikes – both official and imposed by the hazards of 
reporting from dangerous places – complicates a more thorough independent 
accounting.

Speaking in London last week, a former state department official urged Obama 
to place additional checks around what he called “the most awesome 
assassination machine ever known to man”.


Jeremy Shapiro, a senior state department official during Obama’s tenure, told 
an audience at the European Council on Foreign Relations that before the 2012 
election, theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> expressed alarm at 
potentially passing the apparatus of targeted killing to a successor.


“When people looked at it, they thought ‘Christ, this is scary’ – what if we 
give this to the Republicans?”


Disclosure: Naureen Shah, an employee of Amnesty International USA quoted in 
this story, is a colleague of the lead reporter’s wife.

 