
Barack Obama’s end-of-year news conference is finished. Here’s a summary of 
what he said:

 * Obama said evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/barack-obama-final-press-conference-election-hacking>
 that Russia had sought to hack the election on behalf of Donald Trump was 
convincing but he would not weigh in on whether Russian hacking actually swayed 
the election. 
 * Obama said there was no malfeasance in how the election was counted: “the 
votes that were cast were counted, they were counted appropriately.” 
 * Obama defended his response – or lack of response – to Russian hacking 
before the election, saying that the hacking stopped after he told president 
Vladimir Putin to stop and that he did not want to undermine the integrity of 
the election, which Donald Trump was attacking, or to appear partisan. 
 * Obama said that the United States was made vulnerable to attacks by Russia 
or other foreign countries by its divided politics. 
 * Obama went easy on Trump in general, saying that the president-elect was 
“still in transition mode.” 
 * Obama said Syrian president Bashar Assad, Russia and Iran have “blood on 
their hands” for the slaughter of Aleppo. He said tens of thousands of innocent 
people were trapped in the city and should be allowed to leave. 
 * Obama defended his Syria policy, saying he wasn’t willing to deploy a large 
American military ground force and “unless we were all in... we were going to 
have problems. 
 * Obama criticized Republicans for a poll that showed better than a third of 
them supported Vladimir Putin. “Ronald Reagan would roll over in his grave,” 
Obama said. 
 * Obama said he had last spoken to Trump a few days ago in a “cordial” 
conversation. Obama said he gave Trump “specific suggestions about... 
maintaining the effectiveness, integrity, cohesion of the office, our various 
democratic institutions.” 
 * Obama said the country was better off than it was eight years ago. 
 * “Mele Kalikimaka” Obama concluded, which in Hawaii means Merry Christmas.  
Obama says that at the end of his last holiday photo line he took a photo with 
his Marine corps band. He got choked up, he says. “But it was just one small 
example of all the people who have contributed to our success. I’m responsible 
for where we screwed up. All the successes are shared...

On his way out, Obama is asked whether it was his last news conference. He 
said he’ll see.

Mele Kalikimaka, Obama says. Merry Christmas, in Hawaii. Trump had promised 
we’d start saying Merry Christmas again and here we’re sayingMele Kalikimaka. 
 
Obama makes fun of fake news that says Michelle Obama’s eating initiative is 
“a greater threat to democracy than our government going after the press if 
they’re issuing a story that they don’t like. People have asked me how do you 
feel after the election, and i say look, this is a clarifying moment, it’s a 
useful reminder that voting counts, politics counts.. I think people will be 
able to compare and contrast and make judgments about what works for the 
American people.”

Obama says he hopes that Trump’s plan works. He says his plan worked. “You 
can’t argue that we’re not better off. We are. And for that I thank the 
American people...”
 
Obama refuses a question about the electors. It’s their job to pick a 
successor, he says. “I’ve provided people with a lot of information about what 
happened during the course of the election, but more importantly the candidates 
themselves talked about their beliefs... the president elect, I think, has been 
very explicit about what he cares about, what he believes in.

The electoral college is a vestige, it’s a carryover from an earlier vision of 
how our federal government was going to work that put a lot of premium on 
states... it’s the same type of thinking that gives Wyoming 2 senators with a 
half million people... there are some structures in our political system.. that 
sometimes are going to disadvantage Democrats, but the truth of the matter is 
if we have a strong message,.... typically the popular vote and the electoral 
college vote will align... If we look for one explanation or one silver bullet 
or one easy fix for our politics then we’re probably going to be disappointed. 
There are just a lot of factors... that has made both politics and governance 
more challenging... I do hope that we all just take some time, take a 
breath,... to just reflect a little bit more about how can we get to a place 
where people are focused on working together based on at least some common set 
of facts.
 
Question for Obama: should current labor secretary Tom Perez run the DNC?

Obama praises Perez, calling him one of the best labor secretaries in history, 
“tireless” and “wicked smart.”

“If you look at his body of work on behalf of working people, what he’s pushed 
for... he has been extraordinary. Now others who have declared are also my 
friends and are fine people as well. And the great thing is, I don’t have a 
vote in this. I’ve described to you earlier what I think needs to happen. Which 
is that the Democratic party... has to work at the grassroots level, has to be 
present in all 50 states... has to think about message...

“I will say this. I could not be prouder of the coalition that I put together 
in each of my campaigns. Because it was inclusive and it drew in people who 
normally weren’t interested in politics... I always cast a broad net... there’s 
more that we share than divides us, and I want to talk to everybody and get a 
chance to get everybody’s vote. .. outside of the realm of electoral politics, 
I still see people the way I saw them when I made that speech. Full of 
contradictions... but basically folks care about their families, they care 
about having meaningful work, making sure their ckids have more opportunity 
than they did. They want to be safe, they want to make sure things are fair...

“What I was able during my campaigns, I was not able to do during midterms. .. 
the coalition... didn’t always turn out to be transferrable.” That’s an 
understatement!
 
Next question is about Trump’s conversation with the Taiwanese president and 
challenge to the One China policy.

What’s Obama think of a “fresh” China policy?
Great question, he says. “I’m somewhere in between. I think all of our foreign 
policy should be subject to fresh eyes. I am very proud of the work I’ve done. 
I think I’m a better president than when I started [but] democracy benefits 
from some new perspectives.

“Given the importance of the relationship between the United States and China, 
given how much is at stake... there’s probably no bilateral relationship that 
carries more significance, and where there’s also the potential if that 
relationship breaks down... that everybody is worse off. I think it’s fine for 
him to take a look at it.

“What I’ve advised is across the board on foreign policy, you want to make 
sure that you’re doing at in a systematic intentional way... before he starts 
to have a lot of interaction with foreign governments...that he should want to 
have his full team in place... so that as he’s then maybe taking foreign policy 
in a new direction, he’s got all the information to make good decisions.

“With respect to China, and let’s just take the example of Taiwan, there has 
been a longstanding agreement between China, the US and to some degree the 
Taiwanese, which is not to change the status quo.”
 
Obama is asked whether Putin personally directed the hacking.

He says wait for the intelligence report. But he has “great confidence in 
their assessment that the Russians carried out this hack. The hack of the DNC 
and the hack of John Podesta. But again, this is why I want the report out, so 
that everybody can review it.”

Obama says Congress has seen the reports “and I think that what you’ve already 
seen is the folks that have seen the evidence don’t dispute that it was the 
Russians who have carried it out.”

Obama says the larger point is, “not much happens in Russia without Vladimir 
Putin. This is pretty hierarchical operation. Last I checked, there’s not a lot 
of debate and democratic deliberation.. this happened at the highest levels of 
the Russian government and I will let you ... whether there are high-level 
Russian officials going rogue.”

“Martha I’ve given you what I’m going to give you.

“As I’ve said before, I think that the president elect is still in transition 
mode, from campaign to governance... he still has campaign spokesman sort of 
filling in and appearing on cable shows. There’s just a whole different 
attitude and vibe when you’re not in power as when you’re in power. How will 
the president-elect operate and how will his team operate when they’ve been 
fully briefed?”

“The more this [hacking story] can be nonpartisan, the better-served the 
American people are going to be. I’m going to keep on repeating this point. Our 
vulnerability... is directly related to how divided, partisan, dysfunctional 
our political process is. That’s the thing that makes us vulnerable. If fake 
news is being released by some foreign government is almost identical to 
reports that are being issued through partisan news venues, then it’s not 
surprising that that foreign propaganda will have a greater effect, because it 
doesn’t seem so far-fetched.”

Obama warns about “domestic propagandists.”
 
Question for Obama: Can you assure the public this was a free and fair 
election? Will you declassify some of the evidence on Russian hacking? Are you 
concerned about the Tillerson pick and some of Trump’s closeness to Putin?

Obama: I’m getting older. These multi-part questions...

“I can assure the public that there was not the kind of tampering with the 
voting process that was a concern and will continue to be a concern. That the 
votes that were cast were counted, they were counted appropriately. We have not 
seen evidence of machines being tampered with. That assurance I can provide.

We paid a lot of attention to it, we worked with state officials, etc, but we 
feel confident that that didn’t occur and that the votes were cast and they 
were counted.

ON declassification: “We will provide evidence that we can safely provide, 
that does not compromise sources and methods, but... when you’re talking about 
cybersecurity, a lot is classified... if we’re going to monitor this stuff 
effectively going forward, we don’t want them to know that we know.

“Unless the American people genuinely think that the professionals in [the 
intelligence community including Republicans] are less trustworthy than the 
Russians, then people should pay attention to what our intelligence agencies 
say. We’ve got to pay attention to what’s happening to our political culture 
here.”

Obama says that Russia is smaller and weaker and can’t hurt America... except:

Their economy doesn’t produce anything that anybody wants to buy except oil 
and gas and arms. They don’t innovate. But they can impact if we lose track of 
who we are... if we start buying into notions that it’s OK to intimidate the 
press, or lock up dissidents, or discriminate against people because of their 
faith, or what they look like... you’re starting to see certain Republican 
party and voters... starting to see a government contrary to everything we 
stand for as being OK because that’s how much we dislike Democrats.

Some folks who had made a career about being anti-Russian didn’t say anything 
about it. Then after the election they say, well why didn’t you tell us that 
the Russians were trying to elect our candidate. Now come on....

Over a third of Republican voters approve of Vladimir Putin, the former head 
of the KGB. Ronald Reagan would roll over in his grave. And how did that 
happen?... Because for too long, everything that happens in this town, 
everything that’s said, is through the prism of, does this help or hurt us 
relative to Democrats? Relative to president Obama?

“We’ve lost track of what we’re about and what we stand for.”

As for appointments, those are up to Trump, Obama says, and to the senate to 
advise and consent.
 
On safe zones, Obama says, “if you set those zones up on Syrian territory, 
then that requires some force that is willing to maintain that territory in the 
absence of consent from the Syrian government and now the Russians and the 
Iranians.

It may be that with Aleppo’s tragic situation unfolding, if we can get some of 
the tens of thousands that are trapped there out... find some arrangement 
perhaps in coordination with Turkey whereby those people will be safe... 
unfortunately we’re not even there yet, because right now we have Russians and 
Assad claiming that all the innocent civilians that were trapped in Aleppo are 
out... try to put pressure wherever we can to try to get them out.

I will help president-elect Trump with any advice counsel information that we 
can provide.
 
Obama continues. “I mean that with all sincerity. I understand the impulse to 
want to do something, but ultimately I’ve had to think about what can we 
sustain, what is realistic and what’s the right thing to do for America?”

Obama says he provided moderate support to the opposition, tried to minimize 
the extremist jihadi presence and tried to pressure international partners.


“I cannot claim that we’ve been successful,” he says, “but I continue to 
believe it was the right approach, given what realistically we could get done.”
 
Question: on Aleppo, do you feel any personal moral responsibility for the 
carnage? And Trump wants safe zones, which you’ve opposed. Will you support him?

Obama: “Mike I always feel responsible. I felt responsible when kids were 
being shot by snipers. I felt responsible when millions of people were being 
displaced... for murder and slaughter that’s taking place in South Sudan that’s 
not being reported...

There’s places around the world where horrible things are happening, and 
because of my office I feel responsible... there’s not a moment during the 
course of this presidency where I haven’t felt some responsibility. That’s true 
by the way for our own country...

With respect to Syria, what I have consistently done is taken the best course 
I can to try to end the civil war while taking into account the long term 
national interest of the United States...

Obama says he went through every option in Syria in painful detail with maps, 
humanitarian agencies, the military... but “short of putting large numbers of 
US troops on the ground, uninvited, without any international law mandate, 
without sufficient support from Congress... just gone through a decade of war 
and spent trillions of dollars, when the opposition on the ground was not 
cohesive enough...and you had a military superpower in Russia...and a regional 
power in Iran... that in that circumstance, unless we were all in and we were 
willing to take over Syria, then we were going to have problems. And everything 
else sounded tempting... but it was impossible to do this on the cheap...”

Obama pauses as someone passes out or faints. Obama says go get a doctor.

Obama resumes. “It may be that...

Nope, they need a doctor. A woman appears to have fallen down. She has been 
picked up. Now they are helping her from the room. They’re going for a doctor.
 
Questions for Obama: what about Clinton’s contention that Comey’s letter about 
emails on Abedin/Weiner’s computer affected the outcome of the election?

Also, what’s risk of Trump ignoring Russian hack?

Obama takes second question first: “The transition from election season to 
governance season is not always smooth. You know it’s bumpy.”

“When Donald Trump takes the oath of office and is sworn in, he’s got a 
different set of responsibilities and considerations.”

On his conversations with Trump:

“They have been cordial, and in some cases have involved me making some pretty 
specific suggestions about how to be sure...a bout maintaining the 
effectiveness, integrity, cohesion of the office, our various democratic 
institutions. And he has listened. I can’t say that he will end up 
implementing...and I will always make myself available to him.”

On the FBI:

“I’ve had a chance to know a lot of FBI agents... they take their job 
seriously. They work really hard. They help keep us safe and save a lot of 
lives...

“Sometimes that involves investigations that touch on politics. In this 
hyperpartisan environment everything is suspect... one thing I have done...is 
not wading into investigation decisions... to be strict in my own behaviour 
about preserving the independence of law enforcement.... I don’t know why it 
would stop now.
 
“The reason I’m going on here is because I know you guys have a lot of 
questions about this.

“With respect to response, my principle goal... was making sure that the 
election itself went off without a hitch, that it was not tarnish, and that it 
did not feed any sense in the public that tampering had taken place in the 
actual process of voting.

“Our goal continues to be to send a clear message to Russia and others not to 
do this to us, because we can do stuff to you... some of it we can do publicly, 
some of it we will do in a way that they know it, but not everybody will.”

“We already have enormous numbers of sanctions on the Russians... how we 
approach an appropriate response that increases costs for them... but does not 
creat ea problem for us is something that’s worth taking time to figure out.

“There are times where the message will be directly received by the Russians 
and not publicized.”

“I should point out that part of the reason the Russians have been effective 
is they’re not going around the world saying look at what we did!”


Obama is asked whether Clinton lost because of the Russians:

I’m going to let all the political pundits in this town have a long discussion 
about what happened... it was a fascinating election... I’ve said what is 
important for the Democratic party... rather than trying to parse every aspect 
of the election... I don’t think she was treated fairly during the election... 
I think the coverage of her and the issues was troubling. But having said that, 
what I’m most focused on... I can maybe give some counsel and advice to the 
Democratic party, and the thing we have to spend the most time on is, how do we 
make sure that we’re showing up in places where I think Democratic policies are 
needed...but people feel like they’re not being heard... We have to be in those 
communities.
 
Obama:

I’m finding it a little curious that everybody’s acting surprised that this 
would have undermined the election of Hillary Clinton because you guys wrote 
about it every day ... this was an obsession that dominated the news coverage. 
I do think it’s [important to ask how such a momentous election] came to be 
dominated by these leaks.

“This was not some elaborate, complicated espionage scheme. They hacked into 
some Democratic party emails that contained fairly routine stuff. Some of it 
embarrassing or controversial ... And then it just took off. And that concerns 
me, and it should concern all of us. But the truth of the matter is that 
everybody had the information.

“Moving forward, I think there are a couple issues that this raises. Number 
one, the constant challenges that we are going to have with cybersecurity ... 
this particular concern around Russian hacking is part of a broader set of 
concerns about how do we deal with cybersecurity.”
 
Obama points out that Trump was raising questions about the integrity of the 
election. He says that the White House undermining that integrity further would 
not have been good.

“In early September when I saw President Putin in China, I felt that the most 
effective way ... was to talk to him directly, and to tell him to cut it out 
and there would be consequences if they didn’t.”

“We did not see further tampering of the election process, but the leaks from 
Wikileaks were already out there.”


“I think we handled it the way it should have been handled,” he says.
 