
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has claimed 
that drone and other airstrikes, his favored tactics of war, have killed 
between 64 and 116 civilians during his administration, a tally which was 
criticized as undercounted even before Friday’s announcement.


The long-promised assessment acknowledged that the government itself does not 
always know how many civilians it kills and that it may revise its death tolls 
over time.

Between 2009 and 31 December 2015, the administration claimed that it launched 
473 strikes, mostly with drones, that killed between what it said were 2,372 
and 2,581 terrorist “combatants”.

The assessment presents the White House’s account of the death toll from a 
method of warfare that defines Obama’s legacy in many parts of the world. The 
White House released its long-awaited drones report the afternoon before the 
Fourth of July holiday weekend, having pledged transparency on the drones issue 
for years.

Yet the count is also incomplete, leaving out the civilian toll from drone 
strikes in Afghanistan, Syria and Iraq. Nor did the administration go into 
detail about where the strikes occur, citing what an official told reporters on 
Friday were “diplomatic sensitivities”, even as it presented the assessment as 
a significant advance in transparency. The Guardian has filed a freedom of 
information act request for records relating to the civilian-death assessment 
in the US bombing campaign in Iraq and Syria, where thus far the US military 
has concluded it haskilled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/22/us-airstrikes-syria-iraq-civilian-deaths-transparency>
 36 civilians sincesummer 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/22/us-led-military-coalition-civilian-casualties-strikes-isis-iraq-syria>
.

The upper limit of the civilian death toll from drones stands at more than 800 
people 
<https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/category/projects/drones/drones-graphs/> 
in Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia, according to the Bureau of Investigative 
Journalism, during the time period Obama’s drones tally covered. But that and 
similar accounts are imprecise, owing to both official secrecy and the 
difficulties of fact-finding and verifying in some of the world’s most 
dangerous places. In some cases, human rights groups have found that strikes 
intending to kill specific terrorist leaders killedmany more people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/24/-sp-us-drone-strikes-kill-1147>
.

In 2013, senior Republican senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina said that 
drone strikes had killed4,700 people 
<https://www.wired.com/2013/02/graham-drones/>, some 2,000 more deaths than the 
upper limit the administration released on Friday.

Accompanying the release of the death statistics was a new executive order 
Obama issued to effectively codify his counterterrorism strikes for the next 
administration, a process his aides have debated since at least 2012.

A goal of the executive order is to “take feasible precautions in conducting 
attacks to reduce the likelihood of civilian casualties” through training, 
“technological capabilities” and holding off on strikes to limit civilian 
deaths. As well, each May, the office of the director of national intelligence 
will publish an updated annual counterterrorism death toll.

The US has killed people whose identities it does not know, for fitting into 
what it considers patterns of life associated with terrorism, an anonymous 
method of killing known assignature strikes 
<https://www.wired.com/2011/11/cia-drones-marked-for-death/>. But despite the 
executive order’s emphasis on steps to “ensure military objectives and 
civilians are clearly distinguished”, senior administration officials indicated 
that Obama will permit signature strikes to continue.

“We continue to reserve the right to take action not just against individual 
terrorist targets but when we believe we have, for instance, a force protection 
issue or information to suggest a continued imminent threat,” a senior official 
said when asked about signature strikes.

Drone strikes outside of declared war zones are the province of the CIA and 
the US military’s secretive Joint Special Operations Command. The 
administration has treated them as an official secret, and for years would not 
even utter the word “drone” or any of its associated acronyms. No entity 
outside the administration reviews the strikes. The executive order creates an 
internal mechanism to review drone strikes and take into account information 
from non-governmental organizations like human rights groups.

After drones: the indelible mark of America's remote control warfare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/21/drone-war-obama-pakistan-cia> 
To critics, the secrecy has for years permitted Obama to conceal the damage in 
human lives inflicted by what he calls “targeted killing”, insulating him 
politically from the consequences of lethal decisions that the president has 
decided can occur anywhere on earth for an indefinite duration.

Another impact of the secrecy has meant policy arguments over drone strikes 
have accordingly occurred in an information vacuum.

The White House and the CIA, which pioneered the strikes during the George W 
Bush era and dramatically accelerated them during Obama’s presidency, have 
claimed without evidence that drone strikes are an antiseptic solution for 
terrorism and downplayed the civilian casualties, political destabilization and 
life-changing consequences described by strike survivors, witnesses, relatives 
and foreign officials.

John Brennan, the CIA director, and Dianne Feinstein, the top Democrat on the 
Senate intelligence committee, have for years claimed the drone strikes kill “
single digits <https://www.wired.com/2013/02/feinstein-drone-deaths/>” worth of 
civilians annually, though they have provided no evidence for the assertion.

To fill the information vacuum, Obama’s counter-terrorism czar promised in 
March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/07/us-drone-strikes-death-toll> 
that the administration would declassify casualty totals from its drone 
strikes, and rumored interagency disagreements about what and how much to 
disclose have contributed to the delay.

An additional factor in the discussions surrounding the drones disclosure has 
been what the administration will bequeath to its successor, and how 
constraining the rules it had crafted around them, unilaterally and secretly, 
will prove.

Human rights groups have reacted with cynicism in the intervening months, 
arguing that nothing prevents the CIA from grading its own work favorably and 
presenting unverifiable undercounts as the truth.

“Unfortunately, there is reason to doubt that the government will provide the 
kind of specificity that would actually be useful to journalists, human rights 
researchers, and the general public,” Jameel Jaffer, the deputy legal director 
of the American Civil Liberties Union,wrote in a blogpost 
<https://www.justsecurity.org/31687/secret-drone-campaign/> on Monday.

A senior official defended the rigor of the US’s internal count but conceded 
“at the end of the day, this is US government information, and people can make 
their own judgments about how they receive it.”

Other human rights campaigners criticized the White House drone tally on 
arrival.

“While a sign of progress, the information to be released today fails to 
provide enough information to allow the public to assess the harm to civilians, 
the legality of individual strikes, or the overall effectiveness of the 
targeted killing program, especially as the data only covers airstrikes outside 
Syria, Iraq, and Afghanistan,” Human Rights First said in a statement.


The origin of the disclosures came in 2013, during an equivocal speech on war 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/05/23/remarks-president-national-defense-university>
 Obama delivered at the National Defense University. In retrospect, the speech 
reads as the beginnings of a president, who despite pledging the year before in 
his re-election campaign that the “tide of war is receding”, unravelling his 
promise. In his speech, Obama urged the US to “define the nature and scope of 
this struggle, or else it will define us”, and promised additional transparency 
for the strikes.

An associated document, partially declassified for the speech, added 
restrictions on drone strikes that led to anotable drop in drone attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/31/deaths-drone-strikes-obama-policy-change>
 by late 2013. But its major terms were left vague: strikes had to target an 
“imminent” threat, with a “near certainty” not to kill civilians, after 
capturing terror suspects was “infeasible”, all of which raised questions about 
internal definitions. Before the year was done, a US drone strike killed 14 
celebrants at awedding in Yemen 
<http://www.cnn.com/2013/12/12/world/meast/yemen-u-s-drone-wedding/>. 

That full document, known as the Policy Planning Guidance, was not 
declassified with the death tally, although the justice department in February 
told a federal judge it willdeclassify 
<https://www.aclu.org/legal-document/aclu-v-doj-govt-letter-court-re-february-25-2016-order>
 the document after an ACLU transparency lawsuit.

Survivors of the strikes and relatives of the dead consider drone strikes to 
be proof that the US is waging an indiscriminate war on their largely Muslim 
countries, precisely the opposite of how Obama and his surrogates prefer to 
view their “targeted” counter-terrorism.Several have told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/21/drone-war-obama-pakistan-cia> 
that the threat of the strikes have created an ever-present fear in their 
countries amongst civilians while having a negligible impact on the terrorist 
groups they are meant to contain or destroy.

Survivors also resent the lack of official apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/21/drone-war-obama-pakistan-cia>, 
acknowledgement and compensation from the US for mistaken strikes, and bitterly 
note that Obama was quick to take responsibility for an errant2015 strike that 
killed two westerners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/23/us-drone-strike-killed-american-italian-al-qaida>
.

Rafiq ur-Rehman, whose mother was killed and children seriously injured by a 
2012 drone strike in Pakistan, told the Guardian this year: “In my opinion, 
America treats us worse than animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/21/drone-war-obama-pakistan-cia>.”

Faheem Qureshi, who at 14 years old survived Obama’s very first drone strike 
in January 2009, told the Guardian: “If there is a list of tyrants in the 
world, to me, Obama will be put on that list by his drone program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/23/drone-strike-victim-barack-obama>
.”

The executive order now requires the US to “acknowledge US government 
responsibility for civilian casualties and offer condolences”, to include 
paying money for deaths it mistakenly causes. US officials could not say how 
much condolence money they have paid.

“Yes, we are accepting responsibility,” said a senior administration official, 
who would not agree to be quoted by name.

 * This article was amended on 30 June 2016 to correct a figure from the 
Bureau of Investigative Journalism of civilian death tolls during the same time 
period as Obama’s drones tally.  