
Wayland Wilson could have been out a quarter-century earlier if he had pleaded 
guilty.

“I couldn’t plead to something I didn’t do,” he said. “That’s why we ended up 
going to trial.”

It was 1993, and the drug war catalyzed by Ronald Reagan in the 80s was in 
full swing. The nation was in hysterics about the threat of crack cocaine, and 
politicians of all stripes were running on a platform of “tough on crime”.

Wilson, a husband and a father of two, was implicated in a crack-related drug 
conspiracy on a tip from an informant bargaining with prosecutors for less 
time. He was pressured to take a plea deal that could have gotten him out in 11 
years, but he elected to take his chances. A mostly white jury convicted 
Wilson, a black man, on all charges. Thanks largely to federal mandatory 
minimum sentencing, Wilson, a first-time nonviolent offender, was given 37 
years. “I had never even had a parking ticket. Now they had me locked in highly 
secure facilities,” Wilson said.

Resistance and anger: progressives urge Democratic party to stand up and fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/democrats-dnc-party-chair-progressives-ellison-dean-omalley>
This May, more than two decades into his sentence, Wilson became one of the 
lucky ones. He was one of 58 federal prisoners granted an early release by
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> as part of a 
pronounced late-presidency focus on criminal justice reform.

“It really touches you to have the commander-in-chief reach down and correct 
what was wrong,” Wilson said. “And yet, people still don’t want to see that it 
was a mistake to lock people up and throw away the key for a nonviolent crime.”

Obama’s presidency has taken place in an era of unprecedented national 
attention on the inefficiencies and inequities of the US criminal justice 
system. From pop culture phenomena such asOrange is the New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/orange-new-black-taught-me-criminal-justice-reform-congress-must-act>
 to political movements such as Black Lives Matter, issues largely ignored by 
the public for decades have moved dramatically to the fore, and support for 
reform has begun to engenderrare bipartisan support. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/19/koch-brothers-liberals-prison-reform>


On the surface, Obama’s legacy appears to reflect this shifting zeitgeist. He 
was thefirst sitting president to visit a federal corrections facility, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/16/barack-obama-prison-tour-criminal-justice-race-reform>
 the first president to oversee a sustained reduction in the incarceration rate 
in a half century, and hasissued clemency to nearly 1,000 inmates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/05/criminal-justice-reform-obama-executive-power>
 over his time in office, more than his last three predecessors combined.
criminal justice reform explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=66a41464-6ae7-4222-86f4-b99adccc5907>
But even as the Obama administration has looked to address criminal justice 
policy at all levels, from policing and prosecution tosentencing, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/12/eric-holder-prison-reform-mandatory-minimums>
 incarceration andre-entry, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/02/obama-prisoners-criminal-justice-education-housing-job-applications>
 the US remains an extreme outlier among the world’s developed countries.On 
matters of police violence, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/09/the-counted-police-killings-us-vs-other-countries>
 incarceration and draconian punishment for nonviolent crimes, the country 
remains unmatched.


And now, as the nation prepares for President Donald Trump, who ran a campaign 
openly hostile to the prospect of progressive criminal justice reform, there’s 
ample reason to fear that whatever progress has been made could be lost in the 
blink of an eye.

A nation of second chances?

In his second term, Obama hasn’t been shy about using his executive power to 
push some limited reforms around the mostly gridlocked US Congress. Through his 
Department of Justice and the use of executive orders, Obama has made moves on 
reducing the use of solitary confinement, phasing out private prisons and 
scaling back federal drug prosecutions.

But because Obama had to work around Congress, much of this work could be 
easily reversed or abandoned. .

For the most part, Trump’s plans for criminal justice remain opaque. He did 
not make the matter a major campaign issue, aside from making vague promises to 
be a “law and order candidate”, but has been critical of several of Obama’s 
initiatives, specifically his embrace of clemency for long-serving nonviolent 
drug offenders.

“We don’t know what it’s going to mean, but the likelihood is we’re in a much 
worse place,” said Phillip Atiba Goff, president and co-founder of the Center 
for Policing Equity.

Jessica Jackson-Sloan, the national director for #cut50 – an advocacy group 
which seeks to cut the US prison population by 50% over the next 10 years – 
said part of the impact Obama’s actions have is reminding people just how 
little power the president has to draw down mass incarceration.

“He can commute sentences but he cannot change the laws on the books,” 
Jackson-Sloan said. ”The president and the DoJ can do quite a bit, but Congress 
really holds the keys to this car.”

President Trump's first day: climate deal and immigration could be initial 
targets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/president-donald-trump-first-day-immigration-climate>
Indeed, if there is one theme that unites nearly all of Obama’s steps towards 
reform on criminal justice, it’s the limited reach of nearly all his 
initiatives. Virtually every step the administration has taken either 
exclusively applies to federal prosecutions and inmates – a small fraction of 
cases nationwide – or came in the form of non-binding suggestions and support, 
like the recommendations and resources provided by his taskforce on 21st 
century policing in 2015. That’s because most of the criminal justice system 
lies far outside of presidential authority, in the hands of 50 states, 18,000 
law enforcement departments and tens of thousands more local judicial 
jurisdictions.

“If, for example, the president were to let go of every federal prisoner – and 
that’s not smart criminal justice reform in all likelihood – he’d be handling 
just 1/11th of the total number of people who are incarcerated,” Goff said. 
“This is not and cannot be a federal problem only, but what the president has 
provided is leadership. He’s said, here’s a model you can follow, and he 
deserves credit for that.”

Fixing a broken system

For much of Obama’s first six years, criminal justice remained largely out of 
the spotlight. The president campaigned broadly on some generic reforms, like 
prison work and education programs, but expended most of his political capital 
on other priorities such as passing and defending the Affordable Care Act.

“Criminal justice reform was treacherous waters in the first term,” said Van 
Jones, who served in theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> in 2009 and went on 
to co-found #cut50. “Pre-Trayvon [Martin] and Black Lives Matter, these issues 
were considered to be ultra-liberal and African American.”

Obama was, according to Jones, maintaining hope that he could build bridges 
across race and party under his presidency and “did not want to be seen as 
excessively black or liberal in his agenda”.

But ultimately, “the African American community got more insistent in its 
claims, and the Republicans got more reasonable in their own critique and set 
of concerns about criminal justice”, Jones said, opening the door to more 
direct engagement from the president.

In July 2015, in front of an NAACP convention audience in Philadelphia, Obama 
delivered his first major speech focused on criminal justice reform. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/15/obama-criminal-justice-reform-naacp>
 “Mass incarceration makes our country worse off, and we need to do something 
about it,” Obama said, as he noted the bipartisan support for reform and put 
forward some his plans for the rest of his term, such as the aggressive use of 
commutations.

One-party control of Washington hands Trump enviable power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-republicans-control-washington-congress>
The president’s administration also found plenty of less visible ways to 
tinker around the edges of mass incarceration. In 2010, Obama made good on a 
campaign promise to reduce the 100-to-1 sentencing disparity between crack and 
powder cocaine. This relic of the “crack boom” is one that had been maligned by 
activists as racist for decades. Since Obama lobbied for and signed the bill, 
federal prosecution of crack offenders has been cut in half. This mirrors drops 
in drug prosecution across the board after Holder’s DoJ announced “smart on 
crime” reforms in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/12/eric-holder-prison-reform-mandatory-minimums>
 that expanded so-called compassionate release, and guided prosecutors away 
from seeking maximum punishments for smaller-scale drug crimes.

Through executive orders, Obama has also ended the practice of placing federal 
juvenile prisoners in solitary confinement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/26/obama-bans-solitary-confinement-of-juveniles-in-federal-prisons>
 andmade it illegal for most federal agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/02/obama-ban-the-box-criminal-history-job-applications>
 to ask job applicants if they have been convicted of a crime, part of a 
broader movement known as “ban the box”.

The president commissioned the 21st Century Task Force on Policing in the wake 
of unrest inFerguson, Missouri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/03/justice-department-racial-discrimination-ferguson-police>
, and followed up by hosting more than oneroundtable bringing together 
activists and law enforcement officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/18/black-lives-matter-meet-president-obama-white-house-justice-system>
 in an effort to try and bridge divides between the two.

His White House has also promoted collaborative programs such as the 
Data-Driven Justice Initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/01/data-driven-justice-initiative-obama-us-prison-population>
, which encourages cities, towns and counties to share strategies for cutting 
unnecessary arrests and holding fewer suspects pre-trial when they do not pose 
a threat to public safety.

A city like a powder keg

In 2014 the high-profile police killings of several unarmed black Americans 
led to wholesale changes in the national consciousness on the nexus between 
race and policing. And nowhere was this more true than thedeath of Michael 
Brown in Ferguson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michael-brown-shooting> 
and the enduring days of protest and unrest.

In the aftermath, The Obama-Holder DoJ produced two sets of investigative 
findings. The firstbroadly refuted many of the lingering accusations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/mar/04/justice-department-reports-ferguson-michael-brown-full-text>
 about what transpired that August day between Ferguson police officer Darren 
Wilson and the 18-year-old Brown, including whether his hands were up in 
surrender.

But the second report, which focused on the police department as a whole, took 
the unprecedented step of delving into the waysthe department was operating as 
a de facto revenue agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/04/ferguson-police-racial-persecution-federal-report>
 for the municipal government. “Ferguson’s law enforcement practices are shaped 
by the City’s focus on revenue rather than by public safety needs,” the report 
read, adding that the city’s “police and municipal court practices both reflect 
and exacerbate existing racial bias”, including a reliance on racial 
stereotypes.

How to survive and resist in the Trump era: practical things you can do now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/how-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now>
“That’s the exact right level of analysis to get into,” said Goff. “If you 
compare that to anything the civil rights division did in the prior 
administration, they are from different planets.”


The law that gives the department the authority to conduct broad, sweeping 
analysis like what was done in Ferguson traces to another flashpoint moment of 
police violence in the nation’s history: the 1991 LAPD beating of Rodney King. 
The following year, a statute was added to the federal books giving the DoJ the 
authority to obtain “relief to eliminate the pattern or practice” of civil 
rights violations by law enforcement agencies.

But power was used sparingly until Obama deployed it to make “federal 
engagement around civil rights issues involving policing more robust”, Smith 
said. Under Obama’s justice department these “patterns and practices” 
interventions increased more than 50% over the Clinton and Bush years. Obama’s 
administration used these investigations to impose federal oversight on eight 
large police departments over its two terms. In their 16 years combined, 
Clinton and Bush oversaw just six.

“There was a moribund civil rights division that was rejuvenated like Lazarus 
when Obama took office in 2009,” Goff said.

Jones said this reborn civil rights division had served a crucial role during 
a period in which frustration with the system had boiled over in cities and 
towns across the country.

“Even where there hasn’t been redress, it’s at least been addressed,” Jones 
said. “The quickness with which the DoJ has said ‘we’re going to investigate’ – 
it signaled to people that there’s somebody in DC who believes that their 
concerns were worthy of real attention.”

Irreversible action

The president’s most direct contribution to the rolling back of mass 
incarceration has been his aggressive use of the executive power to grant 
clemency to federal prisoners, especially during his final year in office. More 
than 700 of the 1,014 pardons and commutations granted under Obama, including 
Wilson’s, have come in the past 10 months.

The spike follows the DoJ’s 2014 clemency initiative, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/01/justice-department-clemency-initiative-thousands-inmates-apply>
 which encouraged federal prisoners meeting certain criteria to submit 
petitions for commutations. As a result, the department has processed more than 
20,000 petitions over these past three years. By comparison, during Ronald 
Reagan’s entire eight years in office, his justice department processed just 
over 1,300 applications and granted a total of 13.

But while the number of accepted petitions under Obama is unprecedented, it is 
also underwhelming, in part because the federal government has not been able to 
keep pace with the tens of thousands of applications.

While most of Obama’s executive actions could be undone by Trump, cutting 
short the sentences of inmates like Wayland Wilson will have a permanent impact 
for those people.

“My big hope is that this clemency campaign now really breaks through in 
Obama’s final days,” Jones said. “That’s the last thing he can do to really 
cement his legacy: send home folks who have served more than a fair amount of 
time and let them return to their families.”

 