
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> recognised 
almost from the start of his presidency in 2009 that he would never be able to 
meet the high expectations raised by an election campaign in which he had 
electrified voters with rolling, honeyed rhetoric and a slogan based on hope.


Obama's legacy: the promises, shortcomings and fights to come
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/barack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights>
He had begun his bid for the presidency in earnest in January 2008 in 
snow-covered Iowa, traditionally the first state to vote in the nomination 
battles. An outsider, he hurtled along icy roads, always running late, from 
church to church, from community centres to school halls. He spoke to meetings 
of a few score and occasionally a few hundred.

By the time he reached the eve of election day in November that year, he was 
still running late and it was well into the night. But the crowd waiting for 
him in Manassas, Virginia, in fields close to a civil war battlefield was well 
over 100,000, buoyed up by the slogan of “Hope” and chants of “Yes, we can”.

But within a few months of taking office in January 2009, disillusionment was 
already setting in. Speaking at the White House correspondents’ dinner, the 
social event of the year, in which the president is expected to be a standup 
comedian for the night, Obama joked about those high expectations. “I strongly 
believe my next 100 days will be so successful I will finish them in 72 days. 
And on the 73rd day I will rest.”

Although he tried to laugh about it, that sense of disillusionment lingered 
over his presidency for the last eight years.

Covering US politics for the Guardian from January 2007 through to April 2013 
– from the start of Obama’s bid for the presidency through to the start of his 
second term – I never fully shared that sense of disappointment and was puzzled 
from the outset by the speed with which much of the American left began to 
disown him.

But there have been many mistakes, some of them only becoming clearer in 
hindsight, now that Donald Trump is about to become president on 20 January. If 
Hillary Clinton had won, Obama could have expected most of his legacy to remain 
intact. Instead, he faces the prospect of much of it being dismantled.

Obama cannot be directly blamed for Clinton’s poor election run in 2016 but the
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> can. All the 
weaknesses she displayed in the epic 2007-2008 contest with Obama were still 
evident in the 2016 race. She showed no sign of having learned the lessons of 
2008.

Within weeks of arriving in Washington in 2007, I flew to Iowa to cover a 
rally by Hillary Clinton in Des Moines, Iowa, where the official election 
campaign would kick off a year later. I had been looking forward to seeing her 
on the campaign trail but came away underwhelmed. She was unable to connect 
with what had been at the outset a sympathetic audience, leaving them listless, 
with an excessively cautious speech and, in a question-and-answer session 
afterwards, resorting to cliches and platitudes.

Within weeks of seeing Clinton in Iowa, I heard Obama speak for the first time 
at a Democratic conference in Washington and told Guardian editors I thought 
Obama would win the Democratic nomination.

One of his best speeches was in January 2008 when he spoke at the Ebenezer 
Baptist church in Atlanta, near where Martin Luther King had preached. I almost 
missed it, arriving late after a long drive to Atlanta. Obama’s press team 
squeezed me into the balcony and his chief press officer, Robert Gibbs, who I 
knew only slightly at the time, handed me his BlackBerry so I could scroll 
through the speech and take notes. He was trusting: I could easily have 
scrolled through his email messages and phone numbers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-first-term-hope-obamacare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73259ac22e4c57e647e0669151fefeae0a6e1e95%2F184_0_3527_2118%2F3527.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20first%20term%3A%20high%20hopes%2C%20missed%20chances%20and%20a%20signature%20healthcare%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-first-term-hope-obamacare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20first%20term%3A%20high%20hopes%2C%20missed%20chances%20and%20a%20signature%20healthcare%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-first-term-hope-obamacare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73259ac22e4c57e647e0669151fefeae0a6e1e95%2F184_0_3527_2118%2F3527.jpg>
 Barack Obama signs the ‘Obamacare’ healthcare bill in the East Room of the 
White House in Washington on 23 March 2010. Photograph: J Scott Applewhite/AP 
This might seem like a small point but Obama’s campaign team were accessible 
throughout in a way that Clinton’s were not. Another lesson not learned by the 
Clinton team.

Rereading the speech that day from the pulpit of the Ebenezer Baptist church 
offers a contrast with Trump. Obama’s message was that America had to face up 
to the deep divisions in society and stop stereotyping and scapegoating. “We 
can no longer afford to build ourselves up by tearing someone else down. We can 
no longer afford to traffic in lies or fear or hate. It is the poison that we 
must purge from our politics; the wall that we must tear down before the hour 
grows too late,” he said.

That was the central message, even more pressing today than when he delivered 
it. But he also set out his priorities for his presidency: extending healthcare 
coverage, more resources for education, alleviating poverty and tackling 
climate change.

And he did, as president, deliver on much more than he is given credit for. In 
an interview with the New Yorker, he said that he achieved as much domestically 
in his first two years as did Lyndon Johnson. US presidents on average deliver 
about 75% of what they set out to do. Obama did that. He fears the Trump 
administration will roll back about 25% but that would still leave a reasonable 
legacy in place. That might be overly optimistic on his part.

And what is that legacy? Only nine days into his presidency, Obama signed the 
Lilly Ledbetter Act on equal pay into law. He announced a ban on torture in 
response to the Bush administration’s use of waterboarding. He pushed through a 
financial stimulus bill that was to help lift the US out of recession faster 
than Europe.

The biggest single achievement of his presidency has been Obamacare, the 
extension of healthcare provision to 11 million people, signed into law in 2010 
after a prolonged struggle with Congress. It is such a symbol of the Obama 
years that Trump will be under strong pressure from Republicans to dismantle it 
but it will be hard to take that cover away from the millions who now have it.

Barack Obama: I'm 'confident' I could have won a third term as president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/26/barack-obama-third-term-president>
Obama supported same-sex marriage and gays serving openly in the military. He 
withdrew, at Iraq’s insistence, US forces – 139,500 when he took office – from 
Iraq. There are 5,200 back there. He did the same in Afghanistan, down from 
34,400 to 9,800. And he ended the Bush-era rhetoric about bombing Iran.

He was a cool president, seemingly at ease with visiting leaders from overseas 
or invited guests to the White House. One of my favourite moments was when 
there was a blues night at the White House that included BB King. Obama was put 
on the spot, invited to sing and joined in with a reasonable rendition of a 
verse from Sweet Home Chicago.

Despite the calm he brought to the White House and his record of promises 
fulfilled, the list of failures too is long. Guantánamo is still open, though 
the numbers are down. His record on education is debatable. Even though he was 
the first African-American president, race relations are more tense now than 
when he took office. On foreign policy, he expanded the drone campaign started 
under Bush. He also underestimated the rise of Isis and ambitions of Vladimir 
Putin. On top of all that, he was responsible for overseeing a crackdown on 
journalists alleged to have undermine national security.

The Obama years: timeline of a presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/the-obama-years-timeline-of-a-presidency>
One of the biggest frustrations for Obama in the struggle to have the 
healthcare legislation passed was not just the Republicans but his own 
Democrats. For almost two years, the Democrats enjoyed a majority in both the 
Senate and the House and Obama, with the help of those Democratic members, 
could – and should – have pushed through bill after bill.

That Obamacare took so long to pass and occupied so much of the legislative 
programme was down to those Democrats. In November 2010, the Republicans 
regained control of the House, the number of Democrats in the 100-seat Senate 
fell from 58 to just 51 and the opportunity was gone for good. The Republicans 
who came in played by different rules from the Democrats, out to repeatedly 
obstruct Obama. I have strong memories of weekends spent in an eerily empty 
Capitol Building, occupied only by security guards, senior Republicans and 
Democrats and fellow journalists as the deadline approached on yet another 
ultimatum threatening to close down government.

The Democrats too should show the same zeal in opposition to Trump, although 
the arithmetic will make that harder, with the Republicans in control of both 
Senate and House.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-first-term-hope-obamacare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6cae180611d72f8a103938383dc2906d76bd6e3%2F0_634_2888_1732%2F2888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20first%20term%3A%20high%20hopes%2C%20missed%20chances%20and%20a%20signature%20healthcare%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-first-term-hope-obamacare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20first%20term%3A%20high%20hopes%2C%20missed%20chances%20and%20a%20signature%20healthcare%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fbarack-obama-first-term-hope-obamacare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6cae180611d72f8a103938383dc2906d76bd6e3%2F0_634_2888_1732%2F2888.jpg>
 Barack Obama speaks at the White House Correspondents’ Association annual 
dinner in Washington on 30 April 2011. Photograph: Chris Kleponis/AFP/Getty 
Images 
One of Obama’s biggest mistakes may have been, again with hindsight, his 
baiting of Donald Trump at the White House correspondents’ dinner in 2011. 
Trump was in the audience that night, sitting at a table as a guest of the 
Washington Post, and said later that he had not been upset by Obama.

Obama singled out several people that night but he devoted much more time to 
Trump, taking revenge for Trump’s campaign claiming Obama had not been born in 
the US.

They were good gags but they may turn out to have been costly. Trump sat 
stoically, only acknowledging the jokes with an occasional sideways shift of 
his head. But the president publicly humiliated him. Although Trump has since 
denied it, that might have been the moment Trump decided to run for the White 
House.
 