
Punch and Judy, Llandudno, Gwynedd


This year, the Codman's Punch and Judy 
<http://www.visitllandudno.org.uk/content.php?nID=13&langID=1&dID=14&offset=&aID=20>
 show celebrates its 150th anniversary. The show started in 1860 when the 
newly-wed "Professor" Codman carved two pieces of driftwood into the much-loved 
glove puppets. The "swazzle" – a device puppeteers use to create Punch's 
inimitable squawk – has been passed down through five generations of the Codman 
family. Weather permitting, the show can be seen on the North Shore promenade 
near the pier at midday, 2pm and 4pm throughout the summer holiday.
• visitllandudno.org.uk 
<http://www.visitllandudno.org.uk/content.php?nID=13&langID=1&dID=14&offset=&aID=20>

Pier shows, Blackpool, Lancashire

 Photograph: Alamy 
There's nowhere like Blackpool for a bit of seaside nostalgia. Fortuneteller 
Maria Petulengro is a must-see. You'll find her booth on the North Pier, 
decorated with publicity shots of her with a young Cliff Richard and Eddie 
Cochran (the American rock'n'roller who died in a car accident while on tour in 
the UK, aged just 21). Take tea in the magnificent gilded Tower Ballroom (
theblackpooltower.co.uk <http://theblackpooltower.co.uk/>), where you can watch 
serious ballroom dancers as you're served sandwiches and scones by waitresses 
in French maid outfits. For a souvenir, pop your head into the Old Time 
Portrait Studio on Central Pier (oldtimeportraitstudio.co.uk 
<http://www.oldtimeportraitstudio.co.uk>), where you can don Victorian swimwear 
and pose for a sepia portrait in front of a 1900 Blackpool back-drop.
• visitblackpool.com <http://www.visitblackpool.com/>

Vintage events <http://www.visitthanet.co.uk/>, Margate, Kent

Margate is a riot of kitsch and somewhat saucy seaside shenanigans. From 16 to 
21 August, the Walpole Bay hotel hostsBurlesque on the Beach 
<http://www.burlesqueonthebeach.co.uk/> – a series of vintage-inspired 
workshops and performances, with the emphasis on cream teas and tassels. The 
following week (20-27 August), there'll be 1950s-style keep fit classes on the 
beach (8am, Mon-Fri) as part of theDippers and Dunkers Festival of New Variety 
<http://www.dippersanddunkers.org.uk/>. There will be burlesque workshops for 
adults, the Magnificent Insect Circus Museum and five performances of Sideshow 
Illusions featuring a headless lady. For something a little more sedate, the 
Walpole Bay is hostingtwo seaside-themed vintage film nights ( 
<http://www.shellgrottofriends.org/events.html>16 September and 14 October) 
arranged by the Friends of the Shell Grotto, including Magical Margate (circa 
1919) and The Belle of Kent (1958). Expect immaculate RP narration, usherettes 
and lashings of gin fizz and popcorn.
• burlesqueonthebeach.co.uk <http://www.burlesqueonthebeach.co.uk/>; 
dippersanddunkers.org.uk <http://www.dippersanddunkers.org.uk/>; 
shellgrottofriends.org/events <http://www.shellgrottofriends.org/>

Donkey rides, Skegness, Lincolnshire
 Photograph: Alamy 
Donkeys are an increasingly rare sight on Britain's beaches but those that do 
still hoof it up and down the sands are much loved and well cared for.The 
Nuttall family have kept donkeys on Skegness beach 
<http://skegnessvideo.com/2009/05/skegness-donkey-featured-in-international-film/>
 for more than 100 years, and last year they were voted the best in Britain. 
Alfie, Doodles, Lofty, Sooty (who won best individual), Noddy, Bentley, Pedro 
and Cracker are so well trained they walk in formation down the beach and back 
again without being led.
• £1.50, children only

Blackgang Chine <http://www.blackgangchine.com/index.php>, Isle of Wight

 Photograph: Alamy 
This is a surreal, slightly careworn adventure park with resident cowboys, 
pixies, pirates and a Tyrannosaurus Rex in a smoking jacket. The fun starts the 
moment you pass through the legs of a bearded giant with a barrel of rum slung 
over his shoulder. There are 40 acres of Victorian cliff-top gardens to explore 
with themed attractions at every turn – a hall of mirrors, human snakes and 
ladders, spinning barrels, a roller coaster, a crooked house, fairy castle, 
smugglers' cave… Think abandoned Terry Gilliam film set and you're halfway 
there.
• Near Ventnor (01983 730052, blackgangchine.com 
<http://www.blackgangchine.com/index.php>); 10-6pm, over-fours £9.95, 
concessions £7.95, saver for four people £37.50

Cleethorpes Coast Light Railway, Lincolnshire


The mile-long miniature railway at Cleethorpes runs from Kingsway station 
along the sea-sprayed foreshore to North Sea Lane station. You can have a pint 
of shandy and a packet of peanuts from the Signal Box Inn, "the smallest pub on 
the planet", converted from a 2.4 x 2.4m sidings cabin. From 28-30 August 
there's a 60s-themed weekend on the line.
• Lakeside Station, Kings Road, Cleethorpes (01472 604657, 
cleethorpescoastlightrailway.co.uk 
<http://www.cleethorpescoastlightrailway.co.uk/>); return tickets £3.90 adults, 
£3 children

Donald McGill's Saucy Seaside Postcard Museum <http://donaldmcgill.info/>, 
Ryde, Isle of Wight

 Donald McGill's Saucy Seaside Postcard Museum, Ryde, Isle of Wight. 
This quirky museum had its grand opening last month. Donald McGill spent a 
lifetime stirring up scandal in the coastal tearooms of 20th-century Britain 
with his saucy postcards. He produced more than 12,000 cards, which were sold 
in gift shops up and down the country. Five shops in Ryde were raided by police 
in the 50s and nearly 2,000 postcards were seized and burned. McGill, who was 
nearly 80 at the time, was prosecuted under the 1857 obscenity act. See what 
the fuss was about in this wonderful homage to the double entendre.

• 15 Union Street (donaldmcgill.info <http://donaldmcgill.info/>)

Lost World Adventure Golf, Tynemouth, Tyne and Wear

 Lost World Adventure Golf, Tynemouth Park. 
Tynemouth is the place to head to enjoy the surprising sight of a diplodocus 
raising its head for a lungful of sea air. Velociraptors and triceratops also 
lurk among the semi-tropical grasses and plants at Tynemouth'sLost World 
Adventure Golf Course <http://www.tynemouthpark.com/golf.html>. Participants 
can choose between a 9- or 18-hole course, battling the sea breezes, sporadic 
jets of water and fearsome rumbles from the prehistoric jungle. If you survive 
that, tackle a skid around the park's synthetic ice-rink.

• Tynemouth Park, Grand Parade (0191-258 7593, tynemouthpark.com 
<http://www.tynemouthpark.com/>); 9am-5.30pm, nine holes £3 adults, £2 
children; 18 holes £4.50 adults, £3 children. Ice-skating £2.50 adults, £2 
children

Caister Holiday Park 
<http://www.haven.com/parks/norfolk_essex/caister/index.aspx>, Great Yarmouth, 
Norfolk
 Caister Caravan holiday park, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk. 
One of the UK's first holiday camps, this started life in 1906 as the Caister 
socialist holiday camp. Holidaymakers slept in tents and were expected to pitch 
in with the chores. After the first world war, chalets replaced tents and 
organised games replaced the chores. Nowadays the camp (which sprawls over 90 
acres between Great Yarmouth and the Norfolk Broads) is run by Haven Holidays, 
but there are still such kitsch delights as family "wake'n'shake" sessions, 
pedal cars, self-catering chalets and a glittering live entertainment 
programme. Clubbers flock here twice a year for the Caister Soul Weekenders, 
which have been running for more than 30 years (next one 1-3 October).

• 0871 230 1930, haven.com 
<http://www.haven.com/parks/norfolk_essex/caister/index.aspx>. Caister Soul 
Weekenderweekenders.co.uk 
<http://www.weekenders.co.uk/caister/index.html?cbookab.html~mainFrame>), £120 
for three days, including accommodation

• This article was amended on 10 August 2010. The original referred to Punch 
and Judy as marionettes. This has been corrected.

 