
Weymouth, west Dorset

As the sailing venue for the Olympics, Weymouth has made a sterling effort to 
move upmarket 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2012/jun/08/weymouth-dorset-sailing-olympics?INTCMP=SRCH>
: boat-shaped cafes on the beach, uplighters on the seafront, upgraded 
deckchairs. But underneath the gloss, it's the same old Weymouth, thank 
goodness. For a panoramic view, take an airlift up the shiny new Sea Life Tower 
– which opened in June (The Quay, 0871 423 2110,weymouth-tower.com 
<http://www.weymouth-tower.com/>, from £6.50) – and look across a curve of 
Regency terraces to the Purbeck Hills, across the harbour to the gardens of 
Nothe Fort (01305 766626,nothefort.org.uk <http://www.nothefort.org.uk/>) to 
the Isle of Portland. On the beach, there are donkey rides, Professor Mark 
Poulton's classic Punch and Judy show (weymouthpunch.co.uk 
<http://www.weymouthpunch.co.uk>) and, according to the town's Sand World 
(Preston Beach Road, 07411 387529,sandworld.co.uk <http://www.sandworld.co.uk/>
, adult £6.50, child £4.50) the perfect sand for castles and sculptures. At 
Rossi's retro parlour on the seafront, the ice-cream has been made on the 
premises since 1937 (01305 785557). The Stables Pizza and Cider House (Custom 
House Quay,thestabledorset.co.uk) <http://thestabledorset.co.uk/> is one of the 
new breed of restaurants that have popped up in the light of the Olympics. Cafe 
Oasis (01305 833054,cafeoasis.co.uk <http://www.cafeoasis.co.uk/>), on the 
beach at Bowleaze Cove, is a old favourite.

Stay at the funky Roundhouse (1 The Esplanade, 01305 761010, 
roundhouse-hotel-weymouth.com <http://roundhouse-hotel-weymouth.com/>, doubles 
from £105) between the harbour and the beach; or B+B Weymouth (68 The 
Esplanade, 01305 761190,bb-weymouth.com <http://www.bb-weymouth.com/>, doubles 
from £75).

Eastbourne, East Sussex
 Beachy Head, East Sussex. Photograph: Patrick Ingrand/Getty Images 
In the sunniest place in Britain – allegedly – a four-mile stretch of dazzling 
white shingle curves around Pevensey Bay. There are palm trees, tea dances in 
the Winter Gardens ballroom (every other Tuesday), rows of grand Victorian 
terraces planned by the Duke of Devonshire in the 1850s; a lovely bit of floral 
carpet bedding on a cheery promenade. Eastbourne is nowhere near as fast as 
neighbouring Brighton (think coach tours and pensioners in cardigans), but its 
Grade II*-listed pier is one of Britain's finest – all rotundas and delicate 
wrought iron, strings of low-tech light bulbs and a curious little camera 
obscura that opens to the public in summer (eastbournepier.com 
<http://www.eastbournepier.com/>). On the prom, the 1,600-seater Bandstand 
(01323 410611,eastbournebandstand.co.uk <http://www.eastbournebandstand.co.uk/>
) serves up brass, tribute and big bands and musical firework displays beneath 
a 1930s dome clad in aquamarine terracotta. The chalk cliffs of Beachy Head 
(the highest point on the south coast) are within hiking distance.

Try the Printers Bar Brasserie for good-value British tucker (12 Station 
Street, 01323 430880,printersbarbrasserie.co.uk 
<http://www.printersbarbrasserie.co.uk/>), or the Flamenco Tapas Bar (8 
Cornfield Terrace, 01323 641444,flamenco-tapas.co.uk 
<http://www.flamenco-tapas.co.uk/>).

The Big Sleep (King Edwards Parade, 01323 722676, thebigsleephotel.com 
<http://www.thebigsleephotel.com>, doubles from £45 per night) has retro rooms 
on the seafront, but best bet for families are the self-catering suites at 
Guesthouse East (13 Hartington Place, 01323 722774,theguesthouseeast.co.uk 
<http://www.theguesthouseeast.co.uk>, from £70 per night).

Cromer, Norfolk

The up-from-Londoners who swarm into nearby Holkham or Wells-next-the-Sea tend 
to bypass Cromer but what are they missing? Lovely sandy beach, for a start; 
flinty sea walls, rock pools, the zig-zag paths that wander between cliff-top 
gardens and the North Sea shoreline, the slender spire of St Peter and St Paul 
(at 160ft, it's the tallest church tower in Norfolk).

You can watch the local fishermen haul crab boats out of the water with mini 
tractors, or take the coast path to Overstrand or Mundesley-on-Sea, but 
Cromer's speciality is the gloriously tacky Seaside Special – the last of its 
kind to survive. Showing daily at the pier's Pavilion Theatre (01263 512495,
cromer-pier.com <http://www.cromer-pier.com/>), it's a repertoire of song and 
dance, variety acts and saucy jokes performed by artists nobody's heard of. 
Perfect for a rainy day.

On the beach, the contemporary Rocket House Café (East Promenade, 01263 519126,
rockethousecafe.co.uk <http://www.rockethousecafe.co.uk/>) offers good, fresh 
food and great views. Boutique hotels? One day someone may do a Hotel du Vin on 
Cromer's beautiful but decrepit Hotel de Paris, but try the Red Lion (Brook 
Street, 01263 514964,redlion-cromer.co.uk <http://redlion-cromer.co.uk/>, 
doubles from £100 a night), or a sea view apartment at Tudor Villas (Cliff 
Avenue, 01263 823676,tudorvillascromer.com <http://www.tudorvillascromer.com/>, 
from £400 a week).

Southend-on-Sea, Essex 

 Rossi's, Southend-on-Sea. Photograph: VisitBritain/Daniel Bosworth/Getty 
Images 
Let's be honest, it's Southend-on-Thames or EastEnder-on-Sea: Shane Richie in 
panto at the Cliffs Pavilion, Andrew Lloyd Webber's Starlight Express and seven 
miles of Essex beach that runs along the north shore of the estuary.

All this, and only an hour from the centre of London. Aside from the usual 
seaside bling (the twinkly lights of the pier head funfair, for example), 
there's a Victorian cliff lift that trundles up from the promenade to pretty 
Prittlewell Square; you can cycle to neighbouring Leigh-on-Sea (for boatyards 
and clapboard cockle sheds) or up to the wilds of Shoeburyness. But Southend's 
big draw is its pleasure pier. The world's longest, it features a mile of 
railway line and, since 18 July, an end-of-the-pier Cultural Centre – a £3m, 
prefabricated arts venue complete with asymmetric roof and a geometry of glass 
and steel. The town's first Comedy Festival took place on the pier last month (
visitsouthend.co.uk <http://www.visitsouthend.co.uk/>).

Among places to eat, try Ocean Beach (Eastern Esplanade, 01702 611363, 
ocean-beach.co.uk <http://www.ocean-beach.co.uk/>), the subterranean Pipe of 
Port (84 High Street,pipeofport.co.uk <http://www.pipeofport.com/>), or Rossi's 
ice-cream parlour on Marine Parade. For rooms with a view, head for 
18th-century Royal Terrace, which has two decent hotels: Pier View (01702 
437900,pierviewguesthouse.co.uk <http://www.pierviewguesthouse.co.uk/>, doubles 
from £80 per night); and Hamiltons (01702 332350,hamiltonsboutiquehotel.co.uk 
<http://hamiltonsboutiquehotel.co.uk/>, doubles from £60).

Sandown, Isle of Wight

The north coast yachting set can be a bit snooty about the Isle of Wight's 
southern resorts but Sandown and Shanklin (they are more or less joined at the 
hip) have the best of the island's long sandy beaches, the crazy golf, the sun 
on their seafronts, and you can get there via the Island Line which runs from 
Ryde to Shanklin in a restored 1930s Northern Line tube train (
southwesttrains.co.uk <http://www.southwesttrains.co.uk/island-line-fares.aspx>
, £5.20 return). Must-dos include Shanklin Old Village (for tea rooms and 
chocolate-box thatch) and Shanklin Chine (shanklinchine.co.uk 
<http://www.shanklinchine.co.uk/>, adult £3.90, child £2) – a woodland gorge of 
rare plants, red squirrels and the seaside Fisherman's Cottage inn. The quaint 
Small Hope beach offers deckchair hire and a cafe. In wet weather, dive into 
Sandown's Dinosaur Isle (01983 404344,dinosaurisle.com 
<http://www.dinosaurisle.com/newhomepage.aspx>, adult £5, child £3.70), 
everything you need to know about the fossil-rich geology.

Best guesthouse is Bedford Lodge in Shanklin (4 Chine Avenue, 01983 862416, 
bedfordlodge.co.uk <http://www.bedfordlodge.co.uk/>, doubles from £60); or near 
Ryde (20 minutes away), Vintage Vacations' famous airstream caravan site now 
does B&B for two at £75 per night (vintagevacations.co.uk 
<http://www.vintagevacations.co.uk>).

Minehead, Somerset

The largest of the post-war holiday camps, Butlins put the town on the map 
back in 1961. These days Butlins has a Skyline Pavilion – it looks quite cool 
from a distance. But Minehead has other things going for it: a mile of sand and 
pebble beach, views of the Bristol Channel, a farmers' market, narrow 
backstreets and the odd bit of Somerset thatch, plus lots of worthwhile day 
trip potential. North Hill, the big hump of wooded cliff which overlooks the 
town, is the beginning of Exmoor national park. Below, by the harbour, a giant 
sculpture of a hand clutching a fold-out map marks the start of the 630-mile 
South West Coast Path. In the summer, steam trains run from Minehead to 
Bishop's Lydeard on the charming West Somerset Railway (01643 704996,
west-somerset-railway.co.uk <http://www.west-somerset-railway.co.uk/>, day pass 
adult £17, child £8.50), its vintage trains chuffing through 23 miles of 
stunning countryside. For castles, cobbled streets and a bit of posh, pop over 
to nearby Dunster. On the beach at Blue Anchor, just along the coast, the 
Driftwood Cafe (01643 821697) is worth a lunch visit. And if you are sticking 
around, check out the Castle Hotel in Dunster (5 High Street, 01643 823030,
thedunstercastlehotel.co.uk <http://www.thedunstercastlehotel.co.uk>, doubles 
from £90).

Bridlington, Yorkshire

 The Land Train, Bridlington. Photograph: Richard Watson/Getty Images 
Bridlington went up in the world when David Hockney moved in. The artist has a 
house on Brid's South Shore, overlooking the town's vast blue flag beach and 
the Nautical Mile (an architectural promenade of sculptures, modernist beach 
huts and artworks by Bruce McLean). The North Shore is a noisy jangle of 
dodgems, bingo and candy floss, but Bridlington is full of surprises. The Old 
Town (a mile inland) boasts galleries, vintage shops and one of the most 
complete Georgian streets in England. There's a ruined medieval priory. The 
1930s Royal Hall theatre is now the Spa Bridlington, a multi-use venue with a 
jazzed-up facade – an uneasy shade of orange – and a restored art deco interior 
(sign up for a free tour: South Marine Drive, 01262 678258,thespabridlington.com
 <http://www.thespabridlington.com/>). There's a busy old-salt fishing harbour 
(mostly landing crab, lobster and scallops) and some decent seafood 
restaurants. Try Naked Fish (22 Bridge Street, 01262 400266,naked-fish.co.uk 
<http://www.naked-fish.co.uk/>) or the award-winning chippy on Marton Road 
(01262 678378fishandchipsat149.co.uk <http://fishandchipsat149.co.uk>).

Local beauty spots include Flambrough Head, or the nature reserve at Bempton 
Cliffs – for breathtaking views and 200,000 seabirds (rspb.org.uk 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk>>).

Accommodation is not Bridlington's strong point, but Kilham Hall (01262 420466,
kilhamhall.co.uk <http://kilhamhall.co.uk/>, from £120 a night) has luxury 
rooms in a country house in nearby Kilham village.

Morecambe, Lancashire 


On a damp day, with the wind blowing in off the Irish Sea, Morecambe verges on 
the melancholy. But the erstwhile "Naples of the North" has its moments – 
mainly the iconic Midland Hotel, the big smile of cruise-ship art deco which 
helped revive this tired Lancashire resort when it reopened in 2008. What else? 
World-class sunsets, cockles and potted shrimps. And Eric Morecambe (a statue 
of the town's famous son does a "Bring Me Sunshine" number on the seafront). 
Photographers snap away at beached wrecks on gleaming mudflats, the largest 
expanse in the UK. Nearby, there's the lovely Lune Valley, or Lancaster's 
Williamson Park with its must-see Ashton memorial: a Taj Mahal-style folly, 
built in 1906, it offers breathtaking views across Morecambe Bay to the 
Lakeland Hills. Back on the seafront, pop into the Formica heaven of 
Brucciani's tea room – another mid-century classic. And gaze at the wonderful 
Winter Gardens (closed since 1977) and weep. A restoration wannabe, as 
deserving as the Midland, the ornate Victorian theatre is occasionally open to 
the public (01524 422180,thewintergardensmorecambe.co.uk 
<http://www.thewintergardensmorecambe.co.uk/home>). Accommodation-wise, nothing 
rivals the Midland (Marine Road West, 0845 850 1240,englishlakes.co.uk 
<http://englishlakes.co.uk/>, doubles from £112), unless you count the Ashton 
(Wyresdale Road, 01524 68460,theashtonlancaster.com 
<http://www.theashtonlancaster.com>, doubles from £125 a night), which offers 
theatrical townhouse rooms in the centre of Lancaster.

Mablethorpe, Lincolnshire
 Jabba the Hut artwork, Mablethorpe. Photograph: Tony C French/Getty Images 
The name says it all. Mablethorpe. Old-fashioned. First impressions are 
wall-to-wall amusement arcades, Motability scooters, buckets and spades, buns 
and burgers, and Mr Whippy. But Mablethorpe pulled a blinder when it reinvented 
itself as Beach Hut Central. Not just any old beach huts but designer huts, 
novelty showpiece huts; there's one shaped like a gin and tonic – with a slice 
of lemon and a cocktail straw. Jabba the Hut is an onion of striped laminate 
sitting alone in a sand dune. Along the long strip of blue flag beach that 
connects Mablethorpe to Sutton-on-Sea, there are roughly 300 huts; they include 
some jolly 1950s huts on Queen's Park between the sea and the Thomas the Tank 
Engine miniature railway. These, and others, are available to rent (01507 
473641/443765,e-lindsey.gov.uk/beachhuts <http://www.e-lindsey.gov.uk/beachhuts>
, from £10 for a half-day). Sadly they are all booked out for the resort's 
fifth Bathing Beauties Beach Hut Festival (14-16 September,
bathingbeautiesfestival.org <http://www.bathingbeautiesfestival.org>>) but you 
can go along for poetry, art and fireworks. Mablethorpe is a bit of culinary 
wasteland, but Poplar Farm's Wild Coast Pantry at Sandilands, near 
Sutton-on-Sea (01507 443112,poplar-farm.org.uk <http://www.poplar-farm.org.uk>) 
will do you a nice picnic for your beach hut (plum bread, for example, and 
local cheeses). It has a good farmhouse B&B, too (doubles from £75).

Llandudno, Conwy
 The Great Orme Tramway, Llandudno. Photograph: Alamy 
Set on a narrow isthmus between the Great Orme and the Little Orme – the two 
rocky headlands that sit either end of the town's sweeping North Shore 
promenade – this is one of the prettiest of seaside resorts. And I'd say that, 
even on a rainy day. Its handsome Indian-Gothic pier is the longest in Wales; 
the seafront is trimmed with grand Victoriana laced with wrought iron; and from 
the West Shore you can look across the Conwy estuary to Snowdonia. Nice beach, 
too, But it's the magnificent Great Orme Country Park (greatorme.org.uk 
<http://www.greatorme.org.uk>) that provides all the action. You can walk up to 
its summit (or take an Edwardian cable tramway), whizz down its slopes on a 
PermaSnow ski slope (01492 874707,jnlllandudno.co.uk <http://jnlllandudno.co.uk>
, practice session adult £13.50, child £10.50), zip over its Happy Valley 
gardens on a high-wire aerial cabin lift (look out for Kashmiri goats down 
below), or do the scenic Marine Drive circuit in a vintage bus (01492 879133,
alpine-travel.co.uk <http://www.alpine-travel.co.uk/>, £5 adult, £2.50 child). 
A good stopover en route is the Rest and Be Thankful Café (01492 870004,
restandbethankful.net <http://www.restandbethankful.net>). At the foot of the 
Orme, Escape B&B (48 Church Walks, 01492 877776,escapebandb.co.uk 
<http://www.escapebandb.co.uk/>, doubles from £89) is the cool place to stay.

• All accommodation in this article B&B unless specified otherwise

• This article was amended on 8 August 2012. The original said that Llandudno 
is in the county of Clwyd. This has been corrected.
 