
A multinational crew including a US astronaut who is the oldest and most 
experienced woman to fly in space blasted off from Kazakhstan for a two-day 
journey to theInternational Space Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/international-space-station>.

The Russian Soyuz rocket carrying American Peggy Whitson, Russian cosmonaut 
Oleg Novitskiy and French astronaut Thomas Pesquet lifted off from the Baikonur 
Cosmodrome on Thursday night local time.


Whitson, 56, a biochemist and Nasa’s former chief astronaut, is making her 
third trip to the station.

By the time she returns to Earth in six months she will have accumulated more 
time in orbit than any other US astronaut, surpassing the 534-day record set in 
September by astronaut Jeff Williams.

Two crewed space stations now orbiting Earth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/20/two-crewed-space-stations-now-orbiting-earth-spacewatch>
“The most important thing about the station is the friendships and the work we 
accomplish there,” Whitson said during a prelaunch news conference on Wednesday 
in Kazakhstan.

Novitskiy, 45, who is making his second spaceflight, added: “The station is 
... a place where we can demonstrate to the entire world that you can have 
normal relations, where you can work without being distracted by things that 
don’t really matter.”

Pesquet, 38, is a rookie astronaut representing the European Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Agency.

The crew are due to reach the station on Saturday, where they will be greeted 
byNasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> astronaut Shane Kimbrough and 
Russian flight engineers Sergey Ryzhikov and Andrey Borisenko, who arrived on 
21 October.

The combined crew will be one of the last six-member teams to live on the 
station for a while. Beginning in March, Russia plans tocut the number of 
cosmonauts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/16/russia-may-cut-crew-on-international-space-station>
serving on the station to two from three, following delays in launching a new 
science laboratory. The Multipurpose Laboratory Module is now expected to be 
launched in 2018.
 