
Vice-president Joe Biden, on a last foreign trip before leaving office, met 
Ukraine’s president on Monday and called on the incoming DonaldTrump 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> to 
retain Ukraine-related sanctions against Russia.

Related: The Trump interviews: what he said about Brexit, Putin, Israel, Syria 
... and Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/the-trump-interviews-what-he-said-about-brexit-putin-israel-syria-and-twitter>

Biden’s comments at a briefing with Petro Poroshenko came after Trump 
indicated inan interview with the Times and Bild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/no-10-welcomes-donald-trumps-pledge-for-a-speedy-uk-us-trade-deal>
 that he could end sanctions imposed in the aftermath Russia’s 2014 annexation 
of Crimea,in return for a nuclear arms reduction deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/the-trump-interviews-what-he-said-about-brexit-putin-israel-syria-and-twitter>
.

Trump’s attitude to Russia and praise for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/donald-trump-to-hold-summit-with-vladimir-putin-within-weeks>
 Vladimir Putin has been a consistently controversial feature of his rise to 
the White House, which will be completed withhis inauguration in Washington on 
Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/donald-trump-inauguration-washington-progressives>
.

US intelligence agencies believe Russia sought to covertly influence the US 
election in Trump’s favour and against the Democratic nominee, former secretary 
of state Hillary Clinton. Trump has recently admitted that he believes Russia 
did orchestrate such hacks, but has nonetheless fuelleda bitter feud with 
intelligence officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/john-brennan-trump-nazi-germany-russia>
 over the issue.

“The international community must continue to stand as one against Russian 
coercion and aggression,” Biden told reporters, standing alongside Poroshenko, 
in remarks which did not include reference to Trump by name.

“The Crimea-related sanctions against Russia must remain in place until Russia 
returns full control to the people ofUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>.”


Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/putin-confirms-annexation-crimea-ukrainian-soldier-casualty>
. Other US sanctions are connected to Russia’s involvement in theseparatist war 
in eastern Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/28/east-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war>
.

Related: East Ukraine: on the frontline of Europe's forgotten war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/28/east-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war>

“Together with our EU and G7 partners,” Biden said, “we made it clear that 
sanctions should remain in place untilRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> fully, emphasise fully, implements 
its commitments under the Minsk agreement.”

Poroshenko said Ukraine believed in good cooperation with the new US 
administration and urged sanctions to stay, without mentioning Trump’s remarks 
on a deal with Russia.

Andy Hunder, the head of the American Chamber of Commerce in Ukraine, said 
Kiev would have to put much time and resources into dealing with the new US 
administration.

“On 20 January Ukraine will be waking up to a new reality,” he told Reuters. 
“There is a concern in Kiev about how the new relationship will develop. It 
will require building new bridges to the influencers, the gatekeepers and 
decision-makers.”

Kiev has taken steps to win the good favour of the those calling the shots in 
the Trump administration. Days after the election in November, Poroshenko’s 
office started planning an official visit to Washington in early 2017.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Biden to Trump: ‘Grow up, Donald. Time to be an adult’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/06/joe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video>
A bipartisan group of US senators, including Republicans John McCain and Marco 
Rubio, said last week they wanted to slap a wide range of sanctions on Russia 
over its cyber activities and actions in Ukraine and Syria. A sanctions bill 
with similar provisions is being written in the House of Representatives.

“Our job is to make sure this attention on Ukraine does not wane,” Ukraine’s 
ambassador to the US, Valeriy Chaly, said on Wednesday.

As Biden left the room on Monday, a journalist asked if he thought the Trump 
administration would give Ukraine the same priority as he had. Biden gave a 
thumbs up.

“Hope springs eternal,” he said. 

 