
John Napier plonks a pair of blue sequined stilettos – size nine, vertiginous 
heels – on the counter of his shop, Cobblers to the Old Town, on the high 
street in Hastings. These, he says, belong to a loyal customer, a handsome 
South American man who works in the film industry and whose partner, a New 
Zealander, is a big noise in oil. They are part of a new affluent gay crowd 
visiting and even moving to the East Sussex town. Napier, who is 66 and bald 
with a white goatee beard, believes that his shoe repair business tells the 
story of the renaissance of the seaside; that the soul – or sole – of Hastings 
is somehow here. So, he gets the high heels and party shoes, but also fixes 
split wellies for thrifty fishermen, tap shoes for nifty showbizzers and 
expensive brogues for hipsters DFL (down from London).

Hastings Pier reopens following £14.2m restoration project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/27/hastings-pier-reopens-after-restoration-project-heritage-lottery-fund-east-sussex>
“I do love that mix,” he says, Glaswegian accent peeping out, like scuff 
through polish, after almost half a century in the south. “On Saturday 
afternoons in here we all have a glass of wine and a chinwag. Musicians, a 
private investigator, a newsreader, actors, a lord; Harold Bishop from 
Neighbours came once, when he was doing panto. Oh, yeah, Hastings is picking 
up.”

We had been told for years that places like Hastings were doomed. The tide, by 
now, should have gone out entirely. The leftovers of the last full English 
should have been scraped into the bin by the last landlady; the last B&B 
shuttered and locked; the last donkey should have given its final ride and be 
trudging – Eeyore-ishly, Morrissey-ishly – slowly over wet sand in the 
direction of the nearest sanctuary and retirement. All this ought to have come 
to pass and the British seaside holiday should, in short, be dead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F469d3a2ebf3632ed567e273944df528932d40a45%2F0_205_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Once%20more%20on%20to%20the%20beach%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20seaside%20towns%20bounced%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Once%20more%20on%20to%20the%20beach%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20seaside%20towns%20bounced%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F469d3a2ebf3632ed567e273944df528932d40a45%2F0_205_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘The best seaside towns are, frankly, getting their shit together’ … Crowds on 
the beach in Margate last week. Photograph: Gareth Fuller/PA 
And yet, look. See what is happening instead. See the crowds of kids crabbing 
off Whitby’s harbour wall while their parents plan to walk off lunch by 
climbing the famous 199 steps to the abbey. See the “No vacancies” signs all 
over Southend and Skegness. From Essex to Yorkshire, Somerset to Cornwall, 
bookings are up and up, sometimes by more than 500% over the past few years. In 
2015, Brits made 19.4 million trips to the English coast, a 10% increase on the 
year before; in Scotland, the rise was 17%. Forecasts for 2016 are promising – 
a recent survey suggests that more than half of all Britons planned a seaside 
break this summer.

Why is this happening? “For me, UK resorts are making a comeback for a few 
reasons,” says Matthew Rock, co-author ofFrom Ebb to Flow 
<http://centreforentrepreneurs.org/cfe-research/from-ebb-to-flow-how-entrepreneurs-can-turn-the-tide-for-seaside-towns>
, a report exploring the great British seaside revival. “The EU referendum, the 
whiff of impending crisis in the global economy, a Trump presidency, a slowing 
Chinese economy;the terrorist attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/25/tourists-tunisia-june-terror-attack-economy-beach-hotel-sousse>
 on the Tunisian beach resort of Sousse – there are many reasons to be 
concerned about the future and rein back spending on foreign holidays. And the 
best seaside towns are, frankly, getting their shit together.”

England’s 2,800-mile Coast Path to open in 2020
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/02/england-coast-path-2020-norfolk-walking-holidays>
Perhaps we have also arrived at a greater appreciation of the pleasures of the 
classic British break. A blend of familiarity, simplicity and beauty makes our 
coastal resorts comforting and exciting. The Proustian rush of candyfloss and 
donkey dung, yes, but also the thrill of experiencing towns reinventing 
themselves for the 21st century. Margate’s 1920sDreamland amusement park 
<https://www.dreamland.co.uk>, given a retro makeover by the Red Or Dead 
designer Wayne Hemingway, is one example – the schlock of the old meets the 
shock of the new. Think, too, of Banksy’sDismaland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/25/banksys-dismaland-closes-weston-super-mare>
 in Weston-super-Mare, and Butlins marking its 80th anniversary by remodelling 
their Minehead family chalets in consultation with users of Mumsnet. 
Shakespeare would have a phrase for all this: once more on to the beach.

The greatest symbol of the British seaside’s rise from the ashes is the new 
pier at Hastings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/27/hastings-pier-reopens-after-restoration-project-heritage-lottery-fund-east-sussex>
, rebuilt after a long period of disuse and a terrible fire. Its gala reopening 
ceremony takes place on 21 May. Walking to the far end, drawn by the blue haze 
of the English channel, one is tempted to peer over the edge and down at the 
girders, looking for the phoenix that surely roosts there.

A blaze took hold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/oct/05/hastings-pier-destroyed-by-fire> in 
the small hours of 5 October 2010, and the following morning huge numbers of 
locals gathered on the hillside crazy golf course at White Rock Gardens to look 
down aghast at the giant black skeleton jutting out into the water. “You had 
the spectre of this smoking ruin with the remains of the ballroom rotting away 
at the end,” says Simon Opie, chief executive of the charity that rebuilt the 
pier. “It was a blight on the town. What did it say about Hastings if that 
iconic structure was a charred mess? From a moral point of view, it couldn’t 
just be left. Something had to be done.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58cd255e15c73bfa84a3997210e2066fc17b6ac1%2F78_0_5384_3229%2F5384.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Once%20more%20on%20to%20the%20beach%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20seaside%20towns%20bounced%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Once%20more%20on%20to%20the%20beach%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20seaside%20towns%20bounced%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58cd255e15c73bfa84a3997210e2066fc17b6ac1%2F78_0_5384_3229%2F5384.jpg>
 ‘What did it say about Hastings if that iconic structure was a charred mess? 
From a moral point of view, it couldn’t just be left’ … Hastings pier after the 
2010 fire. Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
It is hoped that a visitor centre, bar-restaurant, fairground rides and 
open-air concerts will attract 325,000 visitors a year. In the first fortnight 
of being open to the public, the pier has already been visited by an estimated 
75,000 people. But it’s about more than just money. Rebuilding – at a cost of 
£14.2m – was a defiant act. “It’s about drawing a line in the sand in terms of 
the decline of seaside towns and the way the seaside economy has been allowed 
to slowly fade away,” says Opie. “This pier is saying it doesn’t have to be 
like that.”

Opie is a former head of entertainment at Disneyland Paris, and therefore au 
fait with the economics of the modern leisure industry. But he also appreciates 
the delights of the traditional coastal holiday, having spent childhood trips 
to Hastings walking on the pier with his grandfather. So, does he believe the 
British seaside can make a lasting comeback?

“I really do,” he nods. “What’s important, and what this pier symbolises, is 
that, in order to make that leap forward, you have to separate from the past. 
It’s no use thinking that it’s ever going to return to the model where the 
oppressed workers were finally able to come to the coast by rail when bank 
holidays were invented. Those social conditions just don’t exist any more. But 
that doesn’t mean there’s not a purpose to the seaside. The core attraction of 
being able to sit beside the sea and experience the elements is still there, 
and still a pleasure.”

Five of the best beaches in the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/13/uk-britain-beaches-five> 
That pleasure is even more acute in Rothesay, the main town on the isle of 
Bute. The view across the bay to the Cowal hills is the best seaside panorama 
in Scotland, maybe the whole of Britain.Rothesay 
<https://www.visitscotland.com/info/towns-villages/rothesay-p234971>, a 
35-minute trip by ferry from Wemyss Bay on the Clyde coast, was the most 
popular Scottish holiday resort from the 1930s until the 50s. It was, 
in essence, Glasgow-on-Sea, Weegie-super-Mare. Each July, when the city’s 
workers and their families took the “fair fortnight” holiday, the population 
would expand almost sevenfold to 40,000. This pilgrimage was known as going 
“doon the watter”, a phrase that persists as sentimental nostalgia; the 
phenomenon it describes is long gone.

Since those glory days, the decline has been steep. Precise statistics on 
visitor numbers do not exist, but the numbers of trips to Bute on the ferry 
fell by more than 42,000 in 2015, a drop of 6.29%. More alarming, the most 
recent census revealed that the island’s population had fallen from 7,228 to 
6,498 in 10 years. “Those figures were a shock to everybody, and a wake-up 
call,” says Paul Duffy, a community councillor and facilitator of a campaign to 
revitalise the town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b08b403b1d9a59ae4ab4f75ef42613887c7a29d%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Once%20more%20on%20to%20the%20beach%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20seaside%20towns%20bounced%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Once%20more%20on%20to%20the%20beach%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20seaside%20towns%20bounced%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b08b403b1d9a59ae4ab4f75ef42613887c7a29d%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘People aren’t interested in that old seaside ice cream cone and walk along 
the beach any more. They’re looking for more’ … Rothesay on the Isle of Bute. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The town, too, has its symbolic architecture: the Rothesay Pavilion 
<https://www.argyll-bute.gov.uk/bute-and-cowal/rothesay-pavilion>, a category-A 
listed, modernist concrete pleasure palace – either one of Scotland’s best 
buildings or an eyesore, depending on your taste. In poor repair, its concrete 
badly weathered by the wet and salty air, it has been closed for redevelopment 
since September. Built in the 1930s to boost tourism, it is hoped that its 
reopening – on a proposed date of 1 July 2018, the building’s 80th anniversary 
– will act as a catalyst for the town’s rebirth, rather as theJerwood Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/mar/11/jerwood-gallery-hastings-stade-review>
, arguably, did for Hastings. An artistic director has been appointed, and 
there are plans for art exhibitions and live performance which, in theory, will 
make Rothesay a destination for cultural tourism. The redevelopment is 
estimated to cost £10.5m, investment that may provide an answer to the town’s 
basic problem, as laid out by one regular visitor: “The throngs went long ago. 
The middle class have still to arrive.”

Not everyone agrees it is money well spent. “I’d knock it down,” says Sara 
Goss, who owns a restaurant and a guesthouse of self-catering suites. She would 
prefer to see an empty school building converted to use as an enterprise zone. 
Rothesay has a shortage of properties available for business, locals say, which 
holds the island’s tourism back. Aidan Canavan, who owns theBute Brew Co 
<http://www.butebrewco.co.uk/>, this week threatened to close the craft brewery 
and move off the island after the council refused to lease him a former 
slaughterhouse into which he hoped to expand. Canavan, 37, dislikes the phrase 
“doon the watter”, regarding nostalgia as a trap; he believes Rothesay’s 
recovery depends on attracting a new sort of visitor – young families, people 
from the cities. “People aren’t interested in that old seaside ice cream cone 
and walk along the beach any more,” he says. “They’re looking for more.”

This, no doubt, is true. Yet nostalgia surely plays a part. Seaside towns are 
built on strata upon strata of happy memories; a sort of emotional geology. Dig 
down on Bute’s Kilchattan beach and you might even see the layers. These are 
places of ritual. Few visitors to Rothesay, since 1919, have left without 
eating chips or ice cream, or both, sold to themby a Zavaroni 
<https://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Restaurant_Review-g551924-d3489579-Reviews-Zavaroni_s_Restaurant-Rothesay_Isle_of_Bute_Argyll_and_Bute_Scotland.html>
. Fat and sugar are as much part of the sensory experience of the Scottish 
holiday as cold, damp sand and the sardonic cry of herring gulls with their 
ink-dipped wing tips. Margaret Zavaroni, 62, cousin of the late Lena, runs the 
cafe on Albert Place. She’s a seaside siren: metallic eye-shadow, deep tan, 
pink lippy, bright green eyes. Famous locally as Maggie Zav, she sings Tina 
Turner and Shania Twain in the Taverna pub on Friday and Saturday nights, and 
spends the rest of the season busily purveying Top Hats, a proud Zavaroni 
invention – an ice-cream cone crowned by a marshmallow snowball.

Jerwood Gallery, Hastings – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/mar/11/jerwood-gallery-hastings-stade-review>
“We need a boost,” she says, citing the new reduced ferry fares as a hopeful 
development for this summer. “This island is special, and people all round 
Britain should come and see what we have here.”

Matthew Rock cites “belligerence and creativity” as qualities that will help 
declining seaside towns “turn the tide”. Creativity, of course, but you’ve got 
to love that belligerence – a dogged refusal to die. You can sense it in 
Rothesay, and even more so in Hastings, a place with a pronounced bolshy streak 
that some locals boast is the pirate DNA spiralling through their bloodstream. 
It feels appropriate that the town’s head of marketing is descended from a man 
hanged for smuggling.

Hastings is not without problems. England’s 13th most deprived town, it has 
rough sleepers in “Bottle Alley” on the seafront and within the elegant Ionic 
portico of the church on Pelham Crescent. Lovely turnstones upend pebbles on 
the beach, but so do the problem drinkers, ruddy from sun and wine, burying 
broken glass from carry-outs deep beneath the shingle. Such desolation, 
however, is no longer the dominant note. Somewhere within the borough council 
offices is a “black museum” of negative press cuttings – Costa del Dole, Hell 
Hole-on-Sea, and other such headlines – which has not been added to for a 
while. Instead, the local conversation is about the risk of gentrification and 
rising house prices.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc6854064af6a1ac922f75a7712236c82f262393%2F0_246_4988_2994%2F4988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Once%20more%20on%20to%20the%20beach%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20seaside%20towns%20bounced%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Once%20more%20on%20to%20the%20beach%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20seaside%20towns%20bounced%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fonce-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc6854064af6a1ac922f75a7712236c82f262393%2F0_246_4988_2994%2F4988.jpg>
 Mysterious and fairy-storyish … fishing boats and Victorian-era ‘net shops’ in 
Hastings. Photograph: Alamy 
Little wonder people are rediscovering Hastings. It is a splendid place, 
with that sort of beautiful oddness that characterises the best of the British 
seaside. The Stade, the historic fishing area, is notable for its Victorian-era 
“net shops 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hastings_Old_Town#/media/File:Net_and_tackle_stores_on_Hastings_beach.JPG>
” – a cluster of black wooden towers used by generations of fishermen to store 
their gear. Built tall and narrow for pragmatic reasons – a lack of space 
between sea and cliffs – they now appear mysterious and fairy-storyish. One 
imagines some mermaid version of Rapunzel letting down her seaweed hair.

In Dismaland, Banksy has created something truly depressing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/aug/21/in-dismaland-banksy-has-created-something-truly-depressing>
You can stand in the shadow of the net shops and watch the world pass. 
Fishmongers, morris dancers, a young curate cycling past on his way to perform 
Holy Communion for an ailing parishioner. We could be back in the golden years. 
The miniature railway chuffs its way along the half-mile track, as it has since 
1948.

Janette and Nicholas Wooller, a mother and son from Burgess Hill, have driven 
down for the day, in a racing green Jaguar XKR, to celebrate his 25th birthday, 
and are taking a selfie on the beach. It’s wet, but they don’t mind. 
The thought of pie and mash is warming them up, and besides, they have come 
prepared with coats and jumpers as well as sunbathing gear. Janette, when 
commended on this foresight, seems to speak for all of Britain’s seaside towns 
as they come to terms with the 21st century.

“You have to be ready for the change of weather,” she says. “If we get wet, 
we’ll just carry on.”
 