
The Gerry Adams leadership of Sinn Féin is reminiscent of the U2 song With or 
Without You. On the one hand, the party can’t live with Adams’lacklustre 
performances in media interviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/sinn-fein-gerry-adams-irish-election-second-poll>
, but on the other he is an icon of Irish republicanism without whom the brand 
would lose much of its cachet.

At time of writing, the counting of votes in the Irish general election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/feb/18/irelands-general-election-the-guardian-briefing>
 is still dragging on, but it looks like the “Shinners” will have around 
two-dozen seats when the new Dáil assembles on 10 March. That’s up from 14 
deputies when the election was called, although critics may argue it could have 
been even better if Adams hadn’t come across on radio and TV as lacking 
understanding of his own party’s policies on key issues likewater charges 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/gerry-adams-denies-misleading-public-on-water-charges-1.2539558>
 andincome tax rates 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/election-2016/news/sinn-feins-pearse-doherty-defends-gerry-adams-following-difficult-sean-orourke-interview-34465027.html>
.

Ireland's general election – the Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/feb/18/irelands-general-election-the-guardian-briefing>
But outside the media bubble, Adams looks very much like a plus for the party 
he has led since the early 1980s. He hascelebrity status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/22/gerry-adams-to-release-book-featuring-his-best-tweets-including-rubber-ducks>
 with a lot of ordinary punters who are eager to shake his hand and get their 
picture taken with someone they regard as a living legend. They are clearly 
attracted to a man of whom Bill Clinton is reported to have said: “The 
difference between you and Arafat, Gerry, is that you delivered.”

Following one of his interviews during the election campaign, a constituency 
rival in Louth, Ged Nash of the Labour party, issued a searing press release 
where he said: “This is a man who has to take his shoes off to help him count 
to 20 
<http://www.thejournal.ie/gerry-adams-sean-orourke-interview-2610850-Feb2016/>
.” But Adams had the last laughwhen the votes for Louth were counted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/sinn-fein-gerry-adams-irish-election-second-poll>
. He topped the poll and brought in a running-mate, Imelda Munster, whereas 
Nash lost his Dáil seat.

Sinn Féin suffered an embarrassing setback in Donegal 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/donegal-count-independent-thomas-pringle-takes-final-seat-1.2549873>
 where the party lost one of its two sitting Teachtai Dála (Dáil members). 
However this was not a result of media mishaps by Adams but a misguided 
strategy of running three candidates, two of whom had the surname Doherty.

Nine opinion polls in the first six weeks of the year had Sinn Féin at an 
average of 18.3%, but then things started to fade and the next nine surveys 
averaged less than 16%, while the actual result on the day was less than 14%. 
When election day draws near, there is a tendency within elements of the Irish 
electorate to revert to the mainstream parties and call off their dalliance 
with alternatives such asSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> and the Trotskyist far left.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fireland-election-prospect-of-fine-gael-fianna-fail-coalition-divides-opinion-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ireland%20election%3A%20prospect%20of%20Fine%20Gael-Fianna%20F%C3%A1il%20coalition%20divides%20opinion%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fireland-election-prospect-of-fine-gael-fianna-fail-coalition-divides-opinion-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ireland%20election%3A%20prospect%20of%20Fine%20Gael-Fianna%20F%C3%A1il%20coalition%20divides%20opinion%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fireland-election-prospect-of-fine-gael-fianna-fail-coalition-divides-opinion-video&media=>
 Ireland election: prospect of Fine Gael-Fianna Fáil coalition divides opinion 
– video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/feb/27/ireland-election-prospect-of-fine-gael-fianna-fail-coalition-divides-opinion-video>
Napoleon said he wanted “lucky generals”, and Adams has had a stroke of luck 
in this election. The collapse of the Irish Labour party accompanied by a 
serious decline for Fine Gael means nobody believes the outgoing coalition 
government can be re-established. To do so would require the support of a 
virtual army of independents and smaller fringe parties and, even if this was 
achievable, it could hardly be sustained.

Ireland's fascinating election gets too little UK media coverage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/feb/25/irelands-fascinating-election-gets-too-little-uk-media-coverage>
The pressure is on Fianna Fáil to “put the country first” and form a grand 
coalition with Fine Gael to ensure continuity under challenging economic 
circumstances. Some observers believe a deal will be cut and the old civil war 
enemies will join together in a display of patriotic unity, having agreed on a 
share-out of cabinet posts plus a possible rotation of the office of Taoiseach 
(prime minister) between the two party leaders.

That would leave Sinn Féin as the largest party in opposition and the 
potential leader of an alternative administration after the next election. It’s 
a thought that keeps elements of the business community and upper 
middle-classes awake at night, but the current need to ensure stability may 
well override fears of an eventual republican takeover.

There is regular speculation about a successor to Adams and the usual names 
mentioned are Sinn Féin deputy leader Mary Lou McDonald, finance spokesman 
Pearse Doherty, and former MP from Newry and Armagh Conor Murphy. McDonald and 
Doherty are noted for their media-savvy performances and their contributions to 
parliamentary debate, but neither of them has the republican aura that still 
surrounds Adams.Murphy has been in prison for IRA activities 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conor_Murphy> but would be virtually unknown in 
the south.

So it looks like Gerry Adams will be part of the political scene for some time 
yet, unless he decides to call it a day himself. To paraphrase one of his own 
more notorious utterances,in relation to the IRA, he hasn’t gone away, you know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/26/ira-tradition-army-martin-mcguinness>
.
 