
General practice is changing and Health Education England is spearheading the “
nothing general about general practice <https://www.facebook.com/nothinggeneral>
” campaign to promote the profession and what it has to offer.

Describing it as “one career, endless opportunities”, the campaign uses short 
films, digital adverts and testaments from qualified GPs to help promote the 
idea of a “portfolio” career to medical trainees who may not have otherwise 
considered general practice as a career choice.

As independent contractors, GPs have a lot of control over how they work with 
their patients and with so many different commitments it can be easy to 
overlook just how intellectually and medically challenging the role actually 
is. Adapting to new ways of providing care, particularly over the last five 
years, and continuing to learn, means general practice is a diverse and 
fulfilling career.

Pursuing opportunities such as conducting research in academia or taking up 
business and leadership roles within a practice and locality allows doctors to 
develop clinical and business skills. What many people don’t realise is that 
the most visible but lesser-known opportunities for a GP can include working in 
an urgent care centre, administering treatment at festivals, on a sports field, 
or even supporting an expedition team.

Whitstable Medical Practice

A fantastic example of a practice working at the edge of innovation and 
allowing GPs to work with a multi-disciplinary team to get a huge breadth of 
experience and support isWhitstable Medical Practice 
<http://www.whitstablemedicalpractice.co.uk/> in Kent.

The practice is an NHS GP super-partnership, which achieved an outstanding 
rating from the Care Quality Commission. Staff morale is good and patient 
feedback is excellent. It operates from three sites, serving a population of 
approximately 36,000 people. Twenty GPs are encouraged to plan their hours to 
suit lifestyle, family commitments and combine clinical practice with further 
career opportunities. This means there is more scope to specialise and focus on 
areas of interest and expertise.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQpKztPZ8VcQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQpKztPZ8VcQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQpKztPZ8VcQ&media=>
Across the country, specialist services are moving out of hospitals and closer 
to people’s homes, with GPs interacting daily with other healthcare colleagues 
to share best practice and agree care plans for their patients. Career rewards 
for GPs include the satisfaction of building relationships and providing 
continued care for patients dealing with all stages of life.

Whitstable Medical Practice has integrated care under one roof, including 
patient services for long-term conditions, diagnostic facilities and more than 
30 outpatient clinics along with a minor injury unit with x-ray. It provides 
day surgery, cataract and dermatological operations. Whitstable’s 
musculoskeletal team has an on-site chiropractor and physiotherapist to 
complete the vast range of care on offer. As a result, trainee GPs can gain 
experience in the breadth of services as part of dedicated teams in the heart 
of the local community.


My career in general practice opened up a world of possibilities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/nhs-england-and-health-education-england-partner-zone/2016/nov/07/general-practice-careers-val-wass>
 “Our model combines traditional ‘named GP’ general practice with innovative 
working at scale. This enables GPs to feel part of an energetic 
multi-disciplinary team,” says Dr John Ribchester, senior and executive partner 
of Whitstable Medical Practice.

“New GPs are encouraged to develop their skills to pursue speciality 
interests, or consider a role in training and research. One consequence of this 
model is very high satisfaction among patients, GPs and practice staff.”

Young doctors often say one of the great attractions of working in general 
practice is working within a community, the relationships they are able to 
build, and continuity of care with their patients.

Resident Sue Langdown has witnessed the development of services offered by the 
practice.

“The community’s healthcare needs can be largely attended to in one place by 
the team of professionals at the practice,” she says. “We can book appointments 
with GPs, many of whom are highly qualified and skilled in specialist areas, or 
be referred to local clinics and specialist services like audiology, with ease. 
The administration is streamlined, the medical centres are modern and friendly 
– it all works. The perception in the local area is good as a result.

“Doctors sit at the heart of it all. The younger GPs bring their own new 
perspectives and qualities and are already widely experienced. We are fortunate 
to have such a level of expertise and continuity of care on our doorstep.”

If you would like more information about becoming a GP, visit the National 
Recruitment Office website 
<https://gprecruitment.hee.nhs.uk/Recruitment/Nothing-General> or our like our 
community Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/nothinggeneral> to keep 
updated.

Content on this page is paid for and produced by NHS England and Health 
Education England
 