
The OnePlus 3T is a minor update to a very good smartphone which improves on 
some key areas, but it isn’t quite the bargain the original was.


The Chinese smartphone firm only released the OnePlus 3 in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
, but already it has been replaced. The 3T is practically identical to its 
predecessor, a slight colour difference on the outside the only sign that 
things have changed.

According to OnePlus co-founder Carl Pei, the company had some improvements 
available that would fit more or less in the same package – a larger battery, 
faster processor and improved cameras – so rather than wait a year, it simply 
replaced the OnePlus 3 with the 3T.

But at the same time it has also increased the price of the smartphone, from 
its original £309 on launch, through its post Brexit referendum currency 
adjustment of £329 to a starting price of £399. Is the new 3T worth £70 more 
than the old 3?

Refined and smooth
 The gun metal grey colour is slightly darker than the grey of the OnePlus 3. 
Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The smooth aluminium body with a curved back and beveled sides feels every bit 
as good six months on with the 3T. It is a very nice smartphone to hold, touch 
and appreciate: there’s no doubt the 3T has the look and feel of a smartphone 
costing much more than £400.


The 5.5in 1080p AMOLED screen is great. Now you can customise the colour tone 
to your liking, although out of the box most people will be very happy with the 
more subtle colour mode OnePlus uses compared to other AMOLED-using phones such 
as the Samsung Galaxy S7.

With a pixel density of 401 pixels per inch, the 3T isn’t quite as crisp as 
top-end Android competitors, which have quad HD resolutions at the same screen 
size, and therefore side-by-side with a534ppi Google Pixel XL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/27/google-pixel-xl-review-phablet-price-smartphone-camera-android-71-nougat>
 it looks slightly less pin sharp. Most will be happy with it, although it will 
be noticeably poorer for virtual reality applications.

The narrow bezels and curved back make it manageable one-handed even with the 
5.5in screen. It isn’t quite as narrow as the current king of the large screen 
in a tiny bodied phone, the Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge, but it is 1mm narrower than 
the Pixel XL.
 The alert slider allows you to quickly switch between silent, priority and 
all notifications. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
 OnePlus’ excellent notification slider completes some well made buttons on 
the left and right side of the phone.

 * Screen: 5.5in full HD AMOLED (401ppi) 
 * Processor: quad-core Qualcomm Snapdragon 821 
 * RAM: 6GB of RAM 
 * Storage: 64 or 128GB 
 * Operating system: Android 6.0.1 OxygenOS 3.5 
 * Camera: 16MP rear camera with OIS, 16MP front-facing camera 
 * Connectivity: LTE, Dual-Sim, Wi-Fi, NFC, USB-C, Bluetooth 4.2 and GPS 
 * Dimensions: 152.7 x 74.7 x 7.35 mm 
 * Weight: 158g 
Longer battery life
 Dash Charge through USB-C for a rapid fill up. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for 
the Guardian 
The OnePlus 3T has the same amount of memory and storage as its predecessor, 
but has a slightly more powerful processor: the Snapdragon 821 from Qualcomm, 
which is used in other high-endAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> smartphones including the 
Pixel XL.

It feels snappy, but not quite the fastest smartphone on the market: the 
Huawei Mate 9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/25/huawei-mate-9-review-big-screen-long-battery-life-and-dual-cameras>
. It doesn’t feel any faster than theOnePlus 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
, but the battery did last longer between charges. It has a slightly larger 
battery, and software refinements over the last six months have made the 
experience smoother.

Used as my primary device with five hours of listening to music through 
Bluetooth earbuds, three hours spent browsing or using apps, occasional gaming 
and taking photos, with hundreds of push notifications throughout the day, the 
OnePlus 3T lasted around 36 hours between charges.

The big improvement over the 3 has been in standby performance: where the 3 
dropped 12-16% overnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
, the 3T dropped only 4%, which is very good compared to most of the 
competition.

Charging the battery is fast, too. With OnePlus’ proprietary Dash Charge power 
adapter and cable it took just over 70 minutes to reach 100% from zero charge, 
which is right up there with the fastest charging smartphones. It can also be 
charged using pretty much any USB charger, but at a standard rate.
 Two sim slots allow you to have two numbers connected to one phone. 
Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
The OnePlus 3T also has dual-Sim support, which means two mobile phone 
contracts and two numbers can be used at the same time in the same phone. It’s 
a common and useful feature in Asia, but rare in the UK, and makes travelling 
or juggling a work and personal phone much easier within one device.

The fingerprint scanner on the front, which doubles as a home button, is 
excellent. It’s fast, accurate and works great.

OxygenOS 3.5
 OxygenOS 3.5 is a slightly tweaked version of Android 6 Marshmallow with some 
of the features of Android 7 Nougat. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
OnePlus customises Android to create OxygenOS. Unlike some other manufacturers 
the changes are subtle, more refinements rather than drastic alterations.

If you’re a fan of the standard Android experience, you will appreciate 
OxygenOS. It has more customisation options, from the ability to swap the 
navigation buttons over, put them on screen or use the capacitive buttons 
beside the fingerprint scanner, to extended gesture support and tweaks for the 
dual-Sim capabilities.

But the 3T ships with OxygenOS 3.5, which is based on last year’s Android 
6.0.1 Marshmallow, not thenewest Android 7 Nougat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/android-7-nougat-review-battery-life-multitasking-operation-notifications-facial-recognition-android>
. OnePlus expects to have an update to Nougat available before the end of the 
year. So far, it has not had the best track record for speedy software updates, 
but has got better over the last few months.

Camera
 The camera is good and the camera app easy to use. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs 
for the Guardian 
The 16-megapixel rear camera has some subtle improvements to detail and noise 
suppressionover the OnePlus 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
. Overall it’s a capable camera, shooting detailed shots in good lighting and 
solid if not remarkable shots in lowlight. It’s not quite as good as the best 
from Samsung or Google, but it’s hard to take a rubbish shot with the 3T.

The 16-megapixel selfie camera is one of the highest resolution front-facing 
cameras available, and although more megapixels does not always equal better 
results, the 3T produced some of the most detailed and natural-looking selfies 
I’ve ever shot, even in tough lighting conditions such as office fluorescent 
strip lights.

Price

The OnePlus 3T is available in either gun metal grey or soft gold with 64GB of 
storage for £399 or just in gun metal with 128GB of storage for £439. It’s also 
available exclusively with a mobile phone contract with O2 in the UK.

For comparison, the 5.5in Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/11/samsung-galaxy-s7-edge-review-android-smartphone-phablet-marshmallow>
 costs £520, theGoogle Pixel XL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/27/google-pixel-xl-review-phablet-price-smartphone-camera-android-71-nougat>
 costs £719, theHuawei Mate 9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/25/huawei-mate-9-review-big-screen-long-battery-life-and-dual-cameras>
 costs €699 (£589) and theApple iPhone 7 Plus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/03/iphone-7-plus-review-apple-newest-smartphone-phablet>
 costs £719.

Verdict

The OnePlus 3T is an excellent smartphone. The fit and finish is right up 
there with the best, the metal design is refined and even with a 5.5in screen, 
it’s a manageable smartphone to use on a daily basis.

It isn’t quite the bargain the OnePlus 3 was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
, and I don’t think it’s worth £70 more than the previous model. But with 
currency fluctuations the way they are and the pound down against the US dollar 
it’s not all about profit. It is still excellent value for £400 whenApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/03/iphone-7-plus-review-apple-newest-smartphone-phablet>
 andGoogle’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/27/google-pixel-xl-review-phablet-price-smartphone-camera-android-71-nougat>
 equivalent smartphones, that boast less storage, cost £719.

With the backing of O2, OnePlus also now has more legitimacy as a manufacturer 
in the UK. And while there’s certainly room for improvement, the company is 
committed to delivering faster software updates.

You get more than what you pay for with the OnePlus 3T compared to rivals.

Pros: all-metal, great fingerprint sensor, good screen, fast charging, good 
cameras, excellent notification slider, dual-Sim with dual standby, cheaper 
than rivals

Cons: not quite as cheap as it once was, no removable battery, no expandable 
storage, slow charging from non-Dash charge power adapters, screen low res for 
VR, not yet running Nougat
 The curved back feels great in the hand and produces some interesting 
reflections and colours from different light sources. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs 
for the Guardian 
Other reviews

 * Five of the best phablets for 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/26/best-phablets-apple-iphone-7-plus-google-pixel-xl-samsung-galaxy-s7-edge>
 * OnePlus 3 review: flagship phone at mid-range price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/oneplus-3-review-flagship-phone-at-mid-range-price>
 * Huawei Mate 9 review: big screen, long battery life and dual cameras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/25/huawei-mate-9-review-big-screen-long-battery-life-and-dual-cameras>
 * Google Pixel XL review: very good phablet but with price tag to match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/27/google-pixel-xl-review-phablet-price-smartphone-camera-android-71-nougat>
 * Huawei P9 Plus review: high-class phablet held back by sub-par software 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/07/huawei-p9-plus-review-high-class-phablet-sub-par-software>
 * Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge review: this is the smartphone to beat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/11/samsung-galaxy-s7-edge-review-android-smartphone-phablet-marshmallow>
 * iPhone 7 Plus review: 2014 called – it wants its phablet back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/03/iphone-7-plus-review-apple-newest-smartphone-phablet> 