
To be launched in 2018, Crossrail is now not only an obsession for planners, 
engineers and architects, but is also being sold as a potentialcatalyst 
<http://www.savills.co.uk/research_articles/186866/187170-0> for much-needed 
housing investment and regeneration. Will the capital’s biggest infrastructure 
project,funded mainly by the public purse 
<http://www.crossrail.co.uk/about-us/funding>, help address its housing 
problems? The evidence suggests that, despite the praise, it may make them 
worse.

London, according to a recent study by PricewaterhouseCoopers 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/property/property-market/12157946/Generation-Rent-London-to-become-a-city-of-renters-by-2025.html>
, will be a majority-renting city (60%) by 2025. This majority is paying for 
Crossrail (recently unveiled as the Elizabeth Line) through their taxes and, 
soon, their fares. They will be rewarded with higher rents and house prices.


Estate agents and property developers, at least, are optimistic. “Crossrail 
has already triggered land purchases, development activity and price growth 
along its route but plenty of opportunities and gains still remain”, says JLL 
Residential in a2015 report 
<http://residential.jll.co.uk/~/media/Residential/research/pdfs/jll-crossrail-station-summary-research-report-2015.ashx?la=en-GB>
 (pdf). Highlighting Whitechapel and Woolwich as “the biggest winners from 
Crossrail” with house price increases of over 50% between 2014 and 2020, the 
report also suggests “longer-term, but more opportunistic, locations” such as 
“Ilford, Forest Gate, Abbey Wood, Slough and Southall”.

Overall, JLL notes that although some Crossrail locations may not immediately 
appeal to certain developers, house prices will, on average, increase by 36% 
along the Elizabeth Line by 2020. Even before the first trains run, the 
property consultant CBRE ispredicting 
<http://www.homesandproperty.co.uk/property-news/the-crossrail-effect-the-top-elizabeth-line-stations-tipped-for-house-price-growth-a99801.html>
 “an average £133,000 price hike”.

Londoners should pay at least half of Crossrail 2 bill, Lord Adonis says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/10/londoners-should-pay-at-least-half-of-crossrail-2-bill-lord-adonis-says>
How will this value uplift 
<http://pdf.euro.savills.co.uk/residential---other/london-development-spring-2015.pdf>
 (pdf) affect renters? Inan update 
<http://residential.jll.co.uk/new-residential-thinking-home/research/crossrail-opportunities-2016/jll-crossrail-tool-2016>
 on their original 2015 report, JLL highlighted areas that would be the main 
beneficiaries to rising rents along the Elizabeth Line. The “winners” were 
(again) Whitechapel, Woolwich and Ealing Broadway, which will all see rents 
increase by over 30% by 2020. Good news for landlords and developers; not so 
good for the35% of Whitechapel residents who rent in the private sector 
<http://www.futureoflondon.org.uk/futureoflondon/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2014/04/Crossrail-as-Catalyst-web-version-5.pdf>
, or for the tens of thousands of people across the city who need toclaim 
housing benefit 
<http://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/housing-benefit-claimants--borough/resource/f571b117-1975-4e51-95f2-b1f5001a4ce8>
 to survive in the private market.

So who are the true winners? Commuters are likely to suffer less 
<http://www.cityam.com/221117/citymapper-showing-londoners-how-much-time-commuters-will-save-crossrail-suggesting-journeys>
 and the physical construction of Crossrail has provided a welcomeboost to 
employment 
<http://www.crossrail.co.uk/news/articles/new-figures-show-impact-of-crossrail-on-jobs-and-growth-around-the-uk>
. But when it comes to housing, the real, long-term beneficiaries will be 
estate agents, property developers and homeowners.

Indeed, they are already cashing in. Research from Knight Frank 
<http://content.knightfrank.com/research/520/documents/en/2015-2767.pdf> (pdf), 
another London-based real estate consultancy, indicates that “increased demand 
for property close to transport links has a clear relationship with price 
performance.” The authors of the research add that “the anticipation of new 
transport links also affects prices”, and that “on average, prices within a 10 
or 15 minute walk from Crossrail stations have already outperformed prices in 
the wider local authorities … [On average] the outperformance is around 5%”. 
This is because “the anticipation of new transport links affects prices”. In 
Slough, for example, pricesincreased faster 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-35924474> than anywhere else in Britain 
between February 2015 and February 2016.

Cities other than London might have appreciated some of the £14.8bn 
<http://www.crossrail.co.uk/news/crossrail-in-numbers> being spent on 
Crossrail, one of the largest construction projects in British history. Yet 
despite criticism over the capital’s largeslice of national infrastructure 
spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/25/london-crossrail-elizabeth-line-transport-north-reverse>
, the Crossrail project has been praised across the political spectrum as an
“incredible feat of engineering” 
<http://www.crossrail.co.uk/news/articles/prime-minister-and-mayor-of-london-celebrate-completion-of-crossrails-tunnelling-marathon>
 (David Cameron) and as“the backbone of the transport infrastructure for 
London’s business and financial service sector” 
<http://www.crossrail.co.uk/news/articles/crossrail-reborn> (Ken Livingstone).

While the Elizabeth Line – a multibillion pound public investment – is 
promising opportunities, gains and unlocked potential, it is increasingly clear 
that this promise will not trickle down any time soon to those who don’t own 
property.

Harry Blain is a researcher at LSE Cities, London School of Economics and 
Political Science.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. 

 