
The most expensive political battle in Oregon’s history will culminate next 
week when Oregonians go to the polls. But the fight isn’t betweenHillary Clinton
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and Donald Trump. 
Instead, big business has been bombarding voters with ads in an effort to see 
off a bill that would force them to pay more in taxes towards funding the 
state’s education, healthcare and senior services.

Oregon has the lowest corporate taxes in the country, chiefly due to the state 
having no sales tax. In corporate income tax, however,Oregon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/oregon> rests somewhere in the middle.


The proposal, Measure 97, would make any corporation with annual sales of more 
than $25m in Oregon pay a minimum tax of $30,001, plus a 2.5% tax on their 
sales above $25m.


The contentious debate over the ballot measure has left the state divided, 
with millions being spent on ads, mailers and TV spots. Some of the world’s 
largest corporations – Shell, Walmart, Comcast and Wells Fargo – have paid out 
of pocket to defeat the corporate tax increase in Oregon. Total contributions 
both in and out of state exceed over $23m.

Proposed by the union-led coalition Our Oregon, the measure is aimed at 
stabilizing a trembling Oregon economy and avoiding a looming $1.4bn budget 
shortfall for the next two years. State economists project the corporate tax 
increase would raise some $3bn a year in revenue, increasing the state’s budget 
by roughly a third.


More than most states, the Democratic-dominated Oregon relies on personal 
income taxes – which total 75% of the state’s tax collections – to fund 
services and programs like education, public safety and prisons. “Because of 
our high dependence on the personal income tax, we have more volatility than 
the typical state,” said economist Paul Warner, of Oregon’s non-partisan 
Legislative Revenue Office (LRO).


In an economic upturn – when Oregonians are making money – the state budget 
benefits from increased personal income tax revenue. But when a recession hits, 
income tax becomes a faulty cash stream, and the state is forced to shortchange 
programs and services. The ballot measure is intended to make the state less 
reliant on personal income taxes and more on gross receipts revenue from large 
businesses.

But the debate has opponents and supporters shouting different answers to the 
same question: who bears the cost in the end?


While the measure would directly tax only a small pool of the wealthiest 
corporations – less than a quarter of 1% of all businesses operating in the 
state – opponents claim that Measure 97 is a deceptively disguised sales tax, 
which Oregonians have continually shot down since the 1930s.


A coalition of more than 26,000 supporters – including consumers, family 
farmers, small and large businesses, and local chambers of commerce – have come 
together to defeat it.


They argue that it will be detrimental to businesses with low margins. 
Meanwhile, the tax would be levied on all transactions down the line in the 
retail, wholesale and utility sectors. The result, they warn, would be higher 
prices for Oregonians on everything from electricity and healthcare to food and 
medicine.


“There’s a consensus that there will be some upward pressure on prices. I 
think the issue is around how much,” said Warner, who estimates that consumer 
prices would increase by 0.8%.


Robert Whelan, director of the economic consulting firm ECONorthwest, said the 
problem is that Measure 97 taxes sales, not profits. “A chain like Safeway or 
Fred Meyer passes the $25m threshold in the first week of each year,” he said. 
“Thereafter, they have to pay 2.5% of their sales in tax, even if the stores 
fail to make a profit. And that happens.”


Portland General Electric (PGE) has contributed $250,000 to the campaign 
against Measure 97. “Various suppliers, vendors and contractors we work with 
would also be subject to the new tax, and can be expected to pass their 
increased costs along to us,” said Steven Corson, communications director at 
PGE. He predicts the company’s retail customer base of more than 800,000 would 
face a price increase of about 2%.


The Legislative Revenue Office (LRO) has projected that the measure could cost 
the average Oregonian household an extra $600 per year.


Higher expenses for residents and the loss of thousands of private sector jobs 
“are huge prices for Oregonians to pay, especially when there is absolutely no 
guarantee for how the money would be spent”, said Rebecca Tweed, the statewide 
campaign coordinator for the measure’s opposition. While the language of the 
measure says it is to fund education, healthcare and senior services, the 
legislative assembly is not bound by a promise.


The opposition says voters should not be put in charge of the state’s tax 
system. “Addressing and resolving Oregon’s budget needs and tax policy is the 
responsibility of the Oregon legislature and the governor,” said Tweed.


But supporters say the opposition is using scare tactics – screaming job loss 
and price hikes – to dissuade voters. They argue that competitive pressures 
will make it difficult for corporations to raise prices.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Foregon-corporate-income-tax-proposal-voters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d4a3f417e47da6a004dcc82002d2d10607d28a%2F0_108_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oregon's%20voters%20divided%20on%20corporate%20sales%20tax%20proposal%20to%20fund%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Foregon-corporate-income-tax-proposal-voters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oregon%27s%20voters%20divided%20on%20corporate%20sales%20tax%20proposal%20to%20fund%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Foregon-corporate-income-tax-proposal-voters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d4a3f417e47da6a004dcc82002d2d10607d28a%2F0_108_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Former Clinton rival Bernie Sanders is backing Measure 97, a bill to increase 
taxes on Oregon’s big businesses. Photograph: UPI / Barcroft Images 
“Research shows that the large out-of-state corporations generally have 
national pricing strategies, which means that they charge the same price for 
the same product in every state. There is no relationship between tax regimes 
and corporate pricing,” said Martin Hart-Landsberg, proponent of Measure 97 and 
professor of economics at Lewis and Clark College in Portland.


Katherine Driessen, a spokeswoman for the Yes on 97 campaign, said big 
business wouldn’t be sweating it if their customers were going to bear the 
cost. “The only reason that corporations like Wells Fargo and Comcast are 
spending millions is because they know that it’s corporations, not consumers, 
that are going to pay this tax,” she said.


In the 2013–2014 budget year, businesses in Oregon accounted for an estimated 
37.6% of taxes, the fourth lowest of the 50 states and the District of 
Columbia, according to a study by Ernst & Young for the Council on State 
Taxation. If passed, Measure 97 would put Oregon’s business share of total 
state and local taxes at 45.4%, just above the national average at 45%. The 
measure would also bump Oregon up from 28th to 20th highest in total per capita 
taxes.


If Measure 97 fails to pass, supporters fear a continuation of the status quo, 
which they say is unacceptable.


While education receives about 40% of the state’s almost $20bn general fund, a 
large group of educators and parents say resources are stretched.


“Educators are frontline witnesses to the trauma our students come from,” said 
Suzanne Cohen, president of the Portland Association of Teachers, adding that a 
limited staff of nurses and social workers could not meet the demands of 
impoverished students.


Educators are having to choose between keeping physical education or electives 
like art and music, while receiving unfunded mandates from the state, such as 
requiring career and technical education. “But without increased revenue, 
you’re left increasing class size and cutting from other programs,” said Cohen.


Oregon has the fourth-lowest high school graduation rate and the third-largest 
class size in the country.


A school that offers a place to learn, even if the kids have nowhere to live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/16/homeless-school-portland-oregon-community-transitional>
According to Cohen, every aspect of education – from transportation to 
curriculum to cafeteria standards – has been stripped. Even basics such as 
textbooks, pencils and paper are scarce. In Portland, school buildings have 
been vulnerable to lead in the water, asbestos, airborne heavy metals, and 
earthquakes.


Cohen said Measure 97 was really about “getting people to understand how much 
more money this could be for our schools and how much it could provide”.


Property taxes had been a traditional source of education funding in the past, 
but in the 1990s voters began dialing them back.


Mireille Lafont, member of the board of directors of the Oregon Public Health 
Association, said voters should stop dividing sectors over the measure. 
“Measure 97 is a public health issue, inclusively,” she said. “Education is 
public health, and it creates better opportunity for health.”


Lafont points out that Oregon has consistently ranked in the bottom half in 
the country for public health spending. Measure 97 could help fill in the gaps.


Moreover, one in 10 Oregonians still lacks medical insurance, while 61% more 
Oregon seniors are living in poverty today compared with a decade ago.


Without Measure 97, the state would be forced to look to other revenue options 
and austerity. Larger sectors, like education, would probably bear the brunt.


A new poll conducted for Oregon Public Broadcasting (OPB) shows 48% of 
respondents oppose the measure, while 43% support it – including Governor Kate 
Brown – and 10% are undecided. The former presidential candidateBernie Sanders 
<http://www.bizjournals.com/portland/search/results?q=Bernie%20Sanders> 
announced his support for Measure 97 in October.


In the presidential election, Clinton has a 10-point lead in some polls. It’ll 
be big business more than the Democrats biting their nails next Tuesday.
 