
A full-length portrait of a young, dapper and confident Oscar Wilde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde>, painted as a wedding present 
for his doomed marriage to Constance, is to be exhibited in the UK for the 
first time.

Tate Britain announced that the painting, which has been in Los Angeles since 
the 1920s, is to be a star of its 2017 show,Queer British Art 1861-1967 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/19/queer-british-art-show-leads-tate-2017-programme>
.

The 1.85 metre (6ft) oil painting depicted Wilde as a slender 27-year-old on 
the cusp of success, the exhibition curator Clare Barlow said.


“His stance is confident, holding a pair of gloves in one hand while the other 
clasps a silver-topped cane. It presents a different, more sombre image to the 
one we are more familiar with,” she said.

The portrait was painted by the US artist Robert Goodloe Harper Pennington and 
presented to Wilde and his wife, Constance, as a wedding present in 1884.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Foscar-wilde-portrait-to-have-first-uk-exhibition-robert-goodloe-harper-pennington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05c17b786d9559044ab0e7cc378120e628f299b9%2F0_0_2061_4364%2F2061.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscar%20Wilde%20portrait%20to%20have%20first%20UK%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Foscar-wilde-portrait-to-have-first-uk-exhibition-robert-goodloe-harper-pennington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscar%20Wilde%20portrait%20to%20have%20first%20UK%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Foscar-wilde-portrait-to-have-first-uk-exhibition-robert-goodloe-harper-pennington%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05c17b786d9559044ab0e7cc378120e628f299b9%2F0_0_2061_4364%2F2061.jpg>
 The full portrait. Photograph: William Andrews Clark Memorial Library 
Unsurprisingly, Wilde loved it. It was the couple’s most prized possession and 
hung above the fireplace in their Chelsea home during the good years.

Wilde was at the height of his fame and powers when, in April 1895, the 
Marquess of Queensberry, the father of Wilde’s lover, Lord Alfred Douglas, or 
Bosie, accused Wilde of “posing as a sodomite”.


Wilde took the catastrophic decision to sue, setting in train a sequence of 
events which led to a spirit-sapping jail term, hard labour and an early death.

During the trial, evidence was presented of Wilde’s relationships with other 
men, causing the trial to collapse. On 25 May 1895 he was sentenced to two 
years’ imprisonment with hard labour in solitary confinement on the charge of 
gross indecency.

While awaiting trial, Wilde was declared bankrupt, meaning all his belongings, 
including the portrait, were sold at auction to pay his debts. Most of the 
belongings remain untraced but the portrait was bought by Wilde’s friends 
Ernest and Ada Leverson.

The couple kept it in storage in their Kensington house, with Wilde remarking 
that Ernest “could not have [it] in his drawing room as it was obviously, on 
account of its subject, demoralising to young men, and possibly to young women, 
of advanced views”.

The painting was later in the home of Wilde’s former lover and lifelong friend 
Robert Ross. After his death it was sold to the US collector William Andrews 
Clark and has remained in the US ever since. It is being loaned to Tate Britain 
by theWilliam Andrews Memorial Library <http://clarklibrary.ucla.edu/>, part of 
the University of California, Los Angeles.

The portrait will be displayed in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> next to the door from Wilde’s prison 
cell, c.3.3, in Reading jail.

It was behind this door that Wilde wrote De Profundis, his extended letter to 
Bosie which is considered one of the greatest letters in the English language, 
including lines such as: “Most people live for love and admiration. But it is 
by love and admiration that we should live.”

The time in his cell also inspired The Ballad of Reading Gaol, which he wrote 
while in exile in France.

Wilde’s spirit was broken by the brutal regime in Reading. He was released 
from jail sick, bankrupt, separated from his wife and unable to see his 
children. By 1900, at the age of 46, Wilde was dead.

Oscar Wilde’s prison cell key goes up for auction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/07/oscar-wilde-prison-cell-key-up-for-auction-reading>
Alex Farquharson, the director of Tate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain>, said it was wonderful 
to be able to display such an important portrait in Britain for the first time.

“It’s an extraordinary image of Wilde on the brink of fame, before 
imprisonment destroyed his health and reputation. Viewing it next to the door 
of his jail cell will be a powerful experience that captures the triumph and 
tragedy of his career.”

The Queer British Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> show is 
being staged to mark the 50th anniversary of the decriminalisation of male 
homosexuality in England and Wales. It will present work from the abolition of 
the death penalty for sodomy in 1861 to the passing of the Sexual Offences Act 
in 1967.

The exhibition is expected to include works by David Hockney, John Singer 
Sargent, Francis Bacon, Dora Carrington, Ethel Sands and Keith Vaughan. It will 
also explore lesser known lives and stories, for example the ruination of the 
pre-Raphaelite Simeon Solomon who was spurned by his friends after being 
arrested in a public toilet.

• Queer British Art 1861-1967 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/queer-british-art-1861-1967>
 will be at Tate Britain 5 April-1 October.
 