
Dancers wearing Princess Diana-esque jumpers and fake pearls are to feature at 
Tate Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> for the 
next six months in an artwork that combines 1980s power dressing with 
17th-century baroque.

Pablo Bronstein’s Historical Dances in An Antique Setting is this year’s Tate 
Britain commission, which since 2000 has invited artists to fill the building’s 
large, neo-classical Duveen galleries.

At any given time between 11am-5pm three classically trained dancers will 
weave through the spaces with movements drawn from the 17th-century Italian 
concept ofsprezzatura, which laid down how gentlemen were supposed to behave – 
what we might now see as a kind of camp, wrist-flicking nonchalance.

Equally, Bronstein said, we might see them as gestures from contemporary 
voguing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/nov/18/-sp-vogueing-dance-came-back-into-vogue-madonna>
 – the urban dance movement formed in New York in the 1980s and which became 
famous globally with Madonna’s hit Vogue.

Bronstein said he was fusing baroque gestures with everyday walking. “It is 
showing how mannered walking can be and how normalised baroque gestures can 
become if seen often enough.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpablo-bronstein-tate-britain-dancers-mix-madonna-baroque%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa16eb47b65a73ddbae062661f89852d61ebb223d%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pablo%20Bronstein%20at%20Tate%20Britain%3A%20dancers%20mix%20Madonna%20and%20baroque&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpablo-bronstein-tate-britain-dancers-mix-madonna-baroque%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pablo%20Bronstein%20at%20Tate%20Britain%3A%20dancers%20mix%20Madonna%20and%20baroque&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpablo-bronstein-tate-britain-dancers-mix-madonna-baroque%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa16eb47b65a73ddbae062661f89852d61ebb223d%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Pablo Bronstein has mixed 1980s fashion with the 17th-century Italian concept 
ofsprezzatura. Photograph: Ian Gavan/Getty Images 
He is further playing with time by dressing dancers in classical ballet 
leggings and jumpers with rolled up sleeves, and pearls that hark back to the 
1980s.

Bronstein has long been interested in pre-modern European design and 
architecture and like his other work, the piece explores “how falsified history 
is … how it is constantly remade in the present”.


Previous Tate Britain commissions in the Duveen galleries include Mark 
Wallinger (2007), who recreated Brian Haw’s Parliament Square protest, Martin 
Creed (2008), who simply had runners sprinting as fast as they could, and 
Phyllida Barlow (2014) and hervast ramshackle sculpture dock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/31/phyllida-barlow-dock-2014-tate-britain-review>
 made from throwaway materials such as cardboard, polystyrene and wooden 
pallets.

It is Bronstein’s most ambitious work to date, and filling a space which was a 
real challenge, said the artist. “It is very difficult, it’s huge, it’s cold, 
it’s gloomy, it’s grim and hard and not great for dancers because of the stone 
floor. But it is also beautifully designed and manageably sized … it is 
monumental but not as big as you think.”


Getting the right dancers was also tricky as Bronstein was after a certain 
type of person. “It is not a question of technical expertise,” he said. “You 
can have the best ballet technique in the world but if you can’t flick your 
wrist the way I want you to flick it then you’re no good to me. As cruel as it 
sounds I have to see how people move and then decide whether to work with them.”

Pablo Bronstein: Historical Dances in an Antique Setting 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/pablo-bronstein-historical-dances-antique-setting>
 is at Tate Britain from 26 April to 9 October
 