
Councils up and down the country have been accused of “selling off the crown 
jewels” in their efforts to cope with funding cuts and the impending loss of 
£18bn in central government grants.

Take just three examples. In Sheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield>, the city council has agreed that a 
Chinese consortium can explore plans to lease the Grade II-listed central 
library and redevelop it into a five-star hotel, a move castigated as a “sad 
reflection” on the city; in Hornsey, north London the disposal of the town hall 
has been dubbed a “shameful handover of the family silver”, and in Ealing, west 
London, the Labour-controlled council has been castigated for “betraying the 
borough” by disposing of its “crown jewels”, such as allowing the redevelopment 
of the Grade II-listed town hall into a hotel.

In a letter to the Sheffield Star, comedian, writer and presenter Michael 
Palin, who was born in the city, wrote: “The Sheffield central library embodies 
the very best aspects of civic pride. It is a fine building, built to give 
education and literacy a prominent place at the very heart of the city. That a 
building, seeking to improve the lot of all Sheffielders, should end up as a 
hotel for the rich and privileged seems to be a sad reflection on how little 
the city cares for its public service legacy.”

Supporters of the scheme argue that while the city would have to move the 
library elsewhere, it would gain £1m in annual revenue from leasing the 
building and would be free of the £30m repair bill at a time when the 
Labour-controlled council is facing unprecedented financial pressures – since 
2010, the council has had £352m cut from its budget and is set to lose a 
further £116m by 2021.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcities-pay-price-of-austerity-selling-civic-heritage-sheffield-london-parks-libraries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6b175f2e6e0d0e33c6bdf69862f51e93281f63b%2F0_411_3652_2191%2F3652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parks%2C%20libraries%2C%20halls%3A%20cities%20pay%20price%20of%20austerity%20by%20selling%20their%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcities-pay-price-of-austerity-selling-civic-heritage-sheffield-london-parks-libraries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parks%2C%20libraries%2C%20halls%3A%20cities%20pay%20price%20of%20austerity%20by%20selling%20their%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcities-pay-price-of-austerity-selling-civic-heritage-sheffield-london-parks-libraries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6b175f2e6e0d0e33c6bdf69862f51e93281f63b%2F0_411_3652_2191%2F3652.jpg>
 The town hall in Hornsey, north London may be turned into a hotel and 
restaurants. Photograph: Alamy 
In Hornsey, campaigner Chris Currer condemned the sale of the Grade II*-listed 
town hall for £27m to Far East Consortium International in the face of 
widespread community concern: “Haringey council’s choice seems to hinge mostly 
on the money; the community’s choice seems to hinge mostly on the definition of 
‘community’.”

The Hong Kong-based developer plans to turn the building, a local landmark, 
into a hotel and apartment complex, with an arts centre. Nearly 7,000 people 
have signed a petition opposing the sale but the Labour-controlled council 
decided that selling the building was the only way to secure its future and 
remove it from Historic England’sHeritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> at Risk register, while also 
generating income.

Writing last week in the London Review of Books, one of its editors, Tom 
Crewe, argued 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v38/n24/tom-crewe/the-strange-death-of-municipal-england> 
that “the creation of the British state was a municipal project, and the state 
is now being unmade by the collapse of that project”.

He pointed out that parks, museums, libraries and town halls formed the idea 
of community as much as the social services that councils came to provide. That 
fabric of community, he said, is being cut to pieces. “We fret and fume about 
this council here, that service there, while the whole system is sliding off a 
cliff.

“There are hundreds of local examples of the impact of austerity, each unhappy 
in its own way, but it is only when they are viewed in aggregate that a picture 
emerges of an entire social infrastructure being destroyed.”

The future for that infrastructure looks bleak, with local authorities facing 
the loss of the revenue support grant – the £18bn in funding that comes from 
central government – in 2020. According to the Local Government Association, 
councils will have £9.9bn in unfunded costs by 2019-20.

Compounding the problem, councils have few powers to raise revenue and are 
forbidden from running a deficit. Selling off buildings that are costly to 
maintain and repair, and may no longer be fit for purpose, presents its own set 
of difficulties because local authorities are not legally permitted to use the 
proceeds from the sale of their assets to fund public services.

“Our vision of local government is still bound up by the big town hall,” says 
Simon Parker, author ofTaking Power Back: Putting People in Charge of Politics 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Taking-Power-Back-Putting-Politics/dp/1447326873>. 
“But if you walk around a lot of these buildings they’ve not been modernised. 
They are wonderful – they’ve got this huge history and sense of pride attached 
to them – but they’re not a place you can run a modern business. The challenge 
is to keep them as an anchor for change.

“People value elements of what’s around them but equally there are huge 
pressures, for example on housing. The challenge for local authorities is how 
to be more self-sufficient but not at the cost of the people who feel a sense 
of loss.”

For some, however, the age of imposing municipal buildings is over, and we are 
entering one of charismatic figureheads.

“The new mayors are going to be big political figures,” said Jo Casebourne, 
programme director at the Institute for Government. “Once people buy into the 
concept of mayors and see their value, as we’ve seen inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, then the symbolism of having a mayor 
will become important. Having that personal power and visible local leadership 
can make a vital difference.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcities-pay-price-of-austerity-selling-civic-heritage-sheffield-london-parks-libraries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97c412e0acdc8e31bc529b33f0655720b4c67856%2F0_169_5159_3095%2F5159.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parks%2C%20libraries%2C%20halls%3A%20cities%20pay%20price%20of%20austerity%20by%20selling%20their%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcities-pay-price-of-austerity-selling-civic-heritage-sheffield-london-parks-libraries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parks%2C%20libraries%2C%20halls%3A%20cities%20pay%20price%20of%20austerity%20by%20selling%20their%20heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcities-pay-price-of-austerity-selling-civic-heritage-sheffield-london-parks-libraries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97c412e0acdc8e31bc529b33f0655720b4c67856%2F0_169_5159_3095%2F5159.jpg>
 An area of the South Downs National Park may be sold off to developers. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Assets at risk


Liverpool Municipal Buildings


Faced with the need to make savings of £90m over the next three years 
Liverpool city council has decided to sell the Grade II*-listed Municipal 
Buildings, having deemed the 150-year-old structure “surplus to requirements”. 
Built between 1860 and 1866, the ornate buildings feature 16 sandstone figures 
ranged around the balcony signifying the arts, sciences and industries of 
Liverpool. At the centre of the building is a 148ft tower complete with 
balconies, clocks and five bells.Its new suitors include office, retail, 
leisure and residential developers. One leading bidder for the site wants to 
turn it into a five-star hotel themed around Liverpool’s history.

Ealing town hall


Ealing’s Labour-controlled council approved a deal with developer Mastcraft in 
July to turn the Grade II-listed building into a 140-bed boutique hotel. “This 
is a major loss of a community asset; an asset that was built by public 
subscription,” said the Conservative group leader for the west London borough. 
“The town hall is an iconic building in the heart of Ealing and for a large 
portion of it to be lost to ten generations is incomprehensible.” Julian Bell, 
the council’s leader, defended the 245-year lease agreement, arguing that it 
would generate revenue and reduce the cost to the council of maintaining and 
repairing the building.

South Downs


In the face of local protests, Brighton and Hove City Council this month put 
on hold plans to sell some of its 12,500 acres in the South Downs National Park 
to help fund a project to restore the city’s 18th century Stanmer Park. Just 
along the coast, Eastbourne council is looking to dispose of 3,000 acres of 
land in the Eastbourne Downs, both councils driven by the need to review 
“non-core assets”. Brighton and Hove’s attempted sale was criticised by the 
South Downs National Park head, Trevor Beattie, who declared: “They are not 
just local assets, they are national legacies.”

Hornsey town hall


A plan for the Far East Consortium to redevelop Hornsey town hall in the north 
London borough of Haringey, turning it into a boutique hotel, with restaurants 
and an arts venue, attracted opposition when it was approved in October. The 
1935 Grade II* listed building had fallen into disrepair and needed an outside 
investor to make it good, said the council. The listed building, reputed to be 
the venue for Queen’s first concert, in 1971, sold for £27m. Despite a petition 
signed by nearly 7,000 people and a request by the local MP to reopen 
discussions with local housing associations, the sale is set to be confirmed 
next month.
 