
Following in the footsteps of Michael Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/09/michael-moore-donald-trump-morning-after-to-do-list-facebook>
,Amy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/10/amy-schumer-trump-kicking-screaming-babies>
 andJennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/jennifer-lawrence-donald-trump-election-president-protests>
, Leslie Knope – the relentlessly positive public servant from Park and 
Recreation, who is played by Amy Poehler – has chipped in with a letter to 
America after Donald Trump’s win in the presidential campaign.

Amy Poehler: ‘I see life as being attacked by a bear'
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/11/amy-poehler> 
The fictional character, who has been compared to Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/aug/13/hillary-clinton-parks-and-recreation-hadley-freeman>
, begins: “Amidst the confusion, and despair, and disbelief, it was suggested 
to me by a very close friend of mine (I won’t say her name, to protect her 
identity) (Ann. It was Ann) that perhaps a few people would enjoy hearing my 
thoughts on this election.”


Originally appearing on Vox 
<http://www.vox.com/first-person/2016/11/10/13580582/leslie-knope-donald-trump>
, the letter continues with a typically Knopian anecdote about a fourth grade 
social sciences lesson involving a cartoon tortoise named Greenie, and a jaguar 
named Speedy, who strike resemblances to the Republican and Democratic nominees.

“Rick Dissellio read a speech from Speedy, in which he promised that, if 
elected, he would end school early, have extra recess, and provide endless 
lunches of chocolate pizzandy (a local Pawnee delicacy at the time: deep fried 
pizza where the crust was candy bars),” she writes of the Trump-esque option.

Knope’s speech from Greenie was a more measured approach from a candidate “who 
promised to go slow and steady, think about the problems of our school, and try 
her best to solve them in a way that would benefit the most people”.

After losing the election Knope learned to except it because that’s how 
democracy works. “I acknowledge thatDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is the president,” she adds. 
“I understand, intellectually, that he won the election. But I do not accept 
that our country has descended into the hatred-swirled slop pile that he lives 
in.”

While directly addressing young girls, she writes: “Our president-elect is 
everything you should abhor and fear in a male role model. He has spent his 
life telling you, and girls and women like you, that your lives are valueless 
except as sexual objects. He has demeaned you, and belittled you, and put you 
in a little box to be looked at and not heard. It is your job, and the job of 
girls and women like you, to bust out.”

The Parks and Recreation character became a cult figure, and the show also 
played host to acameo from Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/apr/25/parks-and-recreation-michelle-obama-cameos>
, as well as being considered part of a new wave of shows withpowerful female 
leads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/mar/13/house-of-cards-scandal-tv-new-age-powerful-women>
.

“He is the present, sadly, but he is not the future. You are the future. Your 
strength is a million times his. Your power is a billion times his. We will 
acknowledge this result, but we will not accept it. We will overcome it, and we 
will defeat it,” she writes.

“Now find your team, and get to work.”
 