
Pier Paolo Pasolini’s love affair with the city of Rome began in 1950, when he 
was in his late 20s. He had come there from Casarsa, in the Friuli-Venezia 
Giulia region, after a scandal involving three boys in the small town of 
Ramuscello. His adored, and adoring, mother Susanna was, as always, with him. 
He lived for a year or so with a family named Castaldi at Piazza Costaguti 
while Susanna worked as a live-in maid for another family called Pediconi a few 
doors away.

During those first paradisiacal months he befriended Alberto Moravia, Giorgio 
Bassani (who published one of his poems, an impassioned farewell to Friuli, in 
Friulian dialect, in the literary journal Botteghe Oscure, which Bassani 
edited) and Carlo Emilio Gadda. Then, in the spring of 1951, he was offered a 
teaching job in the Francesco Petrarca school in Ciampino, on the far outskirts 
of Rome, which his biographer Enzo Siciliano describes as a “shantytown”. He 
was offered a salary of 27,000 lire a month. Modest as it was, it ensured that 
Pasolini and Susanna could afford to rent a house in the Rebibbia district. 
They put respectable Rome behind them for a while and settled in Ponte Mammolo, 
which was as rough and rundown as Ciampino. Their neighbours were the 
dispossessed.

This move to the malign suburbs was to change Pasolini’s creative life for 
ever. The language that regaled him every day had little in common with 
accepted, and acceptable, Italian. There were words from Calabria, from Naples, 
from Sicily and Sardinia. He wrote them down as soon as he heard them. His 
pupils in the ruined building in Ciampino were aged between 11 and 13, and they 
all came from families who were just about surviving. One of them, a boy named
Vincenzo Cerami <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/24/vincenzo-cerami>, 
would later become a poet, novelist and screenwriter.

Pasolini read Dante to the children, and encouraged them to collect the songs 
and nursery rhymes their parents had passed on to them when they were very 
young. By the time he finished teaching, in 1953, he had gained enough 
confidence to write in Romanaccio (literally, “ugly Roman”), the dialect of the 
slums, “the privileged language of the poor, blessed by God”, as he once 
claimed.

Ponte Mammolo and Ciampino are miles apart, and Pasolini had to ride on three 
different trams to get between them. It was on these journeys that his new 
vocabulary increased. He dressed casually, like a “premature beatnik”, 
according to Siciliano, in order not to give the appearance of being a 
middle-class intruder. He became known to the boys he met as Giacche Palànce, 
because of his facial resemblance to the American actor Jack Palance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fpasolini-lost-boys-translation-ragazzi-di-vita%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa87a592aa611bc42d939a642637a7092e3894bef%2F0_313_3497_2098%2F3497.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pasolini%E2%80%99s%20lost%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fpasolini-lost-boys-translation-ragazzi-di-vita%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pasolini%E2%80%99s%20lost%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fpasolini-lost-boys-translation-ragazzi-di-vita%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa87a592aa611bc42d939a642637a7092e3894bef%2F0_313_3497_2098%2F3497.jpg>
 ‘Giacche Palànce’ … Pier Paolo Pasolini in 1966. Photograph: ullstein bild via 
Getty Images 
One friend in particular, Sergio Citti, whom Pasolini first encountered in 
1951 when Citti was 18 and newly released from a reform school, was to exert a 
lasting influence on him. Citti, who knew Romanaccio at first hand, was 
intelligent enough to appreciate its nuances. He was Pasolini’s lexicographer 
during the years which saw the publication ofRagazzi di Vita and Una Vita 
Violenta(A Violent Life) and the making of his first film Accattone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/jul/13/top-10-films-rome> (1961).

Ann Goldstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/29/elena-ferrante-fever-pen-world-voices-festival>
, the acclaimed translator ofElena Ferrante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/elena-ferrante>’s remarkable novels, has 
given her translation ofRagazzi di Vita the unpromising title The Street Kids 
<http://www.europaeditions.com/book/9781609453084/the-street-kids>. The book 
has appeared in English before asThe Ragazzi and The Hustlers. Neither is 
satisfactory, but the one Goldstein has chosen strikes me as being even less 
appropriate. It is redolent of a certain sentimental cosiness, as demonstrated 
in those very popular Hollywood B-movies of the 1930s, 40s and 50s: starring a 
group of young actors know as the Dead End Kids or the Bowery Boys, including 
Leo Gorcey, whose every utterance contained a malapropism. It’s certainly true 
that Pasolini’s ragazzi have their lighter moments, especially when they are 
playing football or diving into the Aniene in Lazio. They can be chirpy on 
occasions, when they have sufficient lire for a bowl of pasta or some cheap 
wine, but it is never less than clear that these are youngsters who have been 
pretty horribly brutalised.

Pasolini’s first novel opens in the last days of the second world war. Rome is 
in a ruinous condition. The military police are everywhere. The Germans are 
still a presence. Then, in the second chapter, it is 1946, but there is little 
sense of a promising future. Riccetto, Agnolo, the chronically sick Marcello, 
Alvaro, Caciotta and the rest have to live day by day, by their wits. A school, 
housing several families, suddenly collapses. (Was Pasolini thinking of his old 
school in Ciampino?) Riccetto, the principal character, is about as antiheroic 
as it’s possible to get – stealing money from the blind and from vulnerable old 
women; selling himself in the gardens of the Villa Borghese – yet he attains a 
certain heroic grandeur, so intent is he on surviving in a society that offers 
scant opportunity for survival.

It is very much to Pasolini’s purpose that Riccetto appears at the beginning 
and the end ofRagazzi di Vita. At the start, we see him taking communion “in 
his long grey pants and white shirt” from the priest Don Pizzuto, prior to 
being confirmed by the bishop, along with the other good little white-shirted 
boys. Instead of staying on to celebrate this monumental day in a young 
Catholic’s life, he does a bunk to meet up with his pals. At the end, he walks 
away from a tragic accident, alone and seemingly impregnable.

The book was written while neorealism – in both literature and film – was 
still in fashion in Italy. Films such as Vittorio de Sica’sBicycle Thieves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/19/film-review-bicycle-theives> and 
Umberto D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/08/vittorio-de-sica-tragic-film-makers>
 and Roberto Rossellini’sRome, Open City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/06/rome-open-city-review-roberto-rossellini>
 and the great novels of Cesare Pavese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview18>
, which have been curiously overlooked in Britain, remain important works from 
that period. Pasolini’s novel is neorealistic in essence, but when it was 
published in 1955 it managed to displease many critics of a Marxist or liberal 
persuasion who, it was assumed, would be the most likely to praise it. There is 
nothing in the narrative, they pointed out, to suggest that these wasted lives 
might be changed for the better – as they would be under communism, of course.

The church took a different, predictable stance, declaring the novel obscene. 
It is a rare talent who can unite both the right and the left in such vehement 
hatred, but Pasolini managed to do so up until his terrible death in 1975 and 
beyond.Ragazzi di Vita was banned briefly, and a case brought against the 
publisher Garzanti, which was thrown out of court, but it sold well, being 
reprinted several times for over a decade.

In an interview in the Paris Review, William Weaver – the translator whom 
Calvino, Bassani and Umberto Eco entrusted with their work – admitted that the 
only translation he was unhappy with was the one he made of Pasolini’sUna Vita 
Violenta. The street-talk strained his linguistic skills to the utmost. 
Goldstein, in tackling its predecessor, has faced a similar problem. She uses 
words like “twerp” and “twit” – this last in the mouth of Amerigo, a heartless 
and brutal criminal – which sound far too posh and frivolous. She rendersosteria
 as “tavern” throughout. When, pray, or even forsooth, did anyone last enter a 
tavern? Not in my lifetime, methinks. Surely the all-encompassing “bar” would 
have been a wiser, even more accurate, choice.

The word froscio, which can’t be found in standard Italian-English 
dictionaries, she translates as “faggot” andfroscetto as “fag”. These won’t do, 
not least for historical reasons. If “queer” is good enough for William 
Burroughs, it’s totally appropriate in the scene where the desperate, 
effeminate man is overcome with lust at the sight and size of Riccetto’s 
crotch. “Faggot” is too theatrical, too camp, and far too familiar from 
hundreds of American novels. We are in the 1940s, when to be queer was to be an 
outcast – which is what the man is, and the boys who are taunting and 
humiliating him are outcasts, too.

Pasolini review – monument to a murdered film-maker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/10/pasolini-review-monument-to-a-murdered-film-maker>
I reread The Street Kids alongside my copy of the original, which dates from 
the 1960s. It was strange to see the word “culo” spelt with a “c” followed by 
three asterisks. Such primness in a work the church deemed obscene is sweetly 
comic. Pasolini offers many variations onculo, which becomes “ass” here, and 
has his boys say “vaffan’” (“go fuck yourself”), which is common in colloquial 
Italian.

Goldstein’s translation works best when Pasolini is at his simplest, with 
beautiful descriptions of the city by day and night, and those passages in 
which he accounts for Marcello’s illness and Amerigo’s ascent into something 
resembling dignity. She tends to be a word-for-word translator, which has its 
risks, as in this plonker of a sentence: “At the same time, however, he did 
not, by being a serious youth, give up the other temptations and occupations of 
a smartass son of a bitch, such as the others continued to be.”

Ragazzi di Vita comes with a glossary in Italian, to remind readers of their 
ignorance of street talk. When the boys seem to be singing about clogs, for 
example, they are actually serenading prostitutes, of whom there are many in 
the tableaux-like narrative. In recent years, critics of a romantic inclination 
have taken to print to declare that Pasolini presaged his own violent murder in 
the two novels he wrote in the 1950s. What is certain is that inRagazzi di Vita 
andUna Vita Violenta he presented, in prose of an often incomparable beauty, 
the view from the bottom of the human heap. No one else has done it with such 
fervour or such grandeur. It was his religion to do so.

• The Street Kids by Pier Paolo Pasolini, translated by Ann Goldstein, is 
published by Europa Editions. To order a copy for £9.83 (RRP £11.99) go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/street-kids.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 