
At a distance of nearly 80 years, it is beyond the reach of most of us to know 
what life must have been like during the summer of 1939, before war broke out. 
After Chamberlain’s visit to Munich the previous year and the shabby betrayals 
that followed, the mood seems to have been one of uncertainty shading into 
dread. The world had escaped calamity once: did anyone believe it could escape 
again?

On Christmas Day 1939 Patrick Hamilton  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/apr/16/welcomebackpatrickhamilton>
began writingHangover Square, a novel that adopts those agonising weeks and 
months as its backdrop and brings the reader as close as possible to the 
feeling of a society – a world – unable to arrest its slide into the abyss. Yet 
it is another sort of abyss – an entirely personal one – that is the focus of 
Hamilton’s story. At the very instant we meet his protagonist, George Harvey 
Bone, he has plunged into one of his “dead” moods, a fugue state in which his 
mind shuts down and he proceeds through the world as an automaton, an 
experience akin to “a silent film without music”.

He has suffered these mental wipe-outs since boyhood, but lately they have 
been getting worse. Single, lonely, a depressed wanderer through the twilit 
seediness of Earl’s Court, George survives on a private income that fatally 
allows him to numb his wretchedness with drink.

Hangover Square is a metaphorical place, a stopover on the long and lonely 
pub-crawl to alcoholic oblivion

What soon becomes apparent – to us, at least – is that his brain episodes are 
schizophrenic, during which he is consumed by a single course of action: “he 
had to kill Netta Longdon”. Netta, the woman he loathes, is the centre of a 
rackety bunch of drinkers to whom George is no more than a joke, the “dumb butt 
of their unfriendly wit”.

George, however, cannot help himself, for as much as he hates Netta he also 
adores her, flailing within “her imprisoning field of radiance”. Love and 
madness have been entwined in literature from time immemorial, but one wonders 
whether romantic obsession has ever been so morbidly scrutinised as it is in 
the pages ofHangover Square. Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/apr/08/how-patrick-hamilton-hit-bullseye-the-archers>
 may have pondered the grotesque mismatch between Philip Carey and the 
prostitute Mildred inOf Human Bondage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jun/10/fictionandbiographysomerset>
, but in his creation of Netta Longdon he exceeds even the vicious one-sidedness
Somerset Maugham <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/somerset-maugham> had 
depicted.

A would-be actor and social climber, Netta is one of the great, seductive 
monsters of modern literature. This is shown to be so not merely through the 
deluded consciousness of George, but in the sane and watchful perspective of 
his old friend, Johnnie, who sees through the woman immediately: “This girl 
wore her attractiveness not as a girl should, simply, consciously, as a happy 
crown of pleasure, but rather as a murderous utensil with which she might wound 
indiscriminately right and left.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fpatrick-hamilton-hangover-square-world-slide-abyss-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd01b3fd3a176a982b8311e103ca00589443707b1%2F0_158_3800_2280%2F3800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Hamilton%E2%80%99s%20Hangover%20Square%20and%20a%20slide%20into%20the%20abyss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fpatrick-hamilton-hangover-square-world-slide-abyss-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Hamilton%E2%80%99s%20Hangover%20Square%20and%20a%20slide%20into%20the%20abyss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fpatrick-hamilton-hangover-square-world-slide-abyss-rereading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd01b3fd3a176a982b8311e103ca00589443707b1%2F0_158_3800_2280%2F3800.jpg>
 Laird Cregar as George and Linda Darnell as Netta in the 1945 film adaptation. 
Photograph: Ronald Grant 
Hangover Square is, of course, a metaphorical place, a stopover on the long 
and lonely pub crawl to alcoholic oblivion. To adapt a phrase of Philip 
Larkin’s, drink is to Hamilton what daffodils were to Wordsworth. It is 
George’s refuge, at once his reason for living and his means of access to 
Netta’s company of drunkards, who take advantage of his easygoing way with 
money. The actual milieu of Hamilton’s fiction tends to be specific: it is in 
many cases London’s impermanent acreage of boarding houses, mean hotels and 
cheerless bedsitters. The West End of his trilogyTwenty Thousand Streets Under 
the Sky(1935) now shares space in Hangover Square with the lowering environs of 
Earl’s Court and desultory excursions to seaside towns. It is George’s unhappy 
fate that he can never settle anywhere, seemingly always in transition from one 
place to another. Even Maidenhead, the town he conceives as his idyll, proves 
in the end illusory.

Yet there are deeper, darker resonances thrumming at the margins of this tale 
of obsession and despair. Hamilton was writing the novel throughout 1940, the 
year Hitler’s Blitzkrieg hit its stride, overrunning mainland Europe and later 
launching air-raids on London. He identifies a chrysalis – fascism – that had 
been incubating in English life and had now burst forth in the hideous black 
butterfly of total war. And it is in the shadowy half-life of Earl’s Court that 
he finds the avatars of this poisonous doctrine: Netta, and her vile, 
moustachioed friend, Peter, a blackshirt thug and drunk-driver who has served 
prison time for killing a man. (Hamilton himself had a personal stake in this 
detail: in 1932 he was knocked down on a London street by a car and left 
physically handicapped, with permanent scars to his face).

We see George vividly, this large, sad-eyed, shambling man who takes inno­cent 
pleasure in things yet remains mysterious

Netta herself is sexually attracted to the fascist movement and its 
fetishistic totems: “She liked the uniforms, the guns, the breeches, the boots, 
the swastikas, the shirts.” The political is contiguous with the personal. Her 
coarseness, her casual duplicity, her contempt for the weak and helpless – if 
Netta is not an actual fascist, she is a spiritual adherent, a ruthless foe of 
all that is decent and gentle and cultured. As George, in his abjection, pleads 
with her: “Can’t you be civil? Can’t you look at me and say something civil?”

For all its allegorical subtlety and atmospheric exactitude, for all its 
familiarity with the fatuous bravado of the drinking classes,Hangover Square 
derives its most powerful charge from the portrayal of George Harvey Bone, a 
lost soul of the time, perhaps of all time. Part of Hamilton’s genius is that 
he makes George so acutely and poignantly present to the reader: we see him 
vividly, this large, sad-eyed, shambling man who takes such innocent pleasure 
in things (a round of 68 on a Brighton golf course, a cigarette card, a stray 
cat) and yet remains so oddly mysterious. Whatdid become of his sister Ellen? 
What lies behind his appalling mental disfigurement?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fpatrick-hamilton-hangover-square-world-slide-abyss-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bf61f235477639c03292debd50a97c3c54c9e96%2F0_0_2788_3549%2F2788.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Hamilton%E2%80%99s%20Hangover%20Square%20and%20a%20slide%20into%20the%20abyss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fpatrick-hamilton-hangover-square-world-slide-abyss-rereading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Hamilton%E2%80%99s%20Hangover%20Square%20and%20a%20slide%20into%20the%20abyss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fpatrick-hamilton-hangover-square-world-slide-abyss-rereading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bf61f235477639c03292debd50a97c3c54c9e96%2F0_0_2788_3549%2F2788.jpg>
 Laird Cregar in the film adaptation. Photograph: John Kobal Foundation/Getty 
Images 
Hamilton splits his portrait between the plaintive drunk who repeats phrases 
in his head and the sober, fair-minded loner who sees the world for what it is. 
That is why George makes such a moving character, for outside of his psychotic 
blackouts he understands his situation all too well. He knows that he is 
Netta’s dupe, knows that he is being used and mocked and sponged off. And how 
ingeniously Hamilton links this awareness to the gathering crisis in Europe, 
dovetailing the private and the public in a proleptic moment of violence.

George, finding himself in Brighton in fuddled pursuit of Netta, goes to a 
theatre where he knows he will find her, cosying up to an influential theatre 
agent. He enters the circle, “and a huge roar of smoke-hazed, lime-lit 
laughter, coming out of the door like blast from a bomb, hit him in the face. 
It was like the world’s laugh in his face, Netta’s laugh, the last laugh of 
everybody at his failure and isolation, his banishment from the world of virile 
people who were happy and made love and had friends”. It is not an epiphany, 
because George already knows he is a figure of ridicule. But it is a terrible, 
terminal confirmation.

Winter read: The Midnight Bell by Patrick Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/26/winter-read-patrick-hamilton-midnight-bell>
Hamilton finished writing the novel in February 1941, delivering it a month 
later to his publishers. He seems to have been in two minds about its merit, 
telling his brother Bruce that it was “unambitious” and yet, perhaps, “the best 
thing I’ve ever written!”

The reviews, after a slow start, warmed to the book, and its sales took off 
when James Agate, the most revered critic of his day, devoted a column to it in 
the Daily Express: “Don’t gulp this,” he recommended, “ration yourself to 50 
pages a day, and make it last the week.” Its reputation has held steady in the 
years since, even if Hamilton is still bedevilled by the critical perception of 
him as a minor novelist. Today, 54 years after his death, there seems to be 
nothing minor at all aboutHangover Square. His examination of England in the 
limbo between Munich and the declaration of war is so quiet and understated 
that its skill may have been overlooked.

Pulped fictions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/mar/12/books.featuresreviews> 
The tragedy of George Harvey Bone endures. As a study in the perils of drink 
it is piercing. As a portrait of a man at war with himself, it is unforgettable.

• Hangover Square  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hangover-square-419412.html>is published by 
Abacus (£8.99). To order a copy for £7.37 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hangover-square-419415.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 