
The wall that Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
has promised to build on the US-Mexico border may in part “be some fencing”, 
the president-elect said in an interview released on Sunday, as the top 
Republican already in Washington hinted at disagreements and uncertainties for 
how they intend to govern together.

My journeys in Trumpland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house>
In an interview with CBS’s 60 Minutes 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/60-minutes-donald-trump-wall-mexican-border-fence-segments/>
, Trump said “there could be some fencing” in his proposed wall, which would 
span nearly 2,000 miles andcost billions 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2016/jul/26/how-trump-plans-build-wall-along-us-mexico-border/>
. On the campaign trail hepromised 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/03/21/john-oliver-demolishes-trump-s-mexico-wall-an-impossible-impractical-symbol-of-fear.html>
 that the barrier would be exclusively built of “hardened concrete”, “rebar” 
and “steel”.

“I’m very good at this,” he told CBS. “It’s called construction.”

Also on Sunday, Paul Ryan <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/paul-ryan>, 
speaker of the House and the lawmaker poised to write sweeping new legislation 
for the Republican-controlled government, said he believed his party had “a 
mandate” to reshape healthcare, taxes, regulations and border security for the 
Trump administration.

Discrepancies between Trump’s promises and Ryan’s plans, however, suggested 
that the president-elect and his future Congress do not yet know how they will 
make such changes.

Ryan insisted, for instance, that Trump’s “priority” would not be the mass 
deportation of millions of undocumented migrants.

“That is not what our focus is, we are focused on securing the border before 
we get on any immigration,” Ryan told CNN’s State of the Union. “We are not 
planning on erecting a deportation force, Donald Trump’s not planning on that.”

Trump has repeatedly promised a “deportation force 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/11/11/politics/donald-trump-deportation-force-debate-immigration/>
” andin August said 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-donald-trump-immigration-speech-transcript-20160831-snap-htmlstory.html>
: “Day one, my first hour in office, those people are gone!” In his CBS 
interview, he said he would deport as many as 3 million people.

“What we are going to do is get the people that are criminal and have criminal 
records, gang members, drug dealers, where a lot of these people, probably 2 
million, it could be even 3 million, we are getting them out of our country or 
we are going to incarcerate,” Trumpsaid 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/president-elect-trump-says-how-many-immigrants-hell-deport/>
.

“But we’re getting them out of our country, they’re here illegally.”

In June, Ryan broke with Trump over a proposed ban  
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/06/ryan-trump-muslim-ban-224312>on Muslims 
entering the US. On Sunday, Rudy Giuliani, one of the president-elect’s 
advisers, said the ban would now be imposed on a country-by-country basis.

“The ban would be restricted to particular countries,” the former New York 
mayor told CNN, naming Syria and Yemen. “All the rest from countries that 
contain dangerous populations, they would be subject to ‘extreme vetting’.”


Giuliani suggested the US could work with regimes in Egypt and Pakistan for 
“pretty good vetting”, but not a complete ban.

Speaker Ryan also said the Republican party, which until last year 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/30/us/politics/in-time-of-discord-bashing-trade-pacts-appeals-to-both-parties.html>
 largely supported Barack Obama’s free trade agenda with Asia, was not entirely 
behind Trump’s promises to impose high tariffs on countries such as China and 
Mexico.


“Not tariffs, not trade wars,” Ryan said, instead saying he wanted to “fix our 
taxes on border adjustments”.

He maintained that the party would find common ground with the new president, 
saying: “He’s trying to make America more competitive.”

Trump's policy pledges examined: what could the next president accomplish?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-policy-pledges-gettysburg-speech>
Ryan echoed Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-appears-to-soften-stance-on-range-of-pledges>
 in suggesting that the party intended to keep some parts of Barack Obama’s 
Affordable Care Act, while repealing the healthcare law itself.

A full repeal could mean as many as 20 million people 
<http://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2016/03/03/20-million-people-have-gained-health-insurance-coverage-because-affordable-care-act-new-estimates>
 losing health insurance. Ryan told CNN that people 26 and younger could, 
according to his proposals, stay on their parents’ plan, and that Congress 
would “need to have a solution for pre-existing conditions”. He also said the 
party would propose “refundable tax credits” that “would lower the cost” of 
coverage.

“We would have a healthcare system in America where everyone, regardless of 
income and position,” he said, would “get to buy what you want to buy, not what 
the government is making you buy”.

But Ryan refused to answer questions about whether women would still be able 
to have birth control covered.

“I’m not going to get into all the nitty gritty details about these things,” 
he said, adding, “I’m not going to get into hypotheticals about legislation 
that hasn’t even been written yet.”

Giuliani also insisted that Trump would have no conflicts of interest 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/us/politics/how-federal-ethics-laws-will-apply-to-a-trump-presidency.html>
 in office, even if he hands control of his sprawling, international business 
to three of his children, who have acted as his closest advisers.

“Once he gets into government they will not be – they will not be advising,” 
Giuliani said. “There will have to be a wall between them with regard to 
government matters.”

Ryan also expressed confidence in Trump and his entourage, which includes 
Steve Bannon, a former investor and far-right media chief executive whose 
website, Breitbart, hastrafficked in openly racist, sexist, homophobic and 
antisemitic writing 
<http://mediamatters.org/blog/2016/08/17/breitbart-news-worst-headlines/212467>.

“I’ve never met the guy. I’ve never met Steve Bannon,” Ryan said. “So I have 
no concerns. I trust Donald Trump.

“I believe that Donald is going to have a great set of choices to make for 
staffing [the White House],” Ryan continued. “He’s a successful person, he 
surrounds himself with successful people. So I’m confident he’s going to do the 
same here.”

He denounced the perpetrators of hate crimes and racist graffiti  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-spike-us-donald-trump-president>
that have been reported since Trump’s victory, saying: “They are not 
Republicans and we don’t want them.

“We are pluralistic, we are inclusive, and will continue to be. I really think 
people should put their minds at ease.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Tens of thousands of protesters, however, have marched in cities across the US 
since Tuesday’s election, which Trump won in the electoral college but lost in 
the popular vote. The demonstrations were largely peaceful, although on Saturday
police blocked off a section of Fifth Avenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/anti-trump-protests-new-york-portland-shooting>
 in New York to keep marchers away from Trump Tower.

Trump uses Twitter to bash New York Times coverage and letter to subscribers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-twitter-new-york-times> 
In Indianapolis, some people threw rocks at police and officers fired pepper 
balls into the crowd. In Portland on Saturday night, police made several 
arrests after clashes between protesters and officers in riot gear. Mayor 
Charlie Hayes pleaded for calm.

“As long as protests are peaceful, that’s what we can do in this country, 
that’s what the first amendment is all about,” Ryan said.

Trump has given no clear view about the protests. On Thursday night he said 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/796900183955095552> the marchers 
were “professional protesters, incited by the media” and “very unfair!” OnFriday
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/797034721075228672>, he said: 
“Love the fact that the small groups of protesters last night have passion for 
our great country. We will all come together and be proud!”

Ryan has had a difficult relationship with Trump, whom he met in Washington on 
Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/paul-ryan-donald-trump-meeting-video>
 when the president-elect also met Obama at the White House.

Asked on Sunday about his denunciation in June of Trump’s “textbook racism” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/07/paul-ryan-donald-trump-textbook-racism>
, regarding a Hispanic judge overseeing a fraud lawsuit against the businessman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/31/donald-trump-university-playbook-real-estate-courses>
, Ryan told CNN: “Look, I’m not going to relitigate the past. I’m looking 
toward the future.”
 