
An important surrealist sculpture by the artist Paul Nash, lost for more than 
70 years, has been rediscovered stored in pieces in a cardboard box, and has 
been refurbished and reconstructed for an exhibition of his work opening atTate 
Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> this week.

The exhibition, the most comprehensive in a generation, emphasises not just 
Nash’s best-known landscape and war work, but also his close links with the
surrealist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/sep/18/artsfeatures.surrealismatthevanda>
 andmodernist movements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/30/tate-modernist-how-georgia-okeeffe-shaped-feminist-style>
 and other artists in Britain and Europe.

From English woodlands to war: the pioneering paintings of Paul Nash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/14/from-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash>
 The sculpture, Moon Aviary 1937, was shown in surrealist exhibitions in the 
late 1930s. But, made of fragile and found materials including old egg crates, 
wooden bobbins, ivory and stone, it was thought to have disintegrated or been 
destroyed long ago.

In fact it had unwittingly been inherited by the owner, whose family had a 
gallery in London. It had gone into storage with many other works when the 
gallery closed, and was only rediscovered earlier this year.

The subject relates to Nash’s earlier drawing Mansions of the Dead, with 
winged figures representing souls flying to airy enclosures in the clouds.

The exhibition also displays for the first time a 1936 painting, Circle of the 
Monoliths – one of many in the exhibition to include the distinctive slabs of 
the Avebury stone circle and other prehistoric standing stones. Painted on the 
back of another earlier work, Two Serpents, it has been mounted in a special 
two-sided frame to make both paintings visible for the first time.

The exhibition is the most comprehensive of Nash’s work in a generation. He is 
best known as a landscape artist and an official war artist in both world wars, 
and the exhibition includes his hauntingTotes Meer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/14/from-english-woodlands-to-war-pioneering-paintings-of-paul-nash>
 (Dead Sea), where what first appear to be moonlit waves are actually an 
expanse of wreckage of second world war aircraft stretching to the horizon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fpaul-nash-tate-britain-exhibition-feature-lost-surrealist-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28bd0b725976db59f41944c813fbfa1c1fa8d86a%2F0_117_3534_2222%2F3534.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Nash%20Tate%20Britain%20exhibition%20to%20feature%20'lost'%20surrealist%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fpaul-nash-tate-britain-exhibition-feature-lost-surrealist-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Nash%20Tate%20Britain%20exhibition%20to%20feature%20%27lost%27%20surrealist%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fpaul-nash-tate-britain-exhibition-feature-lost-surrealist-sculpture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28bd0b725976db59f41944c813fbfa1c1fa8d86a%2F0_117_3534_2222%2F3534.jpg>
 Detail from Totes Meer (Dead Sea) (1940-41), by Paul Nash. Photograph: Paul 
Nash/©Tate 
Nash made many paintings of the shattered landscape left by trench warfare in 
Flanders in the first world war – many now in the collection of the Imperial 
War Museum – describing it as “the most frightful nightmare of a country more 
conceived by Dante or Poe than by nature, unspeakably, utterly indescribable”.

Highlights include his three-metre-long 1919 painting the Menin Road – 
originally commissioned for a proposed hall, never built, which was to 
represent the heroism and nobility of Britain’s war. In it, tiny human figures 
pick their way through a scene of utter desolation in which the road has been 
almost obliterated.

Nash died of heart failure in 1946, aged 57. The exhibition includes some of 
his last major works made during the second world war, including his 1944 
Battle of Germany. There will be free admission for members of the armed forces 
and veterans on Remembrance Sunday, 13 November, in recognition of the 
importance of his work as a war artist.

 * Paul Nash is at Tate Britain from 26 October 2016 until 5 March 2017.
 