
Under pressure from President-elect Donald Trump, six years of expectations 
and more than 20 million Americans who could lose their health insurance, a 
Republican senator has offered first hints at what a replacement of the 
Affordable Care Act might look like.

Related: Congress approves initial measures to repeal Affordable Care Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/congress-house-affordable-care-act-obamacare-repeal>

Senator Rand Paul <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rand-paul> of Kentucky 
described details of his plan on Sunday, but did not say whether the 400,000 
people in his state who have gained insurance under the existing law, often 
called Obamacare, would keep it under his own legislation.

Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> in Congress have 
made repealing the ACA a priority, but hesitated for lack of a replacement that 
would not strip millions of Americans of health insurance.

“We need policies that create more jobs,” Paul told CNN’s State of the Union 
on Sunday, when asked directly whether his constituents would keep their 
coverage. “The more jobs we create the less need there is for government to 
jump in.”

His aim, he said, was to “give access to the most amount of people at the 
least amount of cost”.

This week, Republicans in Congress cleared the first hurdles towards repeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/congress-house-affordable-care-act-obamacare-repeal>
 of the ACA, with Trump’s support.

An opthalmologist before entering Congress, Paul has been active on the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/obamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare>
 of what the replacement should look like and how soon it should be passed into 
law.

Last week, he said he had spoken to Trump, who he said expressed support for 
his belief that a replacement should be introducedon the day of repeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/07/rand-paul-donald-trump-obamacare-repeal-replace>
. At a press conference in New York on Wednesday, Trump said he intended to 
replace the plan potentially at “the same hour 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/11/donald-trump-addresses-obamacare-repeal-and-replacement-at-press-conference-in-new-york.html>
” as repeal, but did not say how.

President Barack Obama has led Democratic calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/barack-obama-republican-healthcare-repeal-vox-interview>
 for Republicans to say how they will replace the plan, saying he would 
publicly support some alternatives.

On Sunday Vermont senator Bernie Sanders, who ran strongly for the Democratic 
presidential nomination on aplatform 
<https://berniesanders.com/issues/medicare-for-all/> that promised to create a 
universal healthcare system, told ABC’s This Week that voters stood with him 
and the president. “The vast majority of the American people agree with me and 
many others,” he said, “you don’t simply repeal the Affordable Care Act without 
a replacement.

“Republicans have had six years to come up with a replacement. They got 
nothing.”

Sanders later appeared with Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer and Planned 
Parenthood president Cecile Richards at a rally in support of the ACA in 
Michigan, attracting a crowd of thousands.

Introducing his plan, Paul said: “I believe that it’s incredibly important 
that we do replacement on the same day we do repeal. We’ve had six years to 
complain, and we have complained, I’ve been one of those complaining about 
Obamacare, and replacement should be the same day.”


Paul said that the president’s healthcare plan had “failed” despite the good 
intentions of its authors. “But they put so many mandates in it that they made 
it too expensive,” he said.

“They’ve put in all these mandates that say every policy has to have things 
like pregnancy and dental coverage and all these things, which are great, but 
they add cost. They put people out of the market.”

Paul said his plan would “legalize the sale of inexpensive insurance”, adding: 
“That means getting rid of the Obamacare mandates on what you can buy.”

The senator said his bill would help people with health savings accounts and a 
tax credit, but that it would also help insurance companies that he said were 
losing money. He said his legislation would allow small businesses to band 
together to buy insurance for their employees.

Trump’s nomination to be secretary of health and human services, the Georgia 
congressman Tom Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
, is due to attend Senate confirmation hearings this week.

An avowed opponent of the ACA, Price has drawn concern from senators over 
reports thathe may have broken insider-trading laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/tom-price-senate-investigation-insider-trading-trump-administration>
with healthcare companies.

In response to such reports and calls from Senate Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> for an investigation, a Trump 
transition spokesman said Price had “complied fully with all applicable laws 
and ethics rules governing his personal finances”. The spokesman said Price 
would comply with the law if confirmed.
 