
As a 22-year-old reporter on the Northern Echo in 1965, I was lucky enough to 
meetthe Beatles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles> backstage at a 
gig in Newcastle.Paul McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/paulmccartney> threw me his violin bass and 
told me he was a skinflint, before turning left out of the dressing room to go 
and play before hordes of screaming fans. Not quite believing my luck at having 
landed such a scoop, I immediately decided to devote the rest of my life to 
cataloguing everything to do with the Beatles in obsessive detail.

In 1981, I published Shout! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/12/george-martin-appreciation-philip-norman-beatles>
, which most sensible people agree is the most definitive account of the 
Beatles ever written. In that book – and indeed in my later biography ofJohn 
Lennon <https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnlennon> – I may have given the 
impression that Paul was the least talented member of the Beatles, a musician 
who had piggybacked on the talent of John and whose later career with Wings was 
an abject failure. I want to state firmly now that I have always thought that 
Paul was a total genius and at least the equal of John. If I sounded somewhat 
scathing about Paul, it was because I was jealous of his talent and couldn’t 
come to terms with the fact that he was better looking than me.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnever-before-seen-footage-of-the-beatles-backstage-in-1965-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20before%20seen%20footage%20of%20the%20Beatles%20backstage%20in%201965%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnever-before-seen-footage-of-the-beatles-backstage-in-1965-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never%20before%20seen%20footage%20of%20the%20Beatles%20backstage%20in%201965%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnever-before-seen-footage-of-the-beatles-backstage-in-1965-video&media=>
Newly released footage of the Beatles backstage in 1965 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/apr/26/never-before-seen-footage-of-the-beatles-backstage-in-1965-video>
While watching Paul headline the Olympics closing ceremony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5cCANKXEKtY> in front of the Queen in 2012, it 
occurred to me that he might be quite grateful if I was to write an 800-page 
book about him. So I asked his publicist if he would speak to me. 
Unfortunately, Paul said he would be quite busy for the next 25 years, but that 
I was free to talk to every single person who had ever met him, and to scour 
the cuttings library for detail.

Paul McCartney: The Biography by Philip Norman – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/16/paul-mccartney-the-biography-philip-norman-linda-beatles-lennon-wings>
Paul was born in a much more run-down area of Liverpool than John, which leads 
me to speculate that when John wrote the line “a working-class hero is 
something to be <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YsmQhbd1KWE>” he was 
subconsciously paying homage to Paul. Certainly, Paul’s early life was not 
easy, and he has never got over the death of his mother, but he was by far the 
cleverest person in his class at school, winning a prize for his essay on 
William the Conqueror that contained no spelling mistakes whatsoever.

When he was 16, Paul became friends with George Harrison, and they both began 
playing with John, who was older. John was very impressed with Paul’s musical 
talent and they later went on play together in Hamburg and at theCavern Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2016/feb/26/the-beatles-legacy-in-liverpool-in-pictures>
 in Liverpool. While in Germany, Paul bought a cheap watch and wrote a letter 
to his father to tell him about it.

 Paul did not find it easy that all of his compositions were accredited to 
Lennon-McCartney, and it psychologically scarred him that not enough people 
know he wroteYesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/mar/09/producer-george-martin-beatles-yesterday-archive-video>
 all by himself, in the gents’ toilets of Abbey Road Studios when he was a bit 
stoned. There can be no doubt that Paul has always been a bit vain and, for the 
last 50 years, has employed a woman called Vi to comb his legs for him. Paul’s 
legs are unnaturally hirsute and can get terribly matted if not given daily 
attention.

The breakup of the Beatles, which was brilliantly described in my book Shout!, 
was very difficult for Paul and he went off to live in Scotland with Linda, 
whom nobody liked but him. After a brief period of seclusion while the couple 
devoted themselves to their wonderful children, Paul decided to formWings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/jul/29/paul-mccartney-wings-in-pictures>
. Some people have been critical of the fact that he paid other members of the 
band next to nothing but, after much soul-searching, I now find that he paid 
them exactly the right amount. And I’ve always thought that Linda had a lovely 
singing voice.Mull of Kintyre <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AcZVRiB9AQk> is 
my favourite song ever.

Paul was very sad when Linda died, and his grief may have unbalanced his mind 
and made him marry the delusionalHeather Mills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/17/heather-mills-my-family-values>
. Much to his children’s relief, that marriage ended acrimoniously and Paul is 
now very happy withNancy Shevell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gallery/2011/oct/09/mccartney-wedding-london-in-pictures>
. Two years ago, I was lucky enough to meet Paul for a second time at a gig in 
Liverpool. “Hello, Phil,” he said, before turning right to go on stage. Which 
was nice.

Digested read, digested: Help!

 