
Donald Trump’s vice-president-elect and his chief of staff on Sunday defended 
the president-elect’sfalse claim that millions of people voted illegally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-scam-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton>
 in November’s election, saying it was “refreshing” and “possible”.

'Putting lipstick on a pig': experts on why Obama is lending Donald Trump a 
hand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/barack-obama-donald-trump-phonecalls-transition>
Hillary Clinton now leads in the popular vote by more than 2.5m ballots. Last 
weekend, Trumptweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/802972944532209664?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
: “In addition to winning the electoral college in a landslide, I won the 
popular vote if you deduct the millions of people who voted illegally.”

He added <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/803033642545115140>: 
“Serious voter fraud in Virginia, New Hampshire and California – so why isn’t 
the media reporting on this? Serious bias – big problem!”

There is no evidence of widespread voter fraud, and the US’s decentralized 
system, which cedes election authority to state and city governments, makes a 
“rigged” electiona virtual impossibility 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/can-you-rig-a-us-presidential-election-experts-say-its-basically-impossible/2016/10/18/7bcc4390-9557-11e6-bc79-af1cd3d2984b_story.html?utm_term=.3428576d1b1d>
.

Nonetheless Reince Priebus <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/reince-priebus>
, the incoming White House chief of staff, told CBS’s Face the Nation on Sunday 
he believed it was possible that millions of people voted illegally, with state 
officials and nonpartisan election monitors either oblivious or permissive.

“It’s possible,” he said. When host John Dickerson pressed Priebus over 
Trump’s false claim, he insisted: “I don’t know if that’s not true.”

Priebus refused to say if the presidency was an appropriate platform from 
which to spread rumors and false news.

“I think he’s done a great job,” he said. “I think the president-elect is 
someone who has pushed the envelope and caused people to think in this country. 
He’s not taking conventional thought on every single issue.”

Vice-President-elect Mike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence> also defended Trump’s tweet, 
telling the host of ABC’s This Week, George Stephanopoulos: “I don’t know that 
that is a false statement, George, and neither do you.”

Pressed on the lack of evidence for Trump’s claim, Pence said: “He’s entitled 
to express his opinion on that.

“I think the American people find it very refreshing that they have a 
president who will tell them what’s on his mind. He’s going to say what he 
believes to be true and I know that he’s always going to speak in that way as 
president.

Trump foreign policy faces scrutiny as team defends Taiwan phone call
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/trump-foreign-policy-faces-scrutiny-as-team-defends-taiwan-phone-call>
Trump lost the popular vote by at least 2.6m votes 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/133Eb4qQmOxNvtesw2hdVns073R68EZx4SfCnP4IGQf8/htmlview?sle=true#gid=19>
, with some ballots still being counted. The president-elect’s claim that 3m 
votes were cast by undocumented people apparently derives from an article on 
the conspiracist InfoWars website that drew its information froma non-existent 
report 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/nov/28/donald-trump/donald-trumps-pants-fire-claim-millions-illegal-vo/>
 and tweets by an unaffiliated person.

A Trump spokesman, Jason Miller, has cited a widely disputed 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/oct/24/donald-trump/donald-trump-wrongly-says-14-percent-noncitizens-a/>
 2014 article and a2012 Pew study 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2012/pewupgradingvoterregistrationpdf.pdf>
 that does not show evidence of any fraud.

Research over <http://votingrights.news21.com/article/election-fraud/> the last
 
<http://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legacy/The%20Truth%20About%20Voter%20Fraud.pdf>
16 years 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/08/06/a-comprehensive-investigation-of-voter-impersonation-finds-31-credible-incidents-out-of-one-billion-ballots-cast/>
 has found voter fraud to be extremely uncommon, and 2016 appears to follow 
that pattern. ProPublica election monitorssaw 
<https://twitter.com/ProPublica/status/803022213779689473?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
no evidence 
<https://twitter.com/ProPublica/status/803023771124826112?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
of widespread illegal voting.

The Washington Post, meanwhile, found <http:// 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/12/01/0-000002-percent-of-all-the-ballots-cast-in-the-2016-election-were-fraudulent/?utm_term=.869dd221e5e9>
 four documented cases of voter fraud in the November election: an Iowa woman 
who votedtwice 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2016/10/29/trump-supporter-charged-with-voting-twice-in-iowa/?utm_term=.ac7f494599a7>
 for Trump; a Texas man who votedtwice 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/2016/11/08/texas-man-accused-trying-vote-twice/nJbkjgMkNsA3Uqn1TDnhlK/story.html>
 for Trump; an Illinois woman who votedfor her dead husband 
<http://www.bnd.com/news/local/article112583058.html>; and a Florida woman who 
wasfilling in votes 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/politics-government/election/article111029767.html>
 for absentee ballots.
 