
The owners of Penguin and Random House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/random-house> have announced a deal to merge 
their publishing arms to create the world's biggest book publisher.

Bertelsmann, which owns Random House, will own 53% of the newly created group 
and Random House boss Markus Dohle will be chief executive. Penguin's owner 
Pearson will retain 47%, with its man John Mackinson, currently chairman and 
chief executive of Penguin, stepping up as chairman of the joint venture, which 
will be calledPenguin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/penguin> Random House.

The announcement scuppers the hopes of Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation to 
crash the merger plans.Reports over the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/oct/28/penguin-authors-terrified-news-corp?INTCMP=SRCH>
 suggested News Corp's publishing arm, HarperCollins, could put a £1bn bid for 
Penguin to the board of Pearson this week.

Random House has annual sales of £1.5bn, while Penguin sales topped £1bn last 
year. The combined group will publish 25% of all books sold in the UK from 
authors as diverse as TV chef Jamie Oliver, Fifty Shades of Grey author EL 
James and diver Tom Daley.

The combined market share of the two book publishers means the deal is 
expected to face an inquiry from the competition commission. Analysts, however, 
suggest it is likely to be waved through as regulators allowed the music 
industry to be consolidated down to just three big players. The companies 
expect to complete the deal in the second half of next year, if they win the 
approval from the regulators.

Bertelsmann chairman and chief executive Thomas Rabe said the merger would 
advance the group's digital transformation and increase its presence in Brazil, 
India and China.

Pearson's chief executive, Marjorie Scardino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/marjoriescardino>, said: "Together, the two 
publishers will be able to share a large part of their costs, to invest more 
for their author and reader constituencies and to be more adventurous in trying 
new models in this exciting, fast-moving world of digital books and digital 
readers."

The announcement comes just weeks after Scardino announced her intention to 
stand down after 15 years at the helm. Her exit sparked speculation that the 
Financial Times could be sold, as she had vowed that would only happen "over my 
dead body".
 