
The German artist Hans Haacke 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/12/09/arts/at-the-met-with-hans-haacke-peering-at-a-wide-world-beyond-works-on-a-wall.html?pagewanted=all>
 wrote that “museums are managers of consciousness” giving us “an 
interpretation of history, of how to view the world and locate ourselves in 
it.” If you are a black and minority ethnic (BAME) attendee, what is painfully 
obvious is our absence in these public cultural spaces. That is, of course, if 
you don’t count our presence as security staff.

What should our museums look like in 2020?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/mar/16/museums-in-2020-industry-experts-views>
Last week the print and online magazine collective, gal-dem 
<http://www.gal-dem.com>, curated an event that was nothing short of 
breathtaking at TheV&A <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/v-and-a> in 
London. People of colour, in their thousands, confidently walked through the 
corridors and display rooms of a museum established toshow off the booty of 
empire <http://www.vam.ac.uk/page/g/great-exhibition/>. For once we could 
gather in such a space and view it not as a diminishment of our value, but 
rather a celebration of our worth.

As part of the The V&A’s Friday Late programme 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/info/friday-late>, the collective treated visitors to 
contemporary work being made by young people of colour. For the editor-in-chief 
and founder of gal-dem,Liv Little 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/liv-little>, the collective “wanted to 
fill this space with a spread of work that is reflective of different lived 
experiences … with art forms that are not static but instead interactive.” Work 
that is, in short, “never seen in traditional museum and gallery spaces”. You 
could listen to the young women spearheading grime music in the grand entrance, 
or twerk to empowerment in the lecture theatre, or immerse yourself through 
dance in the culture of queer and trans women of colour, or listen to 
discussion on how we manage careers in arts, music and politics.

By the museum’s own estimation, more than 4,000 people turned up to take up 
space both as a celebration and an act of resistance. The majority of them 
being people of colour because here was art for us, by us. We strolled through 
exuding a sense of triumph and satisfaction that comes with taking what is 
rightfully yours.

A day after gal-dem’s historic takeover, Museum Detox, a group of BAME museum 
workers,staged a flashmob 
<https://www.museumsassociation.org/museums-journal/news/02112016-bame-museum-workers-conduct-flash-mob-at-museum-of-london>
 at the Museum of London. Sara Wajid, founder of the group and head of 
interpretation at the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery, organised the event to 
declare that “we exist and we want to see more people like us in museums.” It 
stands to reason that if you see yourself reflected in this arena of high art 
and culture, then it will feel less austere an environment.

Museums and galleries are funded by taxpayers. If we are not reflected in 
them, then we can call the situation unjust

Conversations around the low participation levels of BAME people in these 
public centres of culture and debate are not new. Periodically appearing in 
well-researched reports that are the paper copy of pointless hand-wringing, 
they fade into the general hum, part of the whirr of things we could do much 
better on. But, as Wajid points out, museums and galleries are public spaces, 
funded by taxpayers. If, as people of colour, we do not find ourselves 
reflected in them, then we are allowed to call the situation unjust.

What gal-dem’s event highlighted so brilliantly was how the public 
conversations about ourselves and our history do not give us the whole story. 
Many of us do not see ourselves in the works on display and when we do, it is 
often a painful reflection. TheBritish Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum> has for so long consigned 
its Africa and Pacific collections to the basement of the building. If there 
was ever a visual metaphor for the abasement of cultures and traditions, then 
this sorry space is it. Who wants to enter a space that at its very core feels 
uninviting?

Galleries, and museums in particular, are the last remaining free spaces where 
we can conduct a national dialogue about what constitutes culture and art. Yet 
there are obvious absences and silences that betray a narrative that is not 
true for all.

A cultural shift is taking place at the moment. Fact. Collectives like gal-dem 
are evidence of that. “Outsider art” is now accessible on digital platforms 
such as Instagram and emerging artists are finding innovative ways of 
showcasing their work.Museums <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/museums>, as 
custodians of the collection for the past and future, will have to take great 
care in ensuring they don’t become obsolete for the generation of cultural 
consumers to come.
 