
There is something about cities: in music and literature they are places of 
hope, where fame and fortune are sought, where culture and art flourish, where 
love is lost and found. Globally, their allure and importance has never been 
clearer: about56% of the world’s population lives in them 
<http://www.who.int/gho/urban_health/situation_trends/urban_population_growth_text/en/>
 and they are growing rapidly.

 But for most people, cities are less about bright lights and possibility, and 
more about basic survival.

This week the UN is hosting the Habitat III conference <https://habitat3.org/>
, to come up with a sustainable vision and plan for urban centres across the 
globe. More than 36,000 people are in Quito, including mayors, NGOs, UN 
agencies, international financial institutions, urban planners, architects, 
developers, academics and many others. There is much to discuss: the three-day 
agenda is chock-full of impressive and diverse topics – from urban forests, to 
the regulation of real estate markets, the role and responsibilities of local 
governments, infrastructure, financing, public space, migration and housing.

The outcome of the conference is meant to guide sustainable urban development 
over the next 20 years. Thenew urban agenda 
<https://habitat3.org/the-new-urban-agenda> has, in fact, already been drafted 
and merely awaits the dotting of Is and crossing of Ts before it becomes the 
blueprint for cities into the future.

Habitat III: the global housing conference the world must stop ignoring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jul/05/habitat-iii-global-housing-conference-quito-climate-change>
Conferences like this have the potential to both overwhelm and underwhelm – and
Habitat III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/18/world-quito-ecuador-future-cities-local-voices-habitat-3>
is no exception. While the text of the new urban agenda is a neither here nor 
there document, it does commit governments to “work towards an urban paradigm 
shift”. To this end, in an unusual move, mayors from across the globe have been 
actively participating in all aspects of the conference. There appears to be 
energy from many involved to go beyond business as usual, and an appetite for 
learning how to do things differently.

But in light of the unprecedented challenges facing most cities, mainly 
related to housing, the “paradigm shift” suggested in the new urban agenda 
feels more like a nudge than the radical transformation required.

Millions of urban residents live on the edge. Some are homeless, others live 
in housing that is unaffordable or grossly inadequate, without security of 
tenure or access to basic services. Still more are being evicted, often en 
masse, to make way for shopping malls, major sporting events, resource 
extraction or the next luxury tower. To ensure they, too, can enjoy the city 
will require a fundamentally different way of thinking about housing.

So let’s get radical

The new urban agenda must undo what’s happened to housing in the last 20 years 
or more.Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> must now be 
recognised as a human right, no different than the right to vote or express 
yourself freely. This means understanding that housing cannot be viewed first 
and foremost as an economic driver or a commodity to add to an investment 
portfolio; that forced eviction is not development; that land has more than 
monetary value; and that the private market must be regulated.

UN envoy: Europe faces daunting task on refugees but housing is a human right
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/dec/05/un-envoy-europe-refugees-housing-human-right-leilani-farha>
It also means housing homeless people rather than making them criminals for 
trying to stay alive, and it means recognising that everyone has the right to 
live in the city regardless of socio-economic status.

If governments were to govern using this new paradigm, the lives of at least a 
billion people in inadequate housing would shift significantly. And, just 
maybe, the city could once again be a place of hope and possibility.

Leilani Farha is the special rapporteur on the right to housing 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Housing/Pages/LeilaniFarha.aspx>, appointed by 
the UN human rights council.

Join the Guardian Housing Network  
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/>to read more pieces like 
this and follow us on Twitter@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing> to keep up with the latest social housing 
insight and analysis.
 