
The “future of food” company Soylent has recalled its new line of food bars 
after reports that the “meal replacement” has made people ill.

Soylent began selling 250-calorie bars in August, advertising them as a “12.5% 
of your daily nutritional requirements” that are “plant-based and protein 
rich”. In the weeks since, dyspeptic customers have filled Soylent’s message 
boards with complaints about the bar.


One man wrote that he emailed the company 
<https://discourse.soylent.com/t/nausea-and-vomiting-several-times-after-eating-food-bars/26168/322>
, saying: “I thought I was suddenly having something like a sugar crash, but an 
emergency-level sugar crash like I’d never felt before.” He laid down, “but the 
throwing up resumed as I seemingly emptied out my entire stomach and realized 
that this was probably the worst I had felt in my entire life. I then also had 
diarrhea.” He eventually went to the hospital and recovered, he said.

Another person said he fell ill three times on three food bars 
<https://discourse.soylent.com/t/nausea-and-vomiting-several-times-after-eating-food-bars/26168>
 during a trip to Europe, including on a flight. “As much as I enjoy the taste 
of the bars, I have no choice but to abstain from eating them until I can 
figure out what’s going on.”

Others described similar symptoms, which resembled food poisoning, such as “
explosive diarrhea and vomiting within three hours of eating one 
<https://discourse.soylent.com/t/nausea-and-vomiting-several-times-after-eating-food-bars/26168/319>
” and “burning up and sweating profus[e]ly 
<https://discourse.soylent.com/t/nausea-and-vomiting-several-times-after-eating-food-bars/26168/167>
, and started getting very dizzy, lightheaded, and weak”.

The company asked people to stop consuming the bars late Wednesday, after 
reports “that a small number of our customers have experienced gastrointestinal 
issues after consuming Soylent Bars”.

My week on Soylent: 'I was irritable, grumpy and a general pain in the arse'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/30/my-week-on-soylent-i-was-irritable-grumpy-general-pain-in-the-arse>
“We take these complaints extremely seriously as we have no greater priority 
than the quality and safety of our products,” the company said ina statement 
<http://blog.soylent.com/post/151720602057/update-on-soylent-bar>. “As a 
precautionary measure, we are halting all Soylent Bar purchases and shipments 
and are advising our customers to discard any remaining bars in their 
possession.”

Soylent said it is investigating the issue but has “not yet identified [a 
problem] and this issue does not appear to affect ourother drinks and powder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/04/soylent-no-food-dinner-party-san-francisco>
”.

“Though our investigation into this matter continues, we have decided to err 
on the side of caution and take this preventative step,” the company added, 
saying it would offer customers a full refund.

The bars have a long list of ingredients 
<http://files.soylent.com/pdf/bar-nutrition-facts-en.pdf>, including soy 
protein isolate, corn syrup, rolled oat, canola oil, glycerine and whole algale 
flour.

The company told Gizmodo 
<http://gizmodo.com/people-are-saying-that-soylent-bars-are-making-them-bar-1787503280#_ga=1.131681551.122581585.1444279257>
 last week that it had sent recalled bars for “microbiological testing” but so 
far found no clues to the problem. “Based on this we remain very confident in 
the safety of the bars,” it said.

On both Soylent’s message boards and a Reddit group 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/soylent/comments/5649ks/how_many_here_have_experienced_vomiting_after/>
 devoted to the food substitute, people said their symptoms were inconsistent: 
some had eaten several bars over the course of weeks before falling sick with 
one, others had reactions within hours. Many of the Soylent fans insisted they 
would not be deterred by the reports.

“There was a bright green liquid/gelatinous substance on the inner wrapper of 
today’s bar,” onereported to the company. 
<https://discourse.soylent.com/t/nausea-and-vomiting-several-times-after-eating-food-bars/26168/218>
 “I ate it anyways, confident in my ability to digest anything natural. It 
otherwise smelled and tasted fine.”

Soylent is classified as a food by the FDA, and the company says 
<https://faq.soylent.com/hc/en-us/articles/212768023-Allergen-Information-Food-Certifications>
 it has been “generally recognized as safe” and that its production facility 
was last inspected in March 2016, though the FDA’s online database says the 
last inspection <http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/inspsearch/results.cfm> 
was in March 2014. The company has said that complaints represent about .03% of 
bars sold.
 