
New photographs appear to show one of north Africa’s most wanted 
people-smugglers celebrating at a family wedding, giving fresh momentum to 
claims that a man accused of being the smuggler, and set to face trial inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> this week, is the victim of mistaken 
identity.

Prosecutors in Sicily will begin a second round of legal proceedings on 
Wednesday against a man they allege to be Medhanie Yehdego Mered, a 35-year-old 
Eritrean who is said to be a notorious people-smuggler in northAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

Italian prosecutors investigate pair who say they got the wrong people smuggler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/people-smuggling-trial-eritrean-italian-prosecutors>
An Eritrean man was extradited in June from Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/police-investigating-if-wrong-man-caught-in-anti-smuggling-operation>
, with the help of the British Foreign Office and the UK’s National Crime 
Agency (NCA), in a move that attracted intense media attention at the time. But 
the family of the extradited man have always maintained that he is in fact 
29-year-old Medhanie Tesfamariam Berhe.

Some of the smuggler’s former victims have also testified that the man on 
trial is not the man who smuggled them and an estimated 13,000 others between 
Sudan, Libya and southernEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>
. One asked to remain anonymous because he fears the real smuggler is still at 
large in Sudan, and could intimidate his family there.

Before the second round of court proceedings, the prosecution’s case has been 
further weakened by the emergence of nine photographs that allegedly show Mered 
celebrating at his nephew’s wedding in October 2015. The alleged smuggler can 
be seen dancing, posing, holding a drape and being spoon-fed cake by his sister.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64ee65e451f287ce8c04e895c4c8996418fa8766%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=People-smuggling%3A%20new%20photos%20boost%20claim%20that%20wrong%20man%20is%20on%20trial%20in%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=People-smuggling%3A%20new%20photos%20boost%20claim%20that%20wrong%20man%20is%20on%20trial%20in%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64ee65e451f287ce8c04e895c4c8996418fa8766%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 A composite image showing pictures identified as Medhanie Tesfamariam Berhe, 
left, and Medhanie Yehdego Mered, centre and right. Composite: EPA & Handout 
The man in the photographs looks markedly different to the man facing trial in 
Italy but closely resembles the person described as Mered in wanted posters 
released by Italian prosecutors in previous years.

Two guests at the wedding said the man photographed at the celebrations was 
the smuggler the Italians claim to be putting on trial.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd05bb46da8fea517411544590e8319562ffbc239%2F57_73_777_466%2F777.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=People-smuggling%3A%20new%20photos%20boost%20claim%20that%20wrong%20man%20is%20on%20trial%20in%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=People-smuggling%3A%20new%20photos%20boost%20claim%20that%20wrong%20man%20is%20on%20trial%20in%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd05bb46da8fea517411544590e8319562ffbc239%2F57_73_777_466%2F777.jpg>
 A new photo of Medhanie Yehdego Mered, right, with two guests at a family 
wedding in October 2015. Photograph: Withheld 
“The guy on the right is Medhanie Yehdego Mered,” said the first source, when 
presented with a photo showing Mered standing in a row of three wedding guests. 
“Everybody knew he was a smuggler at the wedding and everybody was talking 
about him.”

A second source also confirmed his identity. “That’s him, the guy eating cake 
wearing white,” said the second source, referring to a photo showing Mered with 
his sister. “He is an idiot in real life too. Even at the wedding he was … 
fighting with someone.”

The revelations raise further concerns about the competence of Italian and 
British anti-smuggling operations. In June, both countries presented Mered’s 
alleged arrest as a major victory in the fight to curb people-smuggling in 
north Africa, which has brought nearly 500,000 people to Italy in the past 
three years. The NCA hailed its“substantial” 
<http://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/news/869-prolific-people-smuggler-captured-in-sudan>
 role in both tracking Mered down and liaising with the Sudanese authorities to 
secure his arrest. The FCO also praised its own“crucial” 
<https://www.facebook.com/ukinsudan/posts/10153737027472426> involvement in 
liaising with Sudan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0c77d81f6db2a23bea2415584fe35d76cfa5622%2F13_61_756_454%2F756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=People-smuggling%3A%20new%20photos%20boost%20claim%20that%20wrong%20man%20is%20on%20trial%20in%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=People-smuggling%3A%20new%20photos%20boost%20claim%20that%20wrong%20man%20is%20on%20trial%20in%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0c77d81f6db2a23bea2415584fe35d76cfa5622%2F13_61_756_454%2F756.jpg>
 Medhanie Yehdego Mered being spoon-fed by his sister at the family wedding. 
Photograph: Withheld 
But the emergence of the wedding photographs leaves both Britain and Italy 
with serious questions to answer, said Berhe’s lawyer, Michele Calantropo. 
“These photos are really important because they prove what we have been trying 
to say in the last months,” said Calantropo. “They prove that the smuggler is 
still at large and that he is obviously not my client.”

The FCO admitted that it had not checked whether the man extradited to Italy 
was the man sought by British police, but said that concerns about the 
investigative process should be directed to the NCA and the Italian 
authorities. The NCA said it could not comment on a live case, while Roy 
Godding, the NCA operative who led the Mered investigation, did not respond to 
approaches made to him directly. The Italian prosecutors said: “No comment from 
us.”

The photograph collection is one of several new indications that Italy may be 
prosecuting the wrong man. According to previously unseen court documents, 
prosecutors admitted that Nuredin Atta Wehabrebi, an Eritrean 
smuggler-turned-supergrass assisting in the Mered investigation, did not 
recognise Berhe. “I have never seen this guy before,” he is quoted as saying by 
prosecutors.

Separately, a brief Facebook conversation from October 2015 between Berhe and 
Mered’s wife, Lidia Tesfu, suggests that the pair did not know each other, 
contradicting prosecution claims that Berhe is an alias for Mered.

After an initial exchange in which the pair tried to establish whether they 
had met, Berhe told Tesfu he liked her profile picture, and said he was 
attracted to her. “But I’m a married person,” said Tesfu. “No problem, you can 
have more than one man,” Berhe replied, before Tesfu laughed away his 
suggestion, ending their interactions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40634454db66eeaa58d8398267319d3c0c97b241%2F0_14_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=People-smuggling%3A%20new%20photos%20boost%20claim%20that%20wrong%20man%20is%20on%20trial%20in%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=People-smuggling%3A%20new%20photos%20boost%20claim%20that%20wrong%20man%20is%20on%20trial%20in%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fpeople-smuggling-new-photos-boost-claim-that-wrong-man-is-on-trial-in-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40634454db66eeaa58d8398267319d3c0c97b241%2F0_14_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Medhanie Yehdego Mered at the October 2015 family wedding. Photograph: Withheld
Court documents also reveal that the Sudanese justice ministry could have 
approved Berhe’s extradition by overriding the recommendations of Sudanese 
investigators. His extradition papers say that the justice minister could 
deport him “without obligating the minister to take into consideration the 
recommendations of the detective judge who interrogated the criminal”. However, 
the document does not explain the content of those recommendations.

These disclosures are the latest in a series of revelations that raise 
questions about the prosecution’s case. It has already emerged that:

 * Prosecutors could not provide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/21/eritrean-second-trial-italy-medhanie-berhe-mered-people-smuggler>
 a single witness to testify against Berhe.

 * The prosecution’s chosen experts could not tell whether Berhe’s voice 
matched that heard in a 2014 wiretapping of a man said to be Mered.

 * Berhe looks markedly different to the photographs of Mered released by 
prosecutors prior to Berhe’s arrest.

 * Berhe’s high-school documents and Eritrean ID card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/10/eritrean-accused-of-being-people-smuggling-kingpin-says-he-is-innocent>
 suggest that he and Mered are different people.

 * Gory pictures found on Berhe’s phone, which prosecutors claimed were 
photographs of his dead clients, were in fact downloaded from an Asian website.

 * Two of Mered’s former passengers did not recognise Berhe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/smugglers-victims-say-police-have-arrested-innocent-refugee>
, with one refusing to be quoted by name because he believed that Mered was 
still at large, and feared Mered would target him for speaking out.

One of them, Anbes Yemane, a 23-year-old Eritrean student, said: “I know 
[Mered] very well, I can recognise him very well. That wasn’t him.”

The prosecution’s case now largely rests on three more wiretapped phone calls 
between Berhe and smugglers in Libya in May 2016. In the first, Berhe tells a 
smuggler that some friends want to travel to Libya, according to court 
documents. In the second, Berhe speaks with a man who seems to be both his 
friend and a client of the smugglers, and agrees to pass on a message to the 
friend’s family. In the third, a smuggler tells Berhe that a friend of his has 
yet to pay his smuggling fees.

Berhe’s lawyer does not dispute that these wiretaps feature his client but 
argues the calls contain no incriminating evidence. Many innocent Eritreans are 
regularly in touch with smugglers in Libya, helping to organise transport 
across the Sahara and the Mediterranean for their friends and family. By some 
estimates, 6% of the population has fled the Eritrean dictatorship, and in 
order to secure onward travel to the safety of Europe, thousands of them have 
had to speak with smugglers.

Libya's people smugglers: inside the trade that sells refugees hopes of a 
better life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/24/libyas-people-smugglers-how-will-they-catch-us-theyll-soon-move-on>
“My client is not a smuggler at all,” Calantropo said. “He has been contacted 
by smugglers and he called them back to talk with his friend, who was about to 
leave from Libya. But this does not make him a smuggler. If an Eritrean wants 
to leave the country he can’t exactly go to an airport. They are forced to 
contact a smuggler.’’

Berhe’s family say he has neither been to Libya, where Mered’s business is 
said to have been based, nor speaks Arabic, a language needed to operate as a 
smuggler in Libya. They say he left Eritrea in October 2014, one of thousands 
of Eritreans to flee a government that the UN accused this year ofcommitting 
crimes against humanity on its population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/un-commission-eritrea-international-criminal-court-hague>
.


 