
Republican presidential candidates on Sunday continued to wrestle with 
comments made byDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
about Mexico and immigrants in the US.

Appearing on ABC, Rick Perry repudiated Trump’s criticism of his record on 
border security <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/617705622251917312> 
and said: “Donald Trump does not represent the Republican party.” The former 
Texas governor also called Trump’s remarks “offensive”.

'This country's bankrupt': supporters keep Donald Trump in business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/05/donald-trump-republican-2016> 
The former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-santorum> told CBS that though he 
didn’t “like the verbiage [Trump] used”, he liked “the fact he’s focused on an 
issue that is important to American workers and legal immigrants”.

Mike Huckabee appeared on CNN. He chose not to either express support, as did 
Texas senator Ted Cruz inan interview broadcast on NBC 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/07/ted-cruz-defends-donald-trump-slams-washington-on-immigration-119726.html>
 – in which he said “I salute Donald Trump for focusing on the need to address 
illegal immigration” – or issue a strong condemnation, as didFlorida senator 
Marco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/04/donald-trump-marco-rubio-mexico-immigrants>
 on Friday.


The former Arkansas governor said: “Donald Trump needs no help from Mike 
Huckabee <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mikehuckabee> to get publicity. 
He’s doing a really good job of that.”

On Saturday, the 2012 candidate Mitt Romney and the frontrunner in the 2016 
field, former Florida governor Jeb Bush, contributed to that publicity by 
condemning Trump.

Romney said: “I think he made a severe error in saying what he did about 
Mexican Americans and I feel it was unfortunate.”

Bush, campaigning on Independence Day in Merrimack, New Hampshire 
<http://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-draft/2015/07/04/an-angry-jeb-bush-says-he-takes-donald-trumps-remarks-personally/?_r=0>
, said: “Trump is wrong on this … He’s not a stupid guy. Don’t think he thinks 
every Mexican crossing the border is a rapist. He’s doing this to inflame and 
incite and to draw attention, which seems to be his organising principle of his 
campaign.”

Trump issued a statement in response to Bush 
<http://www.breitbart.com/immigration/2015/07/04/game-on-trump-responds-to-jeb/>
, a favourite target whose wife is Mexican. It read: “Today, Jeb Bush once 
again proves that he is out of touch with the American people.

“He doesn’t understand anything about the border or border security. In fact, 
Jeb believes illegal immigrants who break our laws when they cross our border 
come ‘out of love’.”

On Sunday, on Twitter, he alluded to Perry’s much-touted makeover when he 
said: “He needs a new pair of glasses to see the crimes committed by illegal 
immigrants.”

Trump made his original remarks at his campaign launch in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-announces-run-president>
, when he said: “[Mexico is] sending people that have lots of problems, and 
they are bringing those problems to us. They are bringing drugs, and bringing 
crime, and their rapists.”

Responses included condemnation by the governments of Mexico and Venezuela 
<http://www.mediaite.com/online/the-president-of-venezuela-called-donald-trump-mentally-ill/>
 andHispanic leaders in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/03/hispanic-leaders-republican-candidates-condemn-donald-trump>
 and a succession of terminations of business relationships with the property 
mogul and reality TV star, including actions byUnivision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/25/univision-donald-trump-miss-universe-mexican-immigrants>
,NBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/29/donald-trump-dropped-nbc-mexico>
,Macy’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/01/macys-fires-donald-trump-mexico>
 and Nascar.

Trump has protested that he “loves Mexico”, while repeating and varying his 
charges. On Friday, he toldFox News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/04/donald-trump-links-shooting-death-in-san-franciso-with-border-control>
 the shooting dead of a 32-year-old woman by an illegal immigrant with an 
extensive arrest record in San Francisco was “yet another example of why we 
must secure our border immediately.

“This is an absolutely disgraceful situation and I am the only one that can 
fix it. Nobody else has the guts to even talk about it,” he said.

On CNN on Sunday, Huckabee discussed his views on immigration, if not the 
effect Trump’s comments might have on GOP electoral fortunes with Hispanic 
voters who backed Barack Obama in 2012. Trump is second to Bush in polls and is 
thus in position to qualify for the first debate, in Cleveland on 6 August.


Huckabee said: “What I’ve been doing is focusing on what my own views of 
immigration happen to be, without weighing in on this battle of whether we’re 
with Donald Trump or against him.


“I say some things very differently,” he added. “I say that every night I get 
on my knees and say thank you that I’m living in a country people want to break 
into, rather than one they’re trying to break out of.”

Huckabee praised the hard work of most immigrants to the US, who he said were 
“some of the most conservative, family-oriented and faith-based people I’ve 
ever witnessed.

“Are there some with nefarious goals?” he asked. “Yes, that’s why we need to 
secure the border.”

Perry also praised Hispanic Americans, who he said had served the US “from the 
Alamo to Afghanistan”.

Perry said Trump was “going to have to defend those remarks. I never will. I 
will stand up and say that those remarks were offensive.”
 