
Noël Coward once described Brighton thus: “Ah, dear Brighton, piers, queers 
and racketeers.” And Keith Waterhouse said: “Brighton has the air of a town 
that is perpetually helping the police with their inquiries.”


A smuggling village in the middle ages, Brighton evolved into a racy spa town 
patronised by King George IV. He commissioned its most spectacular building, 
the Royal Pavilion, to impress his mistress, Mrs Fitzherbert. It must surely be 
the world’s grandest bespoke venue for illicit liaisons.

Brighton has a long criminal history, dating back far before 1932 when, 
following the discovery of a series of dismembered bodies in railway lockers, 
it was dubbed the murder capital of Europe.

Three past chief constables of Sussex police each confirmed to me that 
Brighton is one of the favoured places in the UK for first-division criminals 
to live. It has a major seaport on either side, and at the western edge of the 
city lies Shoreham airport; there are miles of unguarded coastline. Plus there 
are lots of escape routes: all the Channel ports, and Eurotunnel. Gatwick 
airport is just 25 minutes away. London is 50 mins by train. It also has the 
largest number of antiques shops in the UK – perfect for fencing stolen goods 
and laundering cash.

The city has an affluent young middle-class population, two universities, and 
a huge number of nightclubs, providing a big market for recreational drugs. It 
has a large transient population, making it hard for police to keep tabs on 
villains and easy for drug overlords to replace any of their dealer minions who 
get arrested. And of course it is a fabulous city to live in – and to write 
about.

It is surprising therefore that so few people have written about it over the 
centuries – something I’m now trying hard to redress! But here is a selection 
of books wholly or partially set in and around this amazing, beautiful, vibrant 
place.

1. Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/pride-and-prejudice-66.html>

Although Brighton is not directly described in the novel, it plays a key role 
in the plot. Austen herself clearly had a poor view of the place, as shown in a 
1799 letter to her sister Cassandra: “Here I am once more in this scene of 
dissipation and vice, and I begin already to find my morals corrupted.” And 
here, from the book: “In Lydia’s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised 
every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye of 
fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers. She saw 
herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them at present 
unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp – its tents stretched forth in 
beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young and the gay, and dazzling 
with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she saw herself seated beneath a tent, 
tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once.”

2. The Clayhanger family novels by  
<http://www.thepotteries.org/bennett/book_clayhanger.html> Arnold Bennett 
<http://www.thepotteries.org/bennett/book_clayhanger.html>

Bennett has long been one of my favourite writers – and the book of his I love 
best is The Card, set mostly in the Potteries. Bennett lived for a time in 
Rottingdean, a village immediately adjoining Brighton, and began writing this 
trilogy in Brighton’s Royal Albion hotel in 1910. In the second part of the 
trilogy, Hilda runs a boarding house in Preston Street.

3. The West Pier by  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/apr/16/welcomebackpatrickhamilton>
Patrick Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/apr/16/welcomebackpatrickhamilton>

Born just outside the city and educated in it, Hamilton wrote a great deal 
about Brighton. Many agree his finest work was in his last novels, written in 
the 1920s – The West Pier, Mr Stimpson and Mr Gorse and Unknown Assailant, all 
featuring the memorable psychopathErnest Ralph Gorse 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/book-review--gin-in-the-afternoon-the-gorse-trilogy--patrick-hamilton-penguin-799-pounds-1540883.html>
. Graham Greene hailed The West Pier as “the best book written about Brighton”, 
with JB Priestley describing his fictional landscape as “a kind of No Man’s 
Land of shabby hotels, dingy boarding-houses and all those saloon bars where 
the homeless can meet”.

4. Brighton Rock by  <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/brighton-rock.html>
Graham Greene <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/brighton-rock.html>

This book, written in 1937, is hands down not just the best book ever written 
about Brighton, but in my view one of the top five crime novels of all time. It 
has surely one of the most arresting opening sentences ever: “Hale knew, before 
he had been in Brighton three hours, that they meant to kill him.” The 
detective is no longer the key character, it’s the villain himself – Pinky, a 
17-year-old killer in charge of a bunch of middle-aged misfits, and a devout 
Catholic terrified of eternal damnation. There is no cosy puzzle to be solved, 
no happy ending. You put the book down with your emotions floored, your 
imagination soaring.

5. Murder on the Brighton Express by  
<http://www.edwardmarston.com/colbeck.html> Edward Marston 
<http://www.edwardmarston.com/colbeck.html>

Marston is a wonderful writer of historical detective fiction, and this 
investigation of a rail crash, set in 1854, is a gem of period detail. The 
opening of the London-Brighton railway line in 1846 transformed Brighton and 
Hove – in both good and bad ways. It has been a symbol of the place ever since.

6. The Brighton Trilogy by  <http://www.peterguttridge.com/index.php?cat=2>
Peter Guttridge <http://www.peterguttridge.com/index.php?cat=2>

An on-off resident of the area, Guttridge is best known for his comic crime 
fiction. But this lovingly written trilogy explores Brighton’s criminal past 
and present through serious, engaging fiction.

7. The Death of Bunny Munro by Nick Cave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/sep/13/death-bunny-munro-nick-cave> 

Cave lives in Brighton and this dark and gripping novel has some wonderful 
depictions of the city’s seamy side. Bunny Munro makes a living selling beauty 
products door-to-door to lonely housewives – and bedding them. In between he 
cruises Brighton in a bright yellow Punto, leering out of his window or 
fantasising about Kylie Minogue’s hotpants.

8. Dirty Weekend by  
<http://www.helenzahavi.com/Dirty-Weekend--Reviews%282395623%29.htm>Helen Zahavi
 <http://www.helenzahavi.com/Dirty-Weekend--Reviews%282395623%29.htm>

A clever, seamy and savage story of revenge by Bella, a former sex-worker 
living in Brighton, who begins murdering abusers. Her death toll is seven by 
the end of the story. Yet another strong and well written novel on Brighton’s 
dark side.

9. Sugar Rush by  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/05/fiction.booksforchildrenandteenagers>
Julie Burchill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/05/fiction.booksforchildrenandteenagers>

And now for something almost completely different. Burchill is almost Brighton 
royalty, so strong are her ties with the city. Sugar Rush was her first YA 
novel, and charts the journey of Kim Lewis, forced to leave her posh high 
school and move to a Brighton comprehensive. It is a no holds barred, but 
beautifully written, account of teenage trials and tribulations.

10. Brighton Rock Picture Book: The making of the Boulting Brothers film 
1946-8 by 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/travel-murder-suicide-and-a-sticky-pink-sweet-1200691.html>
Maire McQueeney 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/travel-murder-suicide-and-a-sticky-pink-sweet-1200691.html>

Few have done more for literature in Brighton in recent decades than McQueeney 
– who began by holding literature classes for commuters on the London-Brighton 
railway line. I think this film of Brighton Rock (not to be confused with the 
dreadful 2010 version) is one of the very best screen adaptations ever. 
McQueeney has created a wonderful tribute to it – and to Brighton.

 * You Are Dead by Peter James is published by Macmillan, priced £20. Buy it 
from the Guardian bookshop for £16 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/295672/>. A Twist of 
the Knife is published by Pan, priced £7.99,available from the Guardian 
bookshop for £6.39 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/295660/>. 
 * The stage adaptation of Dead Simple is currently on tour in the UK 
<http://www.deadsimpletheplay.co.uk/about.html>.

 * The Brighton festival runs until 24 May <http://brightonfestival.org/>.  