
Tech billionaire Peter Thiel’s reported $1.25m contribution 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/technology/peter-thiel-donald-j-trump.html?_r=0>
 to Donald Trump’s presidential campaign has prompted a high-profile Silicon 
Valley organization to cut ties with a startup incubator backed by the 
Republican donor.

Ellen Pao, a former Reddit executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/11/reddit-ellen-pao-women-ceo> 
and vocaladvocate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/jul/06/reddit-ellen-pao-feminist-mysogyny-discrimination-inequality>
 for diversity in tech, has announced that her groupProject Include 
<http://projectinclude.org/> is ending its relationship with Y Combinator, the 
well-known startup “accelerator” where Thiel is apart-time partner 
<https://blog.ycombinator.com/welcome-peter>.

“Thiel’s actions are in direct conflict with our values at Project Include,” 
Paowrote 
<https://medium.com/projectinclude/peter-thiel-yc-and-hard-decisions-2b91bab83764#.rbrhnmtst>
 on Monday, referring to the not-for-profit group that she and a group of 
prominentSilicon Valley women 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/04/technology/women-in-tech-band-together-to-track-diversity-after-hours.html>
 formed earlier this year to push for “diversity and inclusion solutions in the 
tech industry”.

“Because of his continued connection to YC [Y Combinator], we are compelled to 
break off our relationship with YC. We hope this situation changes, and that we 
are both willing to move forward together in the future. Today it is clear to 
us that our values are not aligned,” Pao continued.

Influential developer and Tumblr co-founder Marco Arment 
<https://marco.org/2016/10/17/shame-on-y-combinator> also called out 
Y-Combinator for sticking with Thiel. “This is literally paying a huge amount 
of money to directly support a racist, sexist bigot with rapidly mounting 
allegations of multiple sexual assaults,” he wrote.

“[Y-Combinator is] defending the large-scale support of racism, bigotry, and 
sexual assault by an influential partner and advisor to their startups as its 
own form of ‘diversity’.”

The announcement signals possible fallout in the California tech industry 
surrounding the political donations and campaigning of Thiel, who helpedfound 
PayPal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/25/peter-thiel-gawker-hulk-hogan-sex-tape-lawsuit>
 and was an early investor in Facebook.

Thiel, a conservative outlier in the Democratic stronghold of Silicon Valley, 
became a state delegate for Trump earlier this year and delivered a 
much-discussedspeech at the Republican national convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/peter-thiel-republican-national-convention-proud-to-be-gay>
, during which hesaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/jul/22/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video>
: “I am proud to be gay.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Thiel%20at%20Republican%20convention%3A%20'I%20am%20proud%20to%20be%20gay'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Thiel%20at%20Republican%20convention%3A%20%27I%20am%20proud%20to%20be%20gay%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video&media=>
Peter Thiel at Republican convention: ‘I am proud to be gay’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/jul/22/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video>
The tech mogul also made headlines earlier this year when news broke that he 
wassecretly bankrolling former wrestler Hulk Hogan’s lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/24/peter-thiel-gawker-hulk-hogan-sex-tape-lawsuit-valleywag>
 against Gawker, the media company that subsequentlywent bankrupt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/19/gawker-com-univision-nick-denton-aftermath>
.

Thiel’s embrace of Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech>
 baffled many over the summer, but critics were particularly shocked to see him 
strengthen his support of the real estate mogul at a time when many 
conservatives and Republican party leaders are disavowing the embattled 
presidential candidate.

After Trump was caught on a leaked tape bragging about groping women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 and kissing them without consent, the candidate has faced aflurry of sexual 
misconduct allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations-cathy-heller>
 from women across the US. In the wake of the revelations, many elected 
Republicans have announced that they arewithdrawing their support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-tape-quit-republicans-lewd-comments>
.

Donald Trump, Peter Thiel and the death of democracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech>
Thiel, however, remained silent 
<http://gizmodo.com/peter-thiel-won-t-say-if-he-s-still-supporting-trump-1787674466>
 over the past week, reportedlyignoring 
<https://twitter.com/dmccabe/status/784828954251137024> journalists’ inquiries 
about whether his position had changed. Then on Saturday, the New York Times
reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/technology/peter-thiel-donald-j-trump.html?_r=0>
 that Thiel was living up to his “reputation as the most contrarian soul in 
Silicon Valley” and would be giving $1.25m to Trump through a combination of 
Super Pac gifts and donations directly to the campaign.

The donations make Thiel one of just a few major donors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/22/donald-trump-donor-geoffrey-palmer-los-angeles-property>
 to Trump, who has been widelyrejected 
<https://shift.newco.co/an-open-letter-from-technology-sector-leaders-on-donald-trumps-candidacy-for-president-5bf734c159e4#.ma9w73n37>
 by tech leaders and wealthy conservatives. Thiel’s spokesman did not 
immediately respond to a request for comment on Monday.

Thiel’s support of Trump had already put pressure on Facebook 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2016/05/26/mark_zuckerberg_needs_to_dump_peter_thiel_from_the_facebook_board_of_directors.html>
, where he sits on the board. After the new donations were revealed, many on 
social media called on Y Combinator todump 
<https://twitter.com/_danilo/status/787727547962392576> Thiel, noting that the 
startup firm was effectively supporting someone who has backed an overtlyracist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
,misogynistic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/donald-trump-women-misogyny-lifetime>
 andxenophobic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/23/donald-trump-says-muslim-communities-not-reporting-suspected-terrorists>
 campaign.

Y Combinator’s president, Sam Altman, responded 
<http://www.recode.net/2016/10/16/13302120/y-combinator-sam-altman-peter-thiel-donald-trump>
 with aseries of tweets <https://twitter.com/sama/status/787833897132232704> on 
Sunday night, saying Trump is “an unacceptable threat to America” and “unfit to 
be president”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fproject-include-y-combinator-donald-trump-peter-thiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F949806fceba424908586ac10852740c81cd98356%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Thiel%20faces%20Silicon%20Valley%20backlash%20after%20pledging%20%241.25m%20to%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fproject-include-y-combinator-donald-trump-peter-thiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Thiel%20faces%20Silicon%20Valley%20backlash%20after%20pledging%20%241.25m%20to%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fproject-include-y-combinator-donald-trump-peter-thiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F949806fceba424908586ac10852740c81cd98356%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Ellen Pao – who made headlines last year for hersexual discrimination lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/27/ellen-pao-loses-landmark-sexual-discrimination-lawsuit>
 against venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers – wrote that 
Project Include could not continue to partner with Y Combinator at this time. 
Photograph: Robert Galbraith/Reuters 
But, he added: “YC is not going to fire someone for supporting a major party 
nominee.”

Pao – who made headlines last year for her sexual discrimination lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/27/ellen-pao-loses-landmark-sexual-discrimination-lawsuit>
 against venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers – wrote that 
Project Include could not continue to partner with Y Combinator at this time.

“While all of us believe in the ideas of free speech and open platforms, we 
draw a line here,” she said. “We agree that people shouldn’t be fired for their 
political views, but this isn’t a disagreement on tax policy, this is 
advocating hatred and violence.”

Pao told the Guardian that it was unclear whether other tech leaders would 
follow suit and end partnerships with Thiel.

“I think it’s starting a conversation, but I haven’t seen it really fracture 
Silicon Valley in any significant way.”

She added: “The power in Silicon Valley is concentrated in the hands of very 
few people, and it is hard to try to go up against that.”

Some have noted that Thiel’s support of Trump is not all that surprising 
considering the tech billionaire’s openly sexist views.


In 2009, he argued that capitalist politics have struggled because women can 
vote.

“The 1920s were the last decade in American history during which one could be 
genuinely optimistic about politics,” Thielwrote 
<http://www.cato-unbound.org/2009/04/13/peter-thiel/education-libertarian>. 
“Since 1920, the vast increase in welfare beneficiaries and the extension of 
the franchise to women – two constituencies that are notoriously tough for 
libertarians – have rendered the notion of ‘capitalist democracy’ into an 
oxymoron.”


Altman did not answer questions about Project Include’s announcement, but sent 
the Guardian astatement <http://blog.samaltman.com/the-2016-election>, saying, 
“We shouldn’t start purging people for supporting the wrong political 
candidate.”

Continuing to partner with Thiel is a way to support “diversity”, he wrote, 
even if it is “painful and unpopular”. But, he added, “If Peter said some of 
the things Trump says himself, he would no longer be part of Y Combinator.”
 