
Controversial Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> billionaire Peter Thiel 
will be a member of Donald Trump’s transition team, the campaign has confirmed.

Thiel’s involvement in a Trump administration has been the subject of frenzied 
speculation in Silicon Valley, where the businessman was the sole prominent 
advocate for the divisive Republican candidate.


Peter Thiel faces Silicon Valley backlash after pledging $1.25m to Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/project-include-y-combinator-donald-trump-peter-thiel>
On Wednesday, Thiel told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/technology/peter-thiel-bet-donald-trump-wins-big.html>
 that he would not move to Washington or seek a seat on the supreme court, but 
said: “I’ll try to help the president in any way I can.”


It is not known what role Thiel will play in the transition team. The 
transition team and Thiel’s representatives did not respond to requests for 
further details. But it is likely that he will be expected to help the 
president-elect build bridges with Silicon Valley, a place where Barack Obama is
hugely popular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/24/barack-obama-mark-zuckerberg-startups-conference>
 and where many people regard Trump with either distrust or outright disdain.


Thiel’s vocal and financial support of Trump made him an outlier in the 
largely socially liberal world of Silicon Valley. While other tech CEOs and 
venture capitalists railed against Trump’s aggressive xenophobia, anti-free 
trade saber-rattling and threats to individual companies such as Apple and 
Amazon, Thiel delivered a keynote address at the Republican national convention 
in July anddonated $1.25m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/project-include-y-combinator-donald-trump-peter-thiel>
 to support Trump’s campaign.

“I build companies and I’m supporting people who are building new things, from 
social networks to rocket ships,” he said at the convention. “I’m not a 
politician. But neither isDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. He is a builder, and it’s 
time to rebuild America.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Thiel%20at%20Republican%20convention%3A%20'I%20am%20proud%20to%20be%20gay'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Thiel%20at%20Republican%20convention%3A%20%27I%20am%20proud%20to%20be%20gay%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video&media=>
Peter Thiel at Republican convention: ‘I am proud to be gay’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/jul/22/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video>
Thiel, 49, is a Stanford-trained lawyer who co-founded the online payments 
system PayPal in 1998. After PayPal was acquired by eBay, he launched a hedge 
fund, Clarium Capital, which at first grew to $8bn in assets butfloundered 
<http://www.hedgethink.com/resources/side-peter-thiel-clarium-capital/> after 
the 2008 financial crisis. His current wealth and stature derives in large part 
from his early investment in Facebook.

In 2004, Thiel was the first outside investor in the budding social network. 
His bet on Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has provided him with a seat on the 
board of the world’smost powerful distributor of news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
, as well as the wealth to fund various eccentric interests, such as 
life-extending technologies and a fellowship for college dropouts.

On Thursday, one of those fellows, Cosmo Scharf, announced 
<https://medium.com/@cosmoscharf/why-im-leaving-the-thiel-fellowship-7205ca88766b#.u8oegvdj7>
 that he would be turning down the balance of his $100,000 grant from the Thiel 
Foundation, citing his disgust with Thiel’s support of what he called “our next 
Hitler-elect”.


Thiel also co-founded Palantir Technologies, with early investment from the 
CIA. The secretive data analysis firmwas recently sued by the Department of 
Labor 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/palantir-sued-over-alleged-hiring-discrimination-1474928585>
 for allegedly discriminating against Asians in hiring.


Thiel has distanced himself from some of Trump’s core campaign proposals, such 
as banning Muslims from entering the country and building a wall along the 
US-Mexico border.


“I don’t support a religious test. I certainly don’t support the specific 
language that Trump has used in every instance,” he said during aquestion and 
answer session 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/31/peter-thiel-defends-donald-trump-muslim-ban-mexico-wall>
 at the National Press Club on 31 October. He added that Trump voters 
interpreted the promise of the border wall to mean “we’re going to have a 
saner, more sensible immigration policy”.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
“Build a Wall on the Southern Border” is the first item on the immigration plan
 <https://www.greatagain.gov/policy/immigration.html> published on Trump’s 
official transition website. Other items include blocking funding for sanctuary 
cities, which include San Francisco.


Other members of Trump’s transition team, however, clearly take the 
president-elect more literally. “If he says he’s going to build a wall and make 
the Mexicans pay for it … my guess is he’s going to build the wall and the 
Mexicans are going to pay for it. I think that’s going to happen,” Anthony 
Scaramucci, Trump’s economic adviser and Thiel’s fellow on the transition team 
toldNew York magazine 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/anthony-scaramucci-on-team-trumps-economic-plan.html>
 on Friday.


Representative Marsha Blackburn, another member of the transition team, wrote 
in an op-ed for Breitbart News that Trump’s plan to temporarily suspend Muslim 
immigration into the United States “could not be any more common-sense”.


Thiel’s personal politics are intensely libertarian. He has expressed interest 
in building floating colonies on the oceans free of the restrictions of 
government regulation, a movement known asseasteading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/21/peter-thiel-paypal-luck-atheist-god>
. He has also bemoaned the extension of the vote to women, a constituency that 
he noted was “notoriously tough for libertarians”, in anessay 
<https://www.cato-unbound.org/2009/04/13/peter-thiel/education-libertarian>.


Thiel co-founded the conservative Stanford Review as an undergraduate at 
Stanford. The publication became a home for many future Silicon Valley 
magnates, including venture capitalist Keith Rabois and Zenefits CEO David O 
Sacks, who shared his disdain for the left-leaning campus culture of the early 
1990s.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fpeter-thiel-joins-donald-trump-transition-team%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8bb3c5e1dbd3c242a7b45400ea05f7e8e816dac%2F0_51_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Thiel%20goes%20'big%20league'%2C%20joining%20Trump's%20presidential%20transition%20team&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fpeter-thiel-joins-donald-trump-transition-team%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Thiel%20goes%20%27big%20league%27%2C%20joining%20Trump%27s%20presidential%20transition%20team&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fpeter-thiel-joins-donald-trump-transition-team%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8bb3c5e1dbd3c242a7b45400ea05f7e8e816dac%2F0_51_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Peter Thiel speaking at the Republican convention in July. Photograph: Jeff J 
Mitchell/Getty Images 
Much of Thiel’s and Sacks’ work on the Stanford Review formed the basis for 
their 1995 book, The Diversity Myth: Multiculturalism and Political Intolerance 
on Campus. Thebook lambasts the movement to diversify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/21/peter-thiel-support-donald-trump-date-rape-book>
 student bodies and university faculties, the inclusion of writers such as Zora 
Neale Hurston and Rigoberta Menchú in the Stanford freshman curriculum; and 
campus groups such as the Black Students Union and MECha (Movimiento 
Estudiantil Chicano de Aztlán).


The book also discredited the idea of date rape, writing that the definition 
of rape had been stretched to include “seductions that are later regretted”.


Peter Thiel, Trump campaign donor, sorry for date rape comments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/25/trump-donor-peter-thiel-sorry-date-rape-regret-paypal-facebook>
Thiel apologized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/25/trump-donor-peter-thiel-sorry-date-rape-regret-paypal-facebook>
 for his “insensitive, crudely argued statements” on rape afterthe Guardian 
reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/21/peter-thiel-support-donald-trump-date-rape-book>
 on the book’s contents in October. He also rebuked Trump for his boast that he 
sexually assaults women, saying that the comments were “clearly offensive and 
inappropriate”.


Despite this, the tech investor will find much common ground with Trump on 
their shared disdain for the press.


In May, it emerged that Thiel had secretly pursued a vendetta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/25/peter-thiel-gawker-hulk-hogan-sex-tape-lawsuit>
 against the news and gossip blog Gawker, fundinga legal case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/25/peter-thiel-gawker-hulk-hogan-sex-tape-lawsuit>
 brought by the wrestler and reality TV star Hulk Hogan. Gawker had published a 
sex tape excerpt of Hogan with Heather Clem, the wife of his friend Bubba “The 
Love Sponge” Clem, which Gawker published along with a scathing descriptive 
article.

The suit led to an unprecedented $140m judgement by a Florida court against 
Gawker and its founder Nick Denton which pushed both into bankruptcy. Gawker 
Media, which includes the sites Jezebel, Jalopnik, and Gizmodo, was sold to 
Univision,but its flagship site was shuttered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/10/gawker-media-bankruptcy-auction-hulk-hogan-lawsuit>
. A separate suit, also funded by Thiel, leveled against a Gawker writer, AJ 
Daulerio,is ongoing 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/former-gawker-editor-daulerio-could-go-it-alone-in-hulk-hogan-suit-1478729924>
.


The suit caused consternation among first amendment activists concerned that 
the ability of a billionaire to use the courts, in secret, to destroy media 
outlets based on a private grievance – Gawker had previously outed Thiel as gay 
– would have a depressive effect on freedom of the press.
 