
Earlier this week, while we were still reeling from cavalier boasts 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html>
 about sexual assault and from watching woman after woman come forward to 
recount alleged sexual mistreatment at the hands of Donald Trump, Silicon 
Valley bigwig Peter Thieldonated 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/technology/peter-thiel-donald-j-trump.html?_r=0>
 $1.25m to the candidate.

Far from being blacklisted for supporting Trump, Thiel remains a “part-time 
partner” at influential tech startup incubator Y Combinator, and he still sits 
on the boards ofFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, 
Palantir, Asana and Zenefits.


Zuckerberg: white male Facebook board member's Trump support provides 
'diversity'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/19/peter-thiel-support-donald-trump-mark-zuckerberg>
Mark Zuckerberg defended 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/10/19/13334608/mark-zuckerberg-peter-thiel-donald-trump>
 Thiel on Wednesday in a leaked internal memo. He wrote his company could not 
prioritize diversity while shunning supporters of the Republican nominee – 
arguing that supporting Trump makes a white, libertarian billionaire count as 
diverse. (Thielhas been 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/peter-thiel-women-democracy_us_5747079be4b03ede4413f6f5>
 a vocal advocateagainst diversity, which pokes some holes in Zuckerberg’s 
logic.)

Sam Altman and Paul Graham of Y Combinator both 
<http://blog.samaltman.com/the-2016-election> similarly defended 
<https://twitter.com/paulg/status/788419807729164289> Thiel’s role there 
despite their personal opinions of Trump as an extremely dangerous man who 
represents an existential threat to American democracy.

Both of these companies’ reasoning for keeping ties to Thiel go something like 
this: we need a diversity of opinion; we need to talk; we can’t cut off 
viewpoints – that would set a dangerous precedent.


This is a supremely privileged point of view. 

No business or professional consequence would cut off Thiel’s ability to 
express his viewpoints or his right to free speech. And asErica Joy 
<https://twitter.com/EricaJoy/status/788138679067811842> has noted, the refrain 
of “we need to have these conversations” assumes that no talk has been 
happening. Which may be true if you’re a white man, but not if you’re a woman, 
or a person of color, or identify as LGBT. (Silicon Valley employees are still
overwhelmingly 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/how-silicon-valley-is-trying-to-fix-its-diversity-problem/>
 white and male.)

To condone Trump is to condone hatred and exclusion, not political debate. “We 
can’t create a culture that says it cares about diversity and then excludes 
almost half the country because they back a political candidate,” Zuckerberg 
wrote. But this is not about excluding half the country or filtering 
conservative opinions on Facebook’s platform (which the company hascome under 
fire 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/21/technology/facebook-trending-list-skewed-by-individual-judgment-not-institutional-bias.html>
 for doing in the past). Half the country is not backing a political candidate 
to the tune of $1.25m.

Tech leaders need to take a look at their ties – hard and soft – and 
re-evaluate where they draw the line. We need more companies making decisions 
like Project Include, a nonprofit tech industry initiative thatcut ties with Y 
Combinator 
<https://medium.com/projectinclude/peter-thiel-yc-and-hard-decisions-2b91bab83764#.c6uinx60g>
 over Thiel’s donation.

We need the tech industry to hold itself to the same standards for the humans 
it employs as for product development and engineering.

Facebook’s five core values are: be bold, take risks. Focus on impact. Move 
fast. Be open. Build social value. Its ownNews Feed values 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2016/06/building-a-better-news-feed-for-you/> has 
a passage reading:

“It’s important to note that while we welcome a multitude of viewpoints, we 
also believe strongly that people should feel – and be – safe when they use 
Facebook, and we therefore haveCommunity Standards 
<https://www.facebook.com/communitystandards> that define the behavior that we 
think is out-of-bounds on the platform. We think it’s possible to be inclusive 
without making Facebook a place where people are subjected to attacks, hate, or 
other harmful behavior.”

How might they apply these same values not just in the product and business 
output, but in the way they build their workforce? As of now, tech has become 
synonymous with hostile and abusive spaces, especially for people of 
marginalized groups and women. The higher up you go, the more homogenous it 
becomes.

First Thiel, now the Trumps: how billionaires threaten free speech | Trevor 
Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/23/first-thiel-now-the-trumps-how-billionaires-threaten-free-speech>
Things matter and add up. It’s not just hiring people of color, or sponsoring 
diversity events, or appointing a head of diversity and inclusion. True 
progress requires a fundamental change in the status quo.

And that’s uncomfortable, especially for the men in power. While there’s 
definitely work for everyone to do, it starts at the top, with the industry’s 
elite taking a stand and leading the way forward on inclusive solutions.

We need to choose courage over fear. Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> needs to stand up and 
take responsibility to not just do what’s expected, but to go beyond and choose 
do what’s right. Even if that means losing some connections and funding.

Representation matters both ways: for underrepresented groups to see people 
who look like them, but also to not see people who openly advocate for 
misogyny, racism, white supremacy and violence.
 