
Facebook board member and Trump donor Peter Thiel has apologised for a book he 
co-wrote in 1995that argued the definition of rape had been expanded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/21/peter-thiel-support-donald-trump-date-rape-book>
 to include “seductions that are later regretted”.

Thiel’s co-author, David Sacks, a Stanford and Paypal alumnus along with 
Thiel, also apologisedafter the Guardian reported on the book’s contents on 
Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/21/peter-thiel-support-donald-trump-date-rape-book>
.

Thiel gave a statement to Forbes magazine, which said 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/ryanmac/2016/10/25/peter-thiel-apologizes-for-past-book-comments-on-rape-and-race/#5d9067f51309>
: “More than two decades ago, I co-wrote a book with several insensitive, 
crudely argued statements. As I’ve said before, I wish I’d never written those 
things. I’m sorry for it. Rape in all forms is a crime. I regret writing 
passages that have been taken to suggest otherwise.” Thiel had not responded to 
a request for comment to the Guardian.

Thiel made his fortune as a co-founder of PayPal, which increased markedly 
after an early investment inFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>. He now sits on the board of 
the company, and has attracted notoriety after donating $1.25m (£1m) to Donald 
Trump’s presidential campaign.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Thiel%20at%20Republican%20convention%3A%20'I%20am%20proud%20to%20be%20gay'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Thiel%20at%20Republican%20convention%3A%20%27I%20am%20proud%20to%20be%20gay%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video&media=>
Peter Thiel at Republican convention: ‘I am proud to be gay’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/jul/22/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video>
In the 1995 book, The Diversity Myth: Multiculturalism and Political 
Intolerance on Campus, Thiel and Sacks wrote of Stanford’s sexual assault 
policies: “It is ludicrous to believe that anyone who had been forcefully 
violated would not know it and bear physical marks.

“But since a multicultural rape charge may indicate nothing more than belated 
regret, a woman might ‘realise’ that she had been ‘raped’ the next day or even 
many days later. Under these circumstances, it is unclear who should be held 
responsible. If the alcohol made both of them do it, then why should the 
woman’s consent be obviated any more than the man’s? Why is all blame placed on 
the man?”

Sacks, who is now the chief executive of Human Resources startup Zenefits, 
told Recode 
<http://www.recode.net/2016/10/24/13395798/zenefits-ceo-david-sacks-apologizes-1996-book-co-wrote-peter-thiel-date-rape-belated-regret>
: “This is college journalism written over 20 years ago. It does not represent 
who I am or what I believe today. I’m embarrassed by some of my former views 
and regret writing them.”

The book has proven endlessly controversial since its publication, with Thiel 
already apologising for some of its contents once before: in 2011,he expressed 
regret <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/11/28/no-death-no-taxes> for 
writing about an incident in which a future PayPal executive, Keith Rabois, 
stood outside the house of a Stanford staff member shouting “Faggot! Faggot! 
Hope you die of Aids!”. Rabois had hoped to provoke discussion of free speech, 
and the subsequent anger was compared by Thiel and Sacks to the Salem Witch 
Trials, Orwell’s 1984, and the Spanish Inquisition.
 