
Sixty years ago the Picasso whose irresistible weight of imagery has both 
convinced and bewildered a whole generation had not yet emerged. Doubtless that 
weight will have its full impact when the big retrospective exhibition at the 
Tate Gallery opens next week. Meanwhile at the O’Hana Gallery in Carlos Place, 
W.1, a collection of pastels, water colours, and drawings done mainly between 
1900 and 1903 makes one ponder.

From the archive, 9 April 1973: Picasso, end of a dynasty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/apr/09/archive-1973-picasso-death>
To-day we can hardly avoid seeing them as a prelude to a spectacular career, 
but what if we had seen them in the years when they were done? Would they carry 
with them the implications of what was to follow? Certainly they are an 
integral part of the blue period whose strained and calculated pathos we still 
find so haunting, but pathos is only incidental in most of these small but 
incisive drawings.

Picasso was only 19 when he began to prove to himself that the kind of comment 
he had to make on life in Barcelona could be made more pointedly in line – 
chalk or pen – than in words. And these early comments are steeped in the 
humanity that has characterised him ever since. But these early works have a 
special kind of humanity. He was, of course, uncannily precocious, and at 19 
his technical assurance was astonishing.

But other artists have been precocious. Picasso’s precocity was more than mere 
dexterity; it was a gift that enabled him to express vividly whatever emotional 
impulse floated into his receptive mind. Often the impulses were cynical, often 
merely high spirited, never bitter. When he made a drawing of a friend, 
character and caricature were subtly mingled. Such drawings are powerfully 
condensed aphorisms. And when he let his imagination have its head the pen or 
chalk line, sometimes self-consciously elegant, sometimes reckless and untidy, 
always revealed a man who could see visions.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpicasso-tate-britain-exhibition-paintings-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f4b6608c0bf93ab98efbde23a9d887ea14d0d9c%2F0_415_3300_2798%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Picasso%20exhibition%20at%20the%20Tate%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2027%20June%201960&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpicasso-tate-britain-exhibition-paintings-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Picasso%20exhibition%20at%20the%20Tate%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2027%20June%201960&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpicasso-tate-britain-exhibition-paintings-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f4b6608c0bf93ab98efbde23a9d887ea14d0d9c%2F0_415_3300_2798%2F3300.jpg>
 Pablo Picasso at his home in Cannes, circa 1960. Photograph: Paul 
Popper/Popperfoto/Getty Images 
A nude woman puts out her tongue at a serpent; a monocled and over-dressed 
business man gazes at a nude who ignores his repulsive presence; Celestina, 
that aged, one-eyed woman, symbol of patient affliction, appears between two 
absurd caricatures of fashionable vacuity. This last sketch, done in 1903, 
stings like the point of a stiletto. It is both brilliant and indignant. 
Evidently the 22-year-old artist who achieved it would one day do more than 
make devastating jottings on the back of an invitation card to his first 
one-man show.


It is possible that in the light of his later developments one reads more into 
these sketches than they deserve. But the light of his later developments 
cannot be ignored. It casts its retrospective glow over the whole of this 
collection of precocious juvenilia.


Also at the O’Hana Gallery is an expressive mixed exhibition of paintings and 
sculpture, mainly French, of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Its 
quality is worthy of the gallery. It is an exhibition to browse in contentedly, 
and if the Picassos did not claim one’s attention it would deserve detailed 
and, in the case of at least a dozen of the exhibits, enthusiastic comment.

 