
The Victoria & Albert Museum’s David Bowie exhibition in 2013 became the 
fastest to sell out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/david-bowie-is-exhibition-review>
 in the museum’s history. Now curators are planning a celebration of another 
musical institution, Pink Floyd – in collaboration with surviving members of 
the band.

A reverential rave-in with the Pink Floyd: archive, 20 Jan 1969
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/20/pink-floyd-roundhouse-rave-1969> 
One of the defining forces behind 1960s psychedelia, Pink Floyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pinkfloyd> became one of the most 
influential and successful groups of all time. The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 
cites them “as the architects of two major music movements – psychedelic 
space-rock and blues-based progressive rock”. The band’s lyrics are described 
as offering “biting political, social and emotional commentary”.

Formed in 1965, Pink Floyd featured lead vocalist and guitarist Roger “Syd” 
Barrett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/06/nick-kent-pink-floyd-syd-barrett-classic-profile-creem-1973>
, bassist Roger Waters, drummer Nick Mason and keyboard playerRick Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/16/pinkfloyd.popandrock1>. 
Guitarist David Gilmour joined shortly before Barrett’s departure in 1968. 
Barrett and Wright died in 2006 and 2008 respectively. The group sold more than 
250 million albums, withThe Dark Side of the Moon and The Wall acknowledged as 
classics.

The V&A’s tribute will emphasise the groundbreaking originality of the band’s 
live concerts. Pioneering psychedelic light shows, spectacular special effects 
and elaborate stage constructions included a model plane that flew over the 
audience before crashing into the stage. For the concert production ofThe Wall, 
animations were projected on to a wall of cardboard bricks built between the 
band and audience.

Their album covers are now considered among the most influential ever created. 
The museum will showcase original artwork by their designers and photographers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fpink-floyd-v-and-a-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb00badf3fbbe6403497e9824ecd74213e48ad7c8%2F0_258_3537_2123%2F3537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pink%20Floyd%E2%80%99s%20psychedelic%20revolution%20will%20rock%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fpink-floyd-v-and-a-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pink%20Floyd%E2%80%99s%20psychedelic%20revolution%20will%20rock%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fpink-floyd-v-and-a-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb00badf3fbbe6403497e9824ecd74213e48ad7c8%2F0_258_3537_2123%2F3537.jpg>
 Pink Floyd in their early days. Photograph: Michael Ochs Archives/Redfern 
Hipgnosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/nov/26/hipgnosis-mind-bending-album-art-in-pictures>
, the experimental design company co-founded by Aubrey Powell and Storm 
Thorgerson in 1968, created the rainbow-through-a-prism graphic forThe Dark 
Side of the Moon, which became one of the most recognisable LP covers, playing 
a part in sales exceeding 40 million copies.

The exhibition will also pay tribute to the genius of Barrett, who taught 
himself guitar – mostly by playing along to records – and reached the heights 
of rock stardom, only to become a casualty of the late-1960s fascination with 
LSD.The Dark Side of the Moon is said to have been partly inspired by Barrett’s 
mental-health struggles.

Last month Royal Mail issued 10 stamps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/25/royal-mail-stamps-pink-floyd-50-years>
 to celebrate the band’s worldwide influence, an honour previously granted to 
the Beatles. In 2014, the group released theirfinal album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/06/pink-floyd-the-endless-river-review>
,The Endless River. In an interview with Classic Rock magazine last year, 
Gilmour said that, after almost half a century together, there were no plans to 
reunite. He said that Pink Floyd had “run its course” and it would be “fakery” 
to reform with his two surviving bandmates.

Some of the ground work for the V&A show has already been done. In 2014, a 
Pink Floyd retrospective organised by one of Italy’s biggest music promoters 
was abandoned following a reported dispute over fees and intellectual property 
rights. A worldwide tour of hundreds of exhibits, including designs and 
recordings, had been planned. A giant inflatable pig, featured on the cover of
Animals, and the stage sculpture of The Wall are among artefacts that are now 
likely to come to the V&A instead.

The museum will also include Pink Floyd in its major autumn exhibition: You 
Say You Want A Revolution? Records & Rebels 1966-70, which will explore the 
wide-reaching social and cultural changes that followed the austerity of the 
postwar years. London’s Carnaby Street will be portrayed as part of a “1960s 
streetscape”, along with the UFO nightclub on Tottenham Court Road, where Pink 
Floyd made their name.

The Revolution exhibition will also highlight figures such as Vidal Sassoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/may/09/vidal-sassoon>, who 
revolutionised hairdressing in the 1960s, creating geometric styles that came 
to define the decade. Stylists at a Sassoon Sunday Salon will offer haircuts to 
visitors.

SHADES OF PINK

1965 Formed by Syd Barrett, Nick Mason, Roger Waters and Richard Wright, later 
to be joined by David Gilmour in 1967.

1968 Barrett leaves due to mental health issues.

1973 The Dark Side of the Moon is released. It has since sold 45m copies.

1979 Double album The Wall is released, with single Another Brick in the Wall 
reaching number one for five weeks.

1985 Waters leaves, saying the band no longer exists without him. He goes to 
court to try to prevent his former bandmates from performing as Pink Floyd, but 
eventually loses his case.

2014 The band’s final album, The Endless River, is released, winning a Grammy.
 