
The best place to watch the world’s money pouring into the UK isn’t at the 
London Stock Exchange or in the offices of the City’smagic-circle 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_Circle_(law_firms)> law firms, but holding 
a cup of tea in one of a handful of hotel lobbies. In the Dorchester’s long, 
narrow Promenade bar one evening in August, most of the high-backed sofas are 
occupied by Middle Eastern guests, some of them drinking with friends and 
families, others sitting next to lawyers and fixers, who listen and scribble. 
Occasionally, something is signed unsmilingly; hands are shaken.

The Promenade 
<https://www.dorchestercollection.com/en/london/the-dorchester/restaurant-bars/the-promenade/>
 is a public space with privacy designed in – the height of the sofas, and the 
faux-marble pillars, make it difficult to see who is talking to who. The guests 
order from the bar menu – beef sliders for £21, £770 for a 50g portion of 
beluga caviar. An order comes in for a £570 bottle of NV Krug Rosé and, unlike 
at a Chelsea nightclub, no fuss is made.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444043409723%2Fe5652a47-1ed6-466e-847c-b597b93bc811-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Playgrounds%20for%20sheikhs%20and%20oligarchs%3A%20the%20secret%20world%20of%20%E2%80%8BLondon%E2%80%99s%20luxury%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Playgrounds%20for%20sheikhs%20and%20oligarchs%3A%20the%20secret%20world%20of%20%E2%80%8BLondon%E2%80%99s%20luxury%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444043409723%2Fe5652a47-1ed6-466e-847c-b597b93bc811-1020x612.jpeg>
 The penthouse at the Dorchester. 
A few decades ago, London’s grand hotels were shabby and beleaguered, their 
rooms empty. Since the crash, without anyone in the real world noticing, they 
have found success in a new role: as the places where the capital’s new class 
of plutocrats like to do business; the unofficial bourses of London’s 
transformation into the richest city in the world.

“I do business with a Saudi client, and he comes over with an entourage of 70 
people,” says an estate agent who has brokered a number of recent eye-popping 
property deals. “He has homes inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, 
but he does business in the hotels.”

The Middle East’s wealthiest men have grown so fond of London’s posh hotels 
that they have bought almost all of them. The Sultan of Brunei owns the 
Dorchester;Saudi prince al-Waleed bin Talal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/03/alwaleed-bin-talal-meet-the-saudi-prince-giving-away-all-his-money>
 has refitted his Savoy, to the dismay of old-school visitors; and this summer 
theBarclay brothers sold their stake in Claridge’s, the Berkeley and the 
Connaught 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/23/barclay-brothers-sale-coroin-war-three-luxury-london-hotels>
 to a business controlled by Qatari sovereign funds, after the Abu Dhabi 
Investment Authority had reportedly offered £1.6bn.

Nowhere are the incredible inequalities at the heart of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/08/observer-view-on-london> 
more stark than in these hotels, where London’s two economic narratives – the 
influx of foreign cash and an epidemic of low pay – come together in the same 
room. Thewealth magazine Spear’s <http://www.spearswms.com/> noted, in an 
interview with a company that provides contract cleaners to the Dorchester, 
that a cleaner at the Park Lane hotel would have to work for56 hours to be able 
to take an entry-level room for the night 
<http://www.spearswms.com/news/the-man-behind-the-people-who-dust-the-dorchester-and-clean-the-connaught-4359438#.VfMDkipVhBc>
, before tax. It’s not just a useful metaphor for modern London; this bumping 
together of obscene wealth and its lowest service layer can throw up practical 
issues of its own.
 A ball at the Savoy, c1911. Photograph: Alamy 
The capital’s most luxurious hotels have always straddled the private and the 
public. According toThe West End Front 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/09/west-end-front-matthew-sweet-review>
, a book by Matthew Sweet about the role of the hotels during the war, men such 
as César Ritz, who opened the Ritz in 1906, played a central role in persuading 
“the plutocracy and the aristocracy to do something to which they were 
unaccustomed – eat, drink, smoke and dance in public”. Sweet says that 
high-born women who previously only socialised in country estates and private 
town houses began to do so at the hotels: “There was a whole class of young 
British women who were allowed to have their first unaccompanied nights out at 
these places.”

On the other hand, they are places designed to feel like islands in the city, 
trading on their separateness from it. “They are these sequestered places – you 
are immediately separated from the outside world,” says Sweet. “They employ 
these strategies, like casinos in Vegas, to prevent you from noticing the 
outside world. The Dorchester has its internal boulevard – you are not looking 
out at Hyde Park. At Claridge’s, you are looking at the staircase, not London. 
The whole idea is to separate you from people outside, so you can enjoy 
yourself in this sort of citadel, unencumbered by the view of people who can’t 
afford to get in.”

The difference is that the hotels have arranged things – specifically 
Michelin-starred restaurants and multimillion-pound spas – so that their guests 
never have to venture out. If they want to occupy a green zone of affluence, 
away from the crowds and prying eyes, the hotels are set up to oblige.

“They used to have terrible restaurants, they never had good service, they 
never had good spas, but then they realised they have to compete 
internationally,” says Josh Spero, editor of Spear’s. “Now they have the best 
restaurants in London, and the best spas. Global money is coming to London, and 
these hotels need to offer better service.”

This year, Simon Rogan’s Fera restaurant at Claridge’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/01/fera-restaurant-review-simon-rogan>
 was awarded a Michelin star. There is also the three-Michelin-starredAlain 
Ducasse at the Dorchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/feb/06/alain-ducasse-dorchester-review>
, the two-Michelin-starredrestaurant at the Connaught, overseen by Hélène 
Darroze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/dec/14/jay-rayner-helene-darroze-the-connaught>
 – named thebest female chef in the world 
<http://www.theworlds50best.com/awards/best-female-chef> – and Marcus Wareing’s 
restaurant at the Berkeley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/nov/01/marcus-wareing-berkeley-review>
, which has two stars. Other luxury hotels competing for the same guests, such 
as the Mandarin Oriental, also haveMichelin-starred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/mar/12/dinner-heston-blumenthal-restaurant-review>
 restaurants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444043592176%2Ff14e98b7-7fd4-4aaf-9590-9b5074c78e4d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Playgrounds%20for%20sheikhs%20and%20oligarchs%3A%20the%20secret%20world%20of%20%E2%80%8BLondon%E2%80%99s%20luxury%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Playgrounds%20for%20sheikhs%20and%20oligarchs%3A%20the%20secret%20world%20of%20%E2%80%8BLondon%E2%80%99s%20luxury%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444043592176%2Ff14e98b7-7fd4-4aaf-9590-9b5074c78e4d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fera at Claridge’s. Photograph: Sophia Evans 
Being high-class islands that offer the best food, gyms and relaxation in the 
city, as well as providing a suite for the night, means guests who don’t want 
to leave don’t have to. Anecdotally, it seems some of the very wealthiest 
guests choose to go all in – doing their business in the lobbies, meeting their 
private advisers in their suite and booking up vast stretches of rooms for 
their entourages.

The estate agent says his wealthiest foreign clients always choose one of 
Claridge’s, the Dorchester, the Berkeley or the Connaught to meet. “Generally 
you will be meeting the people who work for them first,” he says. “They come 
here after Ramadan and take over a whole floor. Sometimes, they take one or two 
or three floors. I have seen that.” He says Saudi clients are more likely to do 
business in the hotels despite owning vast properties in London, in order to 
keep their private lives separate. “The Qataris will let you come to their 
homes, and some have their own offices now, but meetings still get done in the 
hotels.”

A Dorchester staffer says a Qatari guest took over the three big suites at the 
top of the hotel this year, hiring a personal chef for his long stay, and 
apparently spending more than £40,000 a night. “Everything happens upstairs,” 
he says – meaning that the guest never had to leave his floor.

In touch with the needs of their new guests, the hotel’s managers have put a 
manic focus on protecting privacy. Staff approached at several of the top 
hotels tell me they have signed confidentiality agreements preventing them from 
saying anything about what goes on in their workplace. One Dorchester staff 
member, who says he will be instantly fired if he is spotted speaking about his 
job on a nearby street, says that even the staff are not informed when certain, 
very private, guests stay. He says his colleagues have become good at guessing 
when a Middle Eastern sheikh is staying because the VIP booking desk, which 
handles the top guests, will put a British-sounding name down – “such as John 
Stewart” – when everyone in the hotel knows those kind of bookings are very 
rarely made by Europeans these days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444043463968%2Fcdeeea2e-1e2e-492c-a03f-ecf8399398a4-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Playgrounds%20for%20sheikhs%20and%20oligarchs%3A%20the%20secret%20world%20of%20%E2%80%8BLondon%E2%80%99s%20luxury%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Playgrounds%20for%20sheikhs%20and%20oligarchs%3A%20the%20secret%20world%20of%20%E2%80%8BLondon%E2%80%99s%20luxury%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444043463968%2Fcdeeea2e-1e2e-492c-a03f-ecf8399398a4-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Cocktails at the Fumoir at Claridge’s. Photograph: Hemis/Alamy 
“UHNWs’ [ultra-high net-worth individuals] prime value is their privacy, and 
no institution that associates itself with UHNWs will want to be seen to have 
loose lips,” says Spero. “That is as true of their private banks and their 
lawyers as it is their hotels and their private members’ clubs – privacy is 
paramount. So if anything is happening at five-star hotels, which hotel manager 
is going to say: ‘Oh yes, please come and read about the guy who died in our 
presidential suite’?”

On the afternoon of Friday 1 May, a wealthy Kuwaiti guest by the name of 
Sultan Aldabbous, 38, wasfound dead in his room at the Dorchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/11/met-police-name-tourist-who-died-at-dorchester-hotel-kuwait-sultan-aldabbous>
, andtwo men were arrested in connection with the incident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/03/police-scour-london-dochester-hotel-man-found-dead-in-room>
 . The postmortem results were considered inconclusive and the coroner ordered 
further toxicology tests. Then, in August, the Metropolitan police said that 
the two men had been released without charge, and the death had been deemed 
non-suspicious. The coroner will set a date for the inquest soon. A spokesman 
for the Dorchester declines to give any further details, adding that the case 
is “now closed and of a private nature”.

It may rather appeal to a certain type of guest to know that hotels like the 
Dorchester can offer them almost as much privacy in death as they do in life.

A hotel worker tells me another story, this time of an alleged sexual assault 
at a luxury hotel (not one of those named in this article). The staff member – 
foreign and generally happy with his working life – meets me a few blocks from 
his workplace and asks if he is being recorded and if his anonymity can be 
guaranteed. Pockets are turned out, my phone switched off. He describes an 
acquaintance of his at a different hotel who says she was raped by the doctor 
of a wealthy Saudi guest last year. After the hotel’s security team and the 
police looked into it, no action was taken.

Establishing the precise details of the alleged attack is difficult, but 
someone who has intimate knowledge of the incident, and who asks not to be 
named for fear of losing their job, confirms that the complaint was made and 
that a full investigation was undertaken by the hotel’s staff, in cooperation 
with the police. Until now, though, nothing about the alleged rape has been 
reported.

The head of an agency that provides staff to several of the top hotels, again 
speaking anonymously, says that she will only supply bedroom attendants to 
hotels that have strict rules about never allowing a guest to be alone in a 
bedroom with a staff member. “If a girl is in the room, cleaning, and a guest 
walks in, what is the policy? I always ask that question, because I have to 
sleep at night,” she says. “If the guest walks in, they are vulnerable. I 
wouldn’t give them [staff] if their interest wasn’t to protect the girls, in 
any situation. If they say: ‘We leave it up to the girls’ – that isn’t good 
enough.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444043701048%2F7d68c641-ee2b-40fb-8228-5ce6282befbe-2060x1542.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Playgrounds%20for%20sheikhs%20and%20oligarchs%3A%20the%20secret%20world%20of%20%E2%80%8BLondon%E2%80%99s%20luxury%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Playgrounds%20for%20sheikhs%20and%20oligarchs%3A%20the%20secret%20world%20of%20%E2%80%8BLondon%E2%80%99s%20luxury%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-secret-world-of-londons-luxury-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444043701048%2F7d68c641-ee2b-40fb-8228-5ce6282befbe-2060x1542.jpeg>
 The Dorchester ballroom. 
In recent years, London has become a more segregated place, its reputation for 
rich and poor living cheek by jowl on the corners of fashionable streets eroded 
by cash-strapped councils selling off estates to developers and relocating 
poorer inhabitants to the margins – or out of the city altogether. The hotels 
of which the capital’s new cadre of foreign rich are so fond are now the places 
a middle-class Londoner is most likely to bump into an oil-state sheikh or a 
Russian steel tycoon – sitting across the lobby on a wedding anniversary tea or 
brushing shoulders at the restaurant. They are palaces that regulate contact 
and separation like early modern courts.

Their futures will now be dictated by owners probably more interested in 
trophy assets than bottom line. But the arms race to provide ever greater 
pampering, cuisine and luxury threatens to endanger their renaissance. “The 
word is that the Arabs are starting to find London a bit expensive,” says one 
leading concierge.

Not since exiled princes and visiting generals came to stay during the second 
world war have London’s most luxurious rooms-for-hire been so cosmopolitan – or 
so full up with guests worth whispering about. They offer unprecedented luxury 
and look after the capital’s most important guests with undoubted flair. Anyone 
wondering what is really going on in the old hotels these days, though, will 
have a hard job finding out.

 * This article was corrected on 5 October 2015. We originally stated that 
Gordon Ramsay at Claridge’s had three Michelin stars. It is actually Restaurant 
Gordon Ramsay that has three stars; the Claridge’s restaurant only ever had one. 