
Nigel Farage has accused Theresa May of betraying the national interest after 
she rejected his offer to help Downing Street build a better relationship with 
US president-electDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>
.

The outgoing Ukip leader was the first foreign politician to meet Trump since 
last week’s US election, but No 10 made it clear on Monday that there was no 
need for a “third person” in the relationship between Downing Street and the 
White House.

In response, Farage reacted with fury, accusing “ghastly little apparatchiks” 
of excluding him, despite his attempt to help the prime minister.

“It just goes to show they are not really interested in the country or the 
national interest, they are more concerned about petty party politics and 
trying to keep me out of everything,” he said.

“If you think of America in terms of a business and think of them as a client 
we want to do business with, what would you do? You would use the person who 
has the connections. Nobody in this administration in the UK has any 
connections with the Trump team at all, and yet they are prepared on behalf of 
the country to cut off their noses to spite their faces.”

No future: who are the Brex Pistols? | Pass Notes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2016/nov/14/pass-notes-brex-pistols-trump-farage-15-nov>
He said Trump had been “very gracious about Mrs May” but some of his advisers 
have long memories about disobliging things said by UK government ministers

“There are some fences that need to be mended ... actually I could help with 
something very, very important,” he told LBC Radio.

Arron Banks, the Ukip donor and Brexit backer, claimed May was “nuts” to shut 
out Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/theresa-may-is-nuts-not-to-use-nigel-farages-hotline-to-the-white-house>
 given he effectively had a “hotline to the White House” and has already had an 
indepth discussion with Trump about UK politics.


Banks, who was one of five people in Farage’s entourage entertained at Trump 
Tower in Manhattan this weekend, said the hour-longmeeting between Trump and 
Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/all-the-president-elects-men-donald-trump-nigel-farage-photo>
 on Saturday was serious rather than lighthearted and touched on serious issues 
from Brexit to Nato.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fuk-government-must-mend-fences-with-donald-trump-says-nigel-farage-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20government%20must%20%E2%80%98mend%20fences%E2%80%99%20with%20Donald%20Trump%2C%20says%20Nigel%20Farage%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fuk-government-must-mend-fences-with-donald-trump-says-nigel-farage-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20government%20must%20%E2%80%98mend%20fences%E2%80%99%20with%20Donald%20Trump%2C%20says%20Nigel%20Farage%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fuk-government-must-mend-fences-with-donald-trump-says-nigel-farage-video&media=>
UK government must ‘mend fences’ with Donald Trump, says Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/14/uk-government-must-mend-fences-with-donald-trump-says-nigel-farage-video>
Banks said Farage was particularly singled out by Trump for his first meeting 
because he was the “only foreign politician that supported him”, even going out 
to effectively spin for him during the television debates and rallies.

According to those present, Trump did not know the names of many UK 
politicians but understood the issues around Brexit, including immigration.

“We thought we were only going to get a few minutes but Trump wanted to 
download all about the campaign and Brexit, talking person to person with 
Nigel,” Banks said. “It was about an hour and we talked about all sorts, whether
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> was going to 
deliver Brexit. It was not a jokey meeting. They were really going through all 
the big issues.

“Whatever No 10 say, Nigel has a hotline to Trump and some of his closest 
advisers.”

The group had gone to have a cup of tea with Steve Bannon, Trump’s new chief 
strategist, when they got trapped in the building because of a demonstration 
against the president-elect outside.

All the president-elect's men: that golden Trump-Farage photo op
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/all-the-president-elects-men-donald-trump-nigel-farage-photo>
After a chance encounter with Kellyanne Conway, Trump’s campaign manager, they 
were ushered up to meet the president-elect and ended up touring his apartment 
as well ashaving photographs taken with him in a gold lift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/all-the-president-elects-men-donald-trump-nigel-farage-photo>
.

Banks said May was unwise to reject the help offered by Farage, especially 
given his close relationship with Bannon, who ran the rightwing Breitbart news 
website before going to work for Trump. Farage’s former chief of staff, Raheem 
Kassam, also has links to Bannon as the editor of Breitbart in London.


“Breitbart has consistently backed Ukip massively. Steve and Nigel speak and 
text almost daily, probably to that degree,” Banks said.

There have been reports of a cabinet split in which some ministers urged May 
to use Farage’s links to Trump. However, the prime minister appears determined 
not to hand Farage any opportunity for a role in official relations between the 
UK and US, which could boost the outgoing leader’s relevance and profile.

May’s spokeswoman talked about a warm phonecall between May and Trump on 
Thursday, adding: “The president-elect talked about enjoying the same close 
relationship that Reagan and Thatcher did.I don’t remember there being a third 
person in that relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/theresa-may-does-not-need-third-person-nigel-farage-in-trump-relationship-no-10>
.”
 