
And

When summer comes
the cicadas
sing again.

Fireworks
freeze
in my memory.

Distant countries are dim
but the universe
is right in front of your nose.

What a blessing
that people
can die

leaving behind
only the conjunction,
‘and’.

“And” by Shuntarō Tanikawa 
<http://www.poetryinternationalweb.net/pi/site/poet/item/21377/Shuntaro-Tanikawa>
 comes from the impressively selectiveNew Selected Poems 
<http://www.carcanet.co.uk/cgi-bin/indexer?product=9781784100681> published 
last year by Carcanet. It’s a useful, accessible introduction to Japan’s much 
admired senior poet. The collaborative translations by William I Elliott and 
Kazuo Kawamura invite trust, not least because the resultant poems are so 
thoroughly at home and wrinkle-free in their English tailoring.

 Since he began publishing in 1952, Tanikawa has produced over 60 collections. 
He has written song lyrics and children’s books, and is the translator of 
Charlie Schultz’s Peanuts series. Elliott, in his short introductory essay, 
describes him as one of the world’s “active poetic volcanoes”, and represents 
18 of his collections as erupting “peaks”, beginning with the first, Two 
Billion Light-Years of Solitude, and concluding with – or, as I hope, merely 
pausing at – Kokoro (2013).

 The source of this week’s poem, a collection titled minimal, appeared in 
2002. Judging by the selection here, the poems from that volume fit the title, 
although none of Tanikawa’s poetry could be called overblown.

 Death has always been a presence in his work, not as a morbid obsession but 
as a friendly philosophical and metaphorical challenge. In an early poem (from 
his second collection, 62 Sonnets) death was perceived as the absence of 
mirrors – those delusory mirrors into which we peer so as to pretend to see 
life. “Since death lacks mirrors / we shall soon be unselfconscious / and able 
to be one with the world,” the genial optimist declares. And he concludes, 
rather more mysteriously, that the living are “nothing but the distance which 
surrounds death”.

 In And, it’s as if the living needed to be taught a lesson about their 
assumption that anything should or could remain of them after their exit. A 
person dies, and the things that go on happening are nothing to do with him or 
her any more. On the other hand, the poem may be suggesting that to die is to 
leave behind at least an existential invitation to something or someone else.

 Takako U Lento has translated the conjunction differently: in his version of 
the poem, “and” is rendered“and then” 
<http://www.poetryinternationalweb.net/pi/site/poem/item/23071/auto/0/from-minimal-AND-THEN>
. I don’t know which is the more accurate, but “and then” indicates a narrower 
range of possibilities. The additional “then” signals another event in a 
temporal chain of events. It reminds me of EM Forster’s famous definitions of 
story and plot inAspects of the Novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/emforster>: “The king died and then the 
queen died” is a story. But “the king died and then the queen died of grief” is 
a plot. The time-sequence is preserved, but the sense of causality overshadows 
it.”

 The reduction to the single-word conjunction “and” by Elliott and Kawamura 
would not rule out continuation through event, but it seems more humanly 
inclusive: it retains the social dimension as well as an extension of action. 
We can ask “Who else?” as easily as we ask “What else?”. We might think of 
“and” in its connection with children, grandchildren and heirs as yet unborn, 
or with the friends or lovers or colleagues who outlive the death. There’s a 
general, sociable effect of “& Co” alongside the days unlived and stories 
untold.

 Another interpretation, though, could be that it’s an ironical “and” which 
implies “and nothing” or “and so what?”. Tanikawa never takes himself or his 
readers over-seriously, and elsewhere in the poem he is determined not to deal 
in pious or comforting platitudes: “What a blessing / that people / can die.” 
The focus is on the multiplicity of the here and now, the universe “right in 
front of your nose”. Perhaps that “and” is not offering any crumb whatsoever of 
earthly relevance to the dead person.

 Unencumbered by tradition, the young poet in postwar Tokyo was more likely to 
write poems reflecting popular American-influenced culture than to compose 
haiku. Interestingly, though, this work of his late maturity seems formally 
influenced by haiku structure. It even contains some season-words. Both 
“cicada” and “fireworks” are among the haiku’s traditional array oflate-summer 
markers <http://www.2hweb.net/haikai/renku/500ESWd.html>. 

 The Japanese term for fireworks, apparently, is hannabi, a compound of the 
words forflower (hanna) and fire 
<http://worldkigodatabase.blogspot.co.uk/2005/06/firework-display-hanabi.html>. 
“Freeze”, of course, is another season-word, and the mental fixing of these 
bright and ever-changing fiery flowers, which have shorter lives even than 
spring cherry blossom, evokes the stasis of winter and, perhaps, a more 
personal confrontation with death.

 So it’s possible that Tanikawa has dipped a deliberate toe into the Japanese 
literary tradition in And. His ultimate intention may, of course, be to ironise 
those sacred haiku-moments, just as he makes light of sentimental ideas of 
post-mortem legacy. He enjoys reversing expectations and playing with paradox, 
as in the claim that “Distant countries are dim / but the universe / is right 
in front of your nose.” The translucency of the English in these translations 
helps keep all the interpretative options open.

 One poem can’t tell us nearly enough about this brilliant and versatile 
writer, but it’s a start. You canfind many more poems of his online 
<http://www.poetryinternationalweb.net/pi/site/poet/item/21377/Shuntaro-Tanikawa>
, both in their original Japanese and in English translation. Your 
recommendations and preferences are more than welcome – but please use links 
rather than quoted text.
 