
The Lake of Memories

Voices sit
like broken chairs
in a room.


A room stands
for the ceremony
of impermanence.


Impermanence cracks
the façade
of self.


The self builds
its walls
of healing.


Healing frames
the house
of wounds.


Wounds bridge
darkness and light
over time.


Time winds through
the lake of memories
in frozen tongue.


Howard Altmann’s work may be new to many, so a little biography would not go 
amiss.The poet and playwright <https://www.playscripts.com/playwrights/bios/822>
 was born and raised in Montreal, but has lived for many years in New York 
City. His poems are publishedon the Poetry Foundation websit 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/howard-altmann>
e, and in Poetry, The Poetry Review and Academy of American Poets; more are 
forthcoming in Boulevard, Little Star, Southwest Review and elsewhere. This 
week’s poem, The Lake of Memories, is from his second collection, In This House,
published by Turtle Point Press 
<http://www.turtlepointpress.com/books/in-this-house/>). He has recently 
completed a third collection, Notes in the Dark, described by John Ashbery as 
“a quietly brilliant achievement”.


 The “house” in Altmann’s poems is rarely a protected personal enclosure: its 
doors and windows are open to infiltration by inhuman nature and passing time. 
It may, as in Night & Day, have more in common with human skin than with bricks 
and mortar: “A man in a room / is a house in a field.” In the poem Field, an 
impregnably shuttered building that “has sealed its windows and removed its 
signs” symbolises religion. Even a day is a kind of building in Gravity: “the 
day’s architecture collapses” and the poet finds himself “walking over words”. 
In title poem In This House, the speaker “can hear a home / knocking at a door 
/ left unlocked for years”. The home finds him in an unhomely but welcoming 
space, “at the top of some ridge /… / with my walls / building solitude out of 
trees”. That poem, too, features a mysteriously potent, almost decipherable 
lake, its shimmering surface turned by the wind “into Braille for the 
half-standing trees”.

 The inside-outside fusion explored in The Lake of Memories is made clear by 
form as well as imagery. The tercets are linked, their stanzaic borders opened 
by the use ofanadiplosis <http://rhetoric.byu.edu/Figures/A/anadiplosis.htm>. 
This kind of daisy-chain technique, linking the last and first lines of each 
triplet by a repeated word, slows the poem’s forward-impulse to a tentative, 
step-by-step sort of movement.

 “Voices sit / like broken chairs / in a room. // A room stands / for the 
ceremony of impermanence. // Impermanence cracks / the façade / of self.” 
Voices that resemble broken chairs are hardly reassuring: they are damaged (by 
the distortions of time and memory?) and, although they “sit” in the room as if 
settled and at home, they are not to be relied on. The pairing of solidly 
end-stopped statements with their uncompromising finite verbs (sit, stand, 
crack) contrasts with the threat of disintegration. Yet the third stanza 
already makes a concession: the cracking of the “façade of self” might not be 
destructive, after all, but the necessary prelude to enhanced consciousness. 
And so it seems that a new process is initiated and concerns the building of 
“walls / of healing”. This may primarily be a psychological process, but it 
also suggests the biochemistry involved in the healing of physical wounds.

The imagery in stanza six suggests that the wounds are historical and their 
healing long-term. It reminded me of History, a poem nearer the beginning of 
the collection, in which the speaker recounts: “When he was a young man / at 
Auschwitz / my father leapt out of line / for a potato / and was saved by a 
bell / that never rang. / Sixty years later he stands / in his place / by his 
mother’s tomb – / the only tomb – containing / his hunger for memory.”


 While The Lake of Memories can stand by itself, to read the collection 
chronologically is to sense a reprise of that earlier memory-infused narrative 
in compressed, symbolic form. The process implied in the last tercet is a 
strange combination of movement and stasis: “Time winds through / the lake of 
memories / in frozen tongue.” The phrase “frozen tongue” has many overtones: 
unsatisfied or thwarted hunger, a language no longer communicative, perhaps no 
longer spoken, a decision not to speak. There’s a paradox in the idea that such 
a tongue can “wind through” the lake, somehow alive despite its frozenness. But 
the future nonetheless seems to have been brought into being by the 
transformative concept of the wounds forming a bridge.

 Wounds heal by a complex, gradual process 
<http://www.medicaldaily.com/4-stage-process-wound-healing-making-skin-stronger-310872>
 that includes some connective action not dissimilar to bridge-building. The 
final scar might be seen as a bridge of regenerated skin cells. Altmann’s poem 
seems to contain in its slow-paced metaphors the awareness of such a a process.

Poem of the week: Backyard, Hoboken, Summer by Alvin Feinman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/15/poem-of-the-week-backyard-hoboken-summer-by-alvin-feinman>
 The new skin evolved from a repaired wound often doesn’t achieve the full 
function of the original skin, and perhaps something similar occurs in the 
poem. But there is still a transformation. The decrepitude or malfunction of 
the broken chairs, and the death-hints in the phrase “ceremony of 
impermanence”, are replaced by new growth, however imperfect. The “frozen 
tongue” itself may form a secret bridge.

 Despite the poem’s brevity and the fact that it continues to inhabit, through 
the repeated image of wounds and healing, a bodily enclosure, the sense of 
surrounding open space contributes to the frail atmosphere of hope. It might 
remind us that the poet’s formative years were spent in Canada. The lake, like 
the other natural imagery in Altmann’s poems, is metaphorically potent, but 
never simply metaphorical.
 