
There are no pirates in Penzance, but there is David, on loan from London. 
None of us are quite sure what David does; he used to be the lead singer in a 
band called Tribal Nation; now he lives on Berkeley Square in the capital. He 
spends 18 weeks of the year in the south of France and four weeks visiting 
Cornwall’s newest tourist hotspot, Penzance.

Tonight David is serving the dinner at Chapel House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/04/chapel-house-penzance-cornwall-hotel-review>
, a boutique hotel within an impressive Georgian building that was formerly a 
bohemian arts club. Two years ago he was here stripping wallpaper over a chilly 
new year with owner Susan, a long-time friend who moved to the south-western 
tip of the country from London with the dream of renovating and running an 
upmarket B&B. Now it’s the start of a hot summer and places at Susan’s weekly 
dinner are booked up. David makes himself useful, dishing up local turbot to 
the communal table and pouring wine while Susan puts her saffron 
bread-and-butter pudding in the oven. Afterwards, the pair join the guests for 
more wine and animated conversation – there’s a reason this home-from-home has 
been voted the country’s best B&B, and word is spreading (this week’s punters 
are British, German and Austrian).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fpoldark-country-holidays-in-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcf20723976c28cf549bada4ed2526e44b502312%2F0_194_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poldark%20country%3A%20the%20glories%20of%20Penzance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fpoldark-country-holidays-in-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poldark%20country%3A%20the%20glories%20of%20Penzance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fpoldark-country-holidays-in-cornwall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcf20723976c28cf549bada4ed2526e44b502312%2F0_194_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
 Voted the country’s best B&B: Chapel House, Penzance. 
Penzance has become good at attracting outsiders. In fact, in recent years it 
has been experiencing something of a transformation. First, a string of 
sophisticated new lodgings opened: across the road, Artist’s Residence, a 
design hotel with outposts in London and Brighton, attracts a younger crowd 
with an eye for eclectic interiors. Then came the restaurants:The Shore 
<http://theshorerestaurant.uk/>, run by Rick Stein alumnus Bruce Rennie, and the
Tolcarne Inn <http://tolcarneinn.co.uk/>, an authentic Cornish pub with food by 
Michelin-starred chef Ben Tunnicliffe. And that’s without mentioning the “
Poldark effect”. Since the BBC reincarnated its popular 1970s drama series last 
year, Cornwall has seen a 155% increase in visitors. Penzance, along with the 
ever popular St Ives, has become a base to explorePoldark country at its best.

With a baby on the way, my husband and I have come back to the area where we 
both holidayed as toddlers – call it our final infant-free escape or a foolish 
preview of the staycations that lie ahead. The first day, filled with glorious 
weather, seems cut out for thePoldark trek, so we make our first stop 
Porthgwarra, the cove where actorAidan Turner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/bbc-poldark-series-three-aidan-turner>
 took a semi-naked dip in the sea in the first series. In his honour, we sit at 
the tiny cafe on top of the cliff, decimating a large cream tea.

We spot a seal basking on the rocks in the almost turquoise waters

It fuels us for the walk to Porthcurno, an easy hike along the coastal path. 
In early summer sun, the beaches here could pass for the Caribbean, so it’s 
hard not to feel smug. As we reach over the headland we spot a seal basking on 
the rocks in the almost turquoise waters. That afternoon we head up to the
Minack open-air theatre <https://www.minack.com/>, on top of the cliff – there 
are productions here come rain or shine but it’s worth buying a day ticket 
(£4.50) just for the views.

Afterwards, it’s a short drive to Levant Mine, the Unesco world heritage site 
that poses asPoldark’s fictional Tresiders Rolling Mill. We emerge from the 
depths where Cornish miners extracted copper by candlelight in time for a 
stroll along the coast at sunset.

Back in Penzance that night, Susan recommends some pubs in the area. We go to 
the Admiral Benbow, filled with tacky maritime treasures, followed by the Turks 
Head, a whitewashed 13th century inn with an underground tunnel once used to 
smuggle pirates’ bounty. Both are on Chapel Street, home to a rundown Chinese, 
ramshackle antique shops and the Exchange, a contemporary arts space with glass 
running the length of its facade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fpoldark-country-holidays-in-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feea4f57d6b3ec2e0e670f388c66d0a61108437e1%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poldark%20country%3A%20the%20glories%20of%20Penzance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fpoldark-country-holidays-in-cornwall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poldark%20country%3A%20the%20glories%20of%20Penzance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fpoldark-country-holidays-in-cornwall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feea4f57d6b3ec2e0e670f388c66d0a61108437e1%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Thrice as nice: the triangular Jubilee Pool lido in Penzance. Photograph: Matt 
Cardy/Getty Images 
The next morning we head down to the harbour and soon find ourselves at 
Jubilee Pool, the town’s triangular art deco lido on the rocks. This large 
seawater pool took a battering in 2014’s winter storms and reopened after a £3 
million restoration – today it’s filled with regulars, including a group of 
women who meet here for stand-up paddleboarding but spend most of their time 
laughing and falling in.

Over the coming days there’s much more to do: watch the surfers at Sennen, 
wade out to St Michael’s Mount and sample Newlyn crab and other delicious food. 
It’s hard to rival the Tolcarne Inn, where pints of lager and packets of crisps 
are served at the bar alongside impeccable fish dishes (we choose monkfish with 
tomato fondue and grey mullet with orange beetroot). There are more baby-free 
nights of luxury atArtist Residence <http://artistresidencecornwall.co.uk/>, 
where my husband drains pints in the beer garden, plus an impromptu meal at the 
Honey Pot, where we enquire after the homity pie.

“It’s delicious, is what homity pie is,” is all the Cornish waitress will say, 
before disappearing to tend to a mother and daughter who have dropped in on 
their way home from school. We watch as they order the homity pie and an 
ice-cream sundae. In Penzance, we’ve found, people tend to have pretty good 
taste, so we take their cue.

Doubles at Chapel House including breakfast are from £150 per night (
chapelhousepz.co.uk <http://chapelhousepz.co.uk/>). At Artist Residence, prices 
start at £75 per night (artistresidencecornwall.co.uk 
<http://artistresidencecornwall.co.uk/>)
 