
Since being quoted (Culture clash as threat of 100% cut in arts funding 
divides city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jan/29/culture-cut-arts-funding-newcastle>
, 30 January) describing Newcastle's approach as a "political stunt", there's 
been some misunderstanding about what I meant by that phrase (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/feb/01/arts-facilities-vital-vibrant-cities>
, 2 February). Yes, local government is being treated disproportionately 
harshly by this government, in terms of both powers and finance. Yes, that 
effect is hitting many of the major metropolitan councils (mostly 
Labour-controlled) disproportionately hard. Yes, as a result they are having to 
make such deep cuts, on top of so many previous deep cuts, that sustaining core 
and statutory services is now very hard.

However, cutting 100% of Newcastle's external arts budget and closing the 
city's only concert hall and half its libraries to save some £1.6m of the £100m 
saving target is not an inevitable result of the total cut. It is a choice, and 
in my view a badly advised, short-term choice given all the different kinds of 
payback local people get from those relatively tiny investments, and also the 
£250m spent over the past decade building up NewcastleGateshead as one of the 
UK's most admired cultural centres. Remember, NewcastleGateshead came a 
reportedly close second to Liverpool in the choice of European capital of 
culture for 2008. And of course if council revenue support disappears from arts 
organisations, so does the Arts Council's.

I have nothing but sympathy for the ghastly financial choices councils 
throughout the land are facing, but as a political means of pushing this flinty 
government into a change of heart over council spending thisNewcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> campaign appears to have completely 
failed, and in the process caused entirely avoidable grief and mistrust here 
after a decade of very close, symbiotic and collaborative relations. That was 
the context for the quote Charlotte Higgins attributed to me.
Anthony Sargent
General director, The Sage Gateshead

• Harry Pearson is right (Travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/feb/04/discover-new-newcastle>, 2 
February): you can have a good time in Newcastle without having to wear a pink 
cowboy hat. He recommends Newcastle's post-industrial Ouseburn's bars, 
galleries and the Seven Stories centre for children's books (child's entry 
£5.50). But if the unnecessarily savage cuts and closures the council proposes 
for our free libraries, theatres, City Hall music venue and the beautiful 
Victorian Turkish Baths are approved in March, I'm buying a Stetson in fuchsia 
and a hip flask. There'll be nothing else to do downtown.
Joan Hewitt
Tynemouth, North Tyneside
 