
A northern Michigan police officer has been suspended with pay after he was 
seen off-duty driving a pickup truck bearing a Confederate flag around a group 
protesting against the election ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> as president.

There have been numerous reports of threats, intimidation and racially charged 
violence around the country since Trump defeated Democrat Hillary Clinton on 
Tuesday.

Officer Michael Peters’ suspension was announced on Sunday by Traverse City 
police chief Jeff O’Brien, who earlier said an internal investigation would 
start on Monday to see whether Peters broke any departmental rules.

“He is not working as a police officer,” O’Brien told the Traverse City 
Record-Eagle <http://bit.ly/2euIuE5>. “I do not condone his actions.”

O’Brien confirmed that Peters was in a photo taken at Friday’s rally. The 
newspaper could not reach Peters for comment, and the Associated Press was 
unable to find a telephone number for Peters.

The Confederate battle flag is seen by many people as a symbol of hatred and 
intimidation of African Americans following the civil war and the end of 
slavery.

Its official use in southern states came under pressure in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
, after a shooting at a church in Charleston, South Carolina in which nine 
African American members of a bible study group were killed by a gunman who was 
later found to haveposed for photographs with the flag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/20/fbi-investigates-website-manifesto-charleston-shooting-suspect-dylann-roof>
.

The flag was flown from the rear bed of a pickup near a “Love Trumps Hate” 
rally in the city. The truck was then parked near the rally where the driver 
was seen drinking a beer.

O’Brien said the behavior was intimidating and not a reflection of the police 
department’s mission, according to the newspaper.

“We will get through this,” O’Brien said. “The community will get through 
this.”

Protests over the election of Trump have continued across the US, with violent 
confrontations with police in some cities. In New York on Saturday,more than 
10,000 protesters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/anti-trump-protests-new-york-portland-shooting>
 marched to Trump Tower. In Portland, Oregon, on Saturday night, 17 
demonstrators were arrested.


On Sunday, Trump adviser Kellyanne Conway reacted angrily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/kellyanne-conway-harry-reid-legal-threat>
 to a statement by the retiring Nevada senator Harry Reid which accused Trump 
of fuelling his “campaign with bigotry and hate”.

Conway said Reid should be “very careful about characterizing somebody in a 
legal sense”. In response, a Reid spokesman said: “Trump owes the nation 
leadership, not petty attempts to silence his critics.”
 