
In the town where Abraham Lincoln addressed a shattered nation in 1863, Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> gave one of the most 
detailed policy speeches of his campaign last month. As the US – and the world 
– wait to see which elements of the incoming president’s inflammatory campaign 
he will attempt to pursue from the White House, this speech may be something of 
a guide. Alan Yuhas examines the likelihood of each of the 18 presidential acts 
and 10 bills Trump outlined in Gettysburg becoming reality.

The checks and balances of the US system will partially constrain Trump, as 
with any US president. But the eight-justice supreme court is likely to soon 
have a ninth, conservative justice once Trump takes office, and Congress is 
controlled by his fellow Republicans. State governments may resist some of the 
next president’s initiatives by taking his administration to court.

Donald Trump, pragmatist? President-elect's stances seem to shift after win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-campaign-promises-transition-team>
But Trump will also have great leeway to act on his own, in line with 
precedents set by George W Bush and Barack Obama to expand the powers of the 
executive branch.

The text is drawn from Trump’s campaign site 
<https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:NzO_tfKdWIUJ:https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/donald-j.-trump-delivers-groundbreaking-contract-for-the-american-vote1+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us>
.

On the first day of my term of office, my administration will immediately 
pursue the following six measures to clean up the corruption and special 
interest collusion in Washington, DC:

FIRST, propose a Constitutional Amendment to impose term limits on all members 
of Congress;

Trump can propose an amendment and Congress can reject it. The Republican 
leader of the Senate, Mitch McConnell, first took office in 1985 and hasalready 
said 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/card/mcconnell-differs-trump-term-limits-nato-n681681> 
he opposes term limits.

SECOND, a hiring freeze on all federal employees to reduce federal workforce 
through attrition (exempting military, public safety, and public health);

Trump will have the power to halt hiring at federal agencies, but he has also 
said he would expand the size of agencies he has exempted (such as the Border 
Patrol, Immigration and Customs Enforcement and military). There are about2.85 
million federal employees <http://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.t17.htm>, 
according to the Bureau of Labor statistics.

THIRD, a requirement that for every new federal regulation, two existing 
regulations must be eliminated;

Trump requires Congress to repeal regulations, and will almost certainly have 
its support to strip away environmental protections and financial regulations. 
His “requirement” is ambitious in its scope but Republicans have fought to 
deregulate banking and the oil and gas industry for decades.

FOURTH, a 5 year-ban [sic] on White House and Congressional officials becoming 
lobbyists after they leave government service;

FIFTH, a lifetime ban on White House officials lobbying on behalf of a foreign 
government;

SIXTH, a complete ban on foreign lobbyists raising money for American 
elections.

Trump would need Congress’s help to truly cement such bans, though he could 
create rules for his White House staffers. Congress would not likely support a 
ban for its ex-lawmakers. More than 400 former members of the 112th and 111th 
Congresses have become lobbyists, according to the Center for Responsive 
Politics <https://www.opensecrets.org/revolving../top.php?display=Z>, including 
some of the most powerful former lawmakers 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/01/15/which-members-of-congress-become-lobbyists-the-ones-with-the-most-power-heres-the-data/>
.

Conveniently for Trump, this five-year ban, at the moment, would primarily 
affect Democrats ousted from Congress and the Obama administration since 2011. 
His transition team, on the other hand, is already beingfilled with former 
lobbyists 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/us/politics/trump-campaigned-against-lobbyists-now-theyre-on-his-transition-team.html>
 andcourted by current ones 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/11/us/politics/lobbyists-trump.html>. 

Bans on foreign interference could create legal knots for the Trump White 
House, however. He hasa host of foreign business entanglements 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/trumps-foreign-business-entanglements-would-create-unparalleled-conflicts-1478083150>
, with asmany possible conflicts of interest 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/trumps-foreign-dealings-pose-conflicts-interest/>
, and a great dealstill unknown about his dealings abroad 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/us/politics/donald-trump-business-reaction.html>
.

On the same day, I will begin taking the following seven actions to protect 
American workers:

FIRST, I will announce my intention to renegotiate NAFTA or withdraw from the 
deal under Article 2205

Actual renegotiation of a major trade deal could prove difficult: it took 
years of work across 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/fact-checker/wp/2016/05/09/history-lesson-more-republicans-than-democrats-supported-nafta/>
 George HW Bush and Bill Clinton’s White Houses to finalize the deal. 
Restructuring or withdrawing would also present a logistical nightmare, since 
car andairplane 
<http://www.pwc.com/us/en/industrial-products/commercial-aircraft-industry-future/globalization-new-markets-and-manufacturers.html>
 manufacturing, for instance, arealready global, multinational industries 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trumps-nafta-plan-would-confront-globalized-auto-industry-1478800848>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
But Trump could quickly hollow out the trade deal by enforcing some provisions 
harshly and not others, as he has promised, though this could cause litigation,
higher consumer prices 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2016/jun/21/donald-trump-has-floated-big-tariffs-what-could-im/>
 and/or a trade war <http://money.cnn.com/2016/07/06/news/economy/trump-nafta/> 
with countries such as Mexico.

SECOND, I will announce our withdrawal from the Trans-Pacific Partnership

THIRD, I will direct my Secretary of the Treasury to label China a currency 
manipulator

Senate leaders Mitch McConnell and Chuck Schumer, a Republican and Democrat 
respectively, said on Friday that Barack Obama’s long-planned Trans Pacific 
Partnership wasin effect killed by the election 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/11/politics/tpp-congressional-leaders/index.html>. 
Ironically, the deal was designed in large part to curb China’s economic 
influence in the Pacific, and its nullification will not improve US ties to 
would-be partners, who will probably turn to their closer neighbor. Nor will 
Trump’s direction to his treasury secretary, which is in his power, improve 
relations with China.

FOURTH, I will direct the Secretary of Commerce and US Trade Representative to 
identify all foreign trading abuses that unfairly impact American workers and 
direct them to use every tool under American and international law to end those 
abuses immediately

Trump will have the power to direct enforcement priorities for his cabinet 
members, who can sue companies or countries they believe culpable of abuses.

FIFTH, I will lift the restrictions on the production of $50tn dollars’ [sic] 
worth of job-producing American energy reserves, including shale, oil, natural 
gas and clean coal.

SIXTH, lift the Obama-Clinton roadblocks and allow vital energy infrastructure 
projects, like the Keystone Pipeline, to move forward

SEVENTH, cancel billions in payments to UN climate change programs and use the 
money to fix America’s water and environmental infrastructure

Trump will be able to reverse any and all of Barack Obama’s executive actions 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/us/politics/obama-sets-the-stage-for-curbing-emissions.html>
 on climate change, including hisblock on the Keystone Pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/24/obama-vetoes-keystone-xl-pipeline-bill>
, which he ruled against aftera state department review 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/01/31/four-takeaways-from-the-state-departments-review-of-the-keystone-xl-pipeline/>
 found it would not significantly create jobs, lower the price of gas or break 
US dependency on oil imports.

As president, Trump will become the only leader of a large industrialized 
nation to doubt climate change, a crisis which even leaders such as the 
Philippines’ Rodrigo Duterte and Russia’sVladimir Putin 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/projects/cp/climate/2015-paris-climate-talks/vladimir-putin-climate-change-pledges-russia>
 havepledged to act on 
<http://news.abs-cbn.com/news/11/07/16/duterte-changes-mind-to-sign-climate-change-pact>
. Trump could simply ignore the US commitment to the Paris climate accord, 
though withdrawal would take four years. He has appointed a climate skeptic, 
whose organization is in part funded by coal companies 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/science/myron-ebell-trump-epa.html>, to head 
his EPA transition team, and could also try to gut Obama’s environmental 
regulations, though he would facea fight in the courts 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/11/what-trump-can-and-cant-do-all-himself-climate>
, within agencies andfrom states such as California 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/01/31/four-takeaways-from-the-state-departments-review-of-the-keystone-xl-pipeline/>
.

And Trump’s ambitions to resurrect the coal industry face a larger problem 
than environmental safety laws: decades of economic decline, driven by the boom 
of natural gas. His promise to “fix” water and environmental infrastructure 
also runs directly afoul of his promises to reinvest in the coal and natural 
gas industries, the latterlinked to earthquakes 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/drilling-for-earthquakes/> and the 
former to air and water pollution 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/13/us/13water.html>.

Additionally, on the first day, I will take the following five actions to 
restore security and the constitutional rule of law:

FIRST, cancel every unconstitutional executive action, memorandum and order 
issued by President Obama

Trump will have great leeway to rescind executive orders, though he would 
almost immediately run into practical problems in undoing them. He can revoke 
Obama’s 2012 orderto protect about 1.3 million young migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-immigration-policy-deportations-build-wall>
, for instance, leaving them vulnerable to, if still not the priority for, 
deportation. Any orders relating to Obama’s signature healthcare act, as with 
environmental orders, would be sent into the gears of bureaucracy, and could 
disruptan already nervous healthcare industry 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/business/insurers-unprepared-for-obamacare-repeal.html>
. He could also rescind Obama’sban on torture 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/promises/obameter/promise/175/end-the-use-of-torture/>
, but would almost certainly face the courts for this decision (where a 
majority-conservative supreme court could, eventually, accept the decision).

SECOND, begin the process of selecting a replacement for Justice Scalia from 
one of the 20 judges on my list, who will uphold and defend the Constitution of 
the United States

Trump released two lists of names, totaling 21 names, though Senator Mike Lee 
refused 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/mike-lee-no-trump-supreme-court-228573> 
consideration. It is the president’s prerogative to nominate supreme court 
justices, though this year the Republican-controlled Senate has shifted the 
balance of power between the branches by its unprecedented block on even 
hearing Barack Obama’s pick, Merrick Garland.

THIRD, cancel all federal funding to Sanctuary Cities

Trump would have the ability to revoke federal funding to cities such as New 
York, Los Angeles, Texas, Miami and Chicago, whose local governments try to 
shield migrants without criminal histories. So far, the mayors of New York, LA,
San Francisco 
<http://www.sfexaminer.com/mayor-lee-sf-will-remain-sanctuary-city-despite-trump-presidency/>
, and Seattle havepledged to defy Trump 
<http://fortune.com/2016/11/11/new-york-los-angeles-sanctuary-cities-donald-trump/>
. The president has only weak legal power to meddle in city politics, but he 
could threaten them with withdrawing funding.

FOURTH, begin removing the more than 2 million criminal illegal immigrants 
from the country and cancel visas to foreign countries that won’t take them back

Trump has promised to deport migrants with criminal records and without 
papers, and to expand the definition of “criminal alien”. As president, he will 
have discretion to guide law enforcement priorities as widely as he sees fit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftop-priorities-for-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20top%20priorities%3A%20immigration%2C%20healthcare%20and%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftop-priorities-for-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20top%20priorities%3A%20immigration%2C%20healthcare%20and%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftop-priorities-for-donald-trump-video&media=>
Trump’s top priorities: immigration, healthcare and jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/top-priorities-for-donald-trump-video>
Trump’s second pledge refers to a punitive action that the state department 
can take against countries that refuse to accept deported people. In 2001, the 
supreme court ruled that the US cannot detain migrants longer than six months 
if their home country refuses them, even in cases with criminal records (Trump 
spent much of campaign falsely blaming Obama for “catch and release” of 
migrants, when the president was actually following the law and had deported a 
record number of people). Trump’s only recourse in the cases of these 
“recalcitrant” countries is a little-used tactic, denial of visas, which would 
almost certainly strain diplomatic relations.

FIFTH, suspend immigration from terror-prone regions where vetting cannot 
safely occur. All vetting of people coming into our country will be considered 
extreme vetting.

Trump’s 2015 pledge to “ban all Muslims” from entering the US eventually 
became a promise to suspend migration from unspecified countries. Most of the 
power to regulate immigration lies with Congress, and constitutional experts 
are divided 
<http://blog.constitutioncenter.org/2015/12/constitution-check-would-a-ban-on-all-muslims-entering-the-u-s-be-valid/>
about whether such a bancould be ruled legal 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/trump-muslim-ban-probably-legal>. What’s more, as 
the scholar Lyle Dennistonwrote in December 
<http://blog.constitutioncenter.org/2015/12/constitution-check-would-a-ban-on-all-muslims-entering-the-u-s-be-valid/>
, “the supreme court has never decided specifically whether a religious 
preference could be a valid basis for exclusion”.

Trump’s “extreme vetting” also rests on uncertain constitutional grounds, 
especially in the context of a proposed religious test 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/law/2015/12/08/is-trumps-proposed-ban-on-muslim-entry-constitutional/>
. The US already has extraordinarily strict screening procedures for migrants 
and refugees, but presidents havewide discretion for enforcement powers 
<http://www.newsweek.com/donald-trump-muslims-ban-terrorism-radical-islam-guns-orlando-shooting-legal-470470>
. The fight over such a ban would land in all three branches of government.

Next, I will work with Congress to introduce the following broader legislative 
measures and fight for their passage within the first 100 days of my 
Administration:

Middle Class Tax Relief And Simplification Act. An economic plan designed to 
grow the economy 4% per year and create at least 25 million new jobs through 
massive tax reduction and simplification, in combination with trade reform, 
regulatory relief, and lifting the restrictions on American energy. The largest 
tax reductions are for the middle class. A middle-class family with two 
children will get a 35% tax cut. The current number of brackets will be reduced 
from seven to three, and tax forms will likewise be greatly simplified. The 
business rate will be lowered from 35 to 15%, and the trillions of dollars of 
American corporate money overseas can now be brought back at a 10% rate.

Neither the conservative Tax Foundation nor the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center 
have predicted major tax benefits to the middle class from Trump’s plan. It 
would vastly benefit the highest earners, and increase the deficit by several 
trillion dollars over 10 years, according to their estimates.

End The Offshoring Act. Establishes tariffs to discourage companies from 
laying off their workers in order to relocate in other countries and ship their 
products back to the US tax-free.

American Energy & Infrastructure Act. Leverages public-private partnerships, 
and private investments through tax incentives, to spur $1tn in infrastructure 
investment over 10 years. It is revenue neutral.

School Choice And Education Opportunity Act. Redirects education dollars to 
give parents the right to send their kid to the public, private, charter, 
magnet, religious or home school of their choice. Ends common core, brings 
education supervision to local communities. It expands vocational and technical 
education, and make two and four-year college more affordable [sic].

Trump could use federal funding as a carrot and a stick – benefits for 
compliant states, withdrawal for reluctant ones – to try to persuade states to 
abandon Common Core educational standards, but he will not have power except to 
advise and make recommendations to them. He has also not said how he would fund 
his school voucher program.

Repeal and Replace Obamacare Act. Fully repeals Obamacare and replaces it with 
Health Savings Accounts, the ability to purchase health insurance across state 
lines, and lets states manage Medicaid funds. Reforms will also include cutting 
the red tape at the FDA: there are over 4,000 drugs awaiting approval, and we 
especially want to speed the approval of life-saving medications.

Affordable Childcare and Eldercare Act. Allows Americans to deduct childcare 
and elder care from their taxes, incentivizes employers to provide on-side 
childcare services, and creates tax-free Dependent Care Savings Accounts for 
both young and elderly dependents, with matching contributions for low-income 
families.

Trump has been similarly vague about how he would replace the Affordable Care 
Act, which the Republican-controlled Congress will almost certainly try to gut, 
if not repeal. Millions of people stand poised to lose healthcare coverage, and 
it’s not clear how the removal of government programs, in an industry six years 
into adjusting to them, would affect private providers or premiums.

Citizen solutions: things you can do now to prepare for the worst under Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/how-to-prepare-for-donald-trump-presidency>
End Illegal Immigration Act Fully-funds the construction of a wall on our 
southern border with the full understanding that the country Mexico will be 
reimbursing the United States for the full cost of such wall; establishes a 
two-year mandatory minimum federal prison sentence for illegally re-entering 
the US after a previous deportation, and a five-year mandatory minimum for 
illegally re-entering for those with felony convictions, multiple misdemeanor 
convictions or two or more prior deportations; also reforms visa rules to 
enhance penalties for overstaying and to ensure open jobs are offered to 
American workers first.


Mexico has refused to pay for the wall, which nonpartisan estimates place at a 
$25bn cost 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2016/jul/26/how-trump-plans-build-wall-along-us-mexico-border/>
, if not more.

Restoring Community Safety Act. Reduces surging crime, drugs and violence by 
creating a Task Force On Violent Crime and increasing funding for programs that 
train and assist local police; increases resources for federal law enforcement 
agencies and federal prosecutors to dismantle criminal gangs and put violent 
offenders behind bars.

FBI data showed a 10.8% single-year increase in violent crime in 2015, though 
national rates remain near historic lows and about half of their peak in the 
early 1990s. As the chief of federal law enforcement, Trump could instruct the 
justice department to allocate funding for militarized gear to police 
departments, and to rewrite Obama’s guidelines for police departments, away 
from community policing standards and toward more aggressive tactics, such as 
stop-and-frisk, which would probably land theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> in court over its 
legality.

Restoring National Security Act. Rebuilds our military by eliminating the 
defense sequester and expanding military investment; provides Veterans with the 
ability to receive public VA treatment or attend the private doctor of their 
choice; protects our vital infrastructure from cyber-attack; establishes new 
screening procedures for immigration to ensure those who are admitted to our 
country support our people and our values

Clean up Corruption in Washington Act. Enacts new ethics reforms to Drain the 
Swamp and reduce the corrupting influence of special interests on our politics.

Trump has not said how he intends to pay for his huge military budget 
increase, which ends the sequestration cuts that Republicans demanded during 
the Obama administration.
 