
We know now that Mohamed Lahouaiej-Bouhlel, who killed 84 people and injured 
many more on Thursday evening in Nice, was, at 31, getting divorced and living 
in a working-class neighbourhood euphemistically described in the French press 
as “mixed”.

He was an immigrant, as are most of his neighbours. One described him as a 
blédard, a hick from the old country – in his case Tunisia. Taciturn, 
Lahouaiej-Bouhlel scared the neighbours and was prone to angry outbursts. He 
beat his wife and was recently convicted of an assault on a motorist. He had a
record of petty crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/bastille-day-truck-driver-was-known-to-police-reports-say>
 and a possible history of depression, but no known links to radical ideologies 
or networks.

French investigating authorities have various theories about the attack. An 
inquiry into “terrorist mass murder” has been opened, but prosecutors admit 
that for the moment there is no evidence of ideological motivation. Yet there 
has been a claim of responsibility from Isis and there is evidence of 
premeditation. The use of a vehicle, the target, and the fact that the attack 
took place on the highly symbolic Bastille Day all suggest a jihadi operation.

Lahouaiej-Bouhlel certainly matches the classic profile of French violent 
Islamic extremist in many ways – though he is a relatively recent arrival 
rather than born in the country of immigrant parents, as is more usually the 
case. He was a young, male petty criminal. He was also not devout, all 
witnesses so far agree. He did not fast during Ramadan, ate pork, drank, and 
was never seen at any local mosque.

This lack of piety among militants may seem confusing. It is, however, the 
rule rather than the exception. It was true of the dozen or so French and 
Belgian young men involved in bombings and shootings earlier this year, and of 
Mohammed Merah, who committed the first major attack in France in 2012. Other 
examples beyondFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> include that 
of Omar Mateen, who killed 49 in a Florida nightclub last month.

This apparent paradox has prompted a keen debate among experts. The argument 
has major policy implications. In France, it has been bitter. Olivier Roy, a 
well-known French scholar currently at the University of Europe in Florence, 
suggests those drawn into violent activism are already “in nihilist, 
generational revolt”. This is why so many are criminals, or marginal. Extremist 
Islam gives them a cause and frames anger and alienation in the way extremist 
leftwing ideologies did for some in the 1960s and 1970s. The new militants are 
thus not victims of “brainwashing” by cynical and fanatical recruiters. This is 
the Islamisation of radicalism, Roy says, not the radicalisation of Islam.

Many disagree. Some say Roy naively ignores the impact of intolerant and 
reactionary doctrines on Muslim communities in the west.Others suggest 
<https://www.alaraby.co.uk/english/comment/2015/12/15/a-response-to-olivier-roys-islamisation-of-radicalism>
 he underestimates the historical impact of western colonialism as well as that 
of more recent western policies in the Middle East.

The case of Lahouaiej-Bouhlel will now be picked over by the academics as 
intensely as by counter-terrorist experts and detectives. All will be focusing 
on the range and extent of his contacts with other people. Again perhaps 
counter-intuitively, the more numerous those associations, the more worrying 
this attack may be.

There are various possibilities. Lahouaiej-Bouhlel may be a genuine loner and 
suffering serious mental illness. His act may have no ideological element at 
all. This, however seems unlikely. A second possibility is that, already angry 
and violent, he was inspired, if not directed, to commit his attack by Isis or 
extremist Islamic militancy more generally. As in the case of Mateen, this 
would indicate the continuing power of the group’s ideology. In this case it is 
almost certain he will have some contacts with others involved in hardline 
Islamic activism in Nice or its surroundings. Police have now detained five 
people, including Lahouaiej-Bouhlel’s ex-wife. This scenario is more alarming, 
suggesting the possibility of more attacks to come.

Finally, Lahouaiej-Bouhlel could have been part of the continuing series of 
attacks on France run by Isis from Syria since 2014. All have involved recruits 
being tasked with strikes by more senior leaders in the organisation. If true, 
this would indicate that Isis has continuing capacity for ambitious terrorist 
operations in Europe despite the pressure the group is under. And that would be 
a highly concerning prospect.
 