
One of the marks of the serious poet is that they develop a unique, instantly 
recognisable style of their own, a trademark voice that means regular readers 
of verse can tell their Shakespeare from their Milton, their Browning from 
their Dickinson, at a glance. The flip side of this is that the more 
distinctive a style is, the easier it is to send up. Indeed, many of our most 
original poets have found themselves the subject of numerous parodists, whose 
work can range from gentle, affectionate ribbing to witty but well-placed 
literary stilettos.

Joan Murray’s We Old Dudes 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/178409> is on the gentle 
end of the spectrum. Her Republican-voting, golf-playing pensioners are a fine 
balance to Gwendolyn Brooks’ seven pool-playing juvenile delinquents inthe poem 
that inspired Murray’s parody 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/17315>, a poem that could, 
itself, be read as a gentle poke in the ribs of the Beats. As is the case with 
many such send-ups, Murray is also making a serious point: everyone has a story 
and everyone ends up in the grave.

After reading the take-off of Hiawatha, it’s hard to read the original without 
smiling

Somewhat less gentle is the anonymous The Modern Hiawatha 
<http://www.bartleby.com/360/9/144.html>, a sharp take on Longfellow’s 
insistent use ofanaphora <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anaphora_(rhetoric)>, 
mesodiplosis <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Repetition_(rhetorical_device)> and 
other forms of repetition in his famousSong of Hiawatha 
<http://www.hwlongfellow.org/poems_poem.php?pid=62>, and also of the sense of 
bathos that these devices can often create, in part, at least, because of a 
tendency to over-explain everything by saying the same thing several times. 
Having encountered the anonymous take-off, it’s pretty much impossible to read 
the original without smiling.

In a sense, this is part of the point of any good literary parody; if 
imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, the spoof may well be the most 
efficient form of criticism. This appears to have been the case with Paul Dehn, 
whoseA Leaden Anthology of English Verse 
<http://littlecalamity.tripod.com/Poetry/Parodies.html> politely eviscerates a 
wide range of minor, and not so minor, versifiers. Many of his parodies are 
linked to his fear of a nuclear war, but his take onJenny Kiss’d Me 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/180845> by Leigh Hunt hinges on a less 
apocalyptic disaster, the common cold.

Another inveterate parodist was Charles Stuart Calverley. His The Cock and the 
Bull <http://www.bartleby.com/360/9/139.html> neatly captures almost all of 
Robert Browning’s mannerisms: the dated slang, odd abbreviations and elisions 
and forced conversational tones are captured in a bravura mickey-take ofThe 
Ring and the Book <https://archive.org/details/ringbookbyrobert04browrich>.

Perhaps the finest of all verse parodists was Lewis Carroll. Carroll had a 
fine nose for the sententious and took particular delight in pricking the 
bubble of poems that were bumptiously moralising. HisYou Are Old, Father William
 
<http://www.alice-in-wonderland.net/resources/analysis/poem-origins/alices-adventures-in-wonderland/#william>
 completely deflates the didactic balloon of Robert Southey’s smugly dreadful 
The Old Man’s Comforts and How He Gained Them; Southey’s comforts are turned to 
absurdities and his moral rectitude becomes blithe stupidity.The Aged, Aged Man 
<http://allpoetry.com/The-Aged-Aged-Man>, his parody of Wordsworth’s Resolution 
and Independence <http://allpoetry.com/Resolution-And-Independence> is even 
more effective. Carroll manages not only to skewer the poem; Wordsworth’s 
entire persona as the detached dreamer who lives among, but is not part of, the 
noble savages of his poems is put to the sword.

There is an air of portentousness about TS Eliot’s writing that is catnip to 
the eager imitator

If Carroll is prince of parodists, TS Eliot has a fair claim to be the king of 
their victims. There is an air of portentousness about Eliot’s writing that is 
catnip to the eager imitator. Henry Reed’sChard Whitlow 
<http://www.solearabiantree.net/namingofparts/chardwhitlow.html> captures this 
beautifully. The juxtaposition of meditative sentences in hesitant syntax with 
sudden images of urban decay; the unexplained phrase in a foreign language; the 
linking of Hindu mysticism and Blitz fire-fighting – what could be more 
Eliotic? In herWaste Land Limericks 
<http://thebestamericanpoetry.typepad.com/the_best_american_poetry/2009/09/the-waste-land-five-limericks-by-wendy-cope.html>
, Wendy Cope focuses less on style and more on substance, but the result is 
just as effective. I suspect that Eliot might have laughed at Cope’s jokes; 
after all, he was known todabble in parody himself 
<https://theondioline.wordpress.com/category/t-s-eliot-2/>.

And so, this month’s Poster Poems challenge is to write a parody of a famous, 
or infamous, poem. You may go for the gentle option or you might prefer a more 
full-blooded approach. Your parody might be an affectionate joust with a 
favourite poem or a full-blooded act of revenge on the poem you hated at 
school. So don’t hold back, sharpen those quills and get to it.
 