
There can at times be a tendency to think of poetry as being primarily 
concerned with the natural world and fine emotions, a precious art divorced 
from the realities of everyday life. However, as regular readers of this series 
know, poems can be and have been written about almost anything. Take buildings, 
for instance. Most of us spend the best part of the day in or around one or 
more of the things. The majority are fairly prosaic and their very ubiquity 
tends to blind us to their features and characteristics – and yet, there is a 
rich vein of building-inspired poetry out there.

Sometimes buildings impinge on our minds because we go looking for them 
“tourist-eyed”, as Australian poet Katherine Gallagher puts it in her poem
Chartres 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/gallagher-katherine/chartres-0671007>. 
Of course, the famous French cathedral is a work of art in itself, but 
Gallagher skirts around the temptation to indulge in the ekphrastic; her poem 
does not describe Chartres cathedral itself, but evokes the sensation of 
approaching it in expectation. Finally, the building is transmogrified, an ark 
floating above its dull surroundings.

In A Supermarket in California 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/47660>, Allen 
Ginsberg is visited by a vision of another sort when poet Walt Whitman appears 
to him amid the food aisles, an anachronistic figure among shopping families. 
For Ginsberg, the supermarket serves as a marker of the decline in American 
society, from the heady optimism of Whitman’s era, to a dull commercialism of 
the alienated suburban consumer of the 1950s. With the origins of its packaged 
food obscured, the supermarket stands in contrast with the older poet’s world 
of “juicy autumnal fruit, ripe and red from the orchard”.

In Filling Station 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/52193>, Elizabeth 
Bishop visits an even more typically modern building, but to different ends. 
Although she recognises the grimy, oil-saturated reality of her surroundings, 
Bishop can also see the ordinary human grace that seeks to create beauty amid 
the dirt of the garage and that this represents the endurance of love as an 
intrinsic aspect of any act of human making.

Andrew Marvell’s Appleton House 
<http://www.luminarium.org/sevenlit/marvell/appleton.htm> is about as far 
removed from a petrol station as you might imagine, but like Bishop, Marvell is 
interested in the building as a symbol of a kind of order in the chaos of 
Cromwellian England. Appleton House, for Marvell at least, represents a 
Protestant restraint as opposed to both its previous Catholic history and to 
the ongoing civil war – from which his employer at Nun Appleton, Lord Fairfax, 
had withdrawn. The building and its gardens represent a kind of oasis of 
contemplative peace and a model for what England might be. Nevertheless, 
Marvell came to be a great admirer of Cromwell, who perhaps did more to disturb 
the peace than any other English leader of the time.

Marvell’s contemporary Richard Lovelace ended up on the other side of that 
conflict. A passionate royalist, his emblematic building was not a fine country 
house but a prison, where he found himself twice. It was during his first 
period of incarceration that he wrote one of the finest and most enduring 
lyrics of the 17th century,To Althea, from Prison 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/44657>. In the 
much-quoted last verse, Lovelace denies the prison as building its material 
power to confine him. Stone walls may serve to house a gentleman, but, for 
Lovelace at least, they cannot confine him.

In The British Museum Reading Room 
<https://thelondoncolumn.com/2013/07/01/the-british-museum-reading-room/>, 
Louis MacNeice takes a somewhat jaundiced view of the intellectual workers of 
London in their mind-hive, engaging in more or less pointless activity to ward 
off worries about the impending war (the poem was written in July 1939). The 
British Museum acts as refuge for an elite, while outside the pigeons are “at 
their ease”: those who actually need refuge are excluded from the false 
sanctuary of the building.

Poster poems: politics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/may/06/poster-poems-politics> 
Of all the public buildings in the world, Quaker meeting houses must surely be 
amongst the most modest. At one such building, Basil Bunting meditates on 
transience and the need for silence inAt Briggflatts meetinghouse 
<http://jacketmagazine.com/10/bunt-brig.html>. Perhaps this is what buildings 
are ultimately for: to provide what their users require, for as long as they 
and their users endure. A bit like poetry, really.

So this month’s Poster poems challenge is to write a poem about a building or 
buildings. Home or prison, shelter or workplace, great cathedral or humble 
stone hut, the choice is yours. I’ve laid the foundations for you – time to get 
to work.

 