
It’s a startling fact that one third of everything we eat depends on the 
presence of the humble bee for its existence. Without bees, a whole range of 
food crops, from almonds to watermelons, would simply stop producing. If the 
trend of the last decade or so that has seenbee populations decline 
<http://www.beesfree.biz/The%20Buzz/Disappearing-Honey-Bees-Infographic> – as a 
consequence of disease, pesticide use and other environmental factors – were to 
continue, food supplies would collapse and prices would soar, resulting in a 
crisis as great as any we have ever experienced.

These gloomy thoughts were triggered as I read Alex Finlay’s recent book-length
bee poem Global Oracle 
<http://alecfinlayblog.blogspot.ie/2014/08/global-oracle_11.html>. The poem 
encompasses many of the important roles that bees have played in human culture, 
from their association with the oracle at Delphi to their place in rural 
weather lore. As I read the book, I was also struck by how often bees have 
appeared in poetry down the centuries.

The apian association with magic and the fairy world lies behind Shakespeare’s 
great songWhere the bee sucks, there suck I 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/181012>, which is sung by Ariel at the 
moment when he learns that he is to be set free by his master Prospero. The 
image of the bee both returns the fairy to his small world and stands as a 
symbol of happy idleness in a land of milk and honey.

These associations ultimately derive from the place of bees in various forms 
of ancient worship. In a poem called, simply,Bees 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/fahey-diane/bees-0195045>, the 
Australian poet Diane Fahey notices the creatures in her garden and thinks of 
“golden honeycomb//of Daedalus,/the twinned bee brooch/from Knossos” and the 
association leads her to understand something of the bee’s foundational role in 
the natural world.

In a similar vein, Franz Wright reconstructs the role of the bee in the rites 
of Eleusis <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/240956>, an 
ancient Greek fertility cult that Wright sees as having been all but ousted by 
the more destructive cult of Christianity but which survives through the 
continued presence at the site of the very flowers and bees that made it 
possible in the first place.

It may be fanciful to see a thread of continuity between the mysteries of 
Eleusis and the old American custom of telling the bees when their keeper died, 
although the linking of bees and the cycle of life and death in both is 
tantalising. This custom has been celebrated in a number of poems, perhaps the 
best-known being byJohn Greenleaf Whittier 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174759>, but my own favourite is by 
one-time poet laureate of MarylandLizette Woodworth Reese 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/182749>.

In her poem The Miracle of the Bees and the Foxgloves 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/239428>, Anne Stevenson 
undercuts myth and magic with a sharp dose of science. Her bees are impersonal 
agents of the foxglove’s genetic imperative to reproduce in a process that is 
“undistracted by a Mind, or a Design, or by desire”, and none the less 
miraculous for it.

In Ralph Waldo Emerson’s The Humble-Bee <http://www.bartleby.com/102/39.html>, 
the insect represents a kind of natural wisdom. Its innate habit of seeking out 
beauty, in the form of flowers, and of ignoring anything that might cause it 
woe makes it “wiser far than human seer” and leads the philosopher-poet to want 
to follow its example.

In Rosalind’s Madrigal <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/180990>, Thomas 
Lodge, a contemporary of Shakespeare, sees a parallel between the bee’s sting 
and Cupid’s arrows, and so the bee becomes an image of love, being both a 
welcome companion and a disrupter of rest at one and the same time. In the end 
Rosalind decides the pain of having love is less than the pain of losing it and 
so pledges to suffer the bee’s stings gladly.

This roundup of bee poetry wouldn’t be complete without reference to their 
chief role as pollinators. Neither could I end without including a poem by 
bee-lover-in-chief Emily Dickinson. HerTo make a prairie it takes a clover and 
one bee <http://www.bartleby.com/113/2097.html> is a brief hymn to the power of 
human imagination, which is, in its own way, as great a pollinator as any bee.

And so this month’s challenge is to have your imagination fertilised by 
thoughts of bees. Be they magical, mythological or common-or-garden 
pollinators, they deserve to have their praises sung. Why not share your apian 
odes here?
 