
Thursday was National Poetry Day 
<http://www.forwardartsfoundation.org/national-poetry-day/think-of-a-poem/>, 
with this year’s theme being memory – or at least I think it was. I seem to 
remember we’vealready covered memory on Poster poems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jul/04/posterpoemsrememberyourwor>
, but before that slips entirely from our minds perhaps we should consider the 
other side of the coin.

Forgetfulness can be sweet or bitter, sought after and welcomed or unwanted 
and fought against, depending on your circumstances. One way or the other, 
forgetting tends to be a process rather than an event, gradual and not sudden. 
We’ve all had the experience of picking up a favourite book that we haven’t 
read for years and being unable to remember anything beyond the vague outlines 
of plot and character and a couple of vivid phrases. This everyday phenomenon 
serves as starting point forBilly Collins’s poem Forgetfulness 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/26905>, an exploration of 
that slow descent into memory loss we call life.

If forgetting is a natural product of the ageing process, so is the fear of 
being forgotten when life ends. In a sense we still live on for as long as we 
are remembered by the living and suffer a second death when, as Thomas Hardy 
puts it in his dialogue poemThe To-be-forgotten 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173598>, we join “those / Whose story no 
one knows”. Austin Dobson, Hardy’s almost exact contemporary, handles the same 
theme in a more meditative mode inThe Forgotten Grave 
<http://www.bartleby.com/246/855.html>. The irony of those “to Mem’ry dear” 
surviving in some sense on an almost totally illegible gravestone marking an 
unkempt grave carries an echo ofOzymandias 
<http://www.online-literature.com/shelley_percy/672/>; the ordinary citizen is 
as prone to obliteration as is the king.

Anne Stevenson expands on this idea in Forgotten of the Foot 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/180220>, a lament for the lost world of 
English mine-workers and their families. Stevenson mourns the systematic 
obliteration of all traces of this once-essential way of life, the forgetting 
of the very existence of a great civilian army that made industrial Britain 
possible, “As if they were never meant to be part of memory”. It’s a powerful 
and moving poem on a forgetting that was not sought.

By contrast, Emily Dickinson is concerned with willed forgetfulness in Heart, 
We Will Forget Him! <http://www.bartleby.com/113/3047.html>. Like Hardy, 
Dickinson casts her poem as a conversation, but here it’s internal, as head and 
heart plot to forget what may be a lost love. If Dickinson is elusive when it 
comes to the object of her would-be amnesia, Sara Teasdale is entirely opaque in
Let It Be Forgotten <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/175283#poem>, where 
the identity of “it” is very much left to the reader to decide, while the poet 
concentrates her efforts on the clean-etched language and imagery that make the 
poem, ironically, unforgettable.

This irony – the fact that making a poem about forgetting requires an act of 
memory by the poet, and will if the poem is successful imprint itself on the 
memory of the reader – is central to WB Yeats’sMichael Robartes Remembers 
Forgotten Beauty <http://www.bartleby.com/146/17.html>. As with Shelley, the 
fulcrum of Yeats’s poem is the act of writing – a way of ensuring that the 
forgotten object of the poem is remembered.

In this spirit of remembrance, it seems appropriate to conclude this Poster 
poems with a poem by Dannie Abse,who died this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/29/dannie-abse-welsh-poet-dies-aged-91>
. Like his father before him, Abse was a doctor and he often drew on his 
experiences tending to others in his poetry. His poemIn the Theatre 
<http://www.poetryarchive.org/poem/theatre>, however, is a retelling of one of 
his father’s stories. It is a salutary reminder that, try as we may, some 
things just cannot be forgotten.

And so this month I invite you to share not your memories but your 
forgettings, if you can recall them. Perhaps you have rediscovered some 
forgotten memory, public or private, that you want to capture in verse, or 
maybe there is something you wish to forget. Whatever it may be, please share 
your poems here.
 