
After weeks of storms rolling in off the Atlantic it's beginning to feel like 
the world is made of little else but wind. Power lines have come down with 
alarming frequency, uprooted trees block roads, and sleep is broken by noises 
that most closely resemble an express train screaming past the bedroom window 
being chased by the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.

With all this atmospheric activity going on, my thoughts have turned to the 
poetry of wind, a more extensive genre than you might at first think. Perhaps 
the best-known example isOde to the West Wind 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174401>, Shelley's meditation on the 
relationship between prophecy and poetry and on his own relationship with the 
cycle of life and death, decay and growth represented by the temporal sequence 
of the seasons. Just now the poem's conclusion, "If Winter comes, can Spring be 
far behind?" can't help but seem a shade optimistic.

Another much-quoted wind poem is Shakespeare's Blow, Blow Thou Winter Wind 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/181009>, from As You Like It. This is a 
poem of banishment, sung in the play by Lord Amiens who has chosen exile with 
his Duke over life under the corrupt regime that has seized power in their 
native city, and is a meditation on human fickleness, which is portrayed as 
being harsher than even the coldest wind.

In Samuel Taylor Coleridge's Fragment 3: Come, come thou bleak December wind 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173233>, the wind represents a death that 
the poet welcomes like a lover, in a characteristically densely-knit skein of 
images. The poem shows Coleridge at his most despondent. The speaker inJohn 
Masefield's Watching by a Sick-Bed <http://www.bartleby.com/265/213.html>, on 
the other hand, is witnessing a fight between life and death in which he's 
hoping for a victory for the former. Again the wind stands for death and the 
land it batters stands for life, and the speaker is left to ponder why these 
two great forces expend such energy in combatting each other.

Indeed, in all of these poems the wind is forced to represent things other 
than itself, but Christina Rossetti, inWho Has Seen the Wind 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/171952>, is happy to allow it to simply 
be itself, invisible but powerful and seen by its effects on the world it 
passes through. It's a conceit that is further extended by Robert Louis 
Stevenson inThe Wind <http://www.bartleby.com/188/126.html> where he writes "I 
saw the different things you did,/ But always you yourself you hid." From the 
child's-eye view of the poem's narrator, the wind is a playful if invisible 
fellow youngster. We seem to have travelled some distance from Shakespeare, 
though he, too, stressed this unseen aspect of the wind's nature.

Wind Song by Carl Sandburg <http://www.bartleby.com/231/0533.html> is a 
prose-poem about conquering the problem of sleeping in the wind. It's a useful 
skill and one I'd love to master. Unfortunately Sandburg, being a poet, isn't 
entirely clear as to how it's done. Nevertheless, the image Sandburg evokes of 
the wind as both miser and wastrel, "counting its money/ and throwing it away" 
is one that is not easily forgotten.

The last poem I'd like to mention in this short selection of wind-related 
verse isthe medieval Westron Wynde <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Westron_Wynde>
. I don't have much to say about it beyond mentioning, perhaps not for the 
first time, that it is one of the most perfect short lyric poems in the 
language, perhaps in any language.

And so we begin the second century of Poster poems challenges with an 
invitation to write poems on that most topical of topics, the wind. Whether you 
like it or loathe it, see it as a destroyer of sleep or just an impersonal 
force of nature, there's really no avoiding wind at the moment, so why not 
share your poetic responses to it here?
 