
Panta rhei, wrote Heraclitus: “everything flows”. Thus giving expression, in 
these two words, to the paradoxical truth that the only constant in the 
universe is change. Two-and-a-half millennia later, we have yet to come up with 
a more succinct summation of the nature of nature. Everything changes, and what 
stops changing dies. Inevitably, it’s a truththat has found its way into poetry 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/241616>, in many and various ways.

Charles Olson’s poem The Kingfishers 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/241032> opens with the line: “What does 
not change / is the will to change.” It goes on to explore the entirely 
transformed landscape of postwar western culture and the possibility of making 
art after Hiroshima and the Holocaust, on the eve of the cold war. Olson’s 
answer is to abandon the fixed verities of the European tradition in favour of 
a pre-Conquest, Native American vision of the world. Formally, the poem doesn’t 
just reference Heraclitian flux, it enacts it through the deployment of 
juxtaposition of themes and images – and by constantly spiralling back upon 
itself.

Olson the poet owed much to Ezra Pound, who also cited Heraclitus in his long 
poem sequenceHugh Selwyn Mauberley 
<http://genius.com/Ezra-pound-hugh-selwyn-mauberley-entire-annotated>. Faced by 
a similarly crisis-ravaged world, Pound’s tone is more controlled and ironic 
than Olson’s, and his “all things are a flowing” is immediately undercut by the 
perception that what endures is the cheap and tawdry. Second-rate art and 
writing seems, to Pound at least, to evade the necessity of change.

For Lyn Hejinian <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/184117>, constant 
change is the very ground of our experience, being the basis on which memory 
and sensory perception are built. Like Olson, Hejinian uses formal means to 
bring this to life on the page through the use of recurring phrases in a kind 
of musical theme-and-variation structure. It’s interesting to read this poem in 
juxtaposition with the tight formality of Edwin Arlington Robinson’sVillanelle 
of Change <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174251>, which treats its 
subject in a more “objective” manner that views the question of change in a 
historical perspective, in a context of great events.

In Last of His Tribe 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/noonuccal-oodgeroo/last-of-his-tribe-0719010>
, Oodgeroo Noonuccal is also concerned with history, but it is a history of 
ordinary people that interests her. The poem celebrates Willie Mackenzie, a 
member of Australia’s First Peoples and literally the last of his tribe. Here, 
the change is the effective death of a culture through the twin evils of 
oppression and neglect.

Walter Savage Landor’s Absence <http://www.bartleby.com/41/546.html> deals 
with the change that time brings about when two people are parted – a slow, 
insidious process of loss. Similarly,Change 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/182557> by Letitia Elizabeth Landon 
explores the changes that life can bring about through the personalities of two 
children whose early lives are closely shared in warm friendship, but whose 
entry into the adult world moves them apart so that they morph into hostile 
strangers.

Gregory Corso’s Writ on the Steps of Puerto Rican Harlem 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/175643> is more personal still. In a 
world that is changing, that “knows it’s changing”, Corso insists on both the 
possibility and the responsibility of the poet to make sense of it all in the 
face of death, the one constant in his view. In one sense, Corso’s poem brings 
us full circle, back to Olson’s “[n]ot one death but many”. Death is just 
another change, a vital part of the endless process of flux that surrounds us 
all.

Please ring your changes, in original poems, below.
 