
Fifty years ago this October three American poets, Allen Ginsberg, Gary Snyder 
and Philip Whalen,met at the bottom of Mount Tamalpais 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/285911.Opening_the_Mountain>, a small 
mountain at the northwest end of San Francisco bay, to perform a ritual of 
their own devising. Following the example of Tibetan Buddhist monks, they 
walked clockwise around the mountain, imitating the path of the sun as a kind 
of meditation. Nowadays, the 15-mile circumambulation of Tamalpais is 
celebrated four times a year, but minus the poets.

This may seem like a typical bit of Californian hippie-dippy nonsense, but the 
association of poetry and mountains dates back at least as far as the classical 
myth of the Muses and their link with Mount Olympus 
<http://public.wsu.edu/~delahoyd/mythology/muses.html>. The Beat poets’ 
interest in mountains was not purely spiritual, either. Many of them spent 
their summers working as fire lookouts in the western ranges, a handy way to 
earn a bit of money and make time for thinking and writing. BothWhalen 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/180815> and Snyder 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/176581> wrote poems about their 
experiences on Sourdough Mountain, one of the most gruelling climbs in 
Washington State.

Of course, the Beats weren’t the first generation of American poets to write 
about mountains. Robert Frost’s poem called, simply,The Mountain 
<http://www.bartleby.com/118/4.html> is set in Canada but plays with the 
association of mountain, Muses and a spring and in the final lines the simple 
cattle drover morphs into an ancient god.Kenneth Rexroth 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/171535>, two decades later, took to the 
mountains to have space and distance to be able to write about the political 
situation in Depression America, and specifically the deaths of Sacco and 
Vanzetti. The indestructability of Milestone Mountain stands for the endurance 
of the ideals he believed the dead men embodied.

The mountains of these islands may lack the scale of their American 
counterparts, but they have their own grandeur and have inspired their own 
poetry. When we think of the Romantics as poets of the Lake District we can 
easily forget that the area is as noted for its peaks as its water and that in 
many respects the former were more significant for the poets than the latter. In
The Eolian Harp 
<http://www.poetiv.com/coleridge-samuel-taylor/the-eolian-harp.html>, Coleridge 
escapes the confines of an enclosed garden and climbs a mountain to discover 
his pantheistic vision of the oneness of things. Equally, in Wordsworth’sLines 
Composed a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174796> it is the mountain landscape 
around the abbey as much as the building itself that works on his memory and 
impresses thoughts of seclusion on his mind.

In the 1930s, Cecil Day-Lewis envisaged his Magnetic Mountain 
<http://www.cday-lewis.co.uk/#/the-magic-mountain/4525050886> as a kind of land 
of milk and honey to stand in contrast to the realities of Depression Britain. 
If Day-Lewis saw mountains as being something of a paradise, for Ezra Pound, 
they represented the antechamber of hell, at least in hisCanto XVI 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/241048>.

In An Octopus <http://www.poemhunter.com/best-poems/marianne-moore/an-octopus/>
, Marianne Moore uses various animal metaphors for the glacier on top of Mount 
Rainier, which, like the Beats, she once hiked around. This might seem somewhat 
arbitrary at first, but Moore is concerned with the idea of the mountain as a 
complete ecosystem, and the choice of metaphor acts as a kind of ground against 
which the actual flora and fauna of the mountain are picked out. The poem is a 
kind of hymn to Moore’s “capacity for fact”.

Fine as all of these poems are, the ultimate mountain verse has to be Wallace 
Stevens’sThe Poem that Took the Place of a Mountain 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/248826>. In a typically playful mood, 
Stevens writes a poem that, if anything, is more real than the mountain it 
replaces, with the capacity, unlike the actual mountain, to become the reader’s 
“unique and solitary home”.

And so, this month’s Poster poems challenge is to write verses celebrating 
mountains, in all their many and various forms and moods. Whether you’re a 
climber or someone who prefers admiring them from afar, mountains are hard to 
avoid and offer a wide range of possibilities for writing poems. Please share 
yours here.
 