
The Channel tunnel is besieged by the dispossessed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/03/uk-funds-100-extra-channel-tunnel-guards-as-migrant-standoff-continues>
. In the Mediterranean,even the Irish navy is engaged in search-and-rescue 
missions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/30/eu-naval-mission-rescues-more-than-4200-migrants-24-hours>
 to save African migrants who find themselves adrift, having been abandoned by 
those who profit by exploiting them.

In Syria, more than 7.6 million people have left their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/09/syria-refugees-4-million-people-flee-crisis-deepens>
, and more than half of them have left the country, forced out by a brutal 
civil war. All across Africa and the Middle East, we are seeing the latest wave 
in an ongoing saga of migration, as war, poverty and famine force the most 
vulnerable to move on or die. And this is probably just the beginning of what 
could be the greatest human migration yet, asthose who find their homes 
rendered uninhabitable by climate change are forced to move if they want to 
survive <http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49e4a5096.html>.

In the European poetic tradition, the question of forced migration was first 
addressed inThe Aeneid <http://www.gutenberg.org/files/228/228-h/228-h.htm>, 
the great Virgilian epic of war, and war’s aftermath, which tells the story of 
how a group of survivors set off into the unknown when their homeland is 
effectively obliterated. Unlike many tales of forced migration, Virgil’s story 
has a happy ending as the Trojans go on to found Rome and, long after the 
poem’s ending, get co-opted to the foundation myth of a second empire, that of 
the British.

Another foundational European myth involves a couple and their newborn baby 
fleeing persecution in their homeland and crossing into neighbouring Egypt on a 
donkey. InThe Flight into Egypt 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/buckley-vincent/the-flight-into-egypt-0755017>
, Irish-Australian poet Vincent Buckley brings the refugee experience vividly 
to life by the use of small, telling details. This iconic story places the 
condition of being a refugee at the heart of the Christian story and should, 
perhaps, make our society more open to asylum seekers than it actually is.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fposter-poems-seeking-refuge-and-asylum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438935977360%2F2258706d-8469-443a-97ea-62648d5bbf8e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poster%20poems%3A%20seeking%20refuge%20and%20asylum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fposter-poems-seeking-refuge-and-asylum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poster%20poems%3A%20seeking%20refuge%20and%20asylum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fposter-poems-seeking-refuge-and-asylum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438935977360%2F2258706d-8469-443a-97ea-62648d5bbf8e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ellis Island, first port of call of European migrants to America, c.1900. 
Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
The 19th century saw one of the greatest migrations in human history, as 
Europe exported its “poor, [its] huddled masses” to the Americas in enormous 
numbers. The lives of these new immigrant communities were often hard, in the 
early days, and generally tinged with disappointment. Daily life in the new 
ghettos they formed was chronicled by two poets of widely different backgrounds,
Charles Reznikoff <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/182050>, a son of 
Russian Jews who went to the States to escape tsarist pogroms, andLola Ridge 
<https://www.gutenberg.org/files/4332/4332.txt>, the twice-emigrant Irishwoman, 
who grew up in the Antipodes and moved to America as an adult.

The 20th century was a time of wars that can only be described as “great” in a 
pejorative sense, wars of great destruction and waste. With war comes 
displacement, and with large-scale war the level of displacement was 
proportionate; in Nazi Germany, it preceded war as the country’s Jewish 
population sought to escape. InRefugee Blues 
<http://www.ppu.org.uk/learn/poetry/poetry_against1.html>, WH Auden uses a 
blues idiom to capture the dilemma of these refugees; under threat of 
annihilation if they stayed, but finding when they tried to leave that there 
was “no room at the inn”.

Although migration of this sort is often the result of war or catastrophe, 
there can be other factors at play, not least of which is the end of empire and 
the lure of the metropolis. In Britain, many immigrant communities were formed 
when people from colonies and former colonies in the West Indies and the Indian 
subcontinent exercised their rights as citizens and moved to the mother country 
to better their lives.

The poet Benjamin Zephaniah is the son of just such immigrants and his 
experiences growing up as an outsider mean that an empathy with newer waves of 
arrivals is often evident in his writings. In his poemAppeal Dismissed 
<http://benjaminzephaniah.com/what-is-an-asylum-seeker>, both the asylum seeker 
and the civil servant charged with deciding on her appeal against deportation 
are depicted as human beings trapped in an inhuman, rigid system that 
diminishes their humanity in the name of political expediency.

And so this month I invite you to post your poems on the theme of migration in 
search of refuge. It may be that your experience of seeking asylum is limited 
to flickering images on the TV news, or you might have more first-hand 
knowledge. Either way, please share your poems here.
 