
The world of modern physics is full of strange and glorious paradoxes. One of 
the most startling, because it deals with something we all experience, is the 
notion that light behaves as both wave and particle. Until recently it was 
believed that you could observe one or the other of these conditions, but not 
both simultaneously. However, now scientists have come up with a way of 
photographing both at once. As might be expected, this dual nature of light 
yieldsan image of eerie beauty <http://phys.org/news/2015-03-particle.html>.

For poets, too, light has long been possessed of contrasting significances. In 
Milton’s Sonnet 19 <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174016> (traditionally 
known as On His Blindness, although the poet gave it no title), light stands 
for the poet’s life and, possibly, his sight, which he worries about having 
wasted in the eyes of his God. By way of contrast, Dante Gabriel Rossetti uses
the image of sudden light <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174292> as a 
way of expressing the deja vu-like realisation that an experience is being 
relived, that “we’ve been here before”. Rossetti’s light of love that renews 
our lives is somewhat more carnal than Milton’s wish to please the divine.

In They are all Gone into the World of Light by Henry Vaughan 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174699>, the light symbolises heavenly 
glory, by comparison to which the brightness of this world is “mere 
glimmering”. It’s a conceit that turns the idea of death as descent into 
darkness on its head, emphasising that for a true believer, the next life is to 
be desired more than this one. Vaughan’s poem makes an illuminating pairing 
when set besideBut Men Loved Darkness rather than Light 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173307> by his contemporary Richard 
Crashaw, where “the world’s light” is set against the darkness of hell.

In Emily Dickinson’s There’s a certain Slant of light 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174992>, the illumination comes from the 
heavens but is in no way joyous. This harsh low sun of a winter afternoon casts 
a chilling glow, one that oppresses internally, but also brings about change 
inside the viewer, “where the Meanings are”. As is so often the case with 
Dickinson, change is painful but important, unwelcome but necessary.

In Light breaks where no sun shines 
<http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/light-breaks-where-no-sun-shines>, Dylan 
Thomas writes of light as representing life-in-death, the force that through 
the green fuse ensures that the cycle of nature continues uninterrupted, that 
dawn follows night and spring, winter. It is this light that puts flesh on the 
bones of the dead, and means that conception and fruitfulness continue to 
happen.

This view of light is close to the Neoplatonism that runs through Ezra Pound’s 
work from beginning to end. For Pound, light was the informing principle of the 
universe, a view best summarised in the phrase “all things that are, are 
lights” which he attributed to the Irish philosopherJohn Scotus Eriugena 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/scottus-eriugena/> in the Pisan Cantos. 
Towards the end of his life Pound came to the conclusion that his work was a 
failure, but insisted that the light endures, that it “sings eternal 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/241056>”, despite his inability to do it 
justice.

John Kinsella’s Wave Motion Light Fixed and Finished 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/kinsella-john/wave-motion-light-fixed-and-finished-0398018>
 starts from a more scientific position on the subject, but soon branches off 
into an excursus on vision, art and landscape, before returning – wavelike – to 
its axis. It’s a poem that enacts itself; not quite concrete poetry, unless the 
concrete is fluid.

Last month I invited you to post your poems on darkness, so what could be more 
natural, in a Manichean kind of way, than to invite poems on light this month? 
And just as there were various shades of darkness, light comes in a multitude 
of intensities. It can bring happiness or dread and inspire a sense of uplift 
or of bleakness. What does it mean to you?
 