
In the US, the electorate braces itself for what may be the nastiest and most 
bizarre presidential election in living memory. The Brexit referendum in the UK 
has taken on the characteristics of high (or low) farce. Meanwhile, here in 
Ireland, a centrist party that won less than a third of the total seats in the 
March general election is trying to cobble together some kind of minority 
government with the tacit support of another centrist party that refuses to 
enter coalition as junior partners. If there was ever a time for a 
politics-themed Poster poems, this is it.

Matters political of one sort or another have exercised the minds of poets in 
various ways down the ages. At times, the poems they produced have been pithy 
and epigrammatic, likeEE Cummings’s A Politician 
<http://www.poetrynook.com/poem/politician-3> – possibly the most succinct 
political put-down in the history of the art – or Langston Hughes’s prophecy of 
change inBlack Workers <http://www.poetrynook.com/poem/black-workers>.

What's poetry's role in protest politics?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/dec/15/poetry-protest-politics>
Cummings also satirised the political abuse of language through hackneyed 
cliches inNext to of course god America 
<http://www.poetryarchive.org/poem/next-course-god-america>; the poem is a 
technical tour de force in which he weaves the commonplaces of political 
discourse into a perfect rhyming sonnet.In Iphigenia: Politics 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/46865>, Thomas 
Merton draws on classical matter rather than classic form to base his critique. 
Merton’s political stance may be more subtle than Cummings’s, but the poems are 
linked by a shared distain for how our “leaders” are prepared to abuse both 
language and innocent people in the pursuit of power.

John Clare’s famous poem The Fallen Elm 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/best-poems/john-clare/the-fallen-elm/> is a protest 
against the felling of trees in the name of profit and enclosure. Clare views 
this act of vandalism both as an attack on community and on the very language 
he uses to protest against it. In a sense, the poem is a prefiguring of Auden’s 
“poetry makes nothing happen”; despite Clare’s powerful utterance, the trees, 
and the way of life they stood for, are gone.

In many respects, The Fallen Elm is also echoed in the great poem Bagpipe 
Music by Auden’s friendLouis MacNeice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/louis-macneice>. MacNeice’s poem marks the 
destruction of the culture of highland Scotland at the hands of contemporary 
commercialisation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn72XebBaMeI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn72XebBaMeI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn72XebBaMeI&media=>
 Bagpipe Music by Louis MacNeice. 
While Clare was lamenting the destruction of his rural world, Blake was 
bemoaning the rise of urban poverty and oppression 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/43673> in the 
poem London. His political poems are visionary, but can seem a little light on 
detail. The same cannot be said of Irish-born New Yorker Lola Ridge who 
documented, in poems likeThe Ghetto 
<https://ellipticalmovements.wordpress.com/2013/05/25/lola-ridge-forgotten-irish-woman-poet/>
, the effect of political disenfranchisement and neglect on the urban poor. 
Ridge’s ghetto dwellers are afforded a dignity in poetry that the political 
reality of their situation might otherwise have denied them.

Although he may well never have read her, Linton Kwesi Johnson’s political 
poetry is closer to Ridge’s work than might first meet the eye. He, too, gives 
a voice to the marginalised who live in the neglected corners of the urban 
environment. HisSonny’s Lettah <http://www.poetryarchive.org/poem/sonnys-lettah>
 is not just a protest against the politically motivated SUS laws that were 
used as a weapon against young black men in the UK in the late 1970s, it is 
also a glimpse into a different kind of social organisation that existed 
alongside the mainstream, one that is deprived of political power but is strong 
in other ways.

Political poetry with Luke Wright and Hollie McNish – books podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2016/mar/25/political-poetry-with-luke-wright-and-hollie-mcnish-books-podcast>
Johnson’s work bridges the gap between poetry and song, performance and the 
page. Another politically engaged writer to achieve this is, of course, Bob 
Dylan, whose work continued to have a political edge long after he purposefully 
abandoned overt protest. However, his most direct and powerful political 
statements are to be found in his earlier songs, and few are more powerful than 
his dissection of the politics of power, money, justice and class inThe 
Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll 
<http://bobdylan.com/songs/lonesome-death-hattie-carroll/>.

And so this month’s Poster poems challenge is to write poems that engage, in 
one way or another, with the political sphere. You may be in satirical mood, or 
you might want to document the impact of politics on society. You could even be 
straightforwardly angry. However you feel, please share your political poems 
here.
 