
The question of what poetry is for is one that has as many answers as it has 
people who try to answer it. For Ezra Pound, following the teachers of medieval 
oratory, the answer was ut moveat, ut doceat, ut delectate; that poetry should 
move, teach and delight. Most contemporary readers would probably have no issue 
with the first and third of these precepts, but the didactic use of poetry went 
somewhat out of fashion with the Romantic movement and is still not much valued 
by many readers.

Nevertheless, a genre of “how to” poems does exist, and poems of instruction – 
more or less literal – continue to be written. This didactic tradition dates 
back at least as far as Hesiod’s farming manualWorks and Days 
<http://www.sacred-texts.com/cla/hesiod/works.htm>, with its emphasis on the 
value of hard work. For Hesiod, labour is both inevitable and ethically 
desirable, being humanity’s greatest safeguard against unnecessary strife. The 
poem was a major influence on Virgil’sThe Georgics 
<http://classics.mit.edu/Virgil/georgics.mb.txt>, which similarly emphasises 
the importance of hard work. Indeed, Virgil goes so far as to suggest farming 
as a suitable employment for retired Roman soldiers, perhaps picking up on the 
earlier poet’s concern with containing violence through physical labour.

Henry Reed’s great poem Lessons of the War 
<http://www.solearabiantree.net/namingofparts/namingofparts.html> consists of 
what is ostensibly a set of instructions for trainee soldiers. Beneath this 
didactic surface, Reed’s real concern is with the absurdity of war, its 
smallness in the face of natural beauty and human love, and the abuse of 
language required to lend conflict an air of overarching importance. Reed’s 
lessons are by no means simple, but they are vital ones.

Other “how-to” poems are at first glance less ambitious. Gary Snyder’s How to 
Make Stew in the Pinacate Desert: Recipe for Locke and Drum 
<http://www.soupsong.com/ssnyder1.html> has all the appearance of being nothing 
more than a combined shopping list and recipe, but on closer reading it turns 
out to be a hymn to friendship, not as an abstract quality, but as an actual 
act, or series of acts, such as sharing recipes and meals with specific, named 
friends. Similarly, Grace Paley’sHouse: Some Instructions 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/177937> moves from practical information 
on caring for your home to a meditation on what it means to care for, and to 
love, home.

Other poets set out to teach us things that may be of more practical use. 
Benjamin Franklin, for instance, provides three simple precepts forHow to Get 
Riches <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/175556>. These amount to: trust 
nobody; don’t prevaricate; look after the pennies. Were he alive today, 
Franklin could probably spin this out to a series of self-help books and a 
lucrative stint on the lecture circuit.

Ron Padgett is even more ambitious when he sets out to teach us How to Be 
Perfect <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/248270>. Padgett’s advice ranges 
from the practical (“Look after your teeth and gums”) to the somewhat surreal 
(“Answer letters promptly. Use attractive stamps, like the one with a tornado 
on it.”) The didactic value of the poem is deliberately undercut by the 
injunction not to give advice. Perfection, the poem tells us, may be desirable 
but it remains unattainable.

The title of William Carlos Williams’s poem Tract 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174772> makes his instructional intent 
plain, but his subject is a peculiar one: how to properly conduct a funeral. In 
terms reminiscent of a 17th-century Puritan tract writer, Williams constructs a 
plea for simplicity, for an older set of American values that emphasise 
plainness and a lack of ostentation, which chimes well with the poet’s work. In 
a sense, Williams is obliquely providing instruction in how to read his poems.

Wendell Berry takes things a step further in his How to Be a Poet 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/30299>. Berry’s entirely 
unironic manual reflects a view of poetry, or to be precise the making of 
poetry, as a kind of meditation, consisting of preparation followed by waiting; 
of listening to the silence until the poem emerges in the attentive mind. It 
seems a fitting place to end this survey of “how-to” poetry.

This month’s Poster poems challenge is to write instructional poems of your 
own. Most of us have something of the teacher in us, and a particular area of 
knowledge or expertise we’d like to share, and this is the opportunity for you 
to reveal your inner didacticist in verse. If you want, you can even set 
homework. Come to think of it, that’s what I’m doing now. No excuses, no “the 
dog ate my poem”. Start writing.
 