
In the wake of last month’s historic Irish referendum vote to legalise 
same-sex marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/23/gay-marriage-ireland-yes-vote>, 
it struck me that a Poster poems challenge to celebrate the august institution 
of wedlock might just be in order. There is, after all, something profoundly 
poetic about a popular vote to second Shakespeare’srefusal to admit impediment 
to a marriage of true minds <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174373>, 
regardless of gender.

Weddings have always been occasions for celebration, and it is not unusual to 
find poets writing odes on marriage – both their own and other people’s. One of 
the earliest and best English poems to mark the union of others isEdmund 
Spenser’s Prothalamion <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174484>, which was 
written as a “Spousall Verse in Honour of the Double Marriage of Ladie 
Elizabeth and Ladie Katherine Somerset”. It’s a poem of great charm, and the 
refrain, “Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song,” is one of the 
best-known lines of poetry in the language.

Gerard Manley Hopkins’s At the Wedding March 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/180715> is a more modest offering than 
Spenser’s poem, but it seems more personal. At the same time, the poem reminds 
us that Hopkins’s view of marriage is that of a Roman Catholic theologian; God 
is not only present at the ceremony, but is a third participant.

More recent prothalamions tend to take a more secular view. In A Maul for Bill 
and Cindy’s Wedding <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/179274>, Gary Snyder 
uses a most arresting and unexpected image; a maul is a tool for splitting logs 
– not the kind of thing you’d immediately associate with wishing a couple a 
long and happy married life. However, Snyder flips the dynamic of his image at 
the very end of the poem to achieve exactly that.

Jane Hirshfield’s A Blessing for Wedding 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/238894> takes the form of a litany, 
invoking a multi-faceted image of marriage as promises kept, loneliness shared, 
a circle encompassing birth, fertility and death. It is a poem of deceptive 
simplicity that resolves on a sense of the all-encompassing nature of the 
marriage vow.

Of course, not all marriages are happy and not all poems about marriage are 
celebratory. John Dryden’s drama Marriage à-la-Mode is a cynical comedy on the 
topic, and a song from the play,Why Should a Foolish Marriage Vow 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173446>, deals with what happens when 
“passion is decay’d” and the relationship has effectively died.

In Robert Creeley’s A Marriage <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/171566>, 
we see vows and passion turn, over time, to mere habit, with love being 
replaced by cohabitation. This fate befalls all too many relationships. It’s 
also a story that is found in two poems by Denise Levertov:The Ache of Marriage 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/171226> and Wedding-Ring 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/238108>. It is a story that begins in the 
seeking of union through passion and ends with a hope for friendship.

Perhaps the best-known modern poem on the theme of marriage is Philip Larkin’s 
The Whitsun Weddings 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/learning/guide/180154#poem>. Larkin slowly 
realises, in a set of stanzas that link like the carriages of the train on 
which the poem is set, that the unaccustomed activity on each station platform 
is a series of wedding parties seeing off newly married couples who are taking 
the train to their various honeymoons. Despite his characteristically 
dismissive attitude to the people involved and the superiority he initially 
feels at being the only person to see the connection between the dozen couples, 
even a cynic such as Larkin gets caught up in the joys of the day, and the poem 
ends in a fructifying rain.

In honour of the referendum, this month’s Poster poems challenge is to write 
your own poems in praise of the nuptial state. It goes without saying that 
praise may be taken straight or with an ironic twist. Let no impediment be 
admitted to the sharing of poems.

 