
Towards the end of 1955, Marianne Moore was invited to submit suggestions for 
naming the latest model from the Ford range of cars 
<http://www.todayinliterature.com/stories.asp?Event_Date=12/9/1955>. For an 
obscure poet, Moore was something of a celebrity, known for her eccentricity 
and love of baseball as much as for her verse, and was quick to accept the 
invitation. Sadly, none of her suggestions made the cut, and so Americans found 
themselves driving the new Edsel and not the Utopian Turtletop.

Her list of possible names was the nearest that Moore got to writing a poem 
about cars. However, many other poets have been inspired by the internal 
combustion engine and the joys and travails of motor travel. In the case of 
George Oppen, the engine itself fired his practical imagination to writeone of 
the very few poems in the language to feature head gaskets and crank shafts 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/175675>.

If Oppen was happy to get his hands oily, Moore's old friend Elizabeth Bishop 
was fascinated bythe oily dirt of the family who ran a filling station she'd 
stopped at <http://www.poetryarchive.org/poem/filling-station>. Under her 
quiet, attentive gaze they became symbols of grubby humanity in all its 
unlovable grime. And then, of course, she drove away.

But while engines can be fun and filling stations educational, the main 
attraction of cars is the fact that you can drive and be driven in them. This 
became something of a signature for the Beats, who spent much of their time "on 
the road". In fact, Allen Ginsberg took to writing his poems by dictating them 
into a tape recorder (that Bob Dylan bought for him) while driving and being 
driven, and the result was one of his finest books,The Fall of America 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Fall_of_America_Poems_of_These_State.html?id=qlGQbMH_BcIC>
.

Around the same time that Ginsberg was finishing this book, Robert Bly packed 
his family into a car and headed west 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/29720>. It was 1970, the 
Vietnam war seemed to be drawing to a close and the future looked bright. The 
family sang Dylan songs as they headed for the ocean. The mood of Bly's poem is 
bright and hopeful, as befits an outing in the family car whatever the 
historical context.

For Australian poet Dorothy Parker, her car is something like Virginia Woolf's 
room of one's own 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/porter-dorothy/my-car-0129004>; a place 
where she can go to observe the world and blend "business and pleasure" 
undisturbed. Parker's poem makes an interesting contrast with Reginald O'Hare 
Gibson'sThe Red Cadillac 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/178425>, which riffs on 
William Carlos Williams to produce a kind of tabloid TV image of maleness as 
defined by car ownership. The speaker in James L Dickey'sCherrylog Road 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/171426> owns a motorbike, not a car, but 
uses the abandoned vehicles in a scrapyard by the side of the road in the title 
as a set of rooms to share with his girlfriend when she can get away from her 
father's farm.

Like most machines, cars can be dangerous things. Carl Shapiro's Auto Wreck 
<http://marlowstide.blogspot.ie/2009/10/auto-wreck-by-karl-shappiro-1945.html> 
captures the suddenness of a car crash, along with the bystander's sense of 
complicity in what has happened, our need to speculate on causes and 
consequences of the accident's calamitous intrusion into the fabric of the 
everyday. In her poemThe cars <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/182811#poem>
, Kathleen Fraser reminds us that traffic is just as dangerous for those who 
walk as it is for those who drive. The poem is a wonderfully detailed 
photographic observation of a walker crossing a freeway in heavy traffic, seen 
as an athletic contest between man and metal that leaves the reader almost 
breathless.

This month's Poster poem challenge is to write about cars. You might be inside 
one looking out, or outside looking in. Maybe you love the feeling of freedom 
to be had from driving on the open road or hate the confinement of city 
traffic. Perhaps you're a pedestrian engaged in a battle of wits with a street 
full of drivers, or a child in the back seat wondering if you're there yet. One 
way or another, now is your chance to share.
 