
As the latest Greek drama has unfolded night after night on our TV screens, it 
has been interesting to see broadcasters using backdrop images of the Acropolis 
of Athens as a visual shorthand for an entire country. It has been a powerful 
reminder of the symbolic power of ruined buildings, and their ability to 
simultaneously represent both the fragility and the endurance of the 
civilisations that built them in the first instance. It is also, as it happens, 
the subject ofa fine poem by Lawrence Durrell 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?id=143767819111307&story_fbid=250056745149080>
.

The ruin as subject matter entered English poetry early, with the great 
Anglo-Saxon poem preserved in the Exeter Book of that name.The Ruin 
<http://faculty.arts.ubc.ca/sechard/oeruin.htm> covers many of the tropes used 
in poems about ruins ever since: wonder at the skill of those who built the 
place; speculation as to why it fell into disrepair; a meditation (tacit or 
implicit) on our own inadequacy in comparison to the builders; a general sense 
of mortality wrapped up in more than a hint of nostalgia. It is, in some 
senses, deeply appropriate that the manuscript is, itself, somewhat ruined, 
thereby forcing the reader to imagine the missing sections, just as we do when 
contemplating an actual ruin.

Little wonder, then, that this is a poetic subject that appealed to the 
Romantic sensibility – to the extent that landowners felt the need to grace 
their estates with fake ruins in the form of follies. This fashion began in the 
mid-18th century in gardens like those atStowe House 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stowe_House#Stowe_Landscape_Gardens> and reached 
a tragic climax of sorts during the Irish potato famine, when landlords 
employed their starving tenants tobuild follies on their estates as a form of 
relief work <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Folly#Famine_follies>. Of course, 
other landlords had somewhat different experiences of ruined buildings. When 
Byron inherited his family home at Newstead Abbey it was quite literally a 
pile, with only a few rooms habitable. He sold up and his poemOn Leaving 
Newstead Abbey <http://www.readbookonline.net/readOnLine/3608/> reflects the 
ruinous condition of the building he left behind.

Tellingly, perhaps the most famous of all English Romantic poems inspired by a 
ruin, William Wordsworth’sLines Composed a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey, On 
Revisiting the Banks of the Wye during a Tour. July 13, 1798 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174796> has no interest in coming to 
grips with the remains of the building in the title. The nostalgia in the poem 
is for the poet’s lost youth as represented in the changes in the place since 
his last visit; the place itself is purely secondary.

Shelley’s Ozymandias 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/learning/guide/238972#poem> is more focused on 
the ruin itself and the lesson it has for a contemporary traveller who comes 
across it. The statue of the king has all the attributes of the ideal Romantic 
ruin. It sits in splendid isolation, far from any trace of modern civilisation, 
its stones scattered around waiting for a mind sensitive enough to reassemble 
it in imagination and hear its message.

Italian sunshine would appear to have had a salutatory effect on the mind of 
Robert Browning. In his poemLove Among the Ruins 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173019>, Browning used the idea of an 
almost entirely lost city to contrast the urban and the rural, the life of the 
mass and the life of the individual, war and love. Browning’s use of a light, 
tripping rhyming stanza is part of his ironic view of the question the poem is 
asking; the answer, of course, is that cities come and cities go, leaving their 
fascinating ruins behind, but love between individual humans endures and is 
never destroyed.

This theme of ruins versus nature is expressed more succinctly by Samuel 
Menashe in a poem called, simply,Ruins 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/181929>. In Menashe’s concise vision, the 
ruins are being subsumed into a natural landscape that has been biding its 
time, secure in the knowledge that it would win out in the end. The sentiment 
is not a million miles removed fromBasil Bunting’s At Briggflatts Meetinghouse 
<https://www.dur.ac.uk/basil-bunting-poetry.centre/poems.quotes/meetinghouse/>, 
which opens with a recognition of the transience of civilisations and closes 
with a calm delight in that very condition.

However, time is not the only force that can create ruins. In war the process 
is accelerated, made starker and generally stripped of any sense of comforting 
nostalgia. In a poem calledRuins (Ypres, 1917) 
<http://www.poetryexplorer.net/poem.php?id=10048629>, George Herbert Clarke 
recognises that trench warfare not only turns men and their works to ruins but 
also has the same effect on nature itself. Even the trees on the battlefield 
are turned to ruins of their former selves. A war later,that master of gothic 
fantasy Mervyn Peake <http://war-poetry.livejournal.com/146525.html> saw bombed 
London morph into the form a woman, wracked and twisted by her wounds and yet 
towering above “a world of sudden fear and firelight”, broken but unbowed.

And so this month’s Poster poems challenge is to write a poem on the theme of 
ruins. You may see them as telling reminders of what we are capable of building 
or signs of our transient mortality, or both at the same time. The important 
thing is to get writing and to share the results here.
 