
Fear is all around us at the moment. Every time you read or listen to the news 
it’s another story of terror, one way or another. And it’s not limited to the 
bigger stories of bombing, shooting or Donald Trump; we are learning to fear 
the food we eat, the water we drink and the air we breathe.Golfers fear Zika in 
Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/dustin-johnson-withdrawal-olympics-zika>
, so decline invitations to play at the Olympics – then,the virus turns up 
closer to home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/04/florida-zika-virus-outbreak-miami-mosquitos>
. Black Americans fear those whose job it is supposed to be to protect them, 
whilethe police fear toys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/28/tamir-rice-shooting-no-charges-cleveland-officer-timothy-loehmann>
 and telephones.

It can feel at times like we’re living through the hopeless hell of James 
Thomson’s City of Dreadful Night 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/45407>, where 
fear permeates everything, even its half-hearted denial in the line “No hope 
could have no fear”, a kind of desperate whistling in the dark. Thomson’s poem 
is a foreshadowing ofThe Waste Land’s 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/47311> ominous 
swarms of London pedestrians and Eliot’s offer to show the reader “fear in a 
handful of dust”.

It’s interesting to contrast this urban fear of each other, of the crowd, with 
Robert Frost’s Storm Fear <http://www.poetry-archive.com/f/storm_fear.html>, 
where the object of his terror is the power of nature, and where the best 
bulwark against it is in not being alone. It is the smallness of the family 
when pitched against the elemental power of the storm that creates the fear in 
the poet’s mind.

Not that fear of other people is a uniquely urban phenomenon. In Bears at 
Raspberry Time 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/42593>, Hayden 
Carruth deflects from the expected fear of the bears in the woods to those who 
would kill them, so that the actual source of fear is human. Behind that again 
lies the poet’s fear of both writing and not being able to write, a fear of 
expectation.WD Snodgrass’s A Locked House 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/427960> starts 
from a very ordinary fear, that your house may have burned or been broken into 
in your absence. Of course, the fear is usually groundless, but the destruction 
of the home comes about not through some external agency but through the 
actions of those who live in it.

In Beachcomber 
<http://www.scottishpoetrylibrary.org.uk/poetry/poems/beachcomber>, the great 
Scottish poet George Mackay Brown shows how fear of the disapproval of the 
community we live in can inhibit us and keep us from our true calling in life, 
at expense to both ourselves and the very community that inhibits us. Because 
we allow fear to limit us, we become less than we should be.

This idea that the self is what you should really fear is explored by Sharon 
Olds in The Fear of Oneself 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/browse?contentId=34578>, where 
the speaker realises that her partner’s estimation of her inner strength is not 
matched by her self-awareness as someone who comes “from a / long line / of 
women / who put themselves / first.” Her fear is not of some particular thing, 
but that she might fail those who depend on her most, her children.

This internal fear takes a different form in Robert Creeley’s For Fear 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/browse?contentId=28347>. Why, 
the poem asks, will we return to painful situations even when we know they will 
not change? And the answer is fear of change, of the unknown, of abandonment.In 
a poem called 3 <http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/porter-dorothy/3-0320019>
, Dorothy Porter writes of how we willingly take the road of fear, with little 
or no regard to our own wellbeing or happiness. These poems take Roosevelt’s 
“the only thing we have to fear is … fear itself” and turn it on its head 
somewhat; the only thing we have to fear, they say, is what lies within 
ourselves.



And so, this month’s Poster poems challenge is to confront your fears in 
verse. These may be induced by external factors or they might be entirely 
internal. One way or another, you are invited to share your poems of fear here.
 