
The first frost of winter is one of the clearest markers of change in the 
annual cycle of life. Nothing quite signals nature’s hibernation, the temporary 
cessation of growth, like a crisp layer of ice settling on the earth, whitening 
the grass and freezing the surface of lake and stream. Little wonder that ice 
has come to symbolise emotional and physical demise in so many cultural and 
artistic contexts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fposter-poems-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e140e029b664f6471bf135d7cd24aec5a0ea8f6%2F0_0_3581_2151%2F3581.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poster%20poems%3A%20ice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fposter-poems-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poster%20poems%3A%20ice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fposter-poems-ice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e140e029b664f6471bf135d7cd24aec5a0ea8f6%2F0_0_3581_2151%2F3581.jpg>
 First frost … hibernation begins for this dormouse. Photograph: George 
McCarthy/CORBIS 
One of the most popular of all ice-themed poems is Robert Frost’s Fire and Ice 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173527>. Nominally it is concerned with 
the question of how the world might end and widely believed to be inspired by 
Dante’s Inferno, where the worst of the sinners are damned not to the fires of 
perdition but to eternal ice. However, the poem is primarily a balancing of the 
destructive forces of the paired emotions of desire and hatred, each of them 
being considered as dangerous as the other.

In his sonnet My Love is Like to Ice, and I to Fire 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/180614>, Edmund Spenser uses a similar 
trope to exemplify the question of unrequited love. In Spenser’s poem, fire 
also symbolises desire, but ice doesn’t stand for hatred but for an emotion 
that is much more problematic for the lover: indifference.

Spenser’s images of ice and fire acting against their nature are echoed in WB 
Yeats’sThe Cold Heaven <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/172059>. The title 
also mirrors Dante/Frost’s icy hell; a heaven that is like ice burning and yet 
remaining ice is not in any sense conventionally comforting and reflects the 
poet’s loss of faith in the wake of the end of his hopes of a relationship with 
Maud Gonne. The image of ice occurs at the beginning of the poem, but it 
underlies all that follows: the loss of faith, of love, of youth and of life 
itself are all held in its chill grasp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fposter-poems-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a4d11999ca82042d502475abec8d3334c0decf5%2F0_0_2550_1531%2F2550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poster%20poems%3A%20ice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fposter-poems-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poster%20poems%3A%20ice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fposter-poems-ice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a4d11999ca82042d502475abec8d3334c0decf5%2F0_0_2550_1531%2F2550.jpg>
 Icy Mountains … Icebergs drifting in Ittoqqortoormiit, Greenland. Photograph: 
Arctic-Images/Corbis 
All this symbolic ice is one thing, but the real thing also lends itself to 
poetry. In Gail Mazur’s Ice, it is the backdrop for a range of adolescent rites 
of passage in the form of an outdoor rink erected when the river freezes over. 
InGreenland’s Icy Mountains <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/175094>, the 
inimitable Knight of the White Elephant of Burmah William McGonagall reminds us 
of the dangers it represents for seamen.

The same idea, albeit somewhat more seriously expressed, lies at the core of 
Coleridge’sThe Rime of the Ancient Mariner 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173253> when the ship’s misadventures in 
a frozen sea are the context for the appearance of the ill-fated albatross 
whose intervention enables the sailors to escape the ice.

Both these poems concern the dangers of ice for shipping, but Andrew Allport’s 
The Ice Ship <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/239224> looks at a 
potentially dangerous ship of ice. This was the idea of Geoffrey Pyke, an 
English journalist and inventor, who proposed his idea to Louis Mountbatten as 
an enormous, unsinkable aircraft carrier made of ice for the Royal Navy. The 
idea came to nothing, but it did result in the invention ofpykrete 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pykrete>, an almost entirely useless building 
material made of ice and wood pulp that has fascinated generations of nerds 
ever since. It is ice for Lego lovers.

Towards the end of the war that Pyke’s boat played no part in, Ezra Pound was 
incarcerated in an American army detention centre near Pisa, where he wrote 
what was to be his most successful book,The Pisan Cantos 
<https://vimeo.com/87887827>. He was held in a cage and slept under canvas 
through the chill Mediterranean nights. Tellingly, the last two lines of the 
book link this experience, ice and mortality in a way that makes concrete the 
more symbolic mode of some of the other poems we’ve looked at:

If the hoar frost grip thy tent

Thou wilt give thanks when night is spent.

And so, this month’s Poster Poems challenge is to write your own ice-bound 
poems. Whether it be on land or at sea, symbolic or real, a source of danger or 
a place to play, it’s time to defrost your inspiration and share the results 
here.
 