
Coming, as I do, from a long line of people who worked on and around canals, 
inland waterways have always held a fascination for me. My interest has been 
refreshed by readingThe Narrow Boat 
<http://www.ltcrolt.org.uk/books/narrow_boat.htm>, LTC Rolt’s classic tale of 
wandering the canals of England in the months before the second world war. The 
book did more than anything to save those very canals and popularise leisure 
boating on them.

Rolt’s book was an attempt to capture the dying world of the working canal 
boats and, by extension, an entire rural way of life that was passing away, 
buried under ever growing urban sprawl. He celebrated the pubs, villages and 
people found along the towpath, hidden corners of a gentler world. It’s a 
vision that finds an echo inIan McMillan’s Canal Life 
<http://poetrysociety.org.uk/poems/canal-life>, where narrowboats are “tied up 
in the places the map never showed us”.

These very attractions are seen as things to be resisted by Roy Fisher in his 
poemProvision <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/245052>. Driving through a 
towpath village, Fisher is lured by the comforts of canal, church, cottage and 
even a small haulage company, remnant of the waterway’s busier past. However, a 
city dweller at heart, he finds that they “won’t do”, a firm rejection of the 
canal’s quiet beckoning.

As a Brummie, Fisher would be familiar with the urban canals of his native 
city, which might go some way towards explaining his immunity to the charms of 
their rural counterparts. Perhaps the most notable appearance of city waterways 
in poetry occurs in the first section of TS Eliot’sThe Waste Land 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/176735>, where the blasted landscape of 
the Grail legend is transported to the rather less chivalrous world of London 
canalside, on “a winter evening round behind the gashouse”. It is a 
characteristically Eliotic image of a fallen civilisation.

Eliot’s contemporary Siegfried Sassoon had more reason than most to take a dim 
view of civilisation and all its works, given his combat experiences, but in a 
poem calledMiracles <http://www.bartleby.com/137/13.html> he turns the humble 
canal into a bearer of hope, a hope of freedom and peace in the wake of the 
first world war. Unlike Eliot’s “dull” vision, Sassoon’s canal bursts into a 
riot of colourful life.

In the real world, canal water’s defining quality is not so much colour as 
stillness, which makes it a prime surface for reflecting the night sky. This 
Zen-like quality is captured concisely inCarl Sandburg’s Moonset 
<http://www.bartleby.com/134/84.html>. The idea of the canal as a place of 
meditative illumination is explored more fully in Patrick Kavanagh’s great 
sonnet,Lines Written on a Seat on the Grand Canal, Dublin 
<https://www.tcd.ie/English/patrickkavanagh/lineswrittenonaseat.html>. For 
Kavanagh, a countryman in the city and so a kind of reverse Fisher, it’s a 
reminder that at their best, canals are a little bit of the rural world 
infiltrating the urban desert.

In recent years, poetry and canals have moved even closer, with the 
appointment in 2013 of Jo Bell asCanal Laureate 
<http://poetrysociety.org.uk/projects/canal-laureate/>. This is a joint 
initiative between the Canal and River Trust and Arts Council England, designed 
to bring people and the arts to the canals of England.Bell’s canal poems 
<http://www.waterlines.org.uk/poems> form an affectionate yet unsentimental 
chronicle of 21st-century life in, on and around the waterways that are in the 
care of the trust.

So this month’s challenge is for us to add to the poetry of the inland 
waterways. Maybe canals evoke images of lazy days drifting along at a pace that 
allows you to takes in the scenery as it slowly passes. It might be that you’re 
more interested in waterways as working modes of transport, forerunners of the 
railway and the motorway. You may even know them as hidden corners of the urban 
landscape. Whatever your canal experiences may be, now is your chance to open 
the lock gates of inspiration and let your poems flow through.

 * This article was amended on 9 November 2015. An earlier version suggested 
that Ian McMillan’s Canal Life featured “longboats 
<http://collections.rmg.co.uk/collections/objects/111900.html>” – the “largest 
boat carried aboard a commercial vessel”,according to Collins 
<http://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/longboat> – instead of 
narrowboats built for cruising canals.
 