
The writer Robert MacFarlane has carved a trail in the minds of the 
book-reading public in recent years, with his booksThe Old Ways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/02/old-ways-robert-macfarlane-review>
 andHolloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/19/holloway-robert-macfarlane-dan-richards-review>
. Among other things, MacFarlane talks a good deal about writers who have 
shared his fascination with old walkways. Certainly, pathways, both real and 
metaphorical, have played a significant part in the outputs of many poets, past 
and present.

One of MacFarlane’s great literary heroes is the poet Edward Thomas. A 
Londoner by birth but a countryman by inclination, Thomas was an inveterate 
walker and lanes and footpaths were his way into a happier world. Living and 
writing on the brink of the modern world, the world of cities and global war, 
Thomas immersed himself in the rural England he must have known was dying. His 
poemThe Lane <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/248182> captures this 
knowledge and his reaction to it tersely.

John Clare, an actual countryman who worked the land at a time when there were 
still a fair number of people working alongside him, also took great pleasure 
in the old tracks. In Clare’s days, these tracks were important lines of 
communication and a passenger was just a passer-by. InTheres, something rich & 
joyful to the mind 
<http://johnclare.blogspot.co.uk/2009/06/footpaths-final-from-footpaths.html>, 
Clare links the path to Sunday leisure, when the workers who live along its 
path escape the “week’s prison” engage in pastimes they enjoy for their own 
sake.

If Clare’s path is peopled by the quick, those that Thomas Hardy wrote about in
The Excursion <http://genius.com/Thomas-hardy-old-excursions-annotated> were 
followed by the ghost of a dead beloved. The speaker initially wants to avoid 
walking the Ridgeway so as to avoid encountering this ghost, but he comes to 
realise that following the path is the only way that he can reconnect with his, 
and their, past.

Many of the great old paths, from the approaches to Stonehenge to the Camino 
De Santiago, were, and are, approaches to places of pilgrimage. These trails 
have always taken on a particular significance for those who follow them; they 
are rites of passage, a journey to a kind of rebirth.

In The Passionate Man’s Pilgrimage 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174206>, Walter Ralegh uses the idea of 
pilgrimage to symbolise the path to true salvation, as he understood it. In his 
life, Ralegh was more acquainted with sea lanes than pilgrim ways, but on the 
point of his expected execution, the latter must have seemed more fitting for 
his thoughts.

Hugh MacDiarmid’s Island Funeral 
<http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/3848266?sid=21106289885463&uid=4&uid=2129&uid=70&uid=3738032&uid=2>
 is concerned with a different kind of pathway. The winding, stone-walled path 
on a Scottish island whose winding course turns the mourners back on themselves 
as they follow the coffin to the graveyard is a powerful image, calling to mind 
the closed, mutually dependent life of an island community and the harsh 
conditions they live in.

Gary Snyder is one of the great trail poets of the last half century and more. 
His first book was called Riprap, the name given to the stones used to make 
paths in the mountains where he worked as a fire lookout. Thetitle poem of the 
collection <http://www.phys.unm.edu/~tw/fas/yits/archive/snyder_riprap.html> 
serves to remind us that paths are made things, not natural phenomena, and to 
connect human activity, such as making poems or paths, to the poet’s preferred 
geological timescale.

The Irish poet John Montague uses the same word in the surprising context of a 
poem about a garden from his Ulster childhood 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/29521>. The poem is a 
salutaary reminder that not all paths are public highways in the great world; 
these paths serve the small world of a family’s private existence, in which a 
child can effect an escape from the everyday and discover a world of ordinary 
magic.

Another Irish poet, Patrick Kavanagh, was a kind of Edward Thomas in reverse, 
a born countryman trapped in a city where he had fled to escape the hardship of 
farm life in 1930s Ireland. In the 1950s, Kavanagh suffered from cancer and was 
operated on to have a lung removed. The first poem he wrote after the operation 
wasCanal Bank Walk 
<http://vinhanley.com/2014/12/02/canal-bank-walk-by-patrick-kavanagh/>, in 
which the path by the Grand Canal in Dublin became a way back into the joys of 
the natural world, back to his roots. It’s a suitably joyous ending to this 
survey of the poetry of pathways.

And so this month’s challenge is to write path poems of your own. Pilgrimage 
or garden path, country land or city canal bank: the choice is yours. Why not 
share your own experiences of the old, or new, straight or crooked track?

 