
The most visible result of the high winds we celebrated in last month's 
challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/feb/07/poster-poems-wind-storms-atlantic-billy-mills>
 is the large number of uprooted, knocked down, and generally damaged trees 
lying around the place. We even lost Ireland's contender for European Tree of 
the Year, a200-year-old giant grey poplar that stood in the grounds of Birr 
Castle, County Offaly 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/environment/european-tree-of-the-year-contender-blows-over-in-storms-1.1692428>
. There's something about the sight of a prematurely-fallen tree that tugs on 
the heartstrings, perhaps because we've lived in such close interdependency 
with forests and orchards for so long. It's a sense of loss that drives 
Charlotte Mew's poemThe Trees are Down 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/learning/guide/182600#poem>.

Trees have been putting down roots in poetry for centuries â€“ the great world 
tree Yggdrasil is planted right at the heart of theIcelandic Poetic Edda 
<http://asatruringfrankfurt.de/en/poeticedda_bellows/04_grimmnismol.html>. This 
ash is the conduit between the nine worlds of Norse mythology, standing at the 
core of the old Scandinavian cosmology. As befits a tree, it is the source of 
life's vitality, feeding a host of animals without any apparent diminution of 
its own powers. The Scandinavian reverence for the forest may also be 
responsible for giving us the Christmas tree. Be that as it may, the Yuletide 
fir has a magic all its own, far removed from the dark world of Odin and Thor.
EE Cummings' poem beginning "little tree" 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/176724> captures the sense of childhood 
wonder before the tree better than any other poem I know.

In Ireland, trees are often treated with a special reverence, thanks to folk 
traditions that associate them with the world of the fairies, a diminished 
version of the old, pagan Gods. These beliefs are frequently conflated with 
later Christian practices, so that the country is dotted with fairy or holy 
trees that nobody would consider felling for fear of possible supernatural 
consequences. In her poemThe Fairy Tree 
<http://ellipticalmovements.wordpress.com/2013/10/20/temple-lane-irish-woman-poet>
, Temple Lane captures the essence of these folk traditions. A setting of the 
poem was one of the most popular songs in Irish tenor John McCormack's 
repertoire.

The turning of a human into a tree at the behest of some irate god or other is 
a common theme in classical mythology, with the story of howDaphne became a 
laurel <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollo_and_Daphne> being the most 
well-known example. Australian poet Richard James Allen adds an original twist 
to the tale in a poem called, quite simply,Tree 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/allen-richard-james/tree-0162013>.

In Renaissance England, the greenwood was a somewhat more benign environment, 
a sylvan utopia where life was good and peace reigned supreme. It's a recurring 
theme in Elizabethan poetry, but few captured it more succinctly than 
Shakespeare in As You Like it, a play set in the Forest of Arden and especially 
in the songUnder the Greenwood Tree <http://www.bartleby.com/101/135.html>.

Well, our trees have certainly suffered enough "winter and rough weather" this 
year, but spring is here, more or less, and the first buds are showing on the 
branches of the survivors.As William Carlos Williams puts it 
<http://www.poets.org/viewmedia.php/prmMID/15536>, "the profound change/has 
come upon them". Trees are nothing if not resilient creatures and it takes more 
than a bit of a breeze to knock them off their stride.

Of all the poets who have written about trees, few lived with them as much as 
inveterate walker, climber and woodsman Kenneth Rexroth. Rexroth doesn't write 
about the forest so much as enter into specific individual trees and his oaks, 
plums, fir and redwoods are not just the furniture of hisToward an Organic 
Philosophy <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/171533>; they are the joists 
and beams that hold the edifice together and give it its unity.

And so, this month's challenge is to compose poems in honour of trees: 
mythical or real; magical or ordinary; forest, jungle or garden, it's all the 
same. Please share your arboreal odes here.
 