
Rereading Shakespeare's The Tempest recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/apr/02/april-reading-group-shakespeare-the-tempest>
, I was struck again by the importance of the play's island setting, the 
epitome of those magical, liminal spaces where the normal rules of society can 
be suspended, for good or ill. In the play the outcome of this suspension is 
primarily beneficial; Prospero is restored to his Dukedom and Miranda and 
Ferdinand, through their happy love, reunite the divided factions of Naples. 
Once this resolution is achieved, the players can abandon their island 
sanctuary and return to what passes for the real world.

All except one, that is. The hapless Caliban is left to reign as king over an 
empty isle, his ill-treatment as servant rewarded by a hollow crown. He has, at 
least, the consolation of featuring in another major poem,Robert Browning's 
Caliban upon Setebos <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173004#poem>. In 
Browning's poem, the monster turns theologian and the island becomes creation 
in miniature. The poem is a meditation on the place of God in a Darwinian 
world, a dangerous subject for a respectable Victorian gentleman to tackle so 
soon after the publication of On the Origin of Species, perhaps made a little 
less so by projecting it onto an island microcosm.

If Shakespeare's island is a society in miniature, The Lake Isle of Innisfree 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/172053> is the antithesis of the social. 
In what became his major anthology piece, Yeats dreams of a place where he 
could escape from all the pressures and requirements of life among his fellow 
humans in a society of one. Inevitably, it's an island that he conjures up.

Yeats's solitary dream-island was a sanctuary, but the volcanic peak of Saint 
Helena, rising out of the South Atlantic, was to be a tiresome and fatal prison 
for its most famous resident, Napoleon Bonaparte, who spent the last six years 
of his life there, stripped of all power and in declining health. His situation 
is captured with dramatic verve inEdwin Arlington Robinson's An Island 
<http://www.bartleby.com/233/503.html>.

Probably the most famous fictional island dweller in English is Robinson 
Crusoe, another who builds society in miniature on his desert isle, a solitary 
society until the arrival of Friday. InCrusoe in England 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/177903>, Elizabeth Bishop imagines him in 
old age, both hating and missing his lost island home, and none too keen on the 
larger island he has returned to.

These poets constructed their islands from pure imagination, but the Scottish 
poet Hugh MacDiarmid knew the islands he wrote about at first hand. This 
intimate relationship with their harsh stone landscape and hardy inhabitants 
informs a number of his poems. MacDiarmid's feelings about island life are 
neatly summarised in the Scots Gaelic proverb he translates in his poem Island 
Funeral as "every force evolves a form"; his island is the formal expression of 
the twin forces of geology and human endeavour.

The west coast of Ireland is as rich in islands as its Scottish equivalent, 
and one poet, Richard Murphy, has celebrated them more than any other. In fact, 
he even bought one, High Island, off the coast of Connemara. Murphy's island 
had been abandoned by its human residents and Murphy bought it both to preserve 
it and as a place to write. A number of poems resulted from his purchase, 
including one of his finest lyrics,Seals at High Island 
<http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/seals-high-island>, in which the 
identification of the human observer with the non-human observed world of the 
island is made possible by the geography of isolation.

It's a long way from the west of Ireland to Western Australia, and the popular 
and highly unusual holiday resort ofRottnest Island 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/llewellyn-kate/rottnest-island-0225041>, 
a carefully managed, publicly-owned holiday destination near Freemantle. In 
Kate Llewellyn's poem of that name it lies out on the horizon, "barely 
visible", yet it comes between the speaker and her companion, and their safety 
depends on not trying to go out to it. It's an interesting variation on the 
theme; this island is neither imagined nor inhabited, but looms in the 
distance, somewhere between "a threat/or a promise".

And so this month's challenge is to write poems about islands, real or 
imagined, known or unknown, a microcosm of the great world outside or just a 
lump of rock in the sea: the choice is yours. Let's see an archipelago of verse 
rise from the Poster poems sea.
 