
Even now, with the days growing slowly longer, darkness dominates these winter 
months, especially for those of us who live inrelatively rural areas 
<http://www.skyandtelescope.com/astronomy-resources/light-pollution-and-astronomy-the-bortle-dark-sky-scale>
. But for many urban dwellers, true darkness is an almost forgotten condition, 
usually only experienced as a consequence of war, power failures or the 
deliberate seeking out of lightless indoor spaces. Our fear of the dark has led 
us to try and banish it, with the consequence that we have also managed to 
drive out the beauty of a starlit night from many people’s experience.

It is easy to forget how recent a phenomenon this technological elimination of 
the dark is. In Thomas Gray’sElegy Written in a Country Churchyard 
<http://www.thomasgray.org/cgi-bin/display.cgi?text=elcc>, when the weary 
ploughman left the world to darkness and to the poet, it was a darkness the 
depth and quality of which most of us now can barely imagine. And in the dark, 
the poet’s mind was free to meditate on fame and mortality undistracted, and 
enter into a sympathetic understanding of the perpetual darkness that was the 
lot of his fellow denizens of the graveyard.

Like Gray’s elegy, TS Eliot’s East Coker 
<http://oedipa.tripod.com/eliot-2.html> is also a meditation on mortality, and 
the great third section of the poem assembles a cast of Londoners straight out 
of The Waste Land, who find themselves forced by war to enter the darkness of 
unlit underground stations to escape the nightly air raids. The poem draws on 
Eliot’s personal experiences as an air raid warden as well as a phrase from 
Milton’s Samson Agonistes to create an image of death-in-life: “Nobody’s 
funeral, for there is no one to bury.” Here, darkness is a kind of 
renunciation, but renunciation as a prelude to salvation.

In her poem Out of Winter 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/dobson-rosemary/out-of-winter-0192065>, 
Rosemary Dobson also looks for solace in darkness; the solace of things pared 
back, as winter strips the earth to its essentials. Like Eliot, Dobson is 
inspired to patience by the dark. Similarly, for Les Murray,The Dark 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/murray-les/the-dark-0617040> is an 
interior condition, a doorway to the inner life. The sense in his poem of the 
spiritual weight of the dark is virtually the opposite to that which informs 
Gerard Manley Hopkins’s sonnetI Wake and Feel the Fell of Dark, Not Day 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173661>. For Hopkins, the dark to which 
he wakes is symbolic of his alienation from and sense of abandonment by his god.

This use in poetry of the dark as a threshold to the inner life derives, in 
large part, from the opening lines ofDante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dantealighieri>’s Inferno in which the 
narrator’s awareness of being lost in the “selva oscura” (the dark forest) is a 
necessary precondition for finding his way back to the “diritta via” (the 
straight road). Caroline Bergvall’sVIA 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/245738> is a collage of 48 versions of 
Dante’s tercet which takes on something of the nature of a fugue on the theme 
of being lost in the dark.

Byron’s Darkness <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173081> was occasioned 
by the 1816 “year without a summer” caused by the eruption of Mount Tambora in 
1815. Many people interpreted it as the end of the world, and the resulting 
sense of apocalypse was used by Byron to express a pessimism about nature that 
stands in stark contrast to the pantheism that characterises much Romantic 
poetry. In this poem, nature is darkness, and darkness is unremittingly bad.

Emily Dickinson’s We Grow Accustomed to the Dark 
<http://poetry-fromthehart.blogspot.ie/2014/04/we-grow-accustomed-to-dark-emily.html>
, on the other hand, avoids any moral weighting of light and darkness; the 
latter stands for the unknown, which can either be good or bad, and the poem 
celebrates our human ability to adjust to uncertainty, despite the bumps and 
bruises along the way.

This month’s challenge, then, is to write a poem or poems about darkness. You 
may be inspired to meditate on it, struck by fear of it, or moved by the beauty 
of it: one way or another, the crucial thing is to get your feelings down in 
words.
 