
When you hear the word “soil”, you tend to think of growth, organic life, 
fertility. “Clay” is another matter entirely. It’s dead, sticky and wet, it 
sucks you down, nothing grows in it, it’s useful only to the potter. While this 
may be a little unfair to the stuff, I suspect that this is how most of us view 
it.

But there is another side to clay. In the Bible creation story, as in many 
other similar myths, God made the first man from clay, and this association of 
clay and flesh endures in modern literature.

In Patrick Kavanagh’s long poem The Great Hunger 
<http://allpoetry.com/The-Great-Hunger>, clay takes on the character of a 
malevolent deity from the opening line: “Clay is the word and clay is the 
flesh.” The echo of the Gospel of St John reflects the idea that the heavy 
Monaghan earth from which Maguire, the protagonist of the poem, wrestles a 
living is both his god and the locus of his slow, frustrated death-in-life. The 
end of the poem is an “apocalypse of clay”; a vision of abandoned hopelessness, 
with Maguire a lustless, lifeless clay figure of a man.

For Frederick Manning, writing from the front 
<http://www.bartleby.com/266/93.html> during the first world war, the trenches 
were “Endless lanes sunken in the clay”, ironically vivid with wild flowers, 
but also somewhat like arteries and veins running through the clay of the 
soldiers’ bodies. And in the background, the choice of clay rather than earth 
or mud reminds the reader that these trenches would end up serving as graves 
for many of these same bodies.

A world war later, the child Roy Fisher 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/245046> sees the bombed garden where his 
aunt, his two cousins and their neighbour died as “a pod filled with clay”, 
with the centre of the crater a “smooth clay saucer”. The twin meanings of the 
word, literal and metaphorical, fold into one another in images of quiet power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fposter-poems-clay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb84a646a417b042f13f4148e0c764f9f4276617e%2F0_665_7216_4330%2F7216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poster%20poems%3A%20clay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fposter-poems-clay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poster%20poems%3A%20clay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fposter-poems-clay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb84a646a417b042f13f4148e0c764f9f4276617e%2F0_665_7216_4330%2F7216.jpg>
 Two Cows by Stephanie Quayle (2013). Clay, chicken wire, steel. Photograph: 
Stephanie Quayle/Saatchi Gallery 
This association of clay and death is as old as poetry. In Sonnet LXXII 
<http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.03.0064%3Asonnet%3DLXXI>
, Shakespeare uses the rhyme with “decay” to emphasise the finality of the 
separation of lovers that happens when one of them dies. In his poemNigg 
<http://www.scottishpoetrylibrary.org.uk/poetry/poems/nigg>, the Scottish poet 
Ken Morrice reminds us that clay is part of a geological reality that is far 
older than poetry, and links red sandstone, red clay and the blood of the dead 
who lie buried in it in a single process of natural indifference.

Of course, for many poets the reality of clay is as interesting as its 
symbolic meanings.Carl Sandburg <http://www.bartleby.com/165/18.html>, 
characteristically, saw it as a source of work – hard, back-breaking, 
boot-sucking labour, to be pitied or envied depending on the onlooker.

Of all the poets who have written about clay, the one who was most fully 
immersed in it was Jack Clemo, whose centenary falls later this year. Clemo 
lived and died in the clay country of Cornwall, an area that supplied the 
potteries of Britain with much of their raw material, and his poetry is 
saturated with the stuff. Clemo was deaf and blind for most of his writing 
life, which might help explain the attraction of this tactile material to him 
as a poet. Also, his deeply held religious beliefs and his ecological views 
infused his view of clay as more than mere matter.

In poems such as The Clay Pit Worker 
<http://www.sense-of-place.co.uk/Rescorla/clemo.htm>, Clemo celebrated nature’s 
power of survival, the resilience of life which means that even the most 
unpromisingly clayey bit of waste ground is ultimately reclaimed by the green 
world. You don’t have to share the specifically religious aspect of his vision 
to share his delight in this regeneration.

And so this month, we turn our poetic attention to clay in all its malleable 
forms. You may think of clay as the word, the flesh or the pits, or any 
combination of these things. It’s time to dig into your inspiration pit and 
shape the material you find there into a well-wrought urn in verse.
 