
Living on the ocean-facing side of an island in the North Atlantic, you can’t 
but be aware of the ever-changing skyscape. The clouds tend to dominate much of 
the day’s activity and mood, and even their names are evocative, mysterious and 
a touch poetic. Stratus, cumulus, cirrus: they’re like names of characters in 
some lost Greek drama.

Probably the best-known cloud in English poetry is Wordsworth’s lonely wanderer
 <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174790>. In a typical example of 
Wordsworthian anthropocentricism, the cloud is not really a cloud at all – it 
exists as a stand-in for the poet, who imposes his own supposed loneliness on 
it. I say supposed because,as Dorothy Wordsworth’s diary makes clear 
<http://www.rc.umd.edu/sites/default/RCOldSite/www/rchs/reader/dwdaff.html>, 
Wordsworth wasn’t actually alone when he saw the famous daffodils. But perhaps 
he felt lonely in her company.

By contrast, the cloud in WS Graham’s Enter a Cloud 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/243040> is what it is, one of “the real 
ones/ Who have made this possible”, like the landscape it passes over. Which is 
not to say that the poet’s inner life is not expressed in the poem – it clearly 
is – but the cloud works not just as a simile, but as an image of the world in 
which that inner life takes place.

Shelley’s Cloud <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/174384> lies somewhere 
between these two, being also real, if somewhat personified. Supplier of shade 
and of rain in all its forms, this cloud is also a companion to the sun, adding 
to its glory at sunrise and sunset while protecting the earth from its more 
burning rays. It also accompanies the moon on her nightly rounds like a carpet 
beneath her feet. And while the cloud may seem to expend itself in storm and 
rain, it rises like a phoenix from its own moisture, immortal and ever-present. 
The tone is more playful than is often the case in Shelley, and the poem is 
none the worse for it.

If Shelley is good-natured, then Thomas Heywood’s Pack, Cloud, Away 
<http://www.bartleby.com/40/180.html> is positively joyous. In this 
characteristically lively early-17th-century love song, the clouds are 
associated with night, a time of sorrow, and their passing with morning and the 
return of the poet’s beloved. For Heywood, the best thing about clouds is their 
departing.Susanna Blamire 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/written-on-a-gloomy-day-in-sickness/> also 
identifies the clouds with sorrow and gloom, but this matches her despondent 
mood of despondency, so the cloud, a “gloomy lowering of the sky”, is a welcome 
visitor.

Where for Shelley the clouds enhanced the sun, Yeats portrays them as 
hangers-on <http://www.bartleby.com/147/49.html>, the weak dragging down the 
powerful to their level of dullness until “all things at one common level lie”. 
It’s typical of the man that he came to use clouds to illustrate his 
aristocratic political views.

Yeats’ friend Ezra Pound shared many of his political opinions, but the spirit 
of his adaptation from the Chinese,To-em-mei’s The Unmoving Cloud 
<http://www.infoplease.com/t/lit/cathay/unmoving-cloud.html#ixzz3HFli2sOj>, is 
radically different to that of the older man’s poem. Pound’s clouds are purely 
themselves. They and their attendant rain create a sense of unchanging monotony 
that highlights the speaker’s isolation in exile, weather not so much a 
personification of the poet’s feelings as the context in which those feelings 
reach the pitch of poetry.

It’s clear that clouds are as marvellously changeable in poetry as they are in 
the skies above. But of all these various forms,Peter Porter’s Essay on Clouds 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/porter-peter/essay-on-clouds-0288054> is 
perhaps the most comprehensive. Porter sees clouds in the round, as it were, 
and admires the subtlety of their shape-shifting artistry:
 The sun enjoys short sentences 
but clouds prefer 
a shifting Jamesian syntax. 
For this month’s challenge, I invite you to post your poems on the subject of 
clouds. Whatever kind of cloud is floating over you, share your experiments in 
poetic nephology here. You only have to look up for inspiration, especially at 
this time of year.
 