
If William Carlos Williams’s “a poem is a small (or large) machine made out of 
words <http://writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/88/wcw-machine.html>” is right, and I 
see no reason to demur, then written poems are built on a foundation of the 
alphabet, the visual units from which words are made. Sometimes, poets have 
been so intrigued by the alphabet that they have made it the foreground of 
their poems, rather than leaving the letters hidden in plain sight. There’s 
even a poetic form,the abecedarian 
<http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/text/poetic-form-abecedarian>, that is based on 
alphabetical order and dates back to Biblical times. In these poems, the first 
stanza begins with the first letter of the alphabet and each succeeding stanza 
begins with the next letter until the full set is completed.

Edward Lear used the abecedarian form on numerous occasion. He employed it to 
characteristic effect in his wonderfully wryA Nonsense Alphabet 
<http://www.bencourtney.com/org/lear>. Lear’s range of references for the 
letters runs from the predictable (B for book), to the odd (U for urn) to the 
downright zany (S for sugar tongs). There’s also a reminder of a lost world of 
erudition in his choice of the Persian king Xerxes for the letter X, on the 
assumption that his readers would not find it out of place among the other 25 
more everyday nouns in his set.

Equally characteristic is Hilaire Belloc’s bending of the form to suit his 
style of humorous sermonising, in hisA Moral Alphabet 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/files/40134/40134-h/40134-h.htm>. This is a set of 
poems in the mode of the better-knownCautionary Tales for Children 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/files/27424/27424-h/27424-h.htm> with morals appended 
to each alphabetical poem that are both witty and pointed. My own particular 
favourite is short enough to quote in full:

E stands for egg.

MORAL:
The Moral of this verse
Is applicable to the Young. Be terse.


Spike Milligan’s The ABC <http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/the-abc/> is a 
much-attenuated variant on the basic form, but it’s a clever and inevitably 
funny run through the alphabet, treating the letters as characters in a story 
whose ending depends on using the British pronunciation of the 26th letter.

Jan Owen’s Alphabet 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/owen-jan/alphabet-0284044> puts a 
somewhat different slant on things, using a handful of Greek letters as 
starting points for short poems that riff on their shapes. Her approach is also 
rather more serious than Milligan’s, despite the light surface of the writing.

The saying “with 26 soldiers of lead I shall conquer the world” is often 
erroneously attributed to Benjamin Franklin. Whatever its provenance, for 
Owen’s fellow Australian Rosemary Dobson it serves as the starting point fora 
poem  
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/dobson-rosemary/the-alphabet-0367045>
that is a reflection on the power of writing itself 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/dobson-rosemary/the-alphabet-0367045>, 
which, with wit as its only weapon, sets out to conquer new worlds daily. Peter 
Porter’sSleeping with the Alphabet 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/porter-peter/sleeping-with-the-alphabet-0322011>
 covers very similar ground, except that he invites the letters to join him in 
his nightly dream adventure, a search for inspiration in which they serve as 
equal partners.

As this very small, selective list should make apparent, poets have often 
shown a close interest in the alphabet as both a way of organising poems and as 
a subject to write about. No one else, however, has got close to the American
Ron Silliman <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/ron-silliman> who spent the 
quarter-century from 1979 to 2004 working on a single poem, The Alphabet. 
Clocking in at just over 1,000 pages, this remarkable abecedarian is a 
meditation on language, the self and the world – and a working out of the 1970s 
idea that the personal is political and the political personal. The Y section, 
calledYou <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/243980> consists of 52 parts, 
each made up of seven paragraphs, written a paragraph a day over an entire year.

It’s a long way from Lear to Silliman, but what links these two and all the 
other poets I’ve mentioned is a kind of insistent awareness of the fundamental 
importance of the alphabet for any writer and for any written culture. This 
month’s Poster poems challenge is for you to add your contribution to this 
fascinating body of work. As the old children’s rhyme almost says, “now we know 
our ABC, won’t you share your song with me?”
 