
After grinding grain since 1897, Sydney’s Crago Flour Mill finally cranked to 
a halt in the mid 80s. Over the years, this handsome industrial Newtown site 
became rundown, a dusty labyrinth of rooms sprawled over four buildings.

Given the job in 2008 of transforming the mill into 47 strata studios, 
architects Allen Jack+Cottier (AJ+C) made a strategic decision. By refusing to 
tear down the structure, they saved an estimated 21,000 tonnes of CO2. 
Preserving embodied energy (the energy consumed by the entire building process) 
was key, along with avoiding the physical energy needed to destroy a large 
structure.

Machine smarts: how will pedestrians negotiate with driverless cars?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/09/machine-smarts-how-will-pedestrians-negotiate-with-driverless-cars>
“The most sustainable thing we can do is to not build new stuff,” insists AJ+C 
architect Peter Ireland. “I often say to a client, everything is an asset until 
we prove it otherwise. A lot of demolition doesn’t make sense.”

Across Australia, historical buildings are being adapted for reuse. While 
preserving heritage is key, construction methods have changed dramatically 
while energy efficiency is often paramount, so architects are looking at ways 
to make these buildings more sustainable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fpreserving-historical-buildings-the-most-sustainable-thing-is-not-to-build-new-stuff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd30d8902feda0b033bc119a70c94296adbe79aec%2F0_0_2766_3188%2F2766.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preserving%20historical%20buildings%3A%20the%20most%20sustainable%20thing%20is%20not%20to%20build%20new%20stuff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fpreserving-historical-buildings-the-most-sustainable-thing-is-not-to-build-new-stuff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preserving%20historical%20buildings%3A%20the%20most%20sustainable%20thing%20is%20not%20to%20build%20new%20stuff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fpreserving-historical-buildings-the-most-sustainable-thing-is-not-to-build-new-stuff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd30d8902feda0b033bc119a70c94296adbe79aec%2F0_0_2766_3188%2F2766.jpg>
 Sydney’s Crago Flour Mill was converted into 47 strata studios. Photograph: 
Architects AJ+C 
In the newly dubbed Flourmill Studios, it was important to preserve the mill’s 
industrial core and character, such as the original shafts, wheels and belts 
while making the buildings more comfortable and energy-efficient. Internal 
layers were removed to allow natural light into the dim insides; an insulated 
sandwich roof system (in which a metal outer panel is glued to an inner core of 
foam) was added to the historic roof, reducing heat transfer and adding 
insulation; carpets created from recycled PET plastic bottles were laid down; 
and solar panels were installed for heating water and rainwater is collected 
for landscaping.

The Green Building Council of Australia (GBCA) encourages the reuse and 
retrofitting of existing buildings. “Around 80,000 buildings in Australia have 
fallen through the ‘green gap’ and are missing out on retrofit opportunities 
that would improve their energy productivity, resilience and sustainability,” 
says chief executive Romilly Madew. To correct this, the GBCA is developing a 
building retrofit toolkit and is working with governments to get more support 
for funding and incentives to encourage upgrades and retrofits.

Last year Tonsley, a 1950s Adelaide automobile factory turned technology and 
innovation centre, was awarded a six star Green Star rating. It’s Australia’s 
first mixed-use urban redevelopment to achieve the highest available rating. 
Madew points to “world leadership” design, such as internal forests in the 
expansive former Mitsubishi main assembly building which “provide beautiful 
natural spaces for members of the community to enjoy, while at the same time 
capturing carbon and purifying the air”. Its roof also supports an extensive 
photovoltaic array, or complete power-generating unit.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fpreserving-historical-buildings-the-most-sustainable-thing-is-not-to-build-new-stuff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c63854e2438f5fc4e2bb15c8d8f6ceb618e1955%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preserving%20historical%20buildings%3A%20the%20most%20sustainable%20thing%20is%20not%20to%20build%20new%20stuff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fpreserving-historical-buildings-the-most-sustainable-thing-is-not-to-build-new-stuff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preserving%20historical%20buildings%3A%20the%20most%20sustainable%20thing%20is%20not%20to%20build%20new%20stuff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fpreserving-historical-buildings-the-most-sustainable-thing-is-not-to-build-new-stuff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c63854e2438f5fc4e2bb15c8d8f6ceb618e1955%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The redeveloped hall at Tonsley with internal forests. Photograph: Renewal SA 
The main assembly building is central to the Tonsley site. Paul Stoller, 
director of the environmental design consultants Atelier Ten, Australia, who 
advised on Tonsley, says it acts as an “environmental buffer, shading in the 
summer and sheltering from cold winds in the winter”. It was decided to retain 
it, along with installing skylights to maximise light and solar panels on the 
roof to produce sustainable energy.

South Australian development body Renewal SA estimates that conserving the 
main assembly building prevented the loss of roughly 90,000 tonnes of carbon 
embodied in its construction – the equivalent of taking 25,000 cars off the 
road for one year.

What happens to Olympic venues after the closing ceremony?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/01/what-happens-to-olympic-venues-after-the-closing-ceremony>
Woods Bagot architect Gavin Kain, who was behind the Tonsley project, says the 
most difficult element was convincing tenants that the structure would perform 
sustainably. “It was hard for them to visualise as it was a new concept,” he 
says. “When tenants are signing up to a lease for 10 years, a degree of 
conservatism is in play.”

Kain convinced tenants to think about their workforce productivity, which 
dramatically increases in an environment where “wellness” is prioritised. 
“Productivity improvements are much more beneficial than small reductions in 
rent,” he insists. “So we showed them what young creatives were after [ie 
healthy places to work] and that if they wanted to succeed, they needed the 
best people.”

For all the latest technology, there are energy-efficiency lessons to be 
learned from historical buildings. For example, before the advent of 
airconditioning in the 1960s, structures made do with passive environmental 
control from cross-ventilation windows to shutters, awnings and masonry that 
helped keep out the sun. Similarly the high thermal mass of stone, as seen in 
Victorian buildings, retains warmth in winter and cold in summer.

“Old buildings, when properly renovated or restored, can use less energy than 
flash new buildings (even those badged as sustainable) that set up problems for 
themselves by over-glazing, or by creating deep floor plates requiring 
ventilation fans and lights on all day,” says Stoller.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fpreserving-historical-buildings-the-most-sustainable-thing-is-not-to-build-new-stuff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F420afa216a2f75c1fde44ba2b21d5564ebbfc7a2%2F0_0_3768_5706%2F3768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preserving%20historical%20buildings%3A%20the%20most%20sustainable%20thing%20is%20not%20to%20build%20new%20stuff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fpreserving-historical-buildings-the-most-sustainable-thing-is-not-to-build-new-stuff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preserving%20historical%20buildings%3A%20the%20most%20sustainable%20thing%20is%20not%20to%20build%20new%20stuff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fpreserving-historical-buildings-the-most-sustainable-thing-is-not-to-build-new-stuff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F420afa216a2f75c1fde44ba2b21d5564ebbfc7a2%2F0_0_3768_5706%2F3768.jpg>
 The restoration of 171 Collins Street in Melbourne received a six star Green 
Star rating. Photograph: Peter Clarke 
One of the challenges in historic buildings is light. Many require extra 
artificial lighting or skylights. That didn’t put off the restoration of the 
heritage-listed Mayfair building in Melbourne. Built in 1913, the Auditorium, 
as it was then known, was converted to a cinema in the 30s and a shopping mall 
in the 80s. In 2013 the facade was retained amid a $280m revamp that added 
office and retail space set in a newly built nine-storey internal glass atrium.

Now called 171 Collins Street, the atrium works like a kaleidoscope, providing 
ample natural light. Efficiency features for the six star Green Star-rated 
structure include floor to ceiling double glazing, a dedicated waste storage 
area for recycling, an advanced rainwater and grey water reuse system, LED and 
T5 fluorescent lighting, and fritted insulating glass to maximise solar 
insulation. A 315kW natural gas co-generation generator has also been set up to 
transform wasted heat into an energy source, as well as cutting carbon dioxide 
emissions by up to two-thirds.

Knight Frank’s senior facilities and engineering manager CJ Harshana 
Wijewardane says that the six-star rating was achieved through “methodically 
fine-tuning existing infrastructure” while installing new technologies.

Most important was the co-generation system, which operating in parallel with 
the grid supply is not only the base source of electricity for the office tower 
but also provides heating for the building and for hot water.

Despite all this, the Mayfair building retains a richness and decadence, says 
Kristen Whittle of Bates Smart architects. No matter what is going on inside 
the belly of the building, such rare “materiality, a sense of depth and 
texture” remains invaluable to our cities. Buildings of historic significance 
“have great bones”, agrees Stoller. “It’s our job to bring them up to a 21st 
century level.”
 