
Her name, according to the cheap cardboard label, is “Shu Yi baby”, but the 
large plastic doll in a lurid green outfit will not be welcomed into any UK 
households as a gift on Christmas Day.

After being impounded at Felixstowe by trading standards officials, the 
imported toy has been declared unsafe after undergoing tests and will be 
destroyed.

In a draughty warehouse on the edge ofthe UK’s busiest port – and commercial 
gateway for the Far East – officers are stepping up their fight against
dangerous goods that flood the Christmas gift market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/dec/07/christmas-shopping-counterfeit-toys>
. They are focusing on what they consider high risk products such as toys, 
electrical items, cosmetics and power tools.

Top toys for Christmas 2016 - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2016/nov/09/top-toys-christmas-2016-in-pictures>
“The doll came in a large consignment from the far east and probably cost a 
few cents, or pence,” declares Phil Reed, an import surveillance officer with 
theNational Trading Standards <http://www.nationaltradingstandards.uk/>, 
tugging at the doll’s clothing and soft moulded plastic feet. Tests on the 
dolls were carried out last month after the container that delivered them was 
impounded. Reed has now received the test results and they are alarming. They 
reveal that the toy’s feet contain harmful levels of chemicals that can cause 
long-term health problems. The use ofphthalates, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/17/parents-warned-over-counterfeit-christmas-toys-amid-cancer-fears>
 which can disrupt children’s hormones, is tightly restricted across Europe 
where toy manufacturers must restrict content to very low levels.

But the laboratory tests show that the levels in this toy – destined for 
pre-Christmas markets and car boot sales – breach regulations. In addition, the 
doll has a bogusCE  <https://www.gov.uk/guidance/ce-marking>mark that suggests 
– falsely – that she meets recognised EU safety standards. “This is purporting 
to be a stamp of approval and appears to be a deliberate attempt to mislead 
consumers,” says Reed.

Also tested from the same consignment were “plush” dolls, made from a furry 
synthetic fabric, where weak zips and easy access to battery compartments 
failed the safety assessment and were deemed to be dangerous choking hazards 
for young children.


Reed is surrounded by piles of bulging cardboard boxes on pallets in Shed 70 - 
a warehouse the size of a football pitch, where the selected contents of some 
containers coming into Felixstowe <https://www.portoffelixstowe.co.uk/> are 
inspected.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrading-standards-christmas-gifts-hoverboards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe37463600934934e48e8a735747e3bc3d8beb8fd%2F0_0_4028_2417%2F4028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Present%20danger%3A%20trading%20standards'%20battle%20against%20deadly%20Christmas%20gifts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrading-standards-christmas-gifts-hoverboards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Present%20danger%3A%20trading%20standards%27%20battle%20against%20deadly%20Christmas%20gifts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrading-standards-christmas-gifts-hoverboards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe37463600934934e48e8a735747e3bc3d8beb8fd%2F0_0_4028_2417%2F4028.jpg>
 The MSC Oscar has the biggest load-bearing capacity in the world, and can 
carry up to 19,224 containers. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
More than 40% of all imported goods coming into the UK do so via Felixstowe, 
where it typically takes three days to unload the up to 19,224 containers on 
the world’s biggest capacity cargo ship, the 395m MSC Oscar.

A staggering 4m full containers come through the port every year, and Reed – 
part of the NTS’s ports and borders team and working as part of Suffolk Trading 
Standards’ own team – is responsible for organising and carrying out regular 
inspections. “ It would be difficult for any agency to examine anything but a 
very small proportion of the containers arriving at the port each year,” says 
Reed. “Therefore we base our examinations on those which we consider to pose 
the greatest safety risk to consumers. Or we might be focusing our attention on 
those importers or traders who have a history of importing non-compliant and 
unsafe products.”

At one end of the warehouse are stacks of boxes – plastered with yellow 
warning labels – whose contents have already been impounded by trading 
standards. At the opposite end sit the contents of one container that has been 
emptied completely awaiting inspection. This container was singled out because 
the far east-based company that despatched the goods had no UK or EU base while 
a UK residential address had been used for VAT registration.

Reed opened some boxes and found electrical products that are proving popular 
in the run-up to the Christmas including hair straightening brushes, steam 
facial cleansers and portable chargers. He is constantly on the lookout for 
products withfaulty plugs and chargers that can overheat and cause fires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/16/uk-retailers-recall-hoverboards-consumer-protection-act>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrading-standards-christmas-gifts-hoverboards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2872a2b090e24690483fb05fc4bd55c75bf5d0b6%2F0_157_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Present%20danger%3A%20trading%20standards'%20battle%20against%20deadly%20Christmas%20gifts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrading-standards-christmas-gifts-hoverboards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Present%20danger%3A%20trading%20standards%27%20battle%20against%20deadly%20Christmas%20gifts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrading-standards-christmas-gifts-hoverboards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2872a2b090e24690483fb05fc4bd55c75bf5d0b6%2F0_157_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Damage caused at a house in Wyke, Bradford, when a charging hoverboard 
allegedly burst into flames. Photograph: West Yorkshire Fire and Rescue S/PA 
The volume of imported drones suggests that they will be popular as Christmas 
toys, Reed says, recalling a hectic period this time last year as officials 
seized thousands ofunsafe hoverboards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/03/hoverboards-explosion-risk-product-recalls-trading-standards?CMP=share_btn_tw>
.

“One particular trend we have spotted is the growth in “micro-importers” – 
consumers in the UK who order half or even a whole container of goods to import 
for onward sale,” adds Reed. “They have no idea what they are buying and are 
not interested in finding out. This can lead to fake, and often dangerous, 
products such as hoverboards ending up in people’s homes.”

Cosmetics are also increasingly a problem where they contain a higher 
proportion of restricted chemicals than is allowed by law. Ablack henna hair dye
 <http://www.hennapage.com/henna/warnings.html>popular with ethnic communities 
has in some cases been found to have more than 2% of the chemical PPD, which 
can cause burning of the scalp and skin.


In September the trading standards team intercepted four separate consignments 
of nail manicure lamps and nail decoration kits from China because they were 
unsafe. They were found to have hazards including lack of proper insulation and 
unsafe plugs and fuses.

Consumers were warned that some of these kits may have found their way onto 
shopping websites like Amazon and eBay. However, the consignment of Shu Yi baby 
dolls will not get underneath the Christmas tree.

Christmas alert

Electrical products about which trading standards officers are urging 
consumers to be vigilant

 * Children’s scooters

 * Electric scooters

 * Self-balancing scooters (hoverboards)

 * Hair straightening brushes ( similar to hair straighteners but in the form 
of a brush powered by electricity).

 * Steam facial cleansers

 * Power banks

 * Plastic dolls

 * Plush dolls

 * Cosmetics

Source: NTS
 