
In my 29 years of working for the prison service – now called the National 
Offender Management Service – I have seen many things, from truly stunning acts 
of compassion to extreme acts of violence. But the violence I have seen in the 
last four years is the worst I have witnessed.

I am a national officer for the Prison Governors’ Association 
<http://prison-governors-association.org.uk/>, the union that represents prison 
governors, and it is my duty to say that the prison service is in spiralling 
decline, brought about through savage staff cuts over the past four years, 
increased overcrowding, synthetic drugs, mobile phones and the imposition of 
doctrines about how we should manage.

The prison service has been cut to the bone and we struggle to keep control
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/aug/06/crisis-managing-violence-prison-service-cut-to-the-bone>
The impact has been stark: self-inflicted deaths have doubled 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/562897/safety-in-custody-bulletin.pdf>
, violence has increased, serious assaults on our staff are at theirhighest 
level for at least a decade 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/uk-world-news/assaults-prison-staff-highest-level-7262231>
 and we have seenriots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/21/riot-police-called-in-to-prison-near-doncaster-following-disturbance>
 andprisoners escaping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/07/two-prisoners-escape-from-londons-pentonville-prison>
.

Most governors do not have the same legal protection to speak their minds as I 
do and they are being squeezed from both sides. They are often blamed by 
officers for failures while being under intense pressure from the prison 
service to deliver with depleted resources, and their hands tied because of the 
imposition of central control.

I was told by one governor that he could not call in a pest controller to deal 
with a rat and cockroach infestation because he was not authorised to go 
outside the management contract. Another prison refused to accept any more 
prisoners from court because so many cell observation panels were broken, 
placing officers at risk of being assaulted when carrying out their checks.

I continue to carry out operational duties in prisons when required and I 
recently went back to a busy London prison to carry out a duty governor role 
after a nine-year gap working elsewhere. The changes I saw broke my heart. 
Staff are now having to manage a whole series of incidents, including fights, 
drug smuggling, extortion and what I can only describe as an institutional 
breakdown in basic discipline.

Staff are now having to manage an institutional breakdown in basic discipine

Of course incidents of this type happened before the cuts, but the volume of 
incidents is now so much higher. Prisoners are not being locked away when the 
alarm is raised. This is not always necessary but if there is a serious 
incident it allows staff to bring order and ensures that the security of the 
prison is not compromised. This used to happen as matter of course if prisoners 
were fighting, for example, and did not immediately stop when ordered to.

Now, there are so few staff available that all they can do is stop the fight 
and deal with the incident while other prisoners watch. What’s absent is the 
feeling of order and control.

The only redeeming feature of that weekend was seeing the astonishing bravery 
and commitment from the staff on duty – a camaraderie only seen from those 
working in extreme conditions and a professionalism that deserves admiration, 
respect and mention.

The collapse of the prison service has unfolded over four years. It was 
started by the then justice secretary, Chris Grayling, who stripped out 
millions of pounds, and was certainly not halted by his immediate successor, 
Michael Gove, whose ideas were well-intentioned but lacking operational 
credibility.

The new justice secretary, Liz Truss, on the other hand, is genuinely trying 
to halt this collapse. Since she has been in charge, she has obtained funding 
for additional staffing, and is looking for answers beyond that. Importantly, 
she is listening to governors and officers to find out what governors think we 
can do to stop the violence and make prisons safer.

We governors warned of the danger of more prison deaths, but no-one listened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/25/prison-governors-warned-prison-deaths-government>
 The squandering of experienced staff when they were induced to leave the 
service, coupled with lower numbers on the frontline, cannot be rectified 
overnight. It will be years before we get somewhere close to where we once were.
 Additional prison spaces are not available on demand, reducing the population 
appears to be unpalatable to this government, and the re-establishing of 
control, respect and appropriate prisoner-staff relations needs time.

The white paper on prison safety and reform is a good start but it will not be 
supported unconditionally if it is implemented poorly. Let’s hope the new 
justice secretary will be given the opportunity to make good on her commitments 
– anything less would be unrealistic and unfair.

This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contactkirstie.brewer@theguardian.com <mailto: kirstie.brewer@theguardian.com>

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 