
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> took a huge leap out of 
isolation on Saturday night when it was declared that the country had shrunk 
its nuclear programme sufficiently to benefit from the lifting of a decade’s 
worth of sanctions.

A dramatic day witnessed a surprise prisoner swap between Iran and America, a 
by-product of the years of nuclear diplomacy, that included the release of a
Washington Post journalist, Jason Rezaian, who had been held since 2014, and 
four other American nationals. Then there was a tense wait for the UN nuclear 
watchdog, the IAEA, to confirm that Iran had carried out all the steps it 
agreed to in a landmark deal with six major powers last July in Vienna.

“Relations between Iran and the IAEA now enter a new phase. It is an important 
day for the international community. I congratulate all those who helped make 
it a reality,” the agency’s director general, Yukiya Amano, said in a televised 
statement in the Austrian capital. The announcement was the formal signal 
required for sanctions to be lifted.

“Today marks the first day of a safer world,” US secretary of state John Kerry 
said. “We’ve seen that diplomacy works, armed conflict is not always the answer.

“The steps Iran has taken to fully implement the [agreement] have 
fundamentally altered the country’s nuclear programme. Today we are confident 
it would take Iran at least a year to break out of the agreement.

“Verification remains the backbone of this agreement. We welcome Iran has kept 
its word. We will continue to do the same.”

The EU foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini, and the Iranian foreign 
minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, said in a joint statement: “This achievement 
clearly demonstrates that with political will, perseverance, and through 
multilateral diplomacy, we can solve the most difficult issues and find 
practical solutions that are effectively implemented.”

The moment, called Implementation Day, marked a turning point in the nearly 14 
years since the existence of Iran’s uranium enrichment and heavy water 
programme was first revealed. During that time, the nuclear aspirations of the 
Islamic republic, and Israel’s avowed aim of stopping the programme by force if 
necessary, threatened to cause a major new war in the Middle East.

With Saturday night’s declaration, the EU oil embargo came to an end, banking 
restrictions were erased, and Iran will be readmitted to the Swift electronic 
banking system, critical for modern international trade transactions.

Furthermore, Iran will gain access to billions of dollars in frozen assets, 
and will be able to buy commercial airliners to upgrade its dated and 
increasingly unsafe fleet. Abbas Akhoni, Iran’s minister for roads and urban 
development, was quoted by Fars news agencyas saying that Iran had struck a 
deal with the European company Airbus for the purchase of 114 new aeroplanes.

To qualify for sanctions relief under the Vienna agreement, Iran had to slash 
its nuclear capacity, and it did so at a speed that surprised many observers.

Within a few months, it dismantled 14,000 centrifuges, two-thirds of its total 
capacity, and put them into storage under IAEA seal. It shipped out or diluted 
98% of its stockpile of low-enrichment uranium, which had been the main source 
of concern for the international community, as it could be relatively quickly 
turned into highly enriched, weapons grade, uranium. In the past few days, 
technicians have removed the core from its heavy water reactor in Arak – a 
potential source of plutonium and the second big proliferation worry – and 
filled it with concrete so it cannot be used again.

Tehran also cooperated with the IAEA so that the agency could complete its 
investigation into Iran’s suspected past work on nuclear weapons design.

The IAEA declared it closed in December, saying that the concerted weapons 
programme halted in 2003, and continued in a more sporadic basis for a few 
years after that.

Iran released Rezaian; three other Iranian-Americans it had detained, 
including a former marine, Amir Hekmati, a Christian pastor, Saeed Abedini, and 
a writer and researcher named Matthew Trevithick.


In return, the US released seven people, mostly dual nationals, who had been 
convicted of nuclear smuggling, and lifted extradition requests for others. 
“Through a diplomatic channel that was established with the focus of getting 
our detained US citizens home, we can confirm Iran has released from 
imprisonment four Americans detained in Iran,” a US official said.

“We offered clemency to seven Iranians, six of whom are dual US-Iranian 
citizens, who had been convicted or are pending trial in the United States. The 
United States also removed any Interpol red notices and dismissed any charges 
against 14 Iranians for whom it was assessed that extradition requests were 
unlikely to be successful.”

Rezaian was arrested at his home in Tehran in July 2014. His closed-door trial 
began in May this year when he appeared before a hardline judge on charges of 
espionage, collecting confidential information and spreading propaganda against 
the Islamic republic.

Trevithick is a journalist and student who had travelled and worked in 
conflict-torn nations including Syria, Mali and Afghanistan, pausing along the 
way to try to start a rowing team. He was in Tehran studying Dari when he was 
arrested and sent to Evin prison. The reasons for his imprisonment are not yet 
known, but he had worked at American universities in Afghanistan and Iraq and 
written for publications including the Atlantic, the Christian Science Monitor, 
the Wall Street Journal and the Daily Beast.

Throughout the negotiations over Iran’s nuclear programme, which began in 
earnest after the election of reformist president Hassan Rouhani two years ago, 
diplomats on both sides denied that the fate of the detained Iranian-Americans 
was on the table. But the timing of the prisoner swap, on the day the nuclear 
deal was due to take effect, triggering the lifting of multiple sanctions, 
pointed towards a strong connection.

Rouhani has pushed for speedy implementation in the hope that reformist 
candidates will benefit from the psychological, and eventually economic, boost 
of sanctions relief in parliamentary elections next February.

His success in rapidly dismantling Iran’s nuclear infrastructure, persuading 
the Revolutionary Guards to quickly release 10 US sailors who had steered into 
Iranian waters on Tuesday, and then convincing the judiciary to release the 
four Iranian-Americans, suggests he now wields considerable power inside Iran’s 
complicated system of government.

Ali Vaez, an Iran analyst at the International Crisis Group, said an attack on 
the Saudi embassy by a hardline mob on 2 January, in response to the Saudi 
execution of a Shia cleric, provided Rouhani with an opportunity.

“I think the attack on the Saudi embassy and its consequences provided Rouhani 
with a potent tool to push back the hardliners at a crucial juncture for Iran,” 
Vaez said. “Rouhani can advance his agenda as long as it overlaps with that of 
the system.

“The political establishment wants to reap the full benefits of sanctions 
relief. The image of Iran as the embassy burning and hostage taking country 
could play into its foes’ hands and diminish the deal’s positive dividends. It 
might look like Rouhani is on a roll, but the guardians of the system can pull 
many levers to ensure that the existing balance of power is preserved.”

The 39-year-old Rezaian was arrested along with his Yeganeh Salehi, also a 
journalist, and two friends, an Iranian-American couple. The friends were 
released shortly after their arrest, while Salehi was released on bail in 
October and is facing a separate trial.

The Post reporter was held on unspecified charges for more than seven months 
before appearing in court. He was kept incommunicado for most of his time in 
jail, with little access to his lawyers and family.

The Mehr news agency said Rezaian was among the released prisoners.

Trita Parsi, the president of the National Iranian American Council, said the 
release of the prisoners was “a triumph of diplomacy that should be universally 
commended. “Now, the freed Americans can be reunited with their families and 
friends after an extraordinarily trying time for everyone involved. We hope 
that they find solace in their freedom from the turmoil that they endured.”

Troublked relationship


1979 In January the Shah flees Iran once more, after several months of mass 
demonstrations. Two weeks later Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returns from Paris 
after 14 years in exile and starts forming an Islamic republic. In November, 
Iranian students storm the US embassy and take 52 American diplomats hostage.

A rescue mission the following year fails and the diplomats are not freed 
until the start of 1981, after spending 444 days in captivity.

1980 Iraq attacks Iran, starting a brutal war which will drag on for eight 
years, making it the 20th century’s longest conventional war.

1985 US government officials offered secret arms deals to Iran, then under a 
weapons embargo, in an attempt to secure the release of several hostages and 
fund the Contra rebel groups fighting the government in Nicaragua. The scandal 
would become known as the Iran-Contra.

2003 Russian technicians resume construction of Iran’s first nuclear reactor 
in Bushehr. International Atomic Energy Agency says Iran failed to meet 
obligations under nuclear nonproliferation treaty.

2009 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad claims victory in a presidential election that rivals 
say was rigged. Their supporters take to the streets for demonstrations in 
which at least 30 people are killed and hundreds are arrested. Iranian 
authorities blame foreigners for stoking unrest.

2013 Reformist cleric Hassan Rouhani sweeps to power, promises that Iran will 
never build nuclear weapons and offers “time-bound” talks on the nuclear 
programme.

2015 Iran reaches a historic deal on its nuclear programme with western 
powers, and prepares to come in from the cold as they dismantle sanctions 
regime in return for major concessions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Firan-end-nuclear-sanctions-after-prisoner-swap-agreed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7347516d6a94cb4051625629b3d1925fd69df844%2F0_205_3108_1863%2F3108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prisoner%20release%20and%20nuclear%20deal%20sees%20Iran%20sanctions%20lifted%20as%20US%20heralds%20%E2%80%98safer%20world%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Firan-end-nuclear-sanctions-after-prisoner-swap-agreed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prisoner%20release%20and%20nuclear%20deal%20sees%20Iran%20sanctions%20lifted%20as%20US%20heralds%20%E2%80%98safer%20world%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Firan-end-nuclear-sanctions-after-prisoner-swap-agreed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7347516d6a94cb4051625629b3d1925fd69df844%2F0_205_3108_1863%2F3108.jpg>
 Washington Post correspondent Jason Rezaian, right, the Iranian-American 
correspondent for the Washington Post released on Saturday. Photograph: Vahid 
Salemi/AP  