
What do Bannon and Priebus tell us about Trump's coming reign? | Richard Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/steven-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-reign-deplorables>
The astonishing triumph of Donald Trump can be traced to the bitter defeat of 
Occupy Wall Street, a pro-democracy movement that transcended left and right, 
sparking unrest in hundreds of cities and rural towns in 2011. Occupy’s 
consensus-based encampments demanded that President Obama get money out of 
politics. Instead, we got mercilessly smashed by his progressive 
administration. Now the dark irony of history is bashing back.

Trump – an uber-wealthy, partially self-financed candidate who promises to 
“drain the swamp” – was elected president just one week before the fifth 
anniversary of Mayor Bloomberg’s eviction of the Zuccotti Park encampment. 
President-elect Trump, a charismatic strongman with an autocratic temperament, 
is not what millions of Occupiers were dreaming of when we took to the streets 
against the monied corruption of our democracy.

Now, as the nation experiences a disturbing rise of hate crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-spike-us-donald-trump-president>
 against the groups singled out by Trump during his campaign, protests 
descending intoriots 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/portland/index.ssf/2016/11/man_shot_on_morrison_bridge_en.html>
 are rocking our cities. These visceral protests will undoubtedly continue into 
2017. Celebrated progressive Kshama Sawant, a socialist councilwoman in 
Seattle, has already called on people todisrupt Trump’s inauguration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/anti-donald-trump-protests-new-york-chicago-san-francisco>
 in January.


At the same time, despite the excitement of seeing militants marching in the 
cities, leftist activist networks are buzzing with the painful realization that 
contemporary protest is broken. The dominant tactic of getting people into the 
streets, rallying behind a single demand and raising awareness about an 
injustice simply does not result in the desired social change.

Nominally democratic governments tolerate protest because elected 
representatives no longer feel compelled to heed protest. Theend of protest 
<https://endofprotest.com/> is not the absence of protest. The end of protest 
is the proliferation of ineffective protests that are more like a ritualized 
performance of children than a mature, revolutionary challenge to the status 
quo.

Don't let Donald Trump become the new normal | Steven W Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/dont-let-donald-trump-become-the-new-normal>
Activists who rush into the streets tomorrow and repeat yesterday’s tired 
tactics will not bring an end to Trump nor will they transfer sovereign power 
to the people. There are only two ways to achieve sovereignty in this world. 
Activists can win elections or win wars. There is no third option.

Protest can play an important role in winning elections or winning wars 
<http://qz.com/578544/social-movements-will-put-an-end-to-war-as-we-know-it/> 
but protest alone is insufficient. Just think of the three years many activists 
spent on Black Lives Matter versus the 18 months it took Trump to sweep into 
power. It is magical thinking, and a dangerously misguided strategy, for 
activists to continue to act as if the masses in the streets can attain a 
sovereignty over their governments through a collective manifestation of the 
people’s general will. This may have been true in the past, but is not true 
today.

What is to be done now? American activists must move from detached indignation 
to revolutionary engagement. They must use the techniques that create social 
movements to dominate elections.

The path forward is revealed in the rallying cry of the people in the streets: 
“Not My President!” This protest slogan is eerily similar to the one used by 
Spain’s15-M Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/15/spain-15-m-movement-activism>
 ofindignados who set up anti-establishment general assemblies in May of 2011 
and chanted “No Nos Representan!” (“You Don’t Represent Us!”) during their 
election. Their assemblies inspired the birth of Occupy. But when the refusal 
of theindignados to participate in the election resulted in a shocking victory 
for Spain’s right wing, the movement’s activists and supporters quickly 
internalized an important lesson that Americans must now embrace.

Dismantling the ACA would be catastrophic for people like my partner | 
Annamarya Scaccia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/dismantling-aca-catastrophic-donald-trump>
Realizing that new forms of social protest are better equipped to win 
elections than disrupt elections, many of theindignados transformed themselves 
intoPodemos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/06/podemos-surge-wakeup-call-european-left-spain-uk-radical>
, a hybrid movement-party that is now winning elections and taking power. A 
similar story can be told of thePirate party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/iceland-election-could-propel-radical-pirate-party-into-power>
 in Iceland, or the5 Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/italy-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics>
 in Italy or the pan-EuropeanDiem25 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/yanis-varoufakis-launches-pan-european-leftwing-movement-diem25>
. Focus on the form, not the content, of these hybrid movement-parties: their 
organizing style is the future of global protest.

Concretely speaking, activists must reorient all efforts around capturing 
sovereignty. That means looking for places where sovereignty is lightly held 
and rarely contested, like rural communities. Or targeting sovereign positions 
of power that are not typically seen as powerful, such as soil and water 
district boards or port commissions. Protests will remain ineffective as long 
as there is no movement-party capable of governing locally and nationally.

This is a struggle for sovereignty. The endgame is a populist movement-party 
that wins elections in multiple countries in order to carry out a unified 
agenda worldwide. The spark for this electoral movement is bound to emerge from 
an unexpected place.

It could start from a women-led backlash against the pack of patriarchs 
<https://www.ft.com/content/39da343a-9f4b-11e6-891e-abe238dee8e2> governing the 
globe: Putin in Russia, Erdoğan in Turkey, Duterte in the Philippines, Xi in 
China and now Trump in America. Or maybe activists will start moving into 
neglected rural cities – low-population areas of America – and prepare to sweep 
city council elections. That is the strategy I’m pursuing inNehalem, Oregon 
<http://fusion.net/story/360023/occupy-wall-street-activist-micah-white-rural-revolution-oregon/>
, where I recently ran for mayor. In any case, avoid falling for the exhausting 
delusion of endless urban protest or the nihilistic fantasy of winning an 
insurrectionary war.

The difficult path of merging innovative protest, social movements and 
electoral parties is the only viable way forward. And with only two years until 
the next election in America, there is no time to waste.
 