
Adults who groom their pubic hair have higher rates of sexually transmitted 
infections (STIs) according to astudy 
<http://sti.bmj.com/content/early/2016/10/31/sextrans-2016-052687.full.pdf+html>
 released this month. People who shaved, waxed, trimmed or plucked their pubic 
hair were found to be twice as likely to have cutaneous STIs such as herpes 
which can spread via the skin. They were also 90% more likely to have lice and 
70% more likely to have secretory STIs like chlamydia which can spread via 
bodily fluids.

In all, 7,580 US adults were contacted as part of the survey. They were asked 
whether they groom their hair (66% of men and 84% of women said they did) and 
if so, how. Respondents were classified as “high-frequency groomers” if they 
trimmed their pubic hair daily or weekly. Those who had removed all of their 
pubic hair more than 11 times per year were labeled as “extreme groomers”.

The best defense against STIs is to practice safe sex, not to stop pubic 
grooming.
Pubic hair grooming trends 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/12/sti-groomers/> 
The study didn’t prove a clear cause and effect between pubic hair grooming 
and STIs, only that the two are connected. Nevertheless, causation is 
“plausible” according to authors E Charles Osterberg and his colleagues, 
“because the act of grooming with razors or shavers causes epidermal 
microtears, which may permit epithelial penetrance by bacterial or viral STIs”. 
(Translation: if you’re grooming your pubic hair, you might end up cutting 
yourself which could make you more vulnerable to getting an STI.)


But there are other possible explanations. Some people might have chosen to 
remove their pubic hair after discovering that they have an STI. It’s also 
possible that people who groom their pubic hair have different sex lives from 
those who don’t – either having more frequent sex or engaging in more risky 
sexual behaviors. Weekly sexual activity was more common among those who 
groomed their pubic hair than those who didn’t.
Sexual frequency and pubic hair grooming 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/12/grooming-sex-habits/> 
Most 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2016/07July/Pages/Many-women-think-shaving-pubic-hair-is-hygienic.aspx>
 women who groom their pubic hair do so because they think it’s more hygienic, 
according to a separate study published in July this year. That is incorrect. 
Shaving away pubic hair can make the vagina more vulnerable to irritation and 
infection.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fsex-education-vagina-dispatches-episode-four&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vagina%20Dispatches%3A%20what%20you%20didn't%20learn%20in%20sex%20ed%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fsex-education-vagina-dispatches-episode-four>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vagina%20Dispatches%3A%20what%20you%20didn%27t%20learn%20in%20sex%20ed%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fsex-education-vagina-dispatches-episode-four&media=>
Vagina Dispatches: what you didn’t learn in sex ed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2016/nov/17/sex-education-vagina-dispatches-episode-four>
 * Use condoms regularly and correctly. Get tested at a sexual health clinic 
regularly. And tell your partner if you have an STI. For more information about 
sexual health, visit theAmerican Sexual Health Association 
<http://www.ashasexualhealth.org/stdsstis/>
 