
People’s reliance on the internet in their everyday lives is such that good 
cybersecurity is not only about what individuals and organisations do to 
protect themselves, but what governments must do to ensure that national 
critical infrastructure is well protected.


 Ben Gummer, the minister for the Cabinet Office, has highlighted the growing 
vulnerability of public servicesto cyber attack 
<https://civilservice.blog.gov.uk/2016/11/17/cyber-security-a-responsibility-for-everyone/>
, and the chancellor, Philip Hammond, has committed £1.9bn over five years to 
bolster cybersecurity defences. The chancellor’s announcement,a re-announcement 
of the same figure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/17/uk-hit-back-terrorists-cyber-attacks-george-osborne-gchq>
 by his predecessor George Osborne, is dwarfed by the amount of spending the US 
has earmarked – in 2017 along, itplans 
<http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/feature/Can-cybersecurity-spending-protect-the-US-government>
 to spend 10 times the UK sum.

That said, Britain’s spend is almost twice the figure 
<http://www.scmagazineuk.com/french-government-launches-national-cyber-security-strategy/article/447973/>
 France has put aside over the next three years, and is slightly more than the 
European Commission’s €1.8bninvestment 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-2321_en.htm> in a new 
public-private partnership on cybersecurity.

But just how will this money tackle cyber-attacks and is it effective? Cath 
Goulding, head of IT Security at Nominet, the official registry for .uk domain 
names, says governments are looking to invest in capabilities that are required 
for potential cyberwars, but an offensive capability needs to be coordinated 
and consistent and a good defensive posture is paramount.

“The new NCSC [National Cyber Security Centre] has an agenda that details 
tangible outcomes,” says Goulding, who is a former security operations manager 
at Government Communications Headquarters. “Of course, there is no silver 
bullet but these should make a difference when it comes to analysis and 
defence.”


The NCSC 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-national-cyber-security-centre-set-to-bring-uk-expertise-together>
, announced by then chancellor George Osborne in November last year, pools 
cyberexpertise to tackle cybersecurity issues in the UK.

The outcomes Goulding speaks about look to fix the underlying infrastructure 
that powers the internet but that can be subverted by cybercriminals to attack 
computers run by firms, governments and individuals.

Hackers normally infect systems with malicious software, known as malware, 
usually via an attachment on an email, which can then allow the criminals to 
take control of systems and steal information, such as bank details. In the 
case of countries, one country can steal intellectual property of industrial 
targets in order to gain economic advantages. A country with a lot of 
intellectual property will find itself a main target of such hackers.

Cybersecurity consultant Dr Jessica Barker, says cyberthreats are 
international by their nature, and so international cooperation is necessary, 
but often hard to achieve. “The problems and their origins cross borders and so 
solutions must, too,” she says.

 International cooperation is possible. For example, the police service of 
Northern Ireland collaborated with Romanian police, the UK National Crime 
Agency and Europol to charge a man in Romania last month with producing and 
distributing indecent images of children and “webcam blackmail”. Cases like 
this show the importance of international collaboration in tackling cybercrime, 
says Barker.

But while money flows into central government efforts, are local authorities 
getting enough protection? Andrew Rogoyski, formerly an adviser to the UK 
government on cybersecurity issues and founder and chair of the cybersecurity 
group of TechUK, says with local government at the sharp end of austerity 
policies, cybersecurity spending is lower than it should be.

“However, many local government organisations are starting to implement 
digital transformation programmes, creating new efficiency savings and 
economies of scale, providing services to citizens in new and imaginative 
ways,” says Rogoyski. “In these cases, it is imperative to ensure that such 
changes are designed with security built in, rather than bolted on.”

Getting security wrong could mean a catastrophic loss of confidence in the new 
services, resulting in citizens reverting to old-style manual services that 
push costs up and responsiveness down, he warns.

Rogoyski says that if it still goes ahead, the introduction of the General 
Data Protection Regulation 
<https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/data-protection-reform/overview-of-the-gdpr/>
, due to come into force in May 2018, would mean local government organisations 
could face punitive fines if they fail to demonstrate that processes have been 
put in place to protect their citizens’ personal information. This is “a real 
minefield” in areas like health and social care, he adds.

In the US, federal government is trying to protect local authorities through a 
voluntary but heavily encouraged set of cybersecurity standards, developed in 
part by non-regulatory agency the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, (NIST <https://www.nist.gov/>). The standards have been widely 
adopted.

“Adoption and support for these standards is a start but like most 
compliance-driven security programs, it is often written and implemented with 
such lag, that it does not properly stay in sync with real-time attacks and 
techniques,” says Paul Calatayud, chief technology officer at IT security firm 
FireMon.

Rashmi Knowles, chief security architect for Europe, Middle East and Africa at 
security company RSA, says the very nature of local government, with its large 
quantities of sensitive data in constant transit across multiple bodies, makes 
it difficult to defend from cyber-attacks. She cites Lincolnshire county 
council and Dorset district council, which both fell victim toransomware attacks
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-lincolnshire-35443434>earlier this year. 

“It’s vital that authorities educate their employees and foster awareness on 
the safe movement of data,” says Knowles. “People are the weakest link, yet 
this element is often overlooked. It can eliminate many of the threats simply 
by ensuring that local authority staff have been trained to understand the 
dangers of phishing and social engineering.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 