
“You are born with two brains,” says Robert Ingpen. “The main brain is the one 
that your parents insist upon you using for the rest of your life so you can 
get a life; the other one is the one you use yourself when you want to go off 
into the forest and do your dreaming.”

Ingpen, who turns 80 this month, has spent much of his life dreaming. During 
the 50-odd years of his career as an illustrator, his art has brought to life 
classic children’s novels such as Alice in Wonderland, The Secret Garden, The 
Wonderful Wizard of Oz, Robinson Crusoe, Treasure Island, and Peter Pan. He has 
also had productive and continuing relationships with several Australian 
children’s authors including Colin Thiele, whose book Storm Boy, which Ingpen 
illustrated, became staple reading for a generation of schoolchildren, 
particularly after it was made into a film in 1976.

Wonderlands: the whimsical worlds of Robert Ingpen – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/oct/16/wonderlands-the-whimsical-illustration-of-robert-ingpen-in-pictures>
After illustrating more than 100 books, he has developed a slightly 
unconventional collaborative style. “When it comes to finding a way to 
illustrate great writers like Robert Louis Stevenson and Lewis Carroll and 
people like that who have been long dead, you have to engage your reserve 
brain,” he says. “All this time I’ve been entertaining, and having great 
deceased writers [over] to stay in my imagination. To have Charles Dickens to 
stay was a chore, because he was so curious about everything; you couldn’t have 
a phone call without him wanting to know who it was and what was going on.”

The sheer imaginative scope of his work has not gone unnoticed. In 1986, 
Ingpen became the only Australian to win the Hans Christian Andersen award for 
illustration, for his work onPatricia Wrightson’s young adult novel The Nargun 
and the Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/09/patricia-wrightson-obituary>. In 
2007, he was made a member of the Order of Australia for services to 
literature, and earlier this year he was presented with a lifetime achievement 
award from the Children’s Book Council of Australia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fpure-imagination-illustrator-robert-ingpen-on-the-value-of-childhood-dreaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ea8d9440274b4c8d9237072ea9d095535e4304b%2F0_0_3075_4200%2F3075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pure%20imagination%3A%20illustrator%20Robert%20Ingpen%20on%20the%20value%20of%20childhood%20dreaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fpure-imagination-illustrator-robert-ingpen-on-the-value-of-childhood-dreaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pure%20imagination%3A%20illustrator%20Robert%20Ingpen%20on%20the%20value%20of%20childhood%20dreaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fpure-imagination-illustrator-robert-ingpen-on-the-value-of-childhood-dreaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ea8d9440274b4c8d9237072ea9d095535e4304b%2F0_0_3075_4200%2F3075.jpg>
 Photograph: NLA Publishing 
His life’s work has now been commemorated in a new book, Wonderlands, 
published this month by the National Library of Australia.

Ingpen’s earliest artistic memory involves scribbling on the exposed brick 
interior of the Geelong house he lived in when he was a boy. “There were wax 
coloured crayons that were made available to me – for drawing on paper of 
course,” he says. “Well, I wasn’t going to draw on paper, I was going to draw 
on these walls.

“Now if you draw with wax crayon on exposed brickwork it doesn’t come off. And 
until I was quite grown up and adult, these scratchings on walls remained ... 
ancient scribbles that related to stories that I had had read to me.”


Decades have passed since then, but in some ways Ingpen has never left that 
realm of the childhood imaginary.

In 1980, he wrote and illustrated a book that will perhaps prove to be his 
most enduring legacy: The Voyage of the Poppykettle, about a band of tiny 
Peruvian fishermen who fled persecution to land on the shores of Geelong, 
Australia.

“I wrote what I thought to be the fabric of a folk tale,” he says, “with the 
full intent if possible of having it leave the book as a published form, and 
become part of a social piece of storytelling. Well, as luck has it, that’s 
happened.”

He is referring to the Poppykettle festival 
<https://www.gpac.org.au/about-us/news/142/poppykettle-celebrates-35-years-of-igniting-young-imaginations>
, a two-day arts event for children inspired by his book, which takes place in 
Geelong every year in October.

Storm Boy rewatched – heartfelt portrait of a boy and his pelican
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/21/storm-boy-rewatched-heartfelt-portrait-of-a-boy-and-his-pelican>
“Thousands of children all gather and express aspects of imagination through 
singing and dancing and theatre and art and literature and mathematics and all 
sorts of things,” he says. “While the book is pretty much out of print as a 
story, the story is retold by each individual child in their own way.”

It makes Ingpen proud that the story of the Poppykettle has taken on a life of 
its own. “What I’ve been trying to do, deep down, is to help in some small way 
to retain the notion of curiosity in life, which is driven by the imagination 
... You mustn’t be fearful of being imaginative. You might seem foolish in the 
eyes of many, but you mustn’t be fearful of it, because it’s the thing that’s 
going to get you through all the times that are not so good.”

• An exhibition of Robert Ingpen’s work opens on 15 October at the Metropolis 
Gallery in Geelong <http://www.metropolisgallery.com.au/exhibition_upcoming.htm>
, and on 23 October atthe National Library of Australia 
<https://register.eventarc.com/35432/wonderlandscelebrating-the-illustrious-life-of-robert-ingpen>
.Poppykettle Children’s Festival 
<https://www.gpac.org.au/about-us/news/142/poppykettle-celebrates-35-years-of-igniting-young-imaginations>
 begins on 21 October.Wonderlands: The Illustration Art of Robert Ingpen 
<http://publishing.nla.gov.au/book/wonderlands-the-illustration-art-of-robert-ingpen.do>
 is published by the National Library of Australia
 