
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> spoke with 
the US president-elect, Donald Trump, for the first time on Monday, with the 
Russian president keen to emphasise the potential for bilateral cooperation.

While many world leaders watched the US election result with confusion and 
horror,Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> hopes a Trump 
presidency will mean less lecturing from the west and a freer hand to act as it 
pleases in Ukraine and Syria.

According to a Kremlin summary of the phone call, Putin said he was ready for 
“a dialogue of partnership with the new administration based on the principles 
of equality, mutual respect and non-interference in the internal affairs of 
each other”.

'Macho v macho': what to expect from Putin-Trump negotiations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/macho-election-russia-usa-putin-trump-negotiations>
A statement from Trump’s transition team said Putin offered congratulations on 
winning “a historic election”.

“During the call, the two leaders discussed a range of issues including the 
threats and challenges facing the United States and Russia, strategic economic 
issues and the historical US-Russia relationship that dates back over 200 
years,” the statement said.

“President-elect Trump noted to President Putin that he is very much looking 
forward to having a strong and enduring relationship with Russia and the people 
of Russia.”

As with most aspects of a Trump White House, there is very little concrete 
understanding about what his foreign policy may look like. Many in Moscow fear 
that, with his unpredictable temperament, Trump could prove a false friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/macho-election-russia-usa-putin-trump-negotiations>
. But his statement inhis victory speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/donald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video>
 that “we will get along with all other nations willing to get along with us” 
went down well in the Kremlin.

Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said the two leaders shared a “phenomenally 
similar” outlook on foreign policy.

However, one of the leading candidates for the position of secretary of state 
in a Trump administration, John Bolton, former ambassador to the UN, has spent 
the past few years arguing for amuch tougher US position 
<http://www.weeklystandard.com/putin-unleashed/article/1039611> towards Russian 
expansionism in Ukraine and Syria.

The Kremlin has on numerous occasions accused the Obama administration of 
attempting to foment dissent in Russia, and of interfering in the countries 
that border it, notably Ukraine. Meanwhile US officials directly accused Russia 
of attempting to interfere in the election in favour of Trump, by hacking 
Democratic party servers. Putin has denied any interference.


In contrast to many European leaders, who are hoping that some of the more 
outrageous promises made by Trump during the campaign will be discarded during 
his presidency, Putin “wished him success in implementing his campaign 
promises”.


Putin will also have taken heart from Trump’s suggestion that he could move US 
focus in Syria away from removing President Bashar Assad, and back Russia’s 
bombing raids, which have often appeared to target moderate opposition to the 
Syrian regime more than Isis.

“V Putin and D Trump shared the opinion that it is necessary to join forces 
against the common enemy number one: international terrorism and extremism. In 
this spirit, the question of regulating the conflict in Syria was also 
discussed,” said the Kremlin statement.


The two men agreed to keep in touch by telephone and begin planning for an 
in-person meeting. It was not specified whether such a meeting would take place 
before or after Trump’s inauguration in January.

 