
Russian hacking, White House warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-retaliation-russia-hacking-us-election>
, angry denials by Vladimir Putin’s officials: we are edging towards a digital
Cuban crisis 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/coldwar/kennedy_cuban_missile_01.shtml>
. So it is as well to ask what is truly at stake in this e-conflict, and what 
underpins it.

To which end, meet the most important intellectual you have (probably) never 
heard of.Alexander Dugin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aleksandr_Dugin>, the 
Russian political scientist and polemicist, may resemble Santa’s evil younger 
brother and talk like a villain from an Austin Powers movie. But it is no 
accident that he has earned the nickname Putin’s Rasputin. His books and posts 
– often, it must be said impenetrable or plain madcap – are required reading 
for those who seek to understand the new landscape of Brexit,Donald Trump’s 
victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/putin-applauds-trump-win-and-hails-new-era-of-positive-ties-with-us>
 and the global surge of the far right.

Gates: US ‘somewhat laid back’ over Russian election interference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/robert-gates-russia-election-interference-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>
Born in Moscow in 1962, Dugin is a ferocious champion of Russian imperialism, 
orwhat he calls Eurasianism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/23/ukraine-crimea-what-putin-thinking-russia>
. He supports tradition against liberalism, autocracy against democratic 
institutions, stern uniformity against Enlightenment pluralism. InThe Fourth 
Political Theory <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Fourth_Political_Theory> 
(2009), he claims all this adds up to a new and coherent ideology, supplanting 
liberal democracy, Marxism and fascism – though he still seems pretty fond of 
fascism.

The extent of Dugin’s personal access to the Kremlin remains opaque: it has 
certainly waxed and waned over the decades. What is beyond dispute, however, is 
the influence his geopolitical vision has enjoyed in the general staff academy 
and the Russian ministry of defence. Putin’s intervention in Georgia in 2008, 
his invasion of Ukraine in 2014, and his tightening grip on Syria are all 
entirely consistent with Dugin’s strategy for MotherRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

All of which is alarming enough. But what makes Dugin so suddenly significant 
is his growing influence in the west. It has long been alleged that he acts as 
a covert intermediary between Moscow and far-right groups in Europe, many of 
which are believed to receive funding from the Kremlin.

The purpose of operations like the hacking of the US election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-retaliation-russia-hacking-us-election>
 has been to destabilise the Atlantic order generally, and America 
specifically. And on this great struggle, Dugin is positively millenarian: “We 
must create strategic alliances to overthrow the present order of things, of 
which the core could be described as human rights, anti-hierarchy, and 
political correctness – everything that is the face of the Beast, the 
anti-Christ.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fputin-says-us-russia-cooperation-in-worlds-interest-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Putin%20says%20US-Russia%20cooperation%20in%20world's%20interest%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fputin-says-us-russia-cooperation-in-worlds-interest-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Putin%20says%20US-Russia%20cooperation%20in%20world%27s%20interest%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fputin-says-us-russia-cooperation-in-worlds-interest-video&media=>
Putin says US-Russia cooperation in world’s interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/01/putin-says-us-russia-cooperation-in-worlds-interest-video>
Stand by for world war three, then? Not just yet, it seems. Dugin was one of 
the first public figures in Russia to spot that Trump was a potential ally, and 
that his prospective presidency might unite the previously hostile nations in a 
joint crusade to eradicate “perversion” and to carve up the planet between them.

In March 2016, he declared that the tweeting tycoon was the voice of “the real 
rightwing in America … which has found itself caught in the liberal globalist 
sect’s trap, obsessed with the new world order and focused on the interests of 
the world financial elite.” He ended his encomium thus: “In Trump we trust!”

So bonkers does all this sound that one is sorely tempted to tune out. But 
that would be a mistake. I seriously doubt that Trump has ploughed his way 
through Dugin’s 600-pageFoundations of Geopolitics 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foundations_of_Geopolitics> (1997), supposedly a 
standard textbook for Russian army officers. But the man who will be his chief 
strategist in the White House, Steve Bannon, is certainly aware of its author, 
and has spoken with apparent approval of “what I call Eurasianism. We, the 
Judeo-Christian West, really have to look at what [Putin] is talking about as 
far as traditionalism goes, particularly the sense of where it supports the 
underpinnings of nationalism.”

Look further, and it is clear that the virus of Duginism is now fizzing away 
in the bloodstream of the American “alt-right” and the digital nexus so 
important to Trump’s victory. Richard B Spencer, the white nationalist 
president of the National Policy Institute, is notorious for his post-election 
outburst at a Washington conference last month: “Hail Trump, hail our people, 
hail victory!” Less well-known are his close links with Dugin, who he invited 
to a conference on “European identity” in Budapest in 2014 (the Russian was 
denied a visa), having already published Dugin’s writings online.

Tensions between the US and Russia may be distracting us from a potential 
convergence – and not the good kind, either

Let me be clear: I do not mean to suggest that this bearded neofascist is 
heading for a photocall at Trump Tower or the Oval Office. The evidence to date 
suggests, shall we say, that the president-elect is not much interested in 
ideas or intellectuals. Asked in July if he had time to read, he replied: “I 
never have.” Which is candid, if depressing.

My point is that the battle of ideas matters even when those in power pour 
scorn upon it, or claim themselves to be no more than practitioners of “common 
sense”. Discourse analysis teaches us that ideas are the magmatic force of 
public life, rumbling beneath the feet of the mighty, shaping their actions and 
the popular response. As Isaiah Berlin put it, ideas “are indeed the central 
complex of relations of a man towards himself and to the external world”.

In Dugin’s case, the “central complex” is a mess of imperialism, bigotry, 
reactionary religiosity and a loathing of social diversity. To confuse matters 
further, he has borrowed from postmodernism the idea that “truth is a matter of 
belief … there is no such thing as facts”. In the year of “post-truth 
politics”, this contention resonates all too deeply. Worse, Dugin’s ideas help 
to explain why the present tensions between the US and Russia may be 
distracting us from a potential convergence between the two mighty powers – and 
not the good kind, either.

Imagine a world in which the old left-right divide and the east-west conflict 
of the cold war era were practically irrelevant. The conflict of consequence 
would be between traditionalists and pluralists, between internationalists and 
nativists, between autocracy and liberalism. This is Dugin’s world. In it, 
Trump and Putin, for all their differences, would be on the same side.

The core lesson of 2016 is that there is nothing inevitable in the march of 
progress. But it is equally true that the ultra right has no providential 
monopoly on success. Vile as they are, Dugin’s ideas constitute a half-mad 
manual to what is happening today, and may happen tomorrow. It should be read 
with care by all those who are planning the counterattack.
 