
Solutions for a relative’s Alzheimer’s disease, a time lapse camera and a 
gingerbread robot which dances when it detects a human face 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5018019> – 
these are just some of the projects you’ve been telling us about afterwe asked 
you to show off your inventiveness with Raspberry Pi and other electronics 
platforms such as Arduino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/share-your-best-raspberry-pi-or-arduino-projects>
.


If you’re a regular reader this idea may be familiar to you – we also asked 
you to show usthe Raspberry Pi projects you’d been working on towards the end 
of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/08/readers-raspberry-pi-projects>
. Many of you responded to that by telling us how you’d adapted andincorporated 
Arduino into your hardware projects 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/64733133> – so we widened 
the scope.


As well as the highlights below, you can see all of the projects you’ve shared 
so far – and tell us about yours –at this GuardianWitness page 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad>, or, 
discuss the ideas in the comments.


First up, one of many musical ideas you’ve been sharing. This piece of kit, 
explained in some detail below, could provide the soundtrack to the rest of 
this roundup …


Monome + Raspberry Pi + Arduino + Python Step Sequencer 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017746>

The brain is a Raspberry Pi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/raspberry-pi> 3 which runs the step 
sequencer program, written in python. The monome is connected to the Pi via 
USB. An Arduino Uno is also connected to the Pi via USB. The Arduino controls 8 
servos, each with a "mallet" attached. (These mallets are actually Lego bricks 
clumsily taped onto coffee sticks.)

The Arduino is programmed to receive serial commands* from the python program. 
A command is one byte or 8 bits, each bit representing 'on' (play the note) and 
'off' (do nothing) states of each servo.

The monome is totally controlled by the python program. The program sends 
serial commands that, for example, tell the monome which buttons need to light 
up or turn off. It also receives serial data from the monome - like, which 
buttons are getting pressed and depressed.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Joon Guillen <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Joon Guillen> 

14 December 2016, 22:11 

We also liked Ernest Warzocha’s “Musi” 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5018127>, 
an experimental instrument he hooks up to an Ableton Push.
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Ernest%20Warzocha>

This reader has created and modified an impressive-looking drone

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5018021> 
RPi Fishing Quadcopter! 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5018021>

I called this drone "Gabian" in honor to the french mediterranean appelation 
of the seagull. It is a waterproof quadcopter fully built around a Raspberry Pi 
equipped with a Navio 2 board. It uses a RPi Cam V2 and a home made gimbal to 
provide full HD stabilized video stream in flight. It has a built-in drop 
system to transport fishing lines where the fishes are! Its lights even offer 
possibility to use at night time thanks to the powerful leds.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Guillaume Rmrez <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Guillaume Rmrez> 

18 December 2016, 9:37 

Simone Dassi told us about another type of camera made with a Raspberry Pi – 
one she sayscan take a multispectral photo that monitors the health of plant 
life 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5018148>.


The next idea that caught our eyes was from a reader looking for solutions to 
make life easier for a relative with Alzheimer’s disease
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5018011> 
TimePeace - clock to reassure a relative with Alzheimer's about day of week 
and time of day 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5018011>

Diagnosed with early stage Alzheimer's disease my step mother has become 
disconnected from time, the identification of places and people. Constantly 
asking what day of the week it is, time can stretch with an hour seeming to 
last for days, waking in the night and wondering about the day, not wanting to 
bother anyone and it seemingly to last for days - all sounded like torture.

Timepiece says the day of the week and time of day, along with a reminder of 
where you are. "It's nearly lunch", "early evening" etc. First night with the 
clock she woke and the clock said "it's the middle of the night" – so she went 
back to sleep.

Built using a Raspberry Pi, and the Foundations touch display and about 1200 
lines of Python code so that you can change the time, date, size of messages, 
when it goes dim at night and when it brightens in the morning etc

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By David Penney <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/David Penney> 

18 December 2016, 2:08 

David also shared another of his projects here 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5018012>.


Now, time for a coffee break


Raspberry Pi AND Arduino Coffee Roasting machine 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017349>

This is a coffee roasting machine. The speed of the drum and temperature of 
the oven is controlled by the Raspberry via the Arduino.

It features a web interface via WiFi so it can be controlled by any web 
capable device.

The drum is driven by a stepping motor, controlled by the Arduino which gets 
the higher level commands from the Raspberry. Same goes for the Temperature, 
which the Raspberry reads from a thermocouple and controls via the Arduino and 
a solid state relay.

The software on the Pi is written in C#/Mono.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Roasted Battle Squirrel <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Roasted 
Battle Squirrel> 

12 December 2016, 11:57 

If coffee’s your drink, you might also want to check out “Alexabot” – which 
uses Amazon Alexa software combined with a Raspberry Pi robotto fetch this 
reader a cup on command 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5018020>.


Next, a game of virtual chess brought to life. Again, explained below the video


Internet-Of-Things Chessbord (play chess online with a real board!) 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017391>

I love playing chess online but the 2D view on the screen feels very 
unintuitive to me - I much prefer playing with a physical chess board.

Hence the Internet-Of-Things chess board was born. It connects to an online 
game so that the user can play chess with anyone in the world, with a real 
board.

It uses an Arduino to control the LEDs and detect the positions of the pieces, 
and it uses a Raspberry Pi to check for illegal moves and host the online game.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Ben James <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/guardianUser17125259> 

12 December 2016, 16:54 

Gaming possibilities don’t stop at chess, of course. Paul Bilan told us about 
his cute-looking mini arcade machine 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017684>, 
and Claire Pollard shared the Formula Pi project,a racing series she 
commentates on 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017427>.


Phew, time flies, eh – we’re almost there …


Arduino clock 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017658>

A clock with roots that occasionally hoots. The time it can tell without even 
a bell. Ask it nicely and it will tell you precisely, but if no one’s around it 
won’t make a sound. A dozen on their perch won’t leave you in the lurch, the 
assembled dawn chorus will sing something forus. To make time a pleasure – a 
real treasure – not just something to measure.

Can you work it out? The time was 10:45 when I pushed the button

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By ID3719285 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/ID3719285> 

14 December 2016, 10:06 

Can’t figure out how to tell the time? Hint: count those birds … As for 
whether it’s morning or afternoon, well, Kim Booth, who shared the project,says 
in a blogpost explaining the technicalities 
<http://www.bbno.info/wordpress/?p=4072>: “You can look out of the window for 
that.”


Finally (almost) could this retro-looking notification centre challenge the 
Amazon Echo?

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017490> 
The Raspberry Pi Zero Talking Radio 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017490>

This is a 1940s DeWald table radio that I've given new life using a Raspberry 
Pi Zero, a Blinkt! LED strip and a stripped-down set of PC Speakers, all tucked 
inside the case. It reads out notifications, text messages, emails and tweets 
using a Text-To-Speech engine, while the dial glows different colours depending 
on the text, e.g if it reads the word "Sunny" in a weather report it glows 
orange while speaking.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Martin Mander <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Martin Mander> 

13 December 2016, 11:30 

You can read more about Martin’s project and see a video at his instructables 
page, here <http://www.instructables.com/id/Pi-Zero-Talking-Radio/>. Another 
notification system we liked was from James Dawson, who told us how he’susing 
Raspberry Pi to modify an Amazon Dash button to text him when someone’s at the 
door 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017518>.


As ever, thank you for your contributions. Other highlights include an “
off-grid eco campsite control system 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017399>”, 
arobot that helps teach robotics to those on a tight budget 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017542> 
and acolour-tracking model owl 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad/5017709>. 
You can read about these and more at the dedicatedGuardianWitness page 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/584e7c8ae4b08659393bb7ad?page=4>.

 