
Harry “Rabbit” Angstrom, John Updike’s protagonist in Rabbit, Run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/17/julian-barnes-john-updike-rabbit>
, isn’t a freedom fighter or an intellectual. He’s not even particularly 
oppressed. What he is fighting back against is at once mundane and relatable: 
middle-class society.

A former high-school basketball star, Rabbit is used to adoration, 
exhilaration and adrenaline. But, just 26, he works in a sales job that he 
doesn’t like, saddled with a two-year-old son and a pregnant wife who drinks 
and smokes too much. He yearns for freedom and questions the choices he has 
made. He wants out.


Updike said that he conceived of the novel, written in 1959, as a riposte to 
Jack Kerouac’s 1957 beatnik classicOn the Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/05/fiction.jackkerouac>. Rabbit, 
Run was, he said, “meant to be a realistic demonstration of what happens when a 
young American family man goes on the road – the people left behind get hurt”.

If that seems a tad moralistic for some people’s taste, it was not intended to 
be. Rather than beating morality into his readers, Rabbit gives Updike a means 
to explore the urges that exist in everyone – however secretly. Updike, himself 
a 26-year-old father of two at the time of writing, uses Rabbit as a way to see 
parts of the country a writer like him would never venture to, “a ticket to the 
America all around me”.

Unlike Sal Paradise and Kerouac’s merry gang of contemporaries, Rabbit’s 
attempt at escape is an altogether unsuccessful affair. After driving away in 
his car, he barely makes it past midnight before getting lost and turning back. 
His departure is spontaneous, so there is no real destination, just an 
ungraspable, imagined place: “his goal is the white sun of the south like a 
great big pillow in the sky”. One elderly farmer warns him that “the only way 
to get somewhere is to figure out where you’re going before you get there.”. 
But Rabbit disagrees, pointing out: “Everybody who tells you how to act has 
whisky on their breath.”

Yet for all his Holden Caulfield-esque talk of “this phoney business”, Rabbit 
represents something understandable – “our heart’s stubborn and amoral quest 
for something called grace”, as Updike put it.

In writing the way he did, Updike himself was fighting back. Within his 
realist confines, he struggled to “make it new”. That novelty came from his 
choice of present-tense narration. Fifty-seven years ago that was a “rebellious 
and liberating” decision. The narrative style imbues the unfolding events with 
an immediacy and jitteriness perfectly suited to the novel’s capricious 
protagonist.

One of the great joys of reading Updike is always his prose. Balanced, elegant 
and always fresh, it finds ways of “giving the mundane its beautiful due 
<http://www.scotsman.com/lifestyle/john-updike-giving-the-mundane-its-beautiful-due-1-756079>
”. Arias of description bloom on every page and sentences such as this are 
never far away:

 “Curled near one edge, he draws backward into sleep like a turtle drawing 
into his shell. Sleep this night is not a dark haunted domain the mind must 
consciously set itself to invade, but a cave inside himself, into which he 
shrinks while the claws of the bear rattle like rain outside.”

Like James Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/29/colm-toibin-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man>
 andDH Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence> before him, 
Updike treats sex and sexuality with a frankness that was uncommon among his 
contemporaries. The descriptions of sex have retained their raw freshness. In 
an essay,David Foster Wallace named Updike 
<http://www.badgerinternet.com/~bobkat/observer1.html> as one of three Great 
Male Narcissists in US postwar fiction and said that friends had criticised 
Updike for being “just a penis with a thesaurus”. But that feels grossly unfair 
when considering his early novels like this one.

For all of the prose’s curlicues and self-conscious prettiness, there is 
undoubtedly meat on the bone. Through Rabbit, Updike confronts major topics in 
a minor way: unravelling the tapestry of the suburban American male psyche and 
reweaving it into beautiful images. On reading, we become like his protagonist: 
restless strivers yearning for something different and altogether bigger than 
ourselves.
 