
Senator Rand Paul reiterated his opposition to both former New York mayor Rudy 
Giuliani and former UN ambassador John Bolton assecretary of state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/14/donald-trump-transition-team-white-house-live>
 in an interview with the Guardian on Tuesday.

The interview follows an op-ed in 
<http://rare.us/story/rand-paul-will-donald-trump-betray-voters-by-hiring-john-bolton/>
 Rare, an online conservative publication, where Paul condemned Bolton as “out 
of touch”.

The Kentucky senator grounded his opposition in the importance that Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> “pick people who agree 
with his foreign policy”. Trump repeatedly argued on the campaign trail that 
the Iraq war was a mistake and condemned what he saw as an overly 
interventionist foreign policy from Democratic rival Hillary Clinton. As Paul 
phrased it, Trump was “standing up not just to Woodrow Wilson” but also “a 
whole line of neocons in both parties”, and the senator believed such policies 
were “a big part” of Trump’s campaign.

Donald Trump transition team in disarray as key adviser 'purged'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/donald-trump-transition-team-disarray-adviser-purge>
Paul, who serves on the Senate foreign relations committee, insisted “there is 
no way I could vote for someone who is an unrepentant supporter of the Iraq war 
and regime change. I think that is a disaster for the country. It has made us 
less safe and so categorically I can’t support anybody that supports regime 
change.”

He noted in particular that Bolton, who wrote an op-ed in support of bombing 
Iran in 2015, was one of the biggest cheerleaders for the Iraq war and pointed 
out that Giuliani agreed with the former UN ambassador on Iran.

Instead, Paul suggested Senate foreign relations committee chair Bob Corker as 
an alternative. He’s “much more of a realist, not likely to be loading the 
bombs to go to Iran tomorrow”. In contrast, he suggested that Bolton’s hawkish 
stance was perhaps because he was trying to “assuage guilt” over “not serving 
in combat”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fpresident-obama-explains-importance-of-selecting-white-house-staff-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=President%20Obama%20explains%20importance%20of%20selecting%20White%20House%20staff%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fpresident-obama-explains-importance-of-selecting-white-house-staff-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=President%20Obama%20explains%20importance%20of%20selecting%20White%20House%20staff%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fpresident-obama-explains-importance-of-selecting-white-house-staff-video&media=>
President Obama explains importance of selecting White House staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/14/president-obama-explains-importance-of-selecting-white-house-staff-video>
The Kentucky senator, who has been one of the leading advocates for privacy 
issues in the Senate, also expressed concern about Giuliani as a potential 
attorney general, pointing out the former New York mayor had far fewer 
disagreements with the president-elect on the subject than he did.

Paul noted that while “Trump wasn’t as concerned about privacy as I am, he 
still very consistently said regime change was a mistake”. The result was that 
Paul found Giuliani as attorney general to be “less objectionable but still a 
concern for civil liberties”. When asked if private companies should purge user 
data in advance of aTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>, Paul said: “I just 
don’t know yet, but having Giuliani or Chris Christie in charge of information 
would be very worrisome.”

Paul also made clear he would continue to work across the aisle with Ron 
Wyden, an Oregon Democrat on the intelligence committee, as bipartisan privacy 
watchdogs. One privacy battle taking shape early in the next administration 
concerns the reauthorization of a critical surveillance provision, known as 
Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, that permits the 
widespread collection of Americans’ international communications. Paul said he 
was preparing to contest the reauthorization of 702, the legal wellspring of 
the NSA’s controversial Prism program.

The Kentucky senator’s criticisms of Giuliani come nearly a decade after the 
former New York mayor attacked Rand Paul’s father, Ron, when they both ran for 
president in 2007. During a presidential debate, Giuliani interrupted Ron Paul 
and attacked him after Ron Paul suggested that the United States’ 
interventionist foreign policy was a contributing factor to the terrorist 
attacks of September 11.
 