
Rand Paul, once dubbed the most interesting man in American politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/09/rand-paul-polls-donald-trump-ben-carson>
, won’t be on the stage for Thursday’s Republican presidential debate.


The Kentucky senator failed to qualify for the main stage when Fox Business 
News announced its criteria on Monday night and is boycotting the so-called 
“undercard debate”.

To make the main stage, candidates were required to be among the top five in 
the polls in the early primary states of Iowa and New Hampshire or in the top 
six nationally. Paul finished just short. The Kentucky senator polled in 
seventh place nationally and in sixth place in Iowa.

Marco Rubio accuses Ted Cruz of 'intentionally sneaky' tax policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/11/marco-rubio-accuses-ted-cruz-over-intentionally-sneaky-tax-policy>
In a defiant statement announcing his boycott, the Paul campaign said: “By any 
reasonable criteria, Senator Paul has a top-tier campaign. He will not let the 
media decide the tiers of this race and will instead take his message directly 
to the voters of New Hampshire and Iowa.”

The statement went on to note that polls are imperfect: “Polls are at best an 
estimation, and include a standard of error that the media and the RNC are 
ignoring.” Paul’s office argued that creating tiers based on electoral results 
of real votes might make sense, but creating tiers on “bad science” was 
irresponsible.

The Kentucky senator’s campaign insisted that he would triumph in the GOP 
primary. “This race is hitting its final stretch andRand Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rand-paul> is in it to win it. He is on 
the ballot in every state. He has over 1,000 precinct captains in Iowa and a 
huge 500-person leadership team in New Hampshire,” the campaign bragged, 
pledging to campaign in Iowa and New Hampshire instead of appearing on the 
debate stage.

Republican debate: Las Vegas fight night was rollicking from start to finish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2015/dec/15/cnn-republican-presidential-debate-december-15>
Paul was not the only candidate to be demoted to the undercard debate. Carly 
Fiorina, the former chief executive of Hewlett Packard, has also been relegated 
although she will participate. Former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee and 
former Pennsylvania senatorRick Santorum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-santorum> will join her in the 
second-tier debate.

Fiorina’s campaign was boosted by her strong performance in the first 
undercard debate in August, which vaulted her to national prominence and main 
stage. However, since then, she has not been able to maintain her momentum and 
has fallen back to the low single digits in both national polls and those of 
early states.

While Paul has collapsed in polls, Texas senator Ted Cruz has surged, 
successfully appealing to many of the socially conservative libertarians who 
backed Ron Paul, Rand’s father, in his two presidential bids. Cruz will appear 
on the main stage along with businessman Donald Trump, Florida senator Marco 
Rubio, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, New Jersey governorChris Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chris-christie>, former Florida governor 
Jeb Bush and Ohio governor John Kasich. Trump, who has consistently led in 
national and in state polls, will occupy centre stage.
 