
Iggy Pop doesn’t play an instrument when he performs on stage. “He plays his 
body,” according to artistJeremy Deller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jeremy-deller>. “The way he 
manipulates it, damages it, bends it and flaunts it has become his way of 
communicating. His body interprets the music but it’s also playing its own 
tune.”

In fact, for nearly half a century now, Iggy has presented his naked torso as 
a central part of his art, displaying it in a way that is so disruptive and 
unfettered, it suggests a sound wave made flesh. The form and fury of Iggy’s 
torso has become as recognised as Mick Jagger’s lips or Elvis Presley’s hips. 
Before Iggy’s emergence in the late 1960s, no male musical star had bared so 
much flesh so comfortably. What’s more, he has consciously put it in peril, 
cutting himself with glass, or throwing himself into the audience, decades 
before the ritual of “stage-diving” began.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c9b55833830608a5953d031cfb32b9efc38b3de%2F0_0_2952_4614%2F2952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Raw%20power%3A%20why%20Iggy%20Pop%20posed%20naked%20for%20Jeremy%20Deller's%20Life%20Class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Raw%20power%3A%20why%20Iggy%20Pop%20posed%20naked%20for%20Jeremy%20Deller%27s%20Life%20Class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c9b55833830608a5953d031cfb32b9efc38b3de%2F0_0_2952_4614%2F2952.jpg>
 Serpentine beauty … Iggy Pop in Chicago in 1970. Photograph: Douglas R 
Gilbert/Redferns 
For his latest project, Deller decided to highlight all this history in a new 
setting: a life-drawing class. “There are hundreds of thousands of photographs 
of him,” says the Turner prize-winning artist, “but very few drawings. I 
thought his body deserves to be looked at differently, to be taken more 
seriously, in a way that would connect him to art history.”

Deller convinced the Brooklyn Museum 
<https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/exhibitions/iggy_pop_life_class>, a group of 
local artists and Iggy himself to play along. The result, Iggy Pop Life Class, 
opens at the museum next month. The show involves 107 interpretations of the 
star’s nude physique by 22 artists, ranging in age from their teens to their 
80s. The museum will pair their work with objects from its collection depicting 
the male figure over the last few centuries: sculptures from ancient Egypt, 
Africa and India; drawings by such artists asEgon Schiele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/21/egon-schiele-the-radical-nude-review>
 andMax Beckmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/05/max-beckmann-painter-tate-gallery-1965>
; as well as photographs by Jim Steinhardt andRobert Mapplethorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/09/robert-mapplethorpe-photography-jack-fritscher-look-at-the-pictures>
.

Deller, best known for creating vast imaginative works with a political theme, 
first approached Iggy 10 years ago, but the star demurred. “Ten years ago I was 
a little too young,” says Iggy, now 69, in the book that accompanies the show. 
“I thought I didn’t have the weight. Now I feel like a lot has happened with 
and to my body. For some reason, it felt important for me to just stand naked 
for a group of human beings and have an exchange.”

To find his artists, Deller took recommendations from instructors at local 
schools, from theArt Students League of New York 
<http://www.theartstudentsleague.org/> and the Pratt Institute 
<https://www.pratt.edu/> to the Brooklyn Museum’s own studio programme. He was 
keen to have artists with a differing range of ability. “I didn’t want 
everybody to be perfectly adept,” he said. “I wanted variety.”

A lot has happened to my body. It felt important to stand naked for a group of 
humans and have an exchange
Iggy Pop  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbef7ddb68b23e543134de0e01784c207b60b169f%2F0_233_4956_3123%2F4956.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Raw%20power%3A%20why%20Iggy%20Pop%20posed%20naked%20for%20Jeremy%20Deller's%20Life%20Class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Raw%20power%3A%20why%20Iggy%20Pop%20posed%20naked%20for%20Jeremy%20Deller%27s%20Life%20Class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbef7ddb68b23e543134de0e01784c207b60b169f%2F0_233_4956_3123%2F4956.jpg>
 Iggy Pop poses for,from left, Jeremy Day, Patricia Hill, Jeannette Farrow and 
Danielle Rubin. Photograph: Elena Olivio/Brooklyn Museum 
Some of his favourite work came from a 20-year-old called Kallyiah Merilus, 
who had only begun drawing two weeks before the session. “They look like German 
expressionist wood cuttings,” says Deller. Nor were all the artists aware of 
Iggy’s work. Robert Hagen, 82, much prefers folk singers, people like Pete 
Seeger. “I thought Iggy was an alter ego of David Bowie,” he says with a laugh.

 Meanwhile, 37-year-old Guno Park <http://www.gunopark.com/> had heard of Iggy 
but wasn’t fully aware of his status as a proto-punk outsider. “I thought he 
was like Van Halen or the Rolling Stones,” he says. “Just a famous rock star.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd057b46854a195ab9eeb4d7da00ee8aff4a977e2%2F0_0_1132_1500%2F1132.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Raw%20power%3A%20why%20Iggy%20Pop%20posed%20naked%20for%20Jeremy%20Deller's%20Life%20Class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Raw%20power%3A%20why%20Iggy%20Pop%20posed%20naked%20for%20Jeremy%20Deller%27s%20Life%20Class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd057b46854a195ab9eeb4d7da00ee8aff4a977e2%2F0_0_1132_1500%2F1132.jpg>
 ‘Natural and comfortable’ … Guno Park’s Iggy. Photograph: Sarah DeSantis, 
Brooklyn Museum 
During the drawing session, which took place over four hours in February, Park 
found himself impressed by how well Iggy understood his own body. “Even models 
who have been doing life drawing for years don’t quite know how to pose to best 
express themselves,” he says. “But Iggy was so natural and comfortable. He 
would naturally go towards the contrapostal pose ofMichelangelo’s David 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/06/michelangelo-david-ankle-fractures-florence>
.”

Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> from the renaissance, and 
earlier, celebrated the male body, but such a focus became less prevalent in 
later eras. “There are a lot of problems around male nudity,” says Deller, 
“especially in America. We wanted to examine that. In the show, we have 
sculptures from Egypt that would be obscene by today’s standards. Back then, it 
was something you could have in your house.”

Rock’n’roll, believes Deller, has played a part in normalising male beauty in 
modern times. “It gave men a different version of masculinity, a different way 
of looking at themselves,” he says. “It allowed them to show off their bodies 
as something to be screamed over in a way that hadn’t happened before.”

Seeing Iggy flail his naked torso can feel like stumbling across a creature in 
the wild

There was certainly a serpentine beauty to Iggy in his youth, but the drawings 
gently highlight the singer’s broadening torso and weathered features. “It 
looks like his body has been through the ringer,” Hagen says. The mere fact 
that a man pushing 70 would choose to go topless challenges assumptions about 
what’s appropriate – and that’s all to the good, says Deller. “It’s really 
important for an older person to behave badly. There are no rules to follow for 
his generation, the rock generation. There are many ways to go. And he has gone 
his way.”

He always has though; as Deller points out: “There’s nothing narcissistic 
about his presentation.” Instead, Iggy’s frolics have always been about 
self-expression, freedom, naturalism and accepting our animal selves. Seeing 
Iggy flail his naked torso can feel like stumbling across a creature in the 
wild. It’s both liberating and frightening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61ff245f5689ee2eb69832cd4f5bf8ce3143f81c%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Raw%20power%3A%20why%20Iggy%20Pop%20posed%20naked%20for%20Jeremy%20Deller's%20Life%20Class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Raw%20power%3A%20why%20Iggy%20Pop%20posed%20naked%20for%20Jeremy%20Deller%27s%20Life%20Class&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Figgy-pop-life-class-jeremy-deller-interview-brooklyn-museum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61ff245f5689ee2eb69832cd4f5bf8ce3143f81c%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 ‘It looks like his body has been put through the ringer’ … Iggy at the 2011 
Hop Farm festival in Kent. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
“When I first saw him years ago,” says Deller, “l felt he had an otherworldly 
quality. I thought, ‘He’s like a mischievous wood sprite.’ Then I looked up 
what that actually meant. It’s a satyr who lived in the woods. They caused a 
nuisance and ran around half-naked with erections, looking for women and booze 
and fun. That’s what Iggy actually is: an ancient, mythological figure, but in 
contemporary form.”

 * Iggy Pop Life Class is at the Brooklyn Museum 
<https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/exhibitions/iggy_pop_life_class>, New York, 4 
November to 26 March.
 