
It is cold and wet here this morning, and I was feeling particularly sedentary 
until this tale of adventure inspired me to greater feats. Athletes Alan Rankin 
and Willie Gibson are due to recreate the complete journey of David Balfour, 
hero of Robert Louis Stevenson’s Kidnapped, to raise money for charity.

“In the summer of 2016 we will set sail from South Queensferry [west of 
Edinburgh], around Orkney down the Minch to the island of Erraid, off Mull. 
From Erraid, the team will go by foot the 270 miles back to South Queensferry,” 
theywrite on their website <http://www.kidnapped130.com/>. “The overland leg 
will cross some of the wildest and most stunning landscapes in Scotland, 
following the route as described in the book, and mapped on the long-distance 
routethe Stevenson Way <http://www.stevensonway.org.uk/>.”

“We plan to follow as close as possible to the route described in the book,” 
Rankintold the Scotsman 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/adventurers-plan-recreation-of-robert-louis-stevenson-s-kidnapped-1-4093103#ixzz4586Q6K6H>
. “However, unlike the story, there will be no real-life kidnapping and, 
hopefully, no shipwreck either. We hope to complete the whole trip in under 18 
days. Heading off in late May offers us long daylight hours for the sailing leg 
and hopefully we will be finished the trek before the midges are out in force.”

How the moors changed my mind about the Brontës | Lucy Mangan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/16/moors-brontes-yorkshire-charlotte-emily-anne>
Quite apart from the fact that I’d forgotten just how entertaining Kidnapped 
is – I’ve been looking through it this morning and am planning an evening 
wrapped up in David’s adventures – just how much fun does their trip sound? 
It’s a step beyond the usual literary tourism of visitingthe Keats house in Rome
 <http://www.keats-shelley-house.org/> (although I did love that) or the Brontë 
parsonage in Haworth - and I find myself craving my own real literary adventure.

Kidnapped is a great choice: Stevenson is so detailed in his descriptions of 
where David is taken that it makes for an easy route to follow. “And here I 
must explain; and the reader would do well to look at a map. On the day when 
the fog fell and we ran down Alan’s boat, we had been running through the 
Little Minch. At dawn after the battle, we lay becalmed to the east of the Isle 
of Canna or between that and Isle Eriska in the chain of the Long Island. Now 
to get from there to the Linnhe Loch, the straight course was through the 
narrows of the Sound of Mull. But the captain had no chart; he was afraid to 
trust his brig so deep among the islands; and the wind serving well, he 
preferred to go by west of Tiree and come up under the southern coast of the 
great Isle of Mull.”

The 100 best novels: No 24 – Kidnapped by Robert Louis Stevenson (1886)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/03/100-best-novels-kidnapped-robert-louis-stevenson>
But might it not be even more exciting to follow in the footsteps of Jim 
Hawkins? If only we could find our own “map of an island, with latitude and 
longitude, soundings, names of hills and bays and inlets, and every particular 
that would be needed to bring a ship to a safe anchorage upon its shores”.

I think Rankin and Gibson’s choice of Kidnapped has put me in the mood for the 
sort of adventure books I read as a child, so I’m wondering about recreating 
one of Hal and Roger Hunt’s adventures (Amazon Adventure was my favourite), or 
Buck’s journey inThe Call of the Wild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/19/100-best-novels-call-of-the-wild-jack-london>
. But the wilds of the Yukon or the Amazon jungle might be a step too far. 
Maybe Arthur Ransome could be more doable, whether it’s the Lake District 
adventures of Swallows and Amazons, or the North Sea escapades of We Didn’t 
Mean to Go to Sea.

How about you? Which literary adventure would you recreate, if you had the 
time and the money?
 