
The Master and Margarita is this month’s Reading group choice. It was 
nominated by commenterSaorsa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jun/01/help-choose-a-translated-book-for-junes-reading-group#comment-75475734>
 and seconded by several others, one of whom called it “one of the best novels 
ever written”.

 Certainly, it’s a book that has stood the test of time. In fact, as luck has 
it, this year marks the 50th anniversary of the first attempt to bring it to 
publication, following a tortuous gestation.

Mikhail Bulgakov started writing The Master and Margarita around 1928 and it 
quickly became his chief obsession. But he burned his first draft in 1930, 
thinking he had no future as a writer living in Stalinist Russia. This was a 
reasonable assumption, for a well-known public figure who refused to toe the 
party line and had even privately admitted: “My sympathies were entirely on the 
side ofthe Whites <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_movement>, whose retreat 
filled me with horror and incomprehension.”

 Miraculously, Uncle Joe seems to have liked the irreverent author and spared 
him. It was an inherited kidney disease that took Bulgakov when he was only 49, 
in 1940. By this time he had almost finished his masterpiece. Indeed he was 
making plans to get it published as soon as he could; a terrifying prospect to 
his friends and family, given the book’s vigorous lampooning of the Soviet 
Union. It wasn’t until 1966 that his widow released a version of The Master and 
Margarita - and even then it was heavily censored. But more complete versions 
soon started circulating insamizdat editions 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samizdat> - and in the west Michael Glenny’s 
spritely translation hit the shelves by 1967 
<https://orangeraisin.wordpress.com/2009/02/09/master-and-margarita-best-translation/>
.

The Master and Margarita showed me just how easy it is to mess up a nation | 
Viv Groskop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/19/master-margarita-bulgakov-satire-russia>
 Since then, it’s gone from strength to strength, remaining hugely popular in 
Russia and influencingall kinds of writers 
<http://www.thewhitereview.org/interviews/interview-with-will-self/> and public 
figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/19/master-margarita-bulgakov-satire-russia>
 in the west.

 I’m a fan, too - although it’s 15 years since I read it. I’m looking forward 
to getting reacquainted with that cigar-chomping cat and oddly dressed devil. 
I’ll be reading Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky’s Penguin translation, 
alongside Michael Glenny’s 1967 classic (which is currently available from 
Vintage). I hope you’ll join me.

 To further that aim, we’ve got five copies of the book to give away to the 
first five readers in the UK to post “I want a copy please”, along with a nice, 
constructive comment in the comments section below. If you’re lucky enough to 
be one of the first to comment, email Laura Kemp with your address (
laura.kemp@theguardian.com <mailto:laura.kemp@theguardian.com>). Be nice to 
her, too. And as usual, all suggestions and ideas for future discussions will 
be gratefully received!
 