
This September marks the 150th anniversary of HG Wells’s birth. It’s just over 
70 years since his death. Which means that the man they called the “man who 
invented tomorrow” is fading ever further into yesterday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhg-wells-september-reading-group-help-choose-a-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa026a1de884b4fa74074900ca3b33d91084e96d0%2F0_0_2805_2153%2F2805.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20group%3A%20which%20HG%20Wells%20book%20should%20we%20read%20in%20September%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhg-wells-september-reading-group-help-choose-a-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20group%3A%20which%20HG%20Wells%20book%20should%20we%20read%20in%20September%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhg-wells-september-reading-group-help-choose-a-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa026a1de884b4fa74074900ca3b33d91084e96d0%2F0_0_2805_2153%2F2805.jpg>
 A first world war tank. Photograph: Library of Congress/Getty Images 
But that’s not to say that many of his ideas aren’t still current or relevant. 
Or indeed that his inventions aren’t still of huge importance in our world. 
This is the creative force, after all, whom Winston Churchill credited with the 
invention of tanks (Wells dreamed up the idea in 1903, calling them The Land 
Ironclads). Meanwhile,Leo Szilard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/aug/12/politics.history>, one of the 
fathers of the atomic bomb, says it was HG Wells who first made him think that 
it might be possible to provoke a nuclear chain reaction. You canread about 
Szilard on Wikipedia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leo_Szilard>– and you can 
do so while enjoying the knowledge that Wells also wrote about something he 
called “the World Brain” and predicted a: “permanent world encyclopaedia, 
freely available in every country of the globe”. OK, Wells’s global 
encyclopaedia is transported by plane and stored on microfilm – but that’s 
still pretty good augury. So too were Wells’s descriptions of such variously 
handy things as cycle lanes, cellphone networks, automatic doors, telescopic 
rifle sites, planes and parachutes, hot taps, indoor toilets, dishwashers, and 
24-hour news.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhg-wells-september-reading-group-help-choose-a-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa499e902a970a8bdb2b427f16f235ec02135ae55%2F0_0_5284_3745%2F5284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20group%3A%20which%20HG%20Wells%20book%20should%20we%20read%20in%20September%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhg-wells-september-reading-group-help-choose-a-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20group%3A%20which%20HG%20Wells%20book%20should%20we%20read%20in%20September%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhg-wells-september-reading-group-help-choose-a-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa499e902a970a8bdb2b427f16f235ec02135ae55%2F0_0_5284_3745%2F5284.jpg>
 Rod Taylor in the 1960 film of The Time Machine. Photograph: Moviestore 
Collection 
But of even more lasting importance and relevance than the Great Imaginator’s 
real-world inventions are his books. Today he’s probably best known for his 
early scientific romances likeThe War of the Worlds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jun/26/classics.hgwells> and The Time 
Machine, but he also wrote serious real-world political fiction like Ann 
Veronica, delightful comedies likeThe History of Mr Polly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/16/hg-wells-history-of-mr-polly-100-best-novels>
, top quality literary fiction like Tono-Bungay, pioneering (and hilariously 
satirical) modernism like Boon, groundbreaking histories like A Short History 
of the World and even the book that becamethe foundation of the Universal 
Declaration Of Human Rights 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/294544/the-rights-of-man/>. 

Wells was, in sum, a genius. It’s going to be a great pleasure to pay some of 
the tribute he’s due here on the Reading Group. The only difficulty is knowing 
which of those many wonderful books we should discuss – but that’s easily 
solved by holding a vote. We’ll read the book with the most nominations in the 
comments below. So please tell us about your favourite. There’s a useful 
bibliographyhere <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/H._G._Wells_bibliography>.

I’ll post here in a few days after tabulating the results – no doubt with more 
praise for Wells and his wonderfully fertile mind.
 