
This month on the reading group we’re going to read something by Penelope 
Fitzgerald. There’s been a long (and successful!) campaign of popular pressure 
to read one of her novels both in this group and over on ourTips, links and 
suggestions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/tips-links-and-suggestions-books> 
pages – and since December 2016 marked the 100th anniversary of the novelist’s 
birth, it felt right to read her now.

It also feels right to start the new year off with a strong female voice – one 
whosereputation only seems to be growing  
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2014/12/04/victory-penelope-fitzgerald/>as the 
years go by .

 Fitzgerald won plenty of acclaim in her own lifetime – as well as a devoted 
following for her short and sharply-written novels. But she wasn’t always fully 
appreciated. Most notably, when she won theBooker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> in 1979, it wasn’t a happy 
affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/mar/13/booker-prize-fitzgerald-offshore>
. Her book, Offshore, was the second choice of most judges (behind either VS 
Naipaul’s A Bend in the River or William Golding’s Darkness Visible) and the 
award generated bafflement and disdain in the press. One of the judges, Hilary 
Spurling, lamented that the event caused Fitzgerald “pain … and humiliation 
ever after”. There is also the suspicion that (as with Ian McEwan’s notorious
Amsterdam victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/06/booker-club-amsterdam-ian-mcewan>
) Offshore is perhaps not the author’s best work.

 As to what her best work may be, well, there’s an embarrassment of riches. We 
can choose from nine novels and three works of non-fiction 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penelope_Fitzgerald>. This is a considerable 
body of work for a writer who was first published aged 58 – not to mention a 
beacon of hope for all later developers.

I’m sure that any one would be a rewarding read this month; but since I’ve 
only read Offshore myself, I’m in no position to decide. Which is where you 
come in. We’ll put the choice to a popular vote. To have a say, just name a 
title in the comments. (And if you can’t choose one particular book, feel free 
to nominate more: I’ll count them all.) I’ll return in a few days to tot up the 
totals.
 