
Already it’s October, and the UK literary world is beginning to focus again on 
the Booker prize, an annual tradition full of fun and frustration, 
disappointment and delight. An event that has been sadly diminished, however, 
by the fact that the great Beryl Bainbridge can no longer be in contention to 
win. For a long time, a new novel by the Liverpudlian writer would usually find 
a place on the final six, and she would have to sit there smiling at the award 
ceremony as the prize went to another. In 1973, The Dressmaker lost out toJG 
Farrell’s The Siege of Krishnapur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jan/23/lookingbackatthebookerjg>
; in 1974, The Bottle Factory Outing lost out to joint winnersNadine Gordimer’s 
The Conservationist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/feb/27/lookingbackatthebookernad>
 andStanley Middleton’s Holiday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/mar/13/holidaystanleymiddleton>
. In 1990, An Awfully Big Adventure was beaten byAS Byatt’s Possession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/04/as-byatt-possession-book-club> 
and in 1996,Graham Swift’s Last Orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/24/booker-club-graham-swift-last-orders>
 scooped the prize over Every Man For Himself.

Bainbridge turned up for the ceremony and was disappointed so often that she 
became known as the Booker Bridesmaid. She was renowned for her graciousness in 
defeat; according tothe longstanding literary director of the prize Ion Trewin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/08/beryl-bainbridge-booker-prize>, 
she smiled wistfully and sighed “maybe next time”. Alas, the time after 1996 
was 1998, when her sublime novel Master Georgie lost out to Ian McEwan’s 
ridiculousAmsterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/06/booker-club-amsterdam-ian-mcewan>
. Her final book The Girl in the Polka Dot Dress was knocked out of contention 
because Bainbridge died in 2011: Booker rules state that only living authors 
can win.

The Beryl Bainbridge I knew, by her daughter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2010/dec/12/beryl-bainbridge-obituary-by-jojo-davies>
Justice of a sort was done when the Booker organisation granted Bainbridge her 
very own posthumous reward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/08/beryl-bainbridge-booker-prize>. 
It’s also worth noting that while she didn’t have much luck with the Booker, 
she did scoop most of the other serious prizes in the UK, and unlike most 
Booker nomineeswas made a Dame 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/dame-beryl-bainbridge-novelist-whose-work-began-rooted-in-autobiography-and-which-later-developed-to-2017281.html>
. Her books also always received a good part of the critical acclaim they were 
due. But still, it’s worth re-stating what a fine writer she was and it’s going 
to a fine thing to spend a month here on the Reading group celebrating her work.

The question, as ever, is which book should we read. She wrote 20 novels, 
three short-story collections and four substantial works of nonfiction, so 
there’s a lot to choose from. I haven’t read enough to cast any kind of 
judgment, but between us I know we’ll be able to make a good decision. As 
often, we’ll put it to the vote. To nominate your favourite, just name it in 
the comments below. If you could give a reason, that would be fantastic – but 
it’s not compulsory. I’ll come back in a few days to tot up the totals.

As an extra inducement, we have five copies of the fascinating new biography 
of Bainbridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/31/beryl-bainbridge-love-by-all-sorts-of-means-brendan-king-review>
 to give away to the first five readers from the UK to post “I want a copy 
please”, along with a nice, constructive comment in the comments section below. 
If you’re lucky enough to be one of the first to comment, email Laura Kemp with 
your address (laura.kemp@theguardian.com <mailto:laura.kemp@theguardian.com>). 
Be nice to her, too. And as usual, all suggestions and ideas for future 
discussions will be gratefully received.
 