
This month we’ll be reading Beryl Bainbridge’s novel The Bottle Factory 
Outing, which won our public vote by a significant margin.

This work comes from the first successful part of the writer’s career when she 
specialised in “deftly distorted biography”,as AN Wilson put it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/04/beryl-bainbridge-obituary-an-wilson>
. It’s partly inspired by a period in 1970 when Bainbridge and a friend worked 
in Belloni’s wine warehouse in London. This was a pretty miserable job, 
sticking labels on to bottles in conditions so cold that the writer claimed she 
tried to keep warm by wrapping herself up in newspaper. It wasn’t well paid 
either – although it came with the dubious perk of an unlimited wine allowance. 
Bainbridge would later claim she often had to be wheeled home by 3pm. Or 
sometimes even 10.30am.


You can see her talking about it in this charming clip from the 1976 BBC Books 
programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00h73r3>. The clip also contains 
some footage from her publisher Duckworth, during its eccentric pomp, when 
Bainbridge appears to have had a writing desk inside the office. She also 
claims to have mainly written the book between the hours of 11pm and 5am.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Freading-group-beryl-bainbridges-the-bottle-factory-outing-is-our-october-choice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa43c0da8c057f53b98c979f687f8c840c40c50ee%2F0_0_3592_2155%2F3592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20group%3A%20Beryl%20Bainbridge's%20The%20Bottle%20Factory%20Outing%20is%20our%20October%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Freading-group-beryl-bainbridges-the-bottle-factory-outing-is-our-october-choice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20group%3A%20Beryl%20Bainbridge%27s%20The%20Bottle%20Factory%20Outing%20is%20our%20October%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Freading-group-beryl-bainbridges-the-bottle-factory-outing-is-our-october-choice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa43c0da8c057f53b98c979f687f8c840c40c50ee%2F0_0_3592_2155%2F3592.jpg>
 Beryl Bainbridge’s novel is semi-autobiographical. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe 
for the Guardian 
And if that isn’t intriguing enough, how about some of the praise it received 
when it came out? Writing in the Sunday Times, the respected critic Ronald 
Blythe blew his entire annual adjective allowance in one glorious paragraph:


“After turning the final page of The Bottle Factory Outing one can only gasp, 
and grope for the right phrase. What a talent, if that is not too mild a word. 
Such an atmosphere of impending doom has not been created since Brighton Rock – 
except thatBeryl Bainbridge <https://www.theguardian.com/books/berylbainbridge> 
is mercilessly comic instead of mercilessly vicious. Specialising in successive 
denouements, and with her gift for collecting the most amazing detail, she is 
so in control of her marvellous little story that one hangs on her words from 
first to last. What originality, what pleasure.”

The author of the aforementioned Brighton Rock was also impressed. Graham 
Greene called The Bottle Factory Outing “an outrageously funny and horrifying 
novel” in the Observer.


 High praise. She was also shortlisted for the Booker, and, as usual, didn’t 
win. But she did receive the considerable kudos and a handy 200 guineas from 
the Guardian fiction prize.

Speaking for myself, I haven’t read the book yet, and am looking forward to 
doing so. I hope you’ll join me.


As an extra inducement, we have five copies to give away to the first five 
readers from the UK to post “I want a copy please”, along with a nice, 
constructive comment in the comments section below. If you’re lucky enough to 
be one of the first to comment, email Laura Kemp with your address (
laura.kemp@theguardian.com <mailto:laura.kemp@theguardian.com>). Be nice to 
her, too. And as usual, all suggestions and ideas for future discussions will 
be gratefully received.


In the meantime, all extra suggestions, ideas for discussion and early 
impressions of the book as you read through are very welcome, so please post 
your thoughts below.

 