
It’s December, and you know what that means: best-of lists have been published 
and to-be-read piles have grown. Take your pick: authors’ favourites (here, 
curated by the Guardian Review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ng-interactive/2015/nov/28/best-books-of-2015-part-one>
;here, by The Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ng-interactive/2015/nov/29/best-books-of-2015-part-two>
) orcritics’ picks genre by genre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/best-books-of-2015>. But what about readers, 
you ask? Here is a selection of the excellent reviewsthey sent in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/nov/28/which-are-your-favourite-books-of-2015>
 for their favourite books of 2015.

They include some of the year’s most lauded fiction – like Marlon James’s 
powerfulMan Booker winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/10/brief-history-of-seven-killings-marlon-james-review>
 about violence in 70s Jamaica –, some of the most anticipated, like Elena 
Ferrante’sconclusion to her Neapolitan series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/03/the-story-of-the-lost-child-elena-ferrante-review-finale>
 or Franzen’sreturn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/06/purity-jonathan-franzen-review-piercingly-brilliant>
, and some of the most discussed, like Hanya Yanagihara’s mammothA Little Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/05/a-little-life-hanya-yanagihara-review>
, a novel about friendship and the effects of child abuse, which has ignited 
heated debates among readers and critics. But our readers also vouch for 
extraordinary works of fantasy fiction, nature memoir and travel writing. Here 
are the notable books you most voted for, and why they’re worth reading – in 
your own words.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449765144348%2Fb23fc2d7-40fd-4eae-80d4-6376ad2b8e68-1346x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449765144348%2Fb23fc2d7-40fd-4eae-80d4-6376ad2b8e68-1346x2040.jpeg>
1. A Little Life by Hanya Yanagihara

Yanagihara’s Man Booker-nominated novel follows the friendship of four men in 
New York City over the course of their lives, and deals with the effects of 
child abuse – plus, it has certainlygenerated a polarised debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/02/hanya-yanagihara-editor-debate-a-little-life-gerald-howard-daniel-mendelsohn>
. It was the most-voted-for by our readers.

“The most captivating story of human suffering I have read in a very long 
time. This is a fictionalized document of the horrors of abuse at an early age 
and how its aftermath robs the main character of the ability to ever find peace 
or what we generally describe as a ‘normal life’. Riveting.”Joe Fantetti


“This had me weeping, shivering, smiling and utterly captivated throughout its 
length.”Sid

“Astonishing - gruelling but full of love.” Lisa Butcher

“Quite simply, no book has ever sunk so none-deep into me. The main character, 
Jude, lived so vividly in my mind that I woke up one night crying about 
something I dreamt had happened to him. It’s flawed in places but so vividly 
written, so heartfelt, it deserves every praise.”Joanne Finney

 * What we said: “Unusual, uneven, unrelenting” – read the Guardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/05/a-little-life-hanya-yanagihara-review>

 * Interview with Hanya Yanagihara: ‘I wanted everything turned up a little 
too high’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/26/hanya-yanagihara-i-wanted-everything-turned-up-a-little-too-high-interview-a-little-life>
 * Buy the book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/316117/s/a-little-life/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
2. The Story of a Lost Child by Elena Ferrante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/elena-ferrante> 

The eagerly-awaited conclusion of Ferrante’s 4-part Neapolitan novels, which 
follows the lives and friendship between two women, has been beloved by critics 
and readers alike.

“Elena Ferrante’s Neapolitan series harks back to a time in which fiction was 
not trying to shock, preach or impress. It’s storytelling at its purest and 
most compelling, it’s as if Austen, Verga, Dostoyevsky and Stendhal had sat 
down together and decided to write a history of post-war Naples, telling us all 
we need to know about friendship, intellectual ambition, the struggle for true 
feminism and the Italian mind. And everything else, as well. Ferrante is 
certainly one of the most, if not the singular most, interesting figures in 
contemporary world literature.”Davide Ferrauto (New York)

“The last one of Ferrante’s Neapolitan novels features Lila and Elena as 
adults growing elderly. Her prose continues to mine deep and hidden veins of 
consciousness, competition and complex friendships. It is flat-out the finest 
exploration of women’s lives, challenges and relationships I have ever read.” D
iane E. Hamlin

“A wondrous conclusion to the Neapolitan novels. Deep in psychology, erudite 
in detail and compulsively readable.”Patrick Dyer

 * What we said: “A frighteningly insightful finale” – read the Guardian review
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/03/the-story-of-the-lost-child-elena-ferrante-review-finale>
 * Read an extract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/28/the-story-of-the-lost-child-by-elena-ferrante-extract>
 * Read about Elena Ferrante, the global literary sensation nobody knows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/31/elena-ferrante-literary-sensation-nobody-knows>
 * Buy the book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/325756/> 
3. A God in Ruins by Kate Atkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kate-atkinson>

Atkinson’s follow-up to her best-selling Life After Life follows the life of 
Teddy Todd, a second-world-war RAF bomber pilot.

“Humane, witty and erudite while playing some interesting games with the form. 
Utterly beguiling.”Alun Lewis

“Just beautiful, building on the great foundation of Life After Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/06/life-after-life-kate-atkinson-review>
. I cried, and laughed (in that order I think). I want so much more ... more 
Issy, more of everyone ... please! Every character deserves their own volume.”
Robert Thursfield

“It was the best-written book I read this year (and I’ve read 202 books so far 
this year (although not all from 2015). A novel can be about anything as long 
as it is well-written. All is in the telling.”Tom Rosenthal

 * What we said: “Her finest work” – read the Guardian review  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/10/a-god-in-ruins-kate-atkinson-observer-review>
 * Buy the book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283580/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=testtracking-100515&>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449765709534%2Fa83ee484-9e28-4bce-a1d6-5b4c03fee68f-1325x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449765709534%2Fa83ee484-9e28-4bce-a1d6-5b4c03fee68f-1325x2040.jpeg>
4. A Brief History of Seven Killings by Marlon James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/marlon-james>

This year’s Man Booker winner tells the story of the attempted assassination 
of Bob Marley – and of Jamaica in the 70s and 80s, when the guns flooded in and 
CIA agents took up residence.

“It’s hideously violent at times, and the sex scenes are a little strong for 
my taste, but dammit, Marlon James knows how to make these characters come 
alive – they’re flawed and selfish and entrenched in a world that I’ll never 
know, or want to know personally, but when Marlon James writes about it, I have 
no hesitation in visiting it for a few hours. Brilliantly written and 
considering what it was up against, a wonderful winner of the Booker. And for 
teaching me the word bombocloth, Marlon James has my eternal thanks!”Graham 
Vingoe


“Far-reaching, epic, complex, heart-breaking, scary, filled with breathtaking 
cursing and violence, yet still poetic.”Esme

“Brilliant use of perspective and voice. It also shines a light on a time and 
a place in history (Jamaican gunlaw and politics in the 1970s) that has 
previously hardly been noted in literature (in music yes, in literature not). 
Also, it brilliantly shows how blowback is not a concept limited to the Middle 
East; CIA interference in Jamaica directly leads to the Yardie drug possession 
in major American cities a decade later. It’s brilliantly researched, most of 
the main threads of the story are true or believed to be true. As Marlon James 
himself says, ‘if it no go so, it go nearly so’.”Guy Hearn

 * What we said: “Bloody conflicts in 70s Jamaica” – read the Guardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/10/brief-history-of-seven-killings-marlon-james-review>
 * Interview with Marlon James: ‘I was the nerd, I wasn’t into sports, assumed 
gay’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/14/marlon-james-marley-murder-and-me>
 * Read a conversation between Marlon James and Jeanette Winterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/28/conversation-jeanette-winterson-marlon-james-interview>
 * Marlon James chats about the novel on the Guardian Books podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2015/oct/16/marlon-james-brief-history-seven-killings-booker-prize-podcast>
 * Buy the book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/brief-history-of-seven-killings-272989.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449765984580%2F10456dd7-8e12-429a-995e-915e6b323f93-1326x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449765984580%2F10456dd7-8e12-429a-995e-915e6b323f93-1326x2040.jpeg>
5. A Spool of Blue Thread by Anne Tyler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-tyler> 

Tyler’s 20th novel, a portrait of American domestic life landed her on the 
Baileys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2015/apr/14/baileys-prize-shortlist-in-pictures>
 andMan Booker shortlists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/11/man-booker-prize-2015-shortlist-yanagihara-sahota-james-obioma-tyler-mccarthy>
.

“The characters were so fully formed I felt I was reading a family album. 
There is poetry in the way the author has written about mundane family life. 
When the book ended, I felt alone.”Kimberly Shields

“I liked the mixture of endearing and exasperating characteristics of family 
members, the swirl of changing priorities and affinities that they display in 
Anne Tyler’s excruciatingly telling portrayal of family life and its formative 
history.”Pamela Aveyard

“A pitch perfect and tender novel of family dynamics and secrets.” Jane Kirby

 * What we said: “In defence of Anne Tyler” – read the Guardian review  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/04/a-spool-of-blue-thread-anne-tyler-review>
 * Interview with Anne Tyler: ‘I am not a spiritual person’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/15/anne-tyler-interview-i-am-not-a-spiritual-person-spool-of-blue-thread>
 * Buy the book <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/spool-of-blue-thread.html>  
<> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449766203764%2F48990d88-c46e-43af-9c72-e667e9db2614-669x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449766203764%2F48990d88-c46e-43af-9c72-e667e9db2614-669x1020.jpeg>
6. Purity by Jonathan Franzen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathan-franzen> 

Franzen’s new novel was arguably the most hyped of the year and, despite the 
author’scontroversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/21/jonathan-franzen-considered-adopting-iraqi-orphan-young-people>
 figure, it didn’t disappoint (many) readers.

“Franzen’s last work is extremely readable and engaging. Although Purity might 
not be as good asFreedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/01/freedom-jonathan-franzen-review> 
orThe Corrections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/nov/09/fiction.reviews>, it is a 
gripping novel, which touches upon the ubiquity of social media and the way 
they shape human communication, mutual perceptions, and even one’s sense of 
self, as well as privacy and transparency in the internet. Franzen’s 
extravagant parallel between East German totalitarianism and the dictatorship 
of the World Wide Web might be a bit over the top, but it certainly makes you 
think.”Martyna

“Dickensian in scope and characterisation (as well as in its reliance on 
incredible coincidences) this was the most engrossing, thought provoking and, 
at times, infuriating read of 2015. Franzen at his best.”Jason Bright

“Every page contains the perfect words to describe the most confused feelings 
and experiences and beliefs.”Lil

 * What we said: “Piercingly brilliant” – read the Guardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/06/purity-jonathan-franzen-review-piercingly-brilliant>
 * Interview with Jonathan Franzen: ‘There is no way to make myself not male’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/aug/21/jonathan-franzen-purity-interview>
 * Purity: digested read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/13/purity-by-jonathan-franzen-digested-read>
 * Buy the book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323757/?utm_source=editoriallink&ut%20m_medium=>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449764146937%2F6a425820-4138-40b9-9dd1-b6ae20e74f41-1323x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449764146937%2F6a425820-4138-40b9-9dd1-b6ae20e74f41-1323x2040.jpeg>
7. The Buried Giant by Kazuo Ishiguro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kazuoishiguro>

Ten years after his previous novel, the adored Never Let Me Go, Kazuo Ishiguro 
made a comeback with a turn into a Tolkienesque realm – and most readers loved 
him for it.

“The way that Ishiguro creates this epic tale of adventure with a lingering 
sense always of what is lost and absent is beautifully captivating. The novel 
is exciting and yet tragic in the way it masterfully deals with the power of 
memories and the hole their loss leaves as well as asking what love is really 
based on? Memories or feelings right now?” Marcus Bateson


“Whilst I have read pleasanter books, books that made me laugh out loud, books 
whose prose did not suggest a descent into depths of subconscious psychology, I 
can think of no other book read this year that quite simply buried itself into 
my psyche in quite the manner of The Buried Giant. I still find myself – months 
later – dwelling on its themes of memory, death and forgiveness, and attempting 
to answer a question, so heavy in our age of eternal digital memory: is it 
possible to truly forgive when we cannot forget?” Yvonne Bouma O’Brien

 * What we said: “Kazuo Ishiguro ventures into Tolkien territory” – read the 
Guardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/04/the-buried-giant-review-kazuo-ishiguro-tolkien-britain-mythical-past>
 * Listen to an extract on the Guardian Books podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2015/mar/04/kazuoishiguro-fiction> 
 * Read about Ishiguro’s turn to fantasy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/19/kazuo-ishiguro-the-buried-giant-novel-interview>
 * Buy the book <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/buried-giant.html>  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449765231075%2Ff26bc0da-f502-44fa-9f73-684a94e6f67a-1327x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20top%2010%20best%20books%20of%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Freaders-top-10-best-books-of-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449765231075%2Ff26bc0da-f502-44fa-9f73-684a94e6f67a-1327x2040.jpeg>
8. The Shepherd’s Crown by Terry Pratchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/terrypratchett> 

Shortly after Terry Pratchett passed away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/12/terry-pratchett> this year, it 
emerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/27/terry-pratchett-was-working-on-new-discworld-stories-when-he-died>
 that he was still working on several novels for his Discworld series. This, 
published posthumously in August, was the last one he completed.

“Moving finale to Discworld saga, beautifully written as always, full of 
humour and written with heart.”Snoj0815

“It was stunning, glorious and heartbreaking. A grand finale and a fitting 
swan song from one of the greatest writers of this – and the last – century. 
This books allows to mourn Sir Terry, Granny Weatherwax and Discworld together, 
and for that I am very grateful – and in awe of how, even in his last months of 
severe bad health, he was able to produce a book as witty and insightful as 
those that came before.”J.P. Bebbington

 * What we said: “The much-loved author’s last Discworld novel” – read the 
Guardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/27/the-shepherds-crown-terry-pratchett-review-discworld>
 * ‘Mum, me and our Discworld tattoos’: read our readers’ tributes to Terry 
Pratchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/mar/13/its-all-pratchetts-fault-readers-tributes-to-terry-pratchett>
 * Read Graeme Neill on how revisiting Terry Pratchett’s Discworld taught him 
why he loves reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/14/revisting-terry-pratchett-discworld-taught-me-love-of-reading>
 * ‘A butt of my own jokes’: read Terry Pratchett on the disease that finally 
claimed him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/15/a-butt-of-my-own-jokes-terry-pratchett-on-the-disease-that-finally-claimed-him>
 * Buy the book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/318140/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
9. Common Ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/05/common-ground-review-rob-cowen-memoir>
 by Rob Cowen

In a year in which the genre of nature writing has exploded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/05/best-nature-books-2015>, 
following the huge mainstream success ofH is for Hawk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/23/h-is-for-hawk-helen-macdonald-review>
, this memoir about columnist Rob Cowen’s move to Yorkshire captured our 
readers’ imagination.

“Nature writing for a generation that feels disconnected from the land. This 
book teaches us how to connect.”Joe Johnson


“Lyrical, honest and deeply moving exploration of the spaces where humans and 
nature meet.”Rosie Hoole

“Beautiful, fierce, radical loving memoir mapping a patch of ground and a 
personal transformation.”Nancy Kerr

 * What we said: “Rob Cowen searches for the animal within” – read the 
Guardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/05/common-ground-review-rob-cowen-memoir>
 * Buy the book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283383/> 
10. Last Man Off by Matt Lewis 

As true-life tales of endurance and survival go, Matt Lewis’s is one of the 
most dramatic in recent memory. His recounting of his experiences in 1998 on 
the doomed vesselSudur Havid 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/26/i-was-shipwrecked-in-icy-south-atlantic>
 should take its place alongsideThe Perfect Storm 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007230068>
, said reviewerAlexander Larman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/24/last-man-off-review-matt-lewis-gripping-tale-survival-high-seas>
.

“Fascinating autobiographical tale of Matt Lewis surviving treacherous 
conditions to eventual catastrophe out at sea. His description of his crew 
mates is so detailed that you feel you knew them too.” Mary Ogilvie

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
“A frank and emotionally challenging account of a truly horrific accident on 
the high seas. The author writes in such a way that, although you know the 
outcome, it still has you on the edge of your seat.”Chris Lewis


“When faced with a situation beyond ones darkest fears, this is the true story 
of one mans courage, morality and heroism which will stay with you forever. If 
ever unfortunate enough to be faced with this situation, I hope this man is by 
my side.”Joanna Bennett

 * What we said: “Matt Lewis’s tale of survival on the high seas” – read the 
Guardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/24/last-man-off-review-matt-lewis-gripping-tale-survival-high-seas>
 * Buy the book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/34014> 
Is your favourite missing? Please add it in the comments below, and let us 
know why you loved it.
 