
Following our vote last week, Penelope Fitzgerald’s The Blue Flower has 
emerged as this month’s reading group choice – just. It’s been a painfully 
close-run thing, with The Beginning of Spring right behind and The Bookshop 
close after that. “I love them all,” was a fairly typical comment. Choosing 
between these fine novels has clearly proved a challenge.

Since nearly all Fitzgerald’s books seem to be universally admired, I hope I’m 
right in assuming that those disappointed their first choice didn’t win will 
still enjoy The Blue Flower. It certainly sounds like an intriguing novel.

For a start, it has been showered with praise. Fitzgerald biographer Hermione 
Leehas called The Blue Flower 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/book-of-a-lifetime-the-blue-flower-by-penelope-fitzgerald-8915586.html>
 her subject’s “beautiful masterpiece”. Frank Kermode wrote in a 2010 
introduction to the book that it is “the finest work of this extraordinarily 
gifted novelist”. Novelist Andrew Millersays it is “impeccable” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/29/andrew-miller-top-10-historical-novels>
 and when the book came out in 1995 poet and translator Michael Hoffmanwrote in 
the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/97/04/13/reviews/970413.13hofmant.html> that it 
is “hard to know where to begin to praise the book” before also declaring it a 
masterpiece.

This is also a novel with a fascinating, if difficult, subject: the early 
German Romantic philosopherNovalis <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Novalis> and 
his love for a teenage girl. We’ll be able to say more about what to make of 
that as we read through the book.

I have a feeling there’s going to be a great deal to discuss in The Blue 
Flower, but let’s keep our options open and consider touching on The Beginning 
of Spring later on in the month. As ever, I’ll be keen to hear opinions about 
that and any other subjects you’d like to discuss.

To further that end, we have five copies of The Blue Flower to give away to 
the first five readers from the UK to post “I want a copy please”, along with a 
nice, constructive comment in the comments section below. If you’re lucky 
enough to be one of the first to comment, email Laura Kemp with your address (
laura.kemp@theguardian.com <mailto:laura.kemp@theguardian.com>). Be nice to 
her, too.

On 27 January, we’ll also be joined by the wonderful Hermione Lee for a 
webchat about Fitzgerald. Lee wrotePenelope Fitzgerald: A Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/01/penelope-fitzgerald-hermione-lee-review>
 in 2013; “a perfect choice as Fitzgerald’s biographer” according to Philip 
Hensher, who credited Lee in his review for doing “a superb job, capturing an 
elusive personality and a complex, sometimes rather harrowing story”.

Oh, and one final word of caution: Fitzgerald often said she didn’t like to 
explain too much about her books for fear of insulting her readers … but since 
we’ve just spent a monthbreaking the first two rules of Fight Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/dec/06/fight-club-by-chuck-palahniuk-steps-up-for-decembers-reading-group>
, I’m hoping we can grant ourselves a certain amount of leeway.
 