
Barnett Newman was not Jackson Pollock, the consummate action painter. Nor was 
he Rothko, the gloomy suicide. He did not perform for the camera ("I am not a 
dancer!" he once said), and he didn't paint in a barn. He took care to wear a 
suit for photographers; he even wore a monocle. Like Magritte, he affected the 
disguise of the bourgeois. He doesn't fit in with our received notions of how 
painters in New York in the 1950s looked and behaved.

Newman had lots of style, and was by all accounts an inveterate hanger-out at 
openings and parties. It is difficult, looking at the images of him in Tate 
Modern's catalogue for his retrospective opening on Friday - and there are at 
least 61 photos of the artist himself - not to think of him as an avuncular, 
garrulous figure, or at least a man consciously casting himself against type.

As it was, Newman, who was born in Manhattan to Jewish, Polish immigrant 
parents in 1905, didn't even have his first solo exhibition until he was 45. He 
spent much of his time and energy before the war trying to rescue the family 
menswear business. He taught art appreciation classes, studied philosophy, 
wrote music criticism, managed a theatre group and, in 1933, ran on a ludicrous 
ticket for New York mayor. And all this time he was studying and thinking about 
art. He failed at many things: to get a regular teaching licence, to become a 
federal inspector in a prison clothing factory, to obtain a grant to write a 
book on the American civil service. And, of course, he never got to be mayor 
either, though he did become an associate of the American Ornithologists Union. 
Rejected for military service on health grounds, he still insisted on 
registering as a conscientious objector.

That Newman managed to become a full-time artist at all, and has been the 
subject of two Tate retrospectives since his death (the first was exactly 30 
years ago), is all the more surprising, given that he did not, on the evidence 
of what little of his early work survives, appear hugely gifted. This worked in 
his favour when he eventually hit his stride, rejecting the awkwardnesses and 
indeterminate, crabbed meanderings of the drawings and paintings he made prior 
to 1947. Influenced by surrealism (mostly Miro, Masson and Ernst), these works 
today seem stiff and awkward, though necessary to his subsequent development.

That he discovered himself late as an artist is itself an important lesson in 
these days when, if an artist doesn't have a smart gallery or a full 
international curriculum by the time they are 35, it is unlikely anyone will 
ever take them seriously. At the age Newman had his first solo show, many 
careers are effectively over.

Part of Newman's greatness rests in what he worked himself out of, by dint of 
his artistic ambition. It seems to me that neither Newman, Rothko nor Pollock 
was possessed of remarkable natural facility, yet each went on to achieve far 
more than, say, Adolf Gottlieb, William Baziotes or Robert Motherwell, whose 
adept and characterful draughtsmanship and feel for their materials made the 
process of invention a less urgent and precipitous task. In the case of Willem 
de Kooning, in many ways the best trained and most natural painter among the 
abstract expressionists, he achieved his strongest work by leaving some of that 
facility and training behind, by painting against himself.

Newman's work, however, evolved through his concentration on the material 
aspects and conditions of painting: on the practicalities of paint application, 
and the reduction of painting largely to the kinds of skills one might use to 
paint walls or to prime canvases. He set himself limits, and found in them 
enormous freedom and scope for innovation. The qualities of paint combined with 
the qualities of different kinds of canvas came to play significant roles in 
determining the look and feel of his paintings.

His work mostly consists of undifferentiated fields of flat colour interrupted 
by sometimes narrow, sometimes broader verticals, which have come to be called 
zips rather than stripes. That Newman was a tremendously innovative, rewarding 
and influential artist might seem paradoxical, or bolster the false impression 
that innovation in painting has, in the past half century or so, been reduced 
to a few paltry formal devices. But significances were what preoccupied Newman 
the painter. A whole lot of difficult thinking goes on in his large, grand, 
apparently pared-down canvases. They are filled with resonances and silences, 
passages of stillness and sudden, surprising yet somehow inevitable events. At 
his best, Newman produced paintings that balanced calculation and reserve with 
intuitive leaps; he is a painter to whom the dictum that the whole is greater 
than the sum of its parts can truly be applied. If you attend to his paintings, 
you end up thinking a lot, too, with your eye and your body as well as your 
brain.

I doubt, though, that any viewer today would end up thinking the kind of 
things Newman thought and spoke and wrote about when he painted them. 
Thankfully, the richness and depth of Newman's art, and its continuing 
interest, does not depend on what Newman himself said. It is all to easy to 
resist his metaphysical, portentous, biblical and mythological ramblings, his 
mixture of the existential, the anarchistic, the portentous and the downright 
cock-eyed. Certain of his titles make me wince: Onement, Death of Euclid, Vir 
Heroicus Sublimis. His published statements have a tendency to windy verbiage 
about the Sublime (he was, by all accounts, a great and profligate talker). And 
yet what actually obsessed him was the sense of presence, and the encounter the 
artist made with himself in his paintings, both as he painted them and as he 
looked at them.

The artist's personality, however, is not what these paintings are about. In 
fact, it is a misnomer to call them abstract expressionist works at all. They 
are concrete rather than abstract, and they express nothing about the mental 
state of their maker. Instead, looking at a Newman painting, one becomes 
acutely aware of how it was made, the things that have been done with paint and 
canvas, the decisions that have been taken. Newman's paintings reveal 
themselves through our looking closely, walking their length, scanning their 
fields of colour, getting up close to their surfaces; through immersion not in 
their illusions - because, really, there are none - but in the surface itself, 
the colour and the paint.

A Newman work is a succession of differences. Where one thing stops and 
another begins - at the edges between colours, or where paint seeps under a 
taped-up edge, where it coughs or splutters or fades at its margin, where a 
full rich black grazes the nub of the bare canvas, or disappears into a faded 
halo of oil that has soaked out of the paint and into the cotton duck - is 
utterly decisive. In some paintings very little seems to happen - a colour is 
bisected by a vertical zip, a slim band runs parallel to the painting's margin 
- but the placement and characteristics of these interventions are always more 
crucial and complex than at first appears. An edge in a Newman can be biting, 
abrupt, faint, assertive. It can be complex, contested, oddly indeterminate. 
But notching up differences is not, finally, the point. They are the way into 
the paintings. What happens beyond that is much more mysterious.

Are Newman's zips breaks or pauses or figures? Which is the note and where is 
the interval? There are no motifs in Newman, only transitions and 
interruptions. Nowhere is this better seen than in the room at Tate Modern 
devoted to his 14 Stations of the Cross, a series of black-and-white paintings, 
all the same size, painted between 1958 and 1966. He wrests so many differences 
out of his limited palette, and at the same time keeps their overall character 
so unified, that they constitute a single great, painted poem. Do they 
articulate anything about Christ's progress to Calvary? No. But they are a 
progress from one place to another. Each is a stop along the way. Each has its 
difficulties, its own complex character, and each is a return. The pace from 
one painting to the next is measured and sober, and each painting has its own 
physicality, its variety of touches, surfaces, qualities. If there is pain here 
- and I think there is - it is quotidian and remorseless. But it feels 
impossible to talk about this: it is beyond the paintings themselves.

Grand, full-dress occasions such as retrospectives make it difficult to 
concentrate on individual works, which is what we need to do with Newman's 
paintings. There are many important works missing from the Tate Modern show. It 
is not, by a long way, the definitive Newman retrospective. I also doubt that 
it will draw huge crowds, but then Newman was never much interested in pleasing 
his public. He made difficult, severe paintings. His forays into sculpture were 
not so successful, the vertical zip becoming a Giacometti-like vertical man, 
except that Newman presented these figures not on a horizontal plane but on 
fussy plinths. I don't think he really understood sculpture. His very last 
paintings (he died in 1970) are not his best. But no matter. He had already 
said enough in his work, though what he said is still being unravelled by those 
who look at him. Which is why we go back to him, again and again.

Â· At Tate Modern, London SE1 (020-7887 8008) from Friday until January 5.
 