
Khadim Ali remembers the day he started to receive death threats. Anonymous 
callers would ring the young artist in his hometown of Quetta, Pakistan. “You 
are the infidel Shia,” they said. “You are the infidel artist.”

“It was then I decided to leave Pakistan and find a safer place for myself,” 
says Ali. “Because of my ethnicity I was a constant target.”

In 2009 Ali – who has been collected by the likes of the Victoria and Albert 
Museum and the Guggenheim – moved to Australia permanently on a distinguished 
talent visa. His mother and father, exiled Hazaras whose own parents fled 
bloody persecution in Afghanistan in the 1890s, joined him as refugees in 2012. 
Their house in Quetta old town had been bombed in a car suicide attack that 
left them seriously injured, their home destroyed, and 14 dead.

 “I feel like we have a new life, a better and peaceful life here,” says Ali, 
38. “My parents are not concerned about me leaving home in the morning.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Frefugee-art-a-way-to-face-up-to-ugly-truths-and-possibly-change-minds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa77d7194be8670b04d37d5ae97b3e12bddc3dbcf%2F0_0_8000_6822%2F8000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugee%20art%3A%20a%20way%20to%20face%20up%20to%20ugly%20truths%20%E2%80%93%20and%20possibly%20change%20minds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Frefugee-art-a-way-to-face-up-to-ugly-truths-and-possibly-change-minds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugee%20art%3A%20a%20way%20to%20face%20up%20to%20ugly%20truths%20%E2%80%93%20and%20possibly%20change%20minds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Frefugee-art-a-way-to-face-up-to-ugly-truths-and-possibly-change-minds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa77d7194be8670b04d37d5ae97b3e12bddc3dbcf%2F0_0_8000_6822%2F8000.jpg>
 Untitled from the Transitions-Evacuation series (2014) by Khadim Ali, who was 
branded as an ‘infidel artist’ in his hometown in Pakistan 
Ali’s artwork is one of many on show in the exhibition Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> at Sydney’s Casula Powerhouse, 
which opens this month and runs until September. The 65 pieces from 22 globally 
renowned artists – all connected by a refugee background – span painting, 
textiles, sculpture and performance.

“Art has the power to move us,” says the curator, Toni Bailey. “I’m hoping 
that these artists who have big reputations can attract attention, and in doing 
that we can change misconceptions about refugees and asylum seekers.”

New South Wales will resettle half of the 12,000 Syrian refugees the 
Australian government has pledged to take in. Many will find homes in western 
Sydney, near Casula Powerhouse – an area in which 40% of the population are 
born overseas. The show, then, is particularly poignant; a chance to tell “very 
human stories that come from places of danger and destruction”, says Bailey.

Artists include Germans Max Ernst, who escaped arrest by the Gestapo and fled 
to America with the aid of Peggy Guggenheim, and Frank Auerbach, who was sent 
to England in 1939 but whose parents perished in the concentration camps. Then 
there’s Lebanese-born Palestinian Mona Hatoum, who became exiled in London 
after civil war erupted in Lebanon in 1975; Chinese Ah Xian, who sought asylum 
in Australia after the Tiananmen Square massacre; and Vietnamese Dinh Q Lê, who 
emigrated to the US to escape the clutches of the invading Khmer Rouge.

Made in response to the drowning of more than 50 asylum seekers after a 
fishing boat sunk off Christmas Island in 2010, Lê’s contribution of Erasure 
(Still #1) shows an 18th-century tall ship on a beach, doused in flames. The 
piece channels his own (more lucky) journey to freedom and is a reminder that 
Australia is a nation invaded and colonised by “boat people”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Frefugee-art-a-way-to-face-up-to-ugly-truths-and-possibly-change-minds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5bed9eec7710d1c0765e35ea96eb87311de295%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugee%20art%3A%20a%20way%20to%20face%20up%20to%20ugly%20truths%20%E2%80%93%20and%20possibly%20change%20minds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Frefugee-art-a-way-to-face-up-to-ugly-truths-and-possibly-change-minds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugee%20art%3A%20a%20way%20to%20face%20up%20to%20ugly%20truths%20%E2%80%93%20and%20possibly%20change%20minds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Frefugee-art-a-way-to-face-up-to-ugly-truths-and-possibly-change-minds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5bed9eec7710d1c0765e35ea96eb87311de295%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Erasure (Still #1) (2011), by Dinh Q Lê Photograph: Dinh Q Lê 
Bailey insists that the exhibition is necessary because “there are still 
people who think it is illegal to seek asylum by boat”. Fearmongering about a 
flood of immigrants, too, is commonplace. Yet Australia receives less than 1% 
of the world’s refugees. Meanwhile, more than 90% of people arriving by boat 
are found to be escaping war and persecution, according to the Asylum Seeker 
Resource Centre.

Most, like the Hazara Afghan refugee Ahmad Ali Jafari, end up in detention 
centres. In 2013, at the age of 26, Jafari died of a heart attack in Sydney’s 
infamous Villawood immigration detention centre. Jafari had told the officer in 
charge he was suffering severe chest pains; rather than help, he said, guards 
mocked him.

The story of Jafari is relayed in a harrowing tribute zine on display in 
Telling Tales – Excursions in Narrative Form, a major exhibition at the Museum 
of Contemporary Art on until October. One section is devoted to the RefugeeArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Project, founded in 2010 by the 
artist and academic Safdar Ahmed, which features drawings by refugees and 
asylum seekers trapped in limbo at Villawood waiting for their applications to 
be processed.

With the dire lack of materials available at the centre, some pieces are done 
using instant coffee powder mixed in water as a form of paint. Another 
challenge is visiting restrictions: all volunteers had to sign a contract 
stipulating not to speak publicly about what they saw in the facility and no 
video or photography is allowed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Frefugee-art-a-way-to-face-up-to-ugly-truths-and-possibly-change-minds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54374cbee07de014ab916c0ffca504af6f12c89a%2F0_0_3543_2417%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugee%20art%3A%20a%20way%20to%20face%20up%20to%20ugly%20truths%20%E2%80%93%20and%20possibly%20change%20minds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Frefugee-art-a-way-to-face-up-to-ugly-truths-and-possibly-change-minds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugee%20art%3A%20a%20way%20to%20face%20up%20to%20ugly%20truths%20%E2%80%93%20and%20possibly%20change%20minds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Frefugee-art-a-way-to-face-up-to-ugly-truths-and-possibly-change-minds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54374cbee07de014ab916c0ffca504af6f12c89a%2F0_0_3543_2417%2F3543.jpg>
 Mohammed, Untitled by Mohammed (2013-15), painted with powdered coffee, 
courtesy of the Refugee Art Project 
As such, Ahmed’s zine Villawood: Notes From an Immigration Detention Centre 
<https://medium.com/shipping-news/villawood-9698183e114c#.dkkzlvlln> is a 
particularly powerful testament. The comic-book style only serves to reinforce 
the horror: there are close-ups of teeth gritted, bodies being squatted over by 
oversized judicial hammers, mouths sewn shut, and a figure dripping in blood, 
head dropped in despair.

“Being in detention felt like mental torture, like a type of slow poisoning,” 
former Christmas Island and Villawood detainee Murtaza Ali Jafari is quoted as 
saying in the Refugee Art Project zine #5, published in 2014. “I came to 
Australia looking for protection but the politicians have kicked me like a 
soccer ball.”

Villawood leads to “dramatic psychological deterioration of people who are 
kept there indefinitely,” Ahmed says. “To be held for years on end with no 
knowledge of their final outcome or date of release breaks people mentally, and 
that is exactly its purpose, in the context of Australia’s logic of deterrence.”

Most of the artists in the Refugee Art Project have no prior experience as 
artists. Still, Ahmed asserts their work contains a “poignancy and force that 
stems from their need to communicate something about their situation”.

Crucially, he wants art to be a way to humanise asylum seekers, so we do not 
“view them exclusively through the lens of their past suffering”. It is 
important to reject the “stereotypes of the ‘good’ – therefore deserving – 
versus the ‘bad’ refugee”, he says.

Jinette de Gooijer is trying to do exactly that through a performance artwork 
held in Melbourne on Sunday. In Crossing Borders – A Slow Walk, 100 people 
dressed in black will walk to and from the Immigration Museum in an attempt to 
highlight the perilous movements of refugees. De Gooijer, one of many 
organisers, hopes that the walk will give “some sense of what it is to cross 
borders”.

Art, as we know, can serve many purposes. For the Casula Powerhouse curator 
Toni Bailey, it’s a way to spark confronting conversations: “I want to address 
unjust misconceptions and face up to ugly truths,” she says with force. But an 
artist like Ali sees his work as something altogether different: a “breathing 
space. A place where I take refuge.”

• Refugees <http://www.casulapowerhouse.com/whats-on/exhibitions2/refugee> is 
on at Casula Powerhouse, Sydney until 11 September;Telling Tales – Excursions 
in Narrative Form <http://www.mca.com.au/exhibition/telling-tales/> is on at 
the Museum of Contemporary Art, Sydney, until 9 October;In Crossing Borders – A 
Slow Walk <https://www.facebook.com/events/569166776572717/> is taking place in 
Melbourne from 10am on Sunday. Find out more aboutthe Refugee Art Project 
<http://therefugeeartproject.com/home/>.
 