
There remain reservations about how successful England’s expedition to 
Bangladesh was on the field, but as they arrive safely in Mumbai for the second 
leg of their tour, one man is entitled to look back on the first with 
satisfaction.

Reg Dickason, England’s security adviser, is the man whose advice was the 
single largest factor in thetour to Bangladesh going ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/29/alastair-cook-confirms-place-england-tour-bangladesh-security>
 and there has been no argument that the security arrangements for the players 
– and the press, who were incorporated unofficially into the plan along with a 
few stray supporters – were successful.

England confusion over spin stretches back to Salisbury’s forgotten code | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/england-cricket-bangladesh-india-the-spin>
Dickason is an affable, gruff Australian, who was once a policeman in 
Melbourne. For the past two decades he has been a security expert well trusted 
within cricket as well as an increasing number of other sports. If anything 
untoward had happened in Bangladesh his reputation would have been badly 
tainted. But now the trust remains.

“It’s all gone very smoothly,” he said.

“We’ve been very happy with the effort the Bangladesh government and their 
board have put in. We were fortunate that we had an opportunity to see the roll 
out at the Under-19 World Cup [when everyone turned up except Australia]. We 
thought if they can replicate that for the England team we’ll be pretty happy, 
and they have.”

The security on hand in Bangladesh was very visible. Occasionally it seemed 
excessive to the layman, most obviously the convoy between the hotel and the 
ground or airport when the roads were cleared for the buses carrying the teams 
and the press. In cities such as Dhaka and Chittagong that was a major 
operation as well as a major luxury since the journey time through streets that 
are usually extremely congested was slashed dramatically.

Dickason said about 2,000 police a day were allocated to the security plan in 
Dhaka, 1,400 in Chittagong. It was a little eerie to arrive at a cricket ground 
to be surrounded by so many armed guards as well as men with guns stationed on 
nearby rooftops, but Dickason does not believe this had an adverse effect on 
the players.

“When you enter a different environment after two or three days it becomes the 
norm. There were huge convoys and when you get off the plane there was a huge 
security presence. But after a few days it just becomes part of the landscape.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fengland-bangladesh-reg-dickason-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F962efb6d2fd745819593582d824ccec0244597e1%2F0_140_2731_1638%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reg%20Dickason%20vindicated%20after%20England%20tour%20of%20Bangladesh%20passes%20peacefully&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fengland-bangladesh-reg-dickason-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reg%20Dickason%20vindicated%20after%20England%20tour%20of%20Bangladesh%20passes%20peacefully&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fengland-bangladesh-reg-dickason-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F962efb6d2fd745819593582d824ccec0244597e1%2F0_140_2731_1638%2F2731.jpg>
 England’s security expert Reg Dickason said the security operation in 
Bangladesh was probably the most comprehensive he had seen. Photograph: Mike 
Egerton/PA 
The success of the security arrangements – and the tour – may enhance the 
prospect of more home Tests for Bangladesh. Recently Australia declined to 
travel there but in the past fortnight Sean Carroll,Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia’s security manager, has 
been around to witness the arrangements. “They came and saw what you saw,” 
Dickason said. “In 20 years I’ve been doing this it’s probably the most 
comprehensive security roll-out that I’ve seen.”

Who knows what Eoin Morgan and Alex Hales, the two notable absentees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/andrew-strauss-disappointed-eoin-morgan-alex-hales-bangladesh>
 from the England team, would have made of it all? Dickason said he does not 
know the reasons why they chose not to come: “They’re adults and entitled to 
make their own decisions. We had a team meeting, but it wasn’t one to convince 
people. It was just to lay out the facts.”

Although the Bangladesh tour was an undoubted success on just about every 
front Dickason is wary of suggesting that this will change the prospects of 
Pakistan hosting international sides in the foreseeable future. “It would be 
unfair to compare those environments; they are markedly different. We’ll always 
keep an open mind, but something has to change fundamentally there.”

Rohit Sharma ruled out of India Test squad to face England because of injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/rohit-sharma-india-test-squad-england-injury-cricket>
Dickason’s work this winter is not finished. There are security concerns in 
India, just as everywhere else. “It’ll be similar in India but a different 
layout. It was very overt in Bangladesh but it won’t be in India. The road 
clearances that we got there are usually reserved for heads of state. We 
probably won’t get that in India.”

The cricketing challenge may be more overt against India. Their strength on 
their home turf is obvious to all. A snippet of encouragement for England’s 
tourists comes with the announcement of their Test squad, however. They have 
some injury concerns. Rohit Sharma, a heavy run-scorer in the recent series 
against New Zealand, isabsent from the squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/rohit-sharma-india-test-squad-england-injury-cricket>
 because of a thigh problem. So, too, is the colourful opening batsman Shikhar 
Dhawan and another opener, KL Rahul.

So England will be confronted by a familiar figure at the top of the order, 
the more prosaic veteran Gautam Gambhir. The swing bowler Bhuvneshwar Kumar is 
also recovering from a hamstring injury but India’s reservoir of pacemen is 
somewhat deeper than that of Bangladesh.
 