
Channelling Lao Tzu, Glenn Frey and Jeffrey “the Dude” Lebowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/21/readers-suggest-the-10-best-stoners>
, Republican national committee chairman Reince Priebus said on Sunday that 
when it came to personnel issues with the Donald Trump campaign, “I go with the 
flow.”

Libertarian Gary Johnson: crazy election cycle means 'I might be next 
president'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/28/libertarian-gary-johnson-president>
“Look, you know, I go with the flow based on what the campaign wants to do,” 
Priebus told NBC’s Meet the Press. “I think Kellyanne is doing a phenomenal 
job. I don’t know Steve Bannon, to tell you the truth, very well.”

Kellyanne is Kellyanne Conway, the pollster who was promoted to campaign 
manager by Trump two weeks ago. Bannon is the driving force behind the 
rightwing Breitbart website who was named campaign “CEO” in the same round of 
musical chairs.

For a less chill national party chairman, the kind of headlines about Bannon 
that have surfaced in the last week could be a real bummer. Bannon’s past 
includesdomestic violence charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-domestic-violence-trump-campaign-ceo>
,allegations of antisemitism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/27/trump-campaign-ceo-stephen-bannon-denies-antisemitic-remarks>
 and a mysterious arrangement in which he wasregistered to vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-registered-vote-donald-trump>
 at a home where he did not live.

“I’m going to get to know him,” Priebus told Meet the Press host Chuck Todd, 
72 days before the election.

Todd asked whether Bannon might hurt Trump’s attempt to appeal to women.

“Look, and I don’t know how much of it is true or not and neither do you,” 
Priebus said. “And so, I don’t speculate based on what other third parties say 
about people. I tend to judge people based on what I see and what I interact 
with.”


Police documents 
<http://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000156-c3f8-dd14-abfe-fbfbbe310001> regarding 
the domestic violence charges against Bannon, charges which were eventually 
dropped, were published by Politico this week.

Presidential nominees typically work closely with their party’s national 
committee to raise money and coordinate on strategy, messaging and ground 
operations. As RNC chair, Priebus said, he speaks “every day” with Trump.


Priebus, who has been noted 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/magazine/will-trump-swallow-the-gop-whole.html>
 for his gallows humor, is not known as a “go-with-the-flow” type. Asked in 
April about the stress of running a party often at odds with its presidential 
nominee, hesaid 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/rnc-chairman-rejects-idea-party-officials-are-conspiring-against-donald-trump/>
: “I’m not pouring Bailey’s in my cereal.”

He appeared to be kidding and serious both.
 