
Somerset's river Frome rises near Witham Friary and flows for some 21 miles 
generally northward, fed by lesser streams, until it joins the Avon in a valley 
on the border between Somerset and Wiltshire, six miles south-east of Bath. We 
had often admired the look of that valley below us as we went towards Bath. Two 
rivers, the railway and the Kennet and Avon canal pass through it, and a 
majestic aqueduct carries the canal high over railway and river.

What survives of the Somerset coal canal is another local monument to the 
ingenuity of human response to this landscape of steep hills and fast-flowing 
streams. It was an invitation from a Country diary reader and local historian, 
Alan Dodge, that brought us back for a closer look and specifically to the 
village ofFreshford <http://www.freshfordvillage.com/>. We walked a hillside 
terrace with a steep wooded drop on our right and, ahead, buildings grouped 
around St Peter's church.

Early-spring sunshine sharpened the edges of gables, mullions and gothic 
arches in the pale stone of houses strung across green slopes and cottages 
lining steep narrow lanes. This was a prosperous cloth-making place when the 
river Frome drove the mills and the classical proportions of the buildings of 
Bath were in fashion.

St Peter's church stands at the top of a hill, and from the church gate we 
looked down on the roofs of the old rectory at the foot of the hill and, behind 
it, the Victorian rectory and the old brewery, its slender chimney reaching up 
above the skyline. Just across from the church, neatly poised towards the top 
of the steep incline, is a graceful Georgian house in weathered cream stone, 
with five tall symmetrical windows on its first floor and delicate Tuscan 
pilasters at the doorway, a demonstration of what can be achieved by prosperity 
and taste in an age of elegance.
 