
Manchester’s proposed £110m arts centre, the Factory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2015/jul/24/manchesters-new-factory-aims-high-but-fails-to-build-in-social-housing>
, has been promised £9m a year government funding and will be designed by the
Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/12/dasha-zhukova-gorky-park-rem-koolhaas-garage-gallery-opens>
.

George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> previously 
pledged £78m towards the build costs of a project seen as integral to his and 
Manchester city council’s “northern powerhouse” initiative.

On Wednesday, he pledged a further £9m a year revenue funding from 2018-19, 
while the council announced that Koolhaas and his Office for Metropolitan
Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> (OMA) 
practice had won the international competition to design it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Frem-koolhaas-wins-factory-design-project-as-manchester-goes-dutch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3c38cd30c0fa38d9d68161166d1bcc2108ac11b%2F75_88_1976_1186%2F1976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rem%20Koolhaas%20wins%20Factory%20design%20project%20as%20Manchester%20goes%20Dutch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Frem-koolhaas-wins-factory-design-project-as-manchester-goes-dutch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rem%20Koolhaas%20wins%20Factory%20design%20project%20as%20Manchester%20goes%20Dutch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Frem-koolhaas-wins-factory-design-project-as-manchester-goes-dutch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3c38cd30c0fa38d9d68161166d1bcc2108ac11b%2F75_88_1976_1186%2F1976.jpg>
 Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas. Photograph: Lluis Gene/AFP/Getty Images 
It will be the first major public building project in the UK for OMA. Previous 
high-profile projects include theChina Central Television Headquarters in 
Beijing 
<http://www.arup.com/Projects/China_Central_Television_Headquarters.aspx>, 
Seattle Central Library 
<http://www.archdaily.com/11651/seattle-central-library-oma-lmn> and the Garage 
contemporary art gallery in Gorky Park, Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/14/rem-koolhaas-contemporary-art-space-moscow-fondazione-prada-milan>
.

The chancellor said: “One of the biggest economic investments we can make in 
our nation is in our extraordinary arts heritage. That’s why, as part of our 
package for the northern powerhouse, we have backed the Factory with 
significant investment because we know it will provide an outstanding new arts 
venue to be enjoyed by people of all ages and backgrounds for generations to 
come.”

Construction on the Factory, on the site of the former Granada TV 
headquarters, is due to begin next year and completed in 2019. The plan is that 
it will present performance and art across the spectrum such as theatre, music, 
dance, technology, film, TV and scientific advancements.

Sir Richard Leese, council leader, said: “The importance of the Factory cannot 
be overstated. It will be of international significance, the cultural anchor 
for the next phase of economic and cultural regeneration in Manchester,Greater 
Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> and beyond. It 
will help power Manchester and the wider region towards becoming a genuine 
cultural and economic counterbalance to London, as well as being a place where 
inspirational art is created.”

Those behind the project have predicted that within a decade it will help 
create the equivalent of 2,500 jobs adding nearly £140m to the local economy.
 