
One afternoon in 1998, a New York branch of Chase Manhattan bank received an 
unexpected request from a graduate art student. “The poor woman thought I was 
going to open some sort of account,” recalls the artistOmer Fast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/18/omer-fast-present-continuous-baltic-centre-contemporary-art-gateshead-review>
. “My appearance probably told her I wasn’t going to be one of those startup 
millionaires. But the idea I was trying to sell her was that I wanted to stage 
a robbery in the bank without telling the customers. The conversation was 
extremely short.”

“You never told me this!” interjects a tickled Tom McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tom-mccarthy>, whose hypnotic 2005 novel 
Remainder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview> 
culminates in just such a staged heist. We’re discussing Fast’sfilm adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview> 
of the award-winning experimental book. It stars Tom Sturridge, brilliant and 
brooding, as the novel’s nameless Londoner struck by unidentified falling 
objects; suffering from amnesia and relearning rudimentary movement during his 
recovery, his obsession with authentic existence (and the £8.5m insurance 
settlement he receives) leads him to stage increasingly detailed re‑enactments 
of dimly remembered events.

Remainder’s rights were optioned quickly by Film4 after publication, though 
Brad Pitt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradpitt>’s production company had 
briefly flirted with it (“He read 10 pages of it and went, ‘No fucking way’,” 
says McCarthy). Fast, meanwhile, had been knocked for six by the book, 
finishing the story, like the protagonist, on board a flight; another weird 
reverberation. “My reaction was amazed, stunned silence,” the Israel-born, 
Berlin-based artist says. “I had this feeling – I looked out the window and I 
saw the clouds moving slowly by, and the world slowed down for me.” When the 
option lapsed, McCarthy – a fan of Fast’s haunting video art such as 2007’sThe 
Casting <https://vimeo.com/54402884> and 2011’s 5,000 Feet Is the Best 
<https://vimeo.com/34050994>, which is similarly centred on trauma, 
re-enactment and identity – insisted he would only renew if Fast directed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fremainder-tom-mccarthy-novel-omer-fast-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb23a365da94fd64f9c80b9f63cc962a35191df57%2F0_0_5472_3352%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remainder%3A%20Tom%20McCarthy%20and%20Omer%20Fast%E2%80%99s%20avant-garde%20explosion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fremainder-tom-mccarthy-novel-omer-fast-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remainder%3A%20Tom%20McCarthy%20and%20Omer%20Fast%E2%80%99s%20avant-garde%20explosion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fremainder-tom-mccarthy-novel-omer-fast-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb23a365da94fd64f9c80b9f63cc962a35191df57%2F0_0_5472_3352%2F5472.jpg>
 ‘When you begin to work, you narrow down possibilities’ … Omer Fast directs 
Arsher Ali, who plays Naz 
Avant-garde-affiliated novelist and cinematographically fluent artist – it 
looked like a beautiful hookup. The pair have since become friends, holidaying 
with each other. They had fun creating a giant diagram of the novel’s structure 
on the pristine white wall of the Stockholm studio where McCarthy was staying 
on an artist’s residency in 2010. “One of the terms on it was ‘zombie 
flaneur’,” says McCarthy. Fast, viewing their creation, didn’t want to let go. 
“The diagram is the most wonderful stage. Networks are about possibilities, 
shifting terrain. And the moment you begin to work, you begin to narrow down 
possibilities, and that’s just what telling a story is like.”

In the art world, nobody uses the word ‘sympathetic’ to describe the 
protagonist. I heard that word so many times

The artist worked solo on the script. He produced a first draft after six 
months – but the struggle to correctly position it between arthouse and 
mainstream continued. “My first draft was just someone sitting in a room 
reading the book out aloud from cover to cover,” Fast deadpans. The affectless 
protagonist, willing to sacrifice friends, felines and eventually collaborators 
in pursuit of impeccable re-enactments, was a problem for some investors (the 
project was co-financed by the BFI and various German sources, and cost just 
under $2m). “In the art world, nobody uses the word ‘sympathetic’ to describe 
the protagonist,” says Fast, “I heard that word so many times, I’m never going 
to use it again in relation to any storytelling project that I do.”

McCarthy, keen for the adaptation to have its own stamp, stayed out of the 
way. He read some of the 11 drafts, but let Fast fight the battles: “I didn’t 
want to tread on Omer’s toes.” “I didn’t have any toes left by that time,” says 
Fast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fremainder-tom-mccarthy-novel-omer-fast-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40572274e734613399a896fd396964b1509f96ec%2F0_0_5400_3408%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remainder%3A%20Tom%20McCarthy%20and%20Omer%20Fast%E2%80%99s%20avant-garde%20explosion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fremainder-tom-mccarthy-novel-omer-fast-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remainder%3A%20Tom%20McCarthy%20and%20Omer%20Fast%E2%80%99s%20avant-garde%20explosion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fremainder-tom-mccarthy-novel-omer-fast-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40572274e734613399a896fd396964b1509f96ec%2F0_0_5400_3408%2F5400.jpg>
 ‘I didn’t want to voiceover-driven film’ … Fast talks to cast members on the 
set 
Despite that, the film began to zone off its own territory. Fast liberated the 
story from the febrile headspace of the narrator: “He’s talking non-stop. I 
knew that I didn’t want a voiceover-driven film. [In my version], he’s quite 
laconic, he withholds information.” Sturridge’s character – now called Tom, as 
if to stress the artifice at play – insists on filming the cast of ersatz 
residents with which he fills Madlyn Mansions, the south London building he 
buys (there’s a nod to Proust in the name). In the novel, he forbids this 
because it will prevent him from authentically inhabiting the realities he is 
recreating. But the film version seemed less convincing without the presence of 
technology and media that has hemmed us in even more sinceRemainder was 
published. McCarthy rhapsodises the scenes in which Tom’s facilitator, Naz, 
oversees a staging through a bank of monitors. “He’s wearing these really thick 
glasses, and you see the multiple screens reflected in his eyes – like he is 
technology.” He thinks the adaptation triumphantly speaks for the Edward 
Snowden era.

That seems a bit of a stretch. More important is that the novel’s core themes 
and texture have been elegantly compressed according to algorithms whirring in 
the original text. The film fully embraces the genre territory of the 
psychological thriller – presumably for commercial reasons. But also, says 
Fast, because the sense of a latent mystery to be solved lingered in the 
original narrator’s fascination with the Brixton street crimes he later 
appropriates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fremainder-tom-mccarthy-novel-omer-fast-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff642677362b35adcbdac921abcc34fe9006da356%2F408_1542_3131_4074%2F3131.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remainder%3A%20Tom%20McCarthy%20and%20Omer%20Fast%E2%80%99s%20avant-garde%20explosion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fremainder-tom-mccarthy-novel-omer-fast-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remainder%3A%20Tom%20McCarthy%20and%20Omer%20Fast%E2%80%99s%20avant-garde%20explosion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fremainder-tom-mccarthy-novel-omer-fast-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff642677362b35adcbdac921abcc34fe9006da356%2F408_1542_3131_4074%2F3131.jpg>
 Tom McCarthy. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
Before filming began in 2014, McCarthy took producer Natasha Dack-Ojumu on a 
tour of “Remainder real estate”: the Brixton locations that had been 
“generative” for the novel while the author was living there in the late 90s. 
Presumably that included the building in Ferndale Road that inspired Madlyn 
Mansions, though Fast ended up using a different location, in Kennington. 
McCarthy points out that the racial undertones of the gentrification that has 
transformed Brixton beyond recognition were already present in the novel: the 
white narrator, effectively a kind of property developer, also seeks absorption 
– with his street-crime stagings – into the gritty “authenticity” of the black 
rudeboys living in the area.

The novelist praises Fast for taking those undercurrents and “amplifying them 
in an untimid way”. The director goes on: “The protagonist is obsessed with 
recognising a vision in a particular space. And it just so happens that it has 
inhabitants, and they must make room for his fantasy to become realised. 
Inadvertently, he becomes this kind of gentrifier.” He sees a personal link: 
“That’s very much related to the role of the artist – we’re no longer just 
squatting spaces, we’re seeking to acquire them, too.”

McCarthy went to the set three times. Confronted with the contents of his mind 
intricately realised, he didn’t quite manage the kind of epiphany sought by his 
protagonist. (“Film sets are the least likely place where one would have an 
epiphany,” points out Fast. “They’re extremely dull places.”) The 
transubstantiation into the new form, though, was fitting given how much cinema 
saturated the originalRemainder. McCarthy says he thought of the weight and 
slowness ofTarkovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky> and 
Warhol <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> when he was 
writing. The unfeigned grace of Robert DeNiro’sJohnny Boy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p92CKGAeQUY> from Mean Streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mean-streets> is what anxiously inspires the 
narrator in his quest to be authentic: “He seemed to execute the action 
perfectly, to live it, to merge with it until he was it and it was him and 
there was nothing in between.”

When I went on set, the whole thing’s being filmed. It was a redoubling of the 
redoubling of the redoubling

Remainder belongs to a less livewire, more strategic order of cinema – a dark 
cousin in the meta category to the more romanticised likes ofSynecdoche, New 
York <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/15/synecdoche-new-york> and The 
Truman Show <https://www.theguardian.com/film/1998/oct/09/1>, whose heroes are 
also a construct or are imprisoned inside fastidious miniatures of reality. 
With the juicy personal motivations of the traditional psychological thriller 
blanched by Sturridge’s searingly impassive performance,Remainder burrows ever 
inwards. But its repetitions hit a resonant frequency, releasing its 
protagonist somewhere beyond his simulcra, blinking at the light.

The book’s author, at any rate, seems satisfied with this latest, possibly 
final reiteration – an inevitable consequence of the nature of the themes at 
play. Having a new version doesn’t “dilute things”, McCarthy says: “It 
compounds them. The story started with me having deja vu in a bathroom at a 
party, like in the book. The narrator restages even the restagings. And then 
when I went on set, the whole thing’s being filmed. It was a redoubling of the 
redoubling of the redoubling.”

• Remainder is out on 24 June.
 