
In 1963, a teenage woman civil rights worker in Albany, Georgia, said, "If 
you're not prepared to die here then you're not facing reality".

Any of us who participated in the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom
 <http://www.history.com/topics/march-on-washington> will celebrate its 50th 
anniversary with a combination of sweet nostalgia and mixed feelings about its 
"legacy". For me, and so many others, the event itself was redemptive and 
personally transforming. It had been a terrible year for African Americans and 
civil rights activists, a blood-drenched inventory of violence that included 
the jail beating ofFannie Lou Hamer 
<http://www.biography.com/people/fannie-lou-hamer-205625> and assassination of 
Medgar Evers 
<http://www.history.com/news/7-things-you-should-know-about-medgar-evers>. So 
on that Wednesday, 28 August, when 300,000 Americans from right across what I 
call the "decency spectrum" descended on an almost deserted Washington, it was 
as if a Norman Rockwell painting had come alive.

They – we – had come by bus, plane, train, car and hitch-hiker's thumb to 
demonstrate to ourselves and a watching world that there was a better, more 
righteous America than the Birmingham ofBull Connor 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/freedomriders/people/eugene-bull-connor>
 who had set the dogs and fire hoses on black children. Our emotions – and 
amazing self-discipline – ran high. White Washington right on up to the White 
House was scared silly of all us black and white folks mixing together. 
Apocalypse was confidently predicted. The nation's capitol had "its worst case 
of invasion jitters since theFirst Battle of Bull Run 
<http://www.civilwar.org/battlefields/bullrun.html>", as a contemporary 
newspaper put it.

Wandering on the crowd's fringes, I talked to city cops and National Guardsmen 
– the Pentagon had mobilized almost 20,000 troops for the feared riot – who 
were white-faced scared to the point of hysteria. Businesses had shut down; 
liquor was banned; jails were emptied to make room for the anticipated mass 
arrests; emergency room doctors were called in on their days off.

But, against the doomsayers, an almost supernatural peace and good will 
reigned. Strangers became lifelong friends. A lot of us were astonished at how 
beautiful and strong we felt. On that hot, sunny day a genuine rainbow 
coalition of Quakers, Catholics, atheists, black and white church and social 
justice groups, labor unions, socialists and God-fearers poured into Washington 
because we felt that it was terribly important to be there.

Everyone who marched has their own special memory. Although the event comes 
down to us mainly as the RevMartin Luther King 
<http://www.biography.com/people/martin-luther-king-jr-9365086>'s "I have a 
dream" speech to the huge throng standing in the sweltering heat or sprawled 
cooling their toes in the Mall's reflecting pool, I remember it as one big 
picnic with everyone in their Sunday best and on their best manners firmly 
clasping hands in King's "beloved community". The anger that had brought us 
together was for, at least this day, something else.

But it wasn't all kumbaya. More than half the American public viewed King as a 
dangerous troublemaker, a pariah. In the White House, a bet-hedgingPresident 
John Kennedy <http://www.biography.com/people/john-f-kennedy-9362930> and his 
attorney general brother Bobby, rightly fearing the loss of Dixiecrat votes in 
the '64 presidential election, pleaded with King and the organizers to delay, 
postpone or tone down the event. The FBI's racist chiefJ Edgar Hoover 
<http://www.biography.com/people/j-edgar-hoover-9343398> did everything in his 
power to smear the black leaders as communist subversives. Even the main 
African-American organizers – notably the gay socialistBayard Rustin 
<http://www.biography.com/people/bayard-rustin-9467932>, A Philip Randolph 
<http://www.biography.com/people/a-philip-randolph-9451623> of the Brotherhood 
of Sleeping Car Porters 
<http://www.pbs.org/wnet/jimcrow/stories_org_brother.html> and King himself – 
dreaded the possibility that such a concentration of angry blacks and civil 
rights workers might end in a riot.

Privately, behind the scenes, there was a real split between the older, 
traditional civil rights leaders (NAACP <>, CORE <>, Urban League <>, Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference <>) bent on de-radicalizing the movement so as 
to give the Kennedys elbow room to pass Civil Rights and Voting Rights bills – 
against the (very) young foot soldiers of SNCC, theStudent NonViolent 
Coordinating Committee <>, whose willingness to suffer fractured skulls and 
hair-breadth escapes from lynchings had provided much of the movement's moral 
and physical energy.

It had been a slow time coming. As long ago as the 1940s, Randolph had 
threatened President Roosevelt with a similar march if the government did not 
enact an anti-discrimination bill. Then the second world war intervened, which 
gave us the all-black Tuskegee Airmen and also created a new, less deferential 
type of black soldier demanding to be treated at least as civilly as white 
military base commanders dealt with their Nazi prisoners of war.

I came to the '63 march by a strange route. London-based, I was returning to 
the United States after a seven-year absence and had the good luck to follow in 
the footsteps of the Guardian's US correspondentWJ (Bill) Weatherby 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1992/08/08/obituaries/william-j-weatherby-british-writer-was-62.html>
 whose sympathy for the black liberation struggle had left behind strongly 
positive vibes for me to take advantage of. In Detroit, a racially hot city 
that had seen bloody riots and soon would again, I worked (and reported) 
alongside Malcolm X's brother Wilfred X. This gave me an "in". From then on I 
was passed hand to hand along a "black pipeline" of civil rights activists 
until I passed through Selma, Alabama to Albany, Georgia and on to Rustin and 
King's march.

Malcolm X and King played a strange game, each working opposite sides of the 
same street. Malcolm's voice, via radio and pirated tapes, hurled a defiant 
challenge to King's Gandhian nonviolence. "By any means necessary!" his voice 
crackled. "Whoever heard of a revolution where they lock arms and singing We 
Shall Overcome? You don't do that in a revolution. You don't do any singing; 
you're too busy swinging!" And the Detroit masses of blacks roared their 
approval. Meanwhile, King plowed his own ground preaching love and brotherhood. 
In my opinion, each shrewdly knew what the other was up to: Malcolm raising the 
stakes with his angry rhetoric made King, who most Americans really didn't like 
or approve of, at least mildly acceptable.

On the podium at the Lincoln Memorial, a furious debate went on right up to 
the last moment.SNCC's John Lewis <>, representing bold young activists, wanted 
to make a fiery speech warning Kennedy that "We will march through the South, 
through the heart of Dixie, the way Sherman did. We shall pursue our own 
scorched earth policy and burn Jim Crow to the ground..." His elders shut him 
up. They also banned the "inflammatory" writerJames Baldwin 
<http://www.biography.com/people/james-baldwin-9196635> from appearing.

Although black women were the backbone of the voting rights movement, none of 
the official speeches were by women.

Nonetheless, sheer love flowed from the march – but also hate. There was an 
immediate gruesome backlash. The next month, as if in retaliation, four KKK 
members dynamited Birmingham's 16th Street Baptist church killing four little 
girls on their way to hear a sermon "The Love That Forgives". All over the 
South racist cops and white supremacist groups stepped up their beatings and 
shootings. And, of course, only weeks later Kennedy was murdered in a racially 
inflamed Dallas.

John Lewis, now a Georgia congressman, is the only survivor of the March's 
original organizers. He has lived long enough to see an African American in the 
White House and a black attorney general – no small victories. Lewis has also 
lived long enough to see that even a black president can be tone deaf to the 
spirit of King's life. If King, an apostle of non-violence and advocate for the 
poorest of the poor, were alive today, what would he make of President Obama's 
careless-with-life drone assassinations, his bullying of journalists and 
whistleblowers, his assent to slashing Social Security via his Scrooge-like 
"deficit commission"? Without irony, the current 50th birthday organizers have 
invited Obama to speak from the very same podium where King made history.
 