
Yesterday Ted Cruz named Carly Fiorina, the former Hewlett-Packard CEO turned 
failed presidential candidate, ashis running mate in this election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/27/ted-cruz-carly-fiorina-running-mate-vice-president>
. But who is she, again?

Fiorina, 61, served as the first female CEO of a top 20 Fortune-rated company, 
an adviser to the John McCain presidential campaign in 2008, and was the only 
female Republican candidate running in this election season.

Ted Cruz names Carly Fiorina as his vice-presidential running mate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/27/ted-cruz-carly-fiorina-running-mate-vice-president>
What about her beginnings?

Fiorina was born in Texas but attended schools across the country and in 
London and Ghana. Her father had a very successful legal career – as dean of 
Duke University’s law school, deputy US attorney general and judge of the US 
court of appeals for the ninth circuit – and moved the family around a lot 
during Fiorina’s childhood.

She graduated with a BA from Stanford in 1976 and briefly attended UCLA’s law 
school before dropping out and getting her MBA at the University of Maryland in 
1980.

During college she even briefly worked as a “Kelly girl”, or a typist at 
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard>, a 
company she later led. She oversaw a restructure that resulted in 30,000 people 
getting fired, which saw her dubbed Chainsaw Carly by her colleagues.

She got fired from Hewlett-Packard, leaving with a $21m severance package.

What do we know about her political views?

Like most Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>, she’s 
very conservative on women’s health. Fiorina is anti-abortion and wants to pass 
the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act – which bans abortion after 20 
weeks – and believes Planned Parenthood should be stripped of all government 
funding.

Fiorina doesn’t support same-sex marriage and thinks the supreme court 
overstepped its mark by allowing same-sex marriage in all 50 states last year.

But she’s very vocal about equal pay and the representation of women in 
government and the workforce. Fiorina recorded a pretty amusing video with 
BuzzFeed last year, while she was still running for president, titled “What if 
women talked like men in the workplace 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/sajp/if-men-were-treated-like-women-in-the-workplace?utm_term=.uiNgaVyV#.mao8wgng>
”.

What’s the deal with her personal life?

Her second husband Frank started off as a technician at AT&T and ended up as 
its vice-president. The pair met while working at AT&T together, getting 
hitched in 1985. Frank had two daughters from his previous marriage, Lori and 
Tracy.

Her stepdaughter, Lori, died of a drug overdose in 2009, at age 35. Fiorina 
brought up her stepdaughter, who battled alcohol, drug abuse and eating 
disorders, at a Republican debate in September. “I am the only person on this 
stage who can say this, but I know there are millions of Americans out there 
who will say the same thing. My husband, Frank, and I buried a child to drug 
addiction, so we must invest more in the treatment of drugs,” shesaid 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/10/gop-debate-carly-fiorina-2016-i-buried-a-child-213306#ixzz479Ccpdwn>
. Fiorina dedicated her second memoir to Lori.

How can she help Cruz?

Three key things: women, business and California.

Top female Republican strategists told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/28/donald-trump-women-voters-poll-republican>
 they despise Trump for his attitudes towards women – a line Cruz has been 
trying to take advantage of by hostingWomen for Cruz events 
<http://fox6now.com/2016/03/30/ted-cruz-to-host-women-for-cruz-event-in-madison/>
 – so a strong female executive candidate offers voters a good reason to pick 
Cruz.

When introducing her as his running mate, the senator from Texas declared in a 
press release that as “a groundbreaking executive and the first woman to lead a 
Fortune 50 company, Fiorina brings a record of innovation and tremendous 
leadership to the Cruz campaign”.

Noting her business skills and trailblazing female leadership seems a 
deliberate nod to both billionaire businessmanDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and the possible first female 
president Hillary Clinton. Cruz also noted Fiorina is “an outsider to politics” 
in an election season where being anti-establishment is regarded as an 
advantage.

Finally, she’s well-known in California thanks to her tech-biz history and her 
past political aspirations when she won the Republican primary for a 2010 US 
Senate race in California but lost the general.

How might she cause trouble for Cruz?

Fiorina was never very popular, and she dropped out in early February after 
disappointing poll results in New Hampshire (she’d only gotten 1.9% of the vote 
in Iowa).

Maybe her past Senate race in California won’t be the boon Cruz is hoping for: 
she lost and moved from the Golden State to Virginia. “She was a very mean 
opponent, and the bottom line is they rejected her. And now, she’s coming back 
again – it’s like a bad dream,” said Democratic Senator Barbara Boxer, who beat 
Fiorina by 10 points in California in the Senate race.

Anything else interesting?

She speaks Italian fluently – and lived in Italy in the 1970s with her first 
husband. She survived breast cancer in 2009, and underwent a double mastectomy.

Fiorina also owns two yachts 
<http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/matier-ross/article/Boxer-calls-out-Fiorina-as-multiple-yacht-owner-3181304.php>
 – Alchemy V and VI, which her opponent Boxer used as ammunition against her.
 