
Civil-rights campaigner and congressman John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/16/john-lewis-congressman-march-graphic-novel-civil-rights-memoir>
 was in tears as he accepted America’s National Book award for young people’s 
literature in Manhattan on Wednesday night, speaking of how as a child he had 
been turned away from the public library for being black.

John Lewis: 'I don’t think I’ve changed much. I still consider myself an 
activist'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/16/john-lewis-congressman-march-graphic-novel-civil-rights-memoir>
Lewis won the prestigious US honour for the third volume of his graphic memoir 
March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/25/us-congressman-wins-eisner-award-for-graphic-memoir-of-civil-rights-struggle-john-lewis-march>
, which tells of his vital part in thecivil rights movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/civil-rights-movement> in the 1960s. “This 
is unreal. This is unbelievable,” said Lewis as he took to the stage with his 
visibly moved co-authors Andrew Aydin and Nate Powell.

Recounting how he grew up “very, very poor” in rural Alabama, Lewis said there 
were “very few books in our home”, recalling a trip in 1956 to try and borrow 
some books from the library.

“I had a wonderful teacher in elementary school who told me: ‘Read, my child, 
read’, and I tried to read everything. I love books,” said Lewis. “When I was 
16 years old, some of my brothers and sisters and cousins [were] going down to 
the public library trying to get public library cards, and we were told the 
library was for whites only, not for coloureds. To come here and receive this 
award this honour is too much. Thank you.”

Lewis has previously described March as a book “for all of America”, but in 
particular for young people, “to understand the essence of the civil rights 
movement, to walk through the pages of history to learn about the philosophy 
and discipline of nonviolence, to be inspired to stand up to speak out and to 
find a way to get in the way when they see something that is not right, not 
fair, not just”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Frep-john-lewis-national-book-awards-refused-entry-to-library-because-black%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf5e56b8b3f0c7da41d46cd1dafce628014d553f%2F0_275_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rep%20John%20Lewis%20tells%20National%20Book%20awards%20how%20he%20was%20refused%20entry%20to%20library%20because%20he%20was%20black&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Frep-john-lewis-national-book-awards-refused-entry-to-library-because-black%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rep%20John%20Lewis%20tells%20National%20Book%20awards%20how%20he%20was%20refused%20entry%20to%20library%20because%20he%20was%20black&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Frep-john-lewis-national-book-awards-refused-entry-to-library-because-black%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf5e56b8b3f0c7da41d46cd1dafce628014d553f%2F0_275_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
 Colson Whitehead, winner of the National Book awards fiction prize. 
Photograph: Dorothy Hong/Koboy 
During an evening when the spectre of Donald Trump’s presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-spike-us-donald-trump-president>
 reared its head on numerous occasions,Ibram X Kendi 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/author/ibramxkendi-849>, winner of the 
nonfiction prize for his history of racism in America, Stamped from the 
Beginning, spoke in his acceptance speech of his six-month-old daughter Imani. 
“In Swahili it means faith,” said the author. “Her name, of course, has a new 
meaning for us as the first black president is set to leave the White House, 
and as a man who has been emphaticallyendorsed by the Ku Klux Klan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/former-ku-klux-klan-leader-and-us-alt-right-hail-election-result>
 is about to enter.”

Kendi dedicated his award to those “who have dedicated their live to 
anti-racist work” and said he “never lost faith” in America’s capacity to end 
racism while researching his book.

“I never lost faith, because for every racist idea there was an anti-racist 
idea,” said the author. “For every killer of the mind there was a lifesaver of 
the mind. And in the midst of the human ugliness of racism there is the human 
beauty in the resistance to racism. That is why I have faith. And I’ll never 
lose my faith that you and I can create an anti-racist America ... whereblack 
lives matter <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement>.”

Colson Whitehead: 'My agent said: Oprah. I said: Shut the front door'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/17/colson-whitehead-underground-railroad-oprah-book-club>
The poetry award went to The Performance of Becoming Human by Daniel Borzutzky.

Novelist Colson Whitehead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/17/colson-whitehead-underground-railroad-oprah-book-club>
 won the National Book award for fiction for his novel The Underground Railway, 
about a slave who escapes from a cotton plantation in Georgia.In her review for 
the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/09/the-underground-railroad-by-colson-whitehead-review-american-slavery>
, author Cynthia Bond said: “This uncanny novel never attempts to deliver a 
message – instead it tells one of the most compelling stories I have ever read.”

Whitehead said, on accepting his prize: “Outside is the blasted hellhole 
wasteland of Trumpland,” advising his audience that in response to Trump “a 
good formula, for me anyway”, was to “be kind to everybody, make art andfight 
the power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/14/secret-facebook-groups-activism-donald-trump>
”.
 