
Even after the final debate of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/16/republican-las-vegas-debate-lays-bare-deep-divisions-in-republican-race>
, Republicans in the key early voting state of Iowa haven’t yet settled on a 
candidate.


Las Vegas debate lays bare deep divisions in Republican race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/16/republican-las-vegas-debate-lays-bare-deep-divisions-in-republican-race>
On a gloomy Tuesday night, about two dozen Republican stalwarts, many of whom 
were campaign staffers, came out to an Irish bar in a suburban Des Moines strip 
mall to watch the debate and assess the candidates.

After the debate, four caucus-goers who represented a fair cross section of 
establishment Republican sentiment offered mixed reviews of the moderators and 
the candidates.

Shane Blanchard, a member of the city council in Waukee, said: “I think CNN 
did a good job,” although he expressed some concerns about the lengthy 
back-and-forthexchanges between candidates like Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/16/republican-las-vegas-debate-lays-bare-deep-divisions-in-republican-race>
. “I think, you know, when they get going back and forth like that and it goes 
for so long it does a disservice to the debate,” he added. Rod Shirk of West 
Des Moines shared these concerns: “I’d like to see more cohesiveness instead of 
divisiveness.”

Two of the four were wholeheartedly committed to their candidates. Blanchard 
was an ardent supporter of former Florida governorJeb Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeb-bush>. “I’d say he’s probably the most 
intelligent guy up there. He doesn’t always come across that way but tonight he 
was well-spoken.”

Isaiah McGee, a former city councilman who served as diversity coordinator for 
Des Moines public schools, had just officially signed withMarco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio> earlier in the day. He 
praised Rubio’s performance. “I just think he’s been pretty consistent the 
entire time,” McGee said. “Tonight he showed as well too in terms of how 
polished he was, the amount of time other candidates were spending with him, 
even with him being in fourth place, showed me that there’s obviously some 
concern about his strength.”

The other two were undecided. Shirk said he tends to lean toward Trump but 
added “other candidates are still viable” and cited Cruz andCarly Fiorina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/carly-fiorina> by name. John Strathman, 
the county co-chair, was leaning toward Cruz. Strathman, who supported Michele 
Bachmann in 2012, said: “After Steve King and executives of Family Leader [a 
prominent Iowa social conservative group] came out supporting Senator Cruz, I’m 
leaning toward Senator Cruz. I want the most conservative electable candidate 
and he may be the guy.”

In addition to liking Cruz, Strathman was the only person for whom a tough 
line on illegal immigration resonated. He said he had “an initial problem with 
Rubio because of his stance” on the issue and thought that after what he saw as 
the failure of the amnesty implemented in the Reagan administration, it would 
be foolhardy to try to legalize undocumented residents.

In contrast, both McGee and Blanchard supported some form of path to 
citizenship. McGee noted that you have to “follow the rule of law but not as 
simple as saying we’re going to deport 12 million people and just push them 
out”. In this, he was echoed by Blanchard, who noted that Bush’s relatively 
moderate view on the issue was one of the reasons that he supported the former 
Florida governor.

Yet for all the disagreement about the debate, all agreed that if the caucuses 
were held today,Ted Cruz <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz> would 
win easily. There was a significant amount of skepticism expressed about 
Trump’s chances in the state. Strathman openly wondered if Trump supporters 
would show up “on a cold February night” and caucus. However, Shirk, who was 
leaning toward Trump, “took exception” to the rest of the group’s believe that 
supporters of the real estate mogul wouldn’t turn out. “I think Trump has 
moderated himself a little bit and I think the people want someone who is going 
to lead from a position of strength.”

But winning isn’t everything in the Iowa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/iowa> caucuses. As McGee described it: 
“It’s like Nascar. It’s not really about winning, it’s about meeting 
expectations. You need to be in the conversation. You need to be in the top 
four.” And nothing happened on Tuesday night to change any of their 
expectations for the caucuses.
 