
Donald Trump’s controversial remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/18/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-iowa-republicans>
 about Arizona senator John McCain’s service in Vietnam have drawn parallels 
with attacks on John Kerry in 2004 when the current secretary of state was the 
Democratic nominee for president. But they’ve drawn very different reactions 
from Republican candidates for president.

Trump’s jibe on Saturday that McCain’s “not a war hero. He’s a war hero 
because he was captured? I like people who weren’t captured” drew a firestorm 
of condemnation from fellowRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>. In particular, former 
Florida governor Jeb Bush and former Texas governor Rick Perry have condemned 
Trump’s comments.

On Twitter, Bush denounced 
<https://twitter.com/JebBush/status/622455579928203264?lang=en> Trump’s 
statement as “a slanderous attack” and added that McCain “and all our veterans 
– particularly POWs – have earned our respect and admiration.” The former 
Florida governor has long been in a war of words with Trump and condemned the 
real estate mogul’s “rhetoric of divisiveness” at an event in Iowa last week.

Perry said on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/18/rick-perry-donald-trump-john-mccain>
 at the Family Leadership Summit, the same venue where Trump made his remarks, 
“I was highly offended about what Donald Trump said about [McCain’s] years of 
sacrifice in a dirty, dingy, terrible prison in North Vietnam. Donald Trump 
owes every American veteran and, in particular, John McCain an apology.” His 
campaign had already called on Trump to withdraw from the race and Perry had 
previously said Trump’s ideology was “a toxic mix of demagoguery and nonsense.”

Yet, when a well-funded group ran advertisements slamming John Kerry’s war 
record in 2004, both Bush and Perry took very different stances.

During that campaign, a group called Swift Boat Veterans for Truth, heavily 
funded by a majorRick Perry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry> 
donor and aiming to aid the re-election campaign of Jeb Bush’s brother, spent 
millions of dollars in ads that claimed Kerry, a decorated veteran who was 
awarded a Silver Star, a Bronze Star and three Purple Hearts while serving in 
Vietnam, was lying about his war record. Kerry was also criticised for 
protesting against the war after he returned to the United States, where he 
served as a spokesman for Vietnam Veterans Against the War.

Both Bush and Perry refused to speak out against the Swift Boat Veterans for 
Truth ad in 2004. Ina radio interview with 
<http://www.freerepublic.com/focus/f-news/1201484/posts> Sean Hannity, Bush 
said that he didn’t think the group’s attack on Kerry was “a smear.” He added 
“In fact, what ought to happen is, there ought to be fact checks. Every ad that 
goes out ought to be looked at by the press in an objective way and people can 
make their own determination whether they’re accurate or not.”

Bush also sent a letter to Bud Day, a Medal of Honor-winning POW who was a 
leader of Swift Boat Veterans for Truth, praising his role in the organisation. 
In 2005, the then Florida governorwrote to Day of the group 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/07/20/politics/jeb-bush-swift-boat-veterans/index.html>
, “As someone who truly understands the risk of standing up for something, I 
simply cannot express in words how much I value their willingness to stand up 
against John Kerry.”

Tim Miller, a Bush spokesman, said there was “no comparison” between the two 
situations. Miller also noted of the letter “commending Col. Bud Day, a Medal 
of Honor and Air Force Cross recipient, twice captured as a POW is not in any 
way analogous to condemning Donald Trump’s slanderous attack onJohn McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain>.”

Perry took a similar tone in 2004. “I think that there’s a lot of questions,” 
the then Texas governor told the AP at the time. “I’m all about everybody 
laying their records out and I think President Bush has done that,” said Perry. 
“Mr Kerry needs to do that. You lay your records out and then people can run 
all the ads they want.” The Perry campaign did not immediately respond to a 
request for comment from the Guardian.

However, one current GOP presidential candidate did take a strong stance on 
the controversial 2004 ads. At the time, then Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee 
told the AP, “as far as I am concerned,John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry> did honourably serve in 
Vietnam. I have no reason to doubt it. I wasn’t there. I don’t know. We make a 
huge mistake if we want to challenge that part of his life.” The Arkansas 
Republican did express concern about some of Kerry’s activities as war 
protestor.

But the strongest condemnation of Swift Boat Veterans for Truth from within 
the GOP came from John McCain himself. At the time, when the group released 
their first commercial, he told ABC, “I condemn the ad, it is dishonest and 
dishonourable, I think it is very, very wrong. I hope that the president will 
also condemn it.”
 