
Republican presidential candidates have banked millions of dollars in 
donations from a small number of mega-rich individuals and corporations with 
close ties to the fossil fuel industries that stand to lose the most from the 
fight against climate change.

Eight out of the 17 GOP figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/04/republicans-presidential-debates-why-run>
 currently jostling for their party’s presidential nomination have between them 
attracted a bonanza of at least $62m so far this year from sources either 
directly involved in polluting industries or with close financial ties to them. 
Three Republican contenders stand out as recipients of this fossil fuel 
largesse: the Republican climate change denier-in-chief, Ted Cruz; the party 
establishment favorite Jeb Bush; and the former governor of Texas, Rick Perry.

The funds have come from just 17 billionaires or businesses that have pumped 
enormous sums – in one case $15m for a single candidate – into the support 
groups orSuper Pacs <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/super-pacs> that work 
alongside the official campaigns yet are free to attract unlimited 
contributions. The $62m forms a substantial chunk of almost $400m that has been 
given to presidential contenders from both main parties in 2015, raising 
questions about the leverage that fossil fuel interests might seek to exert 
over the next occupant of the White House at a critical time for the battle 
against climate change.

The super-wealthy donors all have connections with oil and gas operations, 
fracking companies, drilling firms and other activities associated with 
emissions of industrial carbon dioxide, the main global warming gas. Their 
money has gone entirely to Republican candidates, signalling a strong 
preference among fossil fuel billionaires for the GOP.

According to a study of donations based on filings to the Federal Election 
Commission carried out by Greenpeace and the Center for Media and Democracy in 
collaboration with the Guardian, by far the greatest beneficiary of what might 
be labelled fossil fuel donations has beenTed Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz>. The sitting US senator from 
Texas, who is among the most prominent and blatant climate change deniers in 
the US, has been showered with a staggering $36.5m from just four wealthy 
sources with links to fossil fuels interests.

Those donors include members of the Wilks family from Texas who have 
collectively given $15m to Cruz-supporting Super Pacs. The Wilks fortune was 
amassed primarily from making equipment used in fracking, a controversial 
technique for extracting natural gas, via a company called Frac Tech, which the 
family sold in 2011.

Robert Mercer, a hedge-fund manager based in Long Island, has given a whopping 
$11m to Cruz Super Pacs. Mercer’s fund, Renaissance Technologies,has major 
financial interests in big oil 
<http://marketrealist.com/2014/08/renaissance-technologies-adds-positions-exxonmobil-chevron/>
 companies such as ExxonMobil, Chevron,Callon Petroleum 
<http://www.insidermonkey.com/blog/should-you-avoid-callon-petroleum-company-cpe-121845/>
 and China Petroleum & Chemical Corp 
<http://www.insidermonkey.com/blog/hedge-funds-are-crazy-about-china-petroleum-chemical-corp-adr-snp-246314/>
.

Another huge wad of cash has been pushed in Cruz’s direction by Toby 
Neugebauer, a private equity financier. He holds partnerships in several fossil 
fuel concerns including Quantum Energy Partners, an active investor in the 
Barnett Shale onshore natural gas field in Texas.

Cruz has made several outspoken comments disputing the overwhelming scientific 
consensus that man-made climate change is a serious and growing threat. In 
February 2014,he told CNN 
<http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2014/02/20/cruz-to-cnn-global-warming-not-supported-by-data/>
 that data did not exist to support the “so-called scientific theory” of global 
warming.

In March he told the Texas Tribune 
<http://www.factcheck.org/2015/03/cruz-on-the-global-cooling-myth-and-galileo/> 
that “satellite data demonstrate that there has been no significant warming 
whatsoever for 17 years”. Last week, at a forum organized by the energy tycoons 
the Koch brothers in California, Cruz made a statement described by some as “
full out denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/03/ted-cruz-expresses-full-out-denial-of-global-warming-during-forum>
” in which he repeated his claim that “the data and facts don’t support” the 
phenomenon of climate change.

The Guardian invited the Cruz presidential campaign to comment on the large 
sums of money flowing into his coffers from fossil fuel interests, but there 
was no immediate response.

Such large-scale investments in the presidential race by those with links to 
polluting industries come at a time of mounting tension between them and US 
federal regulators. Last weekBarack Obama announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/obamas-clean-power-plan-hailed-as-strongest-ever-climate-action-by-a-us-president>
 an ambitious plan to slash carbon emissions by 2030 that could have serious 
ramifications for coal-powered power plants, oil extractors and natural gas 
producers. The Democratic frontrunner for 2016, Hillary Clinton, recentlyput 
forward her plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/27/hillary-clinton-pledges-half-a-billion-solar-panels-for-us-if-she-wins-office>
 for a huge boost to solar power.

Connor Gibson, the Greenpeace researcher who oversaw the Greenpeace/Center for 
Media and Democracy study, said that fossil fuel industries were pouring money 
into the 2016 election cycle in unprecedented quantities. “To see so much money 
flowing into the war chests of viable Republican candidates so early in the 
race from people linked to climate change pollution is very concerning.”

Gibson said it was reasonable to ask what favors might be expected down the 
line as quid pro quo. “Will these candidates be expected to roll back federal 
oversight and regulation of fracking and methane leaks? Will they be more 
likely to allow drilling in the Arctic at a time when scientists are warning 
that fossil fuels must be kept in the ground?”

But David Keating, president of the Center for Competitive Politics, which 
calls for all restrictions on political donations to be lifted, said that “way 
too much was read into numbers like these. Most people at this stage of the 
election cycle are giving because they believe in what the candidate stands for 
and their policies, rather than because they are trying to influence those 
policies.”

The American Petroleum Institute, a national trade association for the oil and 
natural gas industry, said it was only to be expected that money was being 
donated to presidential candidates by people in all walks of life, not just the 
energy sector. “Candidates running for president receive campaign contributions 
from all industries, including the wealthy environmental community, as part of 
our constitutional right. For API, our candidate is energy and its importance 
to jobs, revenue to the government and our national security,” said Sabrina 
Fang, an institute spokeswoman.

The second-largest recipient of major donations from sources linked to 
polluting industries isJeb Bush <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeb-bush>, 
the former governor of Florida who has positioned himself as the leading 
moderate in the GOP field. Super Pacs supporting his bid for the White House 
have banked a total of $13.3m from nine separate donors.

Those donors include Rooney Holdings, which gave $2m to Bush. The company’s 
chief executive, Francis Rooney, a former United States ambassador to the 
Vatican, serves on the board of the independent oil and gas exploration firm 
Laredo Petroleum as well as on the board of Helmerich & Payne Inc, one of the 
world’s main offshore platform drilling contractors.

Other Bush backers are Richard Kinder, co-founder of Kinder Morgan, an energy 
infrastructure company that owns 84,000 miles of pipeline; the oil magnate 
Trevor Rees-Jones; and Dallas oil billionaire Ray Hunt.

Bush has been more measured in his comments on global warming than Cruz, and 
has publicly stated that the climate is changing. But he has injected a note of 
doubt into the debate around the science of global warming and what should be 
done about it.

On his very first day of official campaigning in June, he criticised Pope 
Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/17/jeb-bush-joins-republican-backlash-pope-climate-change>
 for his outspoken call for drastic change to avert the “unprecedented 
destruction of the ecosystem”, telling the pope to keep out of global affairs. 
In May,Bush called the science on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/21/jeb-bush-climate-is-changing-but-human-role-is-convoluted>
 “convoluted”, lambasting the vast majority of scientists who say it is now 
beyond doubt as “really arrogant”.

He added: “I don’t think the science is clear what percentage is man-made and 
what percentage is natural.”

The third big recipient of cash from donors linked to polluting industries is 
the former governor of Texas, Rick Perry. His Super Pac, Opportunity and 
Freedom, has been given $6m by Kelcy Warren, owner of the Texas oil and natural 
gas pipeline company Energy Transfer Partners. In addition to vast sums, Warren 
is also donating his time –he is working for the Perry campaign 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/07/rick-perry-kelcy-warren-super-pac-energy-transfer-partners>
 as its finance chairman.

Perry has frequently denied that climate change is a scientific given. Last 
June 
<http://trailblazersblog.dallasnews.com/2014/06/in-dc-gov-rick-perry-talks-2016-ted-cruz-climate-change-border-security.html/>
, for instance, he said: “I don’t believe that we have the settled science by 
any sense of the imagination.”

He added: “Calling CO2 a pollutant is doing a disservice the country, and, I 
believe, a disservice to the world.”

Five other Republican presidential candidates have received smaller amounts 
from those linked to fossil fuels:Carly Fiorina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/carly-fiorina> ($.2m), Lindsey Graham 
($1m), Bobby Jindal ($1.2m), Donald Trump ($1.8m) and Scott Walker ($1.8m).

True to form, Trump stands in a class all his own. He is not only one of the 
GOP recipients of largesse from a donor with links to polluting industries – he 
also happens to be that donor.

He contributed $1.8m to support his own campaign. As the Greenpeace/Center for 
Media and Democracy study pointed out, Trump has substantial shareholdings in 
several non-renewable energy companies including ConocoPhillips, ExxonMobil and 
Occidental Petroleum.

According to financial disclosure records, he also has $250,000 worth of stock 
in TransCanada Pipelines Ltd. In 2011, he was reported as saying that it is “an 
outrage our president isn’t approving the Keystone pipeline”, the oil pipeline 
that runs from Canada to the US that has become a focal point of environmental 
agitation over combating climate change.
 