
The undercard Republican debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jan/14/republican-presidential-debate-2016-donald-trump-ted-cruz-marco-rubio>
 on Thursday was a lot like a night out at Arby’s. The three candidates served 
up plenty of red meat that no one really wanted to eat.


First Republican debate of 2016: Trump and Cruz set to rumble as Rubio leads 
establishment fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jan/14/republican-presidential-debate-2016-donald-trump-ted-cruz-marco-rubio>
During the one-hour debate, former Hewlett-Packard chief executive Carly 
Fiorina, former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee and former senatorRick Santorum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-santorum> from Pennsylvania would 
have pleased the GOP base – but without the kind of breakout moment they might 
need to make it to the main stage in the future.

Fiorina returned to her normal debate strategy of ignoring her Republican 
rivals and acting as if she is running against Hillary Clinton. In her opening 
statement, she took a clear shot, saying: “Unlike another woman in this race, I 
actually love spending time with my husband.” She went on to attack Clinton 
over the scandal involving her email server.

Fiorina also attacked another favorite target, Donald Trump, whom she said was 
having “a bromance with Vladimir Putin”. She did offer occasional strands of 
policy, including calling for a ban on the US admitting any refugees at all.

Mike Huckabee <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mikehuckabee> made his 
usual folksy remarks, calling Afghanistan “land of the Flintstones, desolate, 
barren and primitive”. He also hit Barack Obama for being overly concerned 
about Muslims, saying the president was “more interested in protecting the 
image of Islam … than protecting us”.

Huckabee also said that three times as many hate crimes in the US are 
committed against Jews than against Muslims, and hit favorite conservative 
targets likeFast and Furious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/19/justice-fast-furious-holder-cleared>
, the botched Department of Justice operation that ended up shipping weapons to 
Mexican drugs cartels. He also had an interesting view on European integration, 
describing the European Union as “a failure”.

Perhaps the best received of the three was Santorum, who repeatedly referenced 
the Citadel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/11/south-carolina-military-college-suspends-cadets-over-ku-klux-klan-hoods>
, the military college in Charleston that two of his sons attend. While 
Santorum struggled through much of the early part of the debate, choosing for 
instance to discuss the threat of an electromagnetic pulse attack on the US – a 
WMD which features in the plot of the James Bond movieGoldeneye 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/defence/9097558/Britain-at-risk-from-GoldenEye-electromagnetic-pulse-attack-from-space-MPs-warn.html>
 – he gained momentum in his closing statement.

There, Santorum described himself to applause as “a fighter” and touted his 
repeated victories against “the Clinton Machine”.

Santorum did so by taking extra time, joking “he was going to take some time 
from Rand Paul” who was boycotting the undercard debate because he felt he did 
not deserveto be relegated to it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/12/rand-paul-fails-to-qualify-for-republican-debate-with-presidential-candidates>
.

It was entirely possible, however, that by skipping this debate and doing a 
media blitz instead, Paul may have done himself and his struggling campaign 
some good.

As someone in the Kentucky senator’s orbit told the Guardian after the debate: 
“I really regret not doing that debate … Not.”
 