
Anti-abortion battleground broadens as US states fight on 'non-medical' grounds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/09/anti-abortion-campaigns-us-states-non-medical>
As they criss-cross early voting states, seeking to woo primary voters, 
Republican presidential contenders are going all-out with their opposition to 
abortion – even if it could come back to bite them.


It all has to do with proposed legislation that would ban women from 
terminating pregnancies after 20 weeks, a move viewed by pro-life advocates as 
the most historic debate on abortion in decades. In recent months, support for 
a 20-week abortion ban has turned into its own litmus test forRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> eyeing the White House. 
Nearly every one of them has thrown his or her support behind the measure.

In the span of one week, hypothetical backing from some presidential hopefuls 
has turned into concrete support for legislation that could become law 
depending on who Americans elect president when they go to the polls next year.

Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina senator who launched his presidential 
campaign this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/01/south-carolina-senator-lindsey-graham-joins-republican-presidential-race>
, introduced a 20-week abortion ban in the Senate last week. His co-sponsors 
included three other Republicans running for president: Florida senator Marco 
Rubio, Kentucky senator Rand Paul and Texas senator Ted Cruz.

Graham’s introduction of the bill happened to coincide with the passage of a 
similar measure by the Wisconsin state Senate, where Governor Scott Walker – 
who is expected to declare his candidacy for president in the coming weeks – 
has said he willsign a 20-week abortion ban without exceptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/10/wisconsin-senate-pbill-abortions-20-weeks>
 once it reaches his desk.

Republican candidates vying to be the most anti-abortion in order to win over 
social conservatives is nothing new, but for a party that has struggle to 
attract women voters in recent elections, the 20-week ban carries with it a 
political risk that could loom well beyond the primary.Democrats have already 
revived the so-called “war on women” narrative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/11/republicans-women-over-the-counter-birth-control>
 that cost Republicans heavily in 2012, when Barack Obama beat Mitt Romney by 
12 points among women voters.

“It could hurt them. It feeds right into this Democratic strategy of the 
Republican war on women,” said Drew Halfmann, an associate professor in 
sociology at the University of California, Davis, and author ofDoctors and 
Demonstrators: How Political Institutions Shape Abortion Law in the United 
States, Britain and Canada 
<http://www.press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/D/bo11757207.html>. 

“It’s been successful in the past, it could be successful again. It could hurt 
them, and it could benefitHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>.”

Indeed, Clinton, the presumed Democratic nominee for president, has wasted no 
time criticizing Republicans for trying to restrict access to abortion. In the 
first rally of her campaign, in New York on Saturday,Clinton told thousands of 
supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/13/hillary-clinton-new-york-rally-progressive-campaign>
 that Republicans “shame and blame women, rather than respect our right to make 
our own reproductive health decisions”.

On the day that Graham introduced his 20-week abortion ban, Clinton hit back 
on Twitter: “A group of senators trying to make medical decisions for millions 
of women: That isn’t leadership – it’s malpractice.”

But Republicans and anti-abortion groups believe they have an opportunity to 
flip the debate. The 20-week abortion ban, they have argued, is supported by 
the majority of Americans. The Republican party’s more aggressive approach was 
perhaps best reflected in a statement made by Paul, shortly after he announced 
his bid for president.

“Why don’t we ask Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats>, 
‘is it OK to kill a 7lb in the uterus?’” he said, after repeatedly refusing to 
specify to reporters if he supported abortion exceptions for rape or incest.

The Susan B Anthony List, a pro-life group that led a campaign to get all 2016 
GOP candidates on the record supporting a 20-week abortion ban, applauded 
Paul’s response.

“The 2016 election cycle is turning out to be vastly different from what 
happened in 2012, and the most important thing that’s happening is we’re seeing 
candidates go on the offense,” Mallory Quigley, the group’s spokeswoman, told 
the Guardian.

“We’re already seeing candidates with confidence and with passion explaining 
the pro-life position … and we’re seeing our candidates call out the other side 
for their extremism.”

Liz Mair, a Republican strategist who has worked for several candidates – 
including Walker and Paul – made a similar argument.

“You don’t want to go and start playing immediately on your opponent’s turf, 
but I don’t believe we’re playing on their turf,” she said. “If Hillary Clinton 
wants to come out and say, ‘No we should allow abortions after Week 20,’ that’s 
going to make her look like an extremist.”

Democrats, Mair added, are “seriously mis-gauging where the public stands on 
this issue”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Frepublican-2016-20-week-abortion-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe66e0d8800b97cdab1302e27a4357545c2cc0699%2F0_81_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Republican%202016%20hopefuls%20seek%2020-week%20abortion%20ban%20but%20rebound%20may%20be%20costly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Frepublican-2016-20-week-abortion-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Republican%202016%20hopefuls%20seek%2020-week%20abortion%20ban%20but%20rebound%20may%20be%20costly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Frepublican-2016-20-week-abortion-ban%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe66e0d8800b97cdab1302e27a4357545c2cc0699%2F0_81_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Pro-choice campaigners carry signs during an abortion rights march in Austin, 
Texas. Photograph: Mike Stone / Reuters/Reuters 
Northern Alabama’s only abortion clinic fights to survive lawmakers' onslaught
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/01/alabama-abortion-clinic-womens-center>
American attitudes on abortion are indeed mixed. The general electorate remains
fairly split <http://www.gallup.com/poll/1576/abortion.aspx> between voters who 
are pro-choice and pro-life. But one potential problem for Republicans is that a
majority <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/11/abortion-poll_n_3575551.html>
 of Americans believe decisions on abortion should be made by a woman and her 
doctor.


Republicans and anti-abortion advocates rest their logic on polls that find 
majority support for banning late-term pregnancies, but other surveys have 
found the results to be more complicated. Many Americans identify as both 
pro-choice and pro-life across every demographic group – in other words, 
voters’ perceptions on abortion can change depending on the circumstances.

Pro-choice groups like Planned Parenthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood> have pointed to such 
nuances in opinion to illustrate why it is misleading to simply say that most 
Americans support a ban on abortion after 20 weeks. They argue that outside of 
those Americans who are staunchly pro-life, in all cases, others are less 
likely to oppose late-term abortions when the reasons women typically seek them 
are broken down.

Late-term abortions account for less than 1.5% of all abortions in the US, 
according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. They often occur 
among women who discover fetal abnormalities at a later stage, women who are 
diagnosed with a life-threatening illness such as cancer, or among women who 
cannot afford to pay for the procedure. Some women do not even find out they 
are pregnant until after the 20-week mark.

“There is no science or medicine behind this bill – just politics,” Cecile 
Richards, the president of Planned Parenthood Action Fund, said in a statement 
responding to Graham’s bill. “Leading medical groups oppose these bills as do 
the majority of the American public when they understand the reality that women 
and their families face when seeking abortion at 20 weeks in pregnancy.”

Medical studies have also disputed that fetuses can feel pain at 20 weeks, the 
core argument pro-life advocates have used to push a flurry of 20-week abortion 
bans at the state level.

The US House of Representatives passed its own version of the legislation last 
month. If Graham’s bill comes up for a vote in the GOP-controlled Senate, 
however, it is unlikely that it would overcome a Democratic filibuster. If it 
did, the Obama administration would most certainly veto it.

It is unclear if Mitch McConnell, the Republican majority leader, would want 
to hold a vote on a bill that could carry also ramifications for the GOP’s 
control of the Senate. Several Republican senators are facing tough re-election 
battles in swing states in 2016 and have sought to curry favor with women 
voters by pushing legislation that would make birth control available over the 
counter. A vote on a 20-week abortion ban would only complicate that message.

Jennifer Lawless, director of the Women & Politics Institute and an associate 
professor of government at American University, said Republicans fare better 
when they are careful not to play into the Democrats’ narrative.

“All it takes is one Todd Akin or Richard Mourdock and the Democrats can put 
forward a narrative – quite compellingly – that the GOP just doesn’t respect or 
understand women,” said Lawless, referring totwo Republicans who lost 2012 
Senate elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/07/todd-akin-richard-mourdock-senate-results>
 after making controversial comments on rape while discussing abortion.

“But with such a large Republican presidential field, and what will surely be 
numerous debates in which the candidates try to differentiate themselves from 
one another, stepping into women’s health issues is slippery.”

Doing so has already proved somewhat slippery for Walker, who recently 
garnered headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/03/wisconsin-scott-walker-abortion-incest-rape?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 for saying rape and incest exceptions were only concerns for women “in the 
initial months” of pregnancy. He also defended a 2013 bill he signed into law 
that requires women seeking abortions to first undergo a mandatory ultrasound 
by noting that ultrasounds were “just a cool thing out there”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Frepublican-2016-20-week-abortion-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23a268893fbf325293a4e9f9e8bbc8328f3fdcb8%2F0_50_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Republican%202016%20hopefuls%20seek%2020-week%20abortion%20ban%20but%20rebound%20may%20be%20costly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Frepublican-2016-20-week-abortion-ban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Republican%202016%20hopefuls%20seek%2020-week%20abortion%20ban%20but%20rebound%20may%20be%20costly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Frepublican-2016-20-week-abortion-ban%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23a268893fbf325293a4e9f9e8bbc8328f3fdcb8%2F0_50_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Pro-life protesters stand in front of a Planned Parenthood clinic in Boston. 
Photograph: Dominick Reuter / Reuters/Reuters 
Scott Walker: women only concerned with rape and incest in 'initial months' of 
pregnancy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/03/wisconsin-scott-walker-abortion-incest-rape>
Rick Perry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry>, again running for 
president after an unsuccessful attempt in 2012, has also shown no hesitation 
defending bills he signed curbing access to abortion while serving as governor 
of Texas – some of which are regarded as the most restrictive anti-abortion 
laws in the country.

When asked on Fox News recently if he supported exceptions for rape, incest or 
to save the mother’s life, Perry told host Megyn Kelly he was “pro-life on all 
of those”.

Halfmann said Republicans “understand the benefits and the risks” of wading 
into the abortion debate. For Graham and Perry, both underdogs in the primary, 
it provides an opportunity to stand out in a crowded GOP field. For Walker, one 
of the early frontrunners, touting his record gives him a leg up over his main 
rivals – Rubio and former Florida governor Jeb Bush.

Voters in the general election do not rank abortion among their top issues, he 
added, which is why it will be critical for Democrats to build a broader case 
on Republicans and women as they have done successfully in the past.

“Abortion is not a super salient issue for voters,” Halfmann said. “But 
portraying the Republican Party as anti-women has very high salience.”
 