
Let’s call it the non-denial denial. Some Republican presidential candidates 
are beginning to peer out from behind the wall of climate denial that has 
defined the party as long as Barack Obama has been in the White House. Finally, 
it seems, the most open expressions of climate denial – such as dismissing 
long-established scientific fact – may be seen as a bit retrograde, and 
possibly embarrassing, even by some who are looking for votes from an 
increasingly rightwing Republican party.

In response to a rare question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/29/republican-debate-donald-trump-marco-rubio-jeb-bush-ted-cruz>
 about climate change in Thursday night’s Republican debate, Marco Rubio 
offered up an answer that was rarer still in the 2016 campaign. He did not 
reduce climate change to a punchline or bash the science underlying climate 
change, asTed Cruz 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/12/ted-cruz-takes-a-stand-against-science/419691/>
 andDonald Trump <https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/656100109386674176>
 have been doing throughout the primary.

The Zika virus foreshadows our dystopian climate future | Bill McKibben
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/25/zika-virus-brazil-dystopian-climate-future>
Rubio spoke instead about policies for fighting climate change – in his case 
his opposition to cap and trade in his home state of Florida.

“When I am president of the United States of America, there will never be any 
‘cap and trade’ in the United States,” the Florida senator said.

Jeb Bush <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeb-bush>, Rubio’s fellow 
Floridian, also steered clear of open climate denial, telling a gathering in 
New Hampshire on Saturday that he opposed federal government policies to deal 
with global warming.

“The market will work faster. There’s someone in a garage somewhere, 
parochially I hope it’s in Miami, that’s going to have a clue, to have an 
answer to this,” Bush said.

The fact that both candidates were operating under the assumption that climate 
change even exists might seem like progress of a sort. As Obama noted last 
month, the Republican party is theonly major party in the advanced world  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/18/obama-year-end-press-conference-climate-change-republicans>
that denies climate change.

In many cases, they still are. In the undercard debate on Thursday night, 
Carly Fiorina dismissed climate change as a silly Democratic party distraction 
from real security threats. Rubio and Bush openly expressed doubt about the 
existence of manmade climate change earlier in the campaign. Bushbutted heads 
with the pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/17/jeb-bush-joins-republican-backlash-pope-climate-change>
. Rubio made his now infamous remark that “America is not a planet” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/17/marco-rubio-chris-christie-climate-change-republican-debate>
.

But there are signs of a shift. The Republican-dominated Congress voted by 
significant margins in December toextend tax credits for wind and solar power 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/renewables-boom-expected-thanks-to-tax-credit/>
, a decision expected to lead to a boom in renewable energy. This week 
Republicans and Democrats joined forces onan energy reform bill,  
<http://www.nytimes.com/glogin?URI=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.nytimes.com%2F2016%2F01%2F28%2Fus%2Fpolitics%2Fsenate-bipartisan-energy-legislation.html%3F_r%3D0>
the first such bipartisan measure in more than eight years.

The White House believes the combination of constant ridicule from Obama and 
other Democratic leaders and “facts on the ground”, in the form of the clean 
power plan and other policies enacted through the use of executive authority, 
will force the next president to deal with climate change, even if a Republican 
wins the November election.

There is a new form of climate denialism to look out for – so don't celebrate 
yet | Naomi Oreskes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/16/new-form-climate-denialism-dont-celebrate-yet-cop-21>
“The next president will not be inclined to be able to [scrap the plan] 
whether he or she wants to change it,” Denis McDonough, Obama’s chief of staff, 
told a forum celebrating the Pulitzer Prizes at the Washington Post on Friday.

But mere acknowledgement of the existence of climate change is not enough. 
Neither Rubio nor Bush came forward to say what they would do to fight climate 
change. Their response to a gathering danger acknowledged by the Pentagon, 196 
world leaders at the Paris climate summit and, yes, scientists, was merely to 
express opposition to the Democratic policy prescriptions already out there. Do 
they have no policy ideas? Would they leave climate solutions entirely to the 
market? That’s a huge oversight.

And given the abundance of evidence all around us about the dangers of climate 
change – extreme sea level rise in the Bush and Rubio home state of Florida, 
the public health emergency of the Zika virus, the climate-fuelled drought in 
California and super-sized blizzards in the north-east, just to name a few 
examples – such oversight by candidates is really just another kind of denial.
 