
The morning after election day was supposed to be one of reckoning for 
Republicans battered by internal strife over their unpopular nominee, Donald 
Trump.


Instead, it was the Democrats who awoke to a harrowing new world. Hillary 
Clinton’s stunning defeat on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/latino-leader-attacks-clinton-campaign-hispanic-vote>
 left the party leaderless and opened a struggle for control.

“The Democratic establishment had their chance with this election,” Stephanie 
Taylor, a co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee, said in a 
statement. “It’s time for new leadership of the Democratic Party – younger, 
more diverse, and more ideological – that is hungry to do things differently, 
like leading a movement instead of dragging people to the polls.”

Latino leader attacks Clinton campaign for taking Hispanic vote for granted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/latino-leader-attacks-clinton-campaign-hispanic-vote>
Shell-shocked, the party’s liberal wing is climbing from the wreckage, angry 
at the running of an establishment candidate in a year when the electorate 
clearly wanted change. In cities around the country, thousands of young people 
have taken to the streets to protest the president-elect.

During the campaign, scenes of Democratic unity – Barack and Michelle Obama 
and two senators,Elizabeth Warren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/elizabeth-warren> and Bernie Sanders, 
campaigning on behalf of Clinton – contrasted with top Republicans disavowing 
their nominee. Such scenes, however, could not hide deep divisions in the party.

The cracks were there to see, from Sanders’ unexpectedly strong primary 
challenge to protests at the convention in Philadelphia in July and the removal 
on its eve of the party’s head, Debbie Wasserman-Schultz.

The first test lies in the selection of a new chair of the Democratic National 
Committee, the position filled by Wasserman-Schultz and now, temporarily, Donna 
Brazile. On Thursday, former Vermont governor Howard Dean put himself forward 
for a secondspell 
<https://twitter.com/GovHowardDean/status/796838538641833990?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
. On Friday, former Maryland governor Martin O’Malley, unsuccessful in his run 
for the presidential nomination, said he was “taking a hard look” at the 
position.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdemocrats-dnc-party-chair-progressives-ellison-dean-omalley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae08faa71b1d00ffeef369f49bb347875be9c9f3%2F0_0_2536_3168%2F2536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Resistance%20and%20anger%3A%20progressives%20urge%20Democratic%20party%20to%20stand%20up%20and%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdemocrats-dnc-party-chair-progressives-ellison-dean-omalley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Resistance%20and%20anger%3A%20progressives%20urge%20Democratic%20party%20to%20stand%20up%20and%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdemocrats-dnc-party-chair-progressives-ellison-dean-omalley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae08faa71b1d00ffeef369f49bb347875be9c9f3%2F0_0_2536_3168%2F2536.jpg>
 Martin O’Malley. Photograph: Matt Baron/BEI/Shutterstock 
The name that seems to resonate most among progressives, however, is that of 
Keith Ellison, a representative from Minnesota.Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> has endorsed Ellison, the 
leader of the Congressional Progressive Caucus. Warren, a liberal firebrand 
from Massachusetts, said on MSNBC he would make a “terrific” chair.

On a conference call Thursday night, Ellison said he was prepared to help the 
party rebuild and would announce his decision on whether to run on Monday.

“My shoelaces are tied up tight and I’m ready to get out on that court,” 
Ellison said on the call, which was hosted by Democracy for America, a 
progressive group founded by Dean. On Friday, Dean severed ties with the group.

Ellison, who is African American and the first Muslim member of Congress, 
would be a symbolic choice to lead the party under a Trump administration. Had 
Clinton won, she would have nominated someone, likely from her circle, to 
replace Brazile, who will serve until a new chair is elected in March 2017.

Wasserman-Schultz stepped down after hacked emails revealed that party 
officials had explored ways to hamper Sanders in the primaries. Another tranche 
of hacked emails revealed that Brazile, working for CNN, had shared a debate 
question with Clinton.

‘The sun will keep rising and we’ll keep fighting’
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Without control of the White House or either chamber of Congress, Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> must protect gains made under 
Obama while trying to advance their agenda.

“We do not control the tools of government, but make no mistake, we know what 
we stand for,” Warren said in a speech at the AFL-CIO union on Thursday. “The 
sun will keep rising and we will keep fighting.”

‘Hillary Clinton didn’t fail us. We failed her’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/12/hillary-clinton-we-failed-her-sarah-churchwell>
She laid out issues on which Democrats might be able to work with President 
Donald Trump, including reforming international trade policy. Already the Obama 
administration has backed away from theTrans-Pacific Partnership trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/12/tpp-trade-deal-congress-obama>
, a win for progressives and Trump. Other possible areas of compromise include 
infrastructure improvement, tackling college and childcare costs and protecting 
social security.

Robert Reich, secretary of labor under Bill Clinton, said liberals needed to 
form a “resistance army” to combat policies that would beat back equal rights.

“Anger is not bad,” Reich said on the conference call. “The angrier we are and 
the more activated and directional – the more we can channel that anger into 
real constructive change and blocking things that are bad, so much the better.”

Reich has argued for some time that the Democratic party has lost touch with 
working class voters it one represented. Exit polls suggest Trump won among 
white working class voterswho supported Obama 
<https://twitter.com/Nate_Cohn/status/796243185739632640?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
in 2008 and 2012. Reich said Democrats had to repair relations with the white 
working class but also embrace the “new American electorate” – millennials, 
minorities and single women.

He added that it was also the party’s job to oppose intolerance.

“We do have to fight bigotry in all its forms,” he said. “Any kind of bigotry 
that has been unleashed by this campaign, by Trump, giving permission to that 
kind of bigotry is something we’ve got to be alert to and we’ve got to fight.”
 