
Exxon boss Rex Tillerson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rex-tillerson> 
will receive more than $180m from the company as he severs financial ties with 
the oil industry to become Donald Trump’s secretary of state. Tillerson’s 
confirmation hearings begin next week.

Rex Tillerson named as Donald Trump's secretary of state
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin>
If confirmed, Tillerson will surrender all unpaid stock that was part of his 
pay package, more than 2m shares. In exchange, the company will make a cash 
payment equal to the value of those shares to a trust to be overseen by a third 
party, according to a regulatory filing on Wednesday with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC).

Some $54m of Tillerson’s stock options have already vested; he will be able to 
sell them at a much-reduced rate of tax, owing to laws that provide financial 
incentive to cabinet appointees to sell holdings that might conflict with their 
duties as public servants. Some have simply refused to do so, notably George W 
Bush’s vice-president, Dick Cheney, who retained stock options 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2004/09/28/us/a-closer-look-at-cheney-and-halliburton.html>
 in government contractor Halliburton, which substantially increased its 
business with the US government while Cheney was in office.


Tillerson, who built close ties, and a personal fortune, with officials at 
many foreign governments including Russia and Nigeria through Exxon’s links to 
their state oil companies, represents a unique set conflicts himself. Exxon 
said in its SEC filing that it hoped to minimize those conflicts by “working in 
close consultation with federal ethics authorities”, though it did not say 
which authorities.


Tillerson, who worked for Exxon for more than 40 years, would have reached the 
company’s mandatory retirement age of 65 by March, after which he would have 
received the money from Exxon over a period of 10 years.

The payouts from the third-party trust will mimic the planned payouts from 
Exxon, though by retiring in January rather than March, Tillerson will forfeit 
some $7m. If Tillerson re-enters the oil and gas industry within 10 years, he 
will forfeit the remaining money in the trust, which would be paid out to 
charities of the controlling trustee’s choosing.

Trump's conflicts of interest: a visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
Trump himself has yet to set out a clear plan as to how, or if, he will manage 
his own complex set of potential conflicts of interest. The president elect has 
investments and building in countries around the world. His children will 
manage his portfolio of businesses and have already been invited to meetings 
with top government officials and business leaders.

The unprecedented wealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/trumps-rich-pickings-president-elects-team-could-be-wealthiest-ever>
 of Trump’s list of cabinet nominees means that more disclosures like 
Tillerson’s ate expected in the coming weeks and multiple billionaires across 
several industries will, like Tillerson, make huge savings on capital gains 
taxes, among other incentives, on their huge fortunes in return to taking up 
public office.


Wilbur Ross, the billionaire banker and restructuring specialist, whom Trump 
tapped to be secretary of commerce, and Gary Cohn, the former second in command 
at Goldman Sachs, whom Trump would like to lead the national economic council, 
are both expected to outline their own plans in the coming days.

Darren Woods, a 25-year Exxon veteran who had served as the company’s 
president, took over as CEO ofExxonMobil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/exxonmobil> at the start of the new year.

Tillerson began his career at Exxon as a production engineer straight out of 
the University of Texas at Austin in 1975. He replaced longtime CEO Lee Raymond 
in 2006 and led the company during one of the most turbulent periods in its 
history, which included the 2008 financial crisis, and a collapse in oil prices 
since mid-2014 that has sharply diluted Exxon’s profits.

 