
Oil executive Rex Tillerson is likely to be nominated by Donald Trump for 
secretary of state, lifting the Exxon Mobil chief executive who has ties to 
Russian presidentVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> into consideration for the 
most senior US diplomat.

Russian involvement in US vote raises fears for European elections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/russian-involvement-in-us-vote-raises-fears-for-european-elections>
The president-elect met Tillerson for the second time in less than a week on 
Saturday morning, a campaign spokeswoman told the Guardian.

Transition team sources told NBC News 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/rex-tillerson-exxon-mobil-expected-be-named-trump-s-secretary-n694371>
,the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/10/us/politics/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
 andCNN 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/10/politics/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state/> that 
the businessman was Trump’s top choice.

Jason Miller, the transition team spokesman, did not confirm or deny the 
reported selection of Tillerson,using Twitter to say 
<https://twitter.com/JasonMillerinDC/status/807664441391284224>: “No 
announcements on Secretary of State until next week at the earliest.”

The news leaked less than a day after reports that US intelligence officials 
had concluded that the Kremlin tried to intervene in the 2016 election to help 
Trump defeat Hillary Clinton,according to officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 quoted anonymously in the Washington Post and New York Times.

Republicans disputed those findings. Earlier on Friday, Barack Obama ordered 
the agencies to review all evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/us-election-hacking-russia-barack-obama-review>
 about Russian interference in the election, including hacks on political 
organizations including the Democratic National Committee.


Trump has repeatedly praised Putin, and said he would like to restore 
US-Russia relations and work with Russian counterparts against international 
terrorism.

The selection of Tillerson, 64, would end a long series of interviews that 
included former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney, retired general and former 
CIA director David Petraeus and former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani.

Each of those candidates faded in turn: Romney over his past opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/mitt-romney-praises-donald-trump-dinner-twitter>
 to Trump, Petraeus regarding hisguilty plea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/03/david-petraeus-pleads-guilty-classified-information-paula-broadwell>
 to leaking confidential information and Giuliani for hisconsulting work 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/16/us/politics/donald-trump-cabinet-rudy-giuliani.html>
 for clients abroad.

Trump met Tillerson on Tuesday at Trump Tower in Manhattan, and again on 
Saturday.

In a decade leading Exxon Mobil, for which he has worked for 41 years, 
Tillerson has cut deals around the world, including several projects with 
Russia’s state-owned oil giant, Rosneft.

Economic sanctions against Russia have hindered Exxon’s work with Rosneft, and 
Tillerson has spoken outagainst 
<http://www.star-telegram.com/news/business/article3859697.html> them. A 2011 
deal with Rosneft, to access Arctic oil reserves, could be worth as much as 
$500bn, Putinsaid at the time 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/31/business/global/exxon-and-rosneft-partner-in-russian-oil-deal.html>
.

In 2013, the Kremlin gave Tillerson an Order of Friendship award 
<http://www.exxonmobil.ru/Russia-Russian/PA/about_who_mgmt_rwt.aspx>. A year 
later, after the US and European Union placed sanctions on Russia over its 
annexation of Crimea and military action in Ukraine, Tillerson said the policy 
was harmful.

“We always encourage the people who are making those decisions to consider the 
very broad collateral damage of who are they really harming with sanctions,”he 
told shareholders 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/rex-tillerson-exxon-mobil-expected-be-named-trump-s-secretary-n694371>
 at the company’s annual meeting.

On Saturday, former ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul noted that Tillerson 
was “very close <http:// https://twitter.com/McFaul/status/807656057837260800>” 
to Igor Sechin, CEO of Rosneft, a former deputy prime minister and a friend of 
Putin since the 1990s. Sechin wasdirectly targeted 
<https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/jl2369.aspx> by US 
sanctions in 2014.

At the army-navy football game in Baltimore on Saturday, which Trump also 
attended, Republican senator John McCain said he had concerns about Tillerson’s 
relationship withRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

“What about all the other things: right now, the targeting of hospitals by 
Russian aircraft with precision weapons in Syria, in Aleppo?” the party’s 2008 
presidential nomineetold CNN 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/10/politics/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state/>. 

Trump's cabinet picks: here are all of the appointments so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-administration-cabinet-picks-so-far>
“Those are the kind of questions that we need to ask about the relationship 
with Vladimir Putin.”

Potential conflicts of interest would likely arise at Tillerson’s confirmation 
hearings with the Senate. So would the subject of climate change.

Exxon Mobil has operations in more than 50 countries and has partnered 
<http://corporate.exxonmobil.com/en/company/worldwide-operations/locations/qatar/about/overview>
 with Qatar’s state oil company, Qatar Petroleum, on a project to build a 
natural gas terminal on the Gulf of Mexico.

Tillerson has acknowledged the threat of climate change and Exxon Mobil has 
endorsed a carbon tax and stated its support for the Paris climate agreement.

The company is also under investigation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/20/science/exxon-mobil-fraud-inquiry-said-to-focus-more-on-future-than-past.html>
 for misleading investors about what it knew about climate change.

Trump has appointed Scott Pruitt, a climate change denier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
, to head the Environmental Protection Agency.
 