
Richard Adams, the author of Watership Down, has died aged 96.

A statement on the book’s official website 
<https://watership-down.com/2016/12/27/requiescat-in-pace/> said: “Richard’s 
much-loved family announce with sadness that their dear father, grandfather, 
and great-grandfather passed away peacefully at 10pm on Christmas Eve.”

The novel, first published in 1972, became one of the bestselling children’s 
books of all time, selling tens of millions of copies.

Adams did not begin writing until 1966, when he was 46 and working for the 
civil service. While on a car trip with his daughters, he began telling them a 
story about a group of young rabbits escaping from their doomed warren.

Watership Down author Richard Adams: I just can’t do humans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/04/richard-adams-watership-down-interview>
In an interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/04/richard-adams-watership-down-interview>
 two years ago, the author recalled: “I had been put on the spot and I started 
off: ‘Once there were two rabbits called Hazel and Fiver.’ And I just took it 
on from there.”

It was made into an animated film in 1978, and the following year the film’s 
theme song Bright Eyes, sung by Art Garfunkel, topped the UK charts for six 
weeks.


The book, which critics have credited with redefining anthropomorphic fiction 
with its naturalistic depiction of the rabbits’ trials and adventures, won 
Adams both the Carnegie medal and the Guardian children’s prize.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwatership-down-author-richard-adams-dies-aged-96%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39d1e258419e2a482d89522505ae175ec97e2d65%2F494_843_5286_3173%2F5286.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Adams%2C%20Watership%20Down%20author%2C%20dies%20aged%2096&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwatership-down-author-richard-adams-dies-aged-96%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Adams%2C%20Watership%20Down%20author%2C%20dies%20aged%2096&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwatership-down-author-richard-adams-dies-aged-96%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39d1e258419e2a482d89522505ae175ec97e2d65%2F494_843_5286_3173%2F5286.jpg>
 Richard Adams in 1975. Photograph: Greenwood/ANL/Rex/Shutterstock 
The statement announcing his death quoted a passage from the end of his 
best-known work. It read: “It seemed to Hazel that he would not be needing his 
body any more, so he left it lying on the edge of the ditch, but stopped for a 
moment to watch his rabbits and to try to get used to the extraordinary feeling 
that strength and speed were flowing inexhaustibly out of him into their sleek 
young bodies and healthy senses.

“‘You needn’t worry about them,’ said his companion. ‘They’ll be alright – and 
thousands like them.”’

A spokesman for Oneworld publications, which brought out a new edition of 
Watership Down with illustrations by Aldo Galli, said: “Very saddened to hear 
that Richard Adams has passed. His books will be cherished for years to come.”

The author, born on 9 May 1920 in Berkshire, also wrote Shardik, The Girl in a 
Swing and The Plague Dogs. The latter explores animal rights through the tale 
of two dogs that escape from a laboratory.

Richard Adams obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/27/richard-adams-obituary> 
Adams enrolled at Worcester College, Oxford, in 1938. But when the second 
world war broke out, he enlisted in the Royal Army Service Corps, serving in 
Palestine, Europe and the far east.

He returned to complete his studies, gaining a degree in modern history, 
before finding work as a civil servant in the housing and local government 
ministry in 1948.

He was also president of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals from 1980–82. He was inducted into the Royal Society of Literature in 
1975.

A new animated TV mini-series of Watership Down, co-produced by the BBC and 
Netflix, is due to air next year in four one-hour parts.
 