
When someone once told Joseph Heller, the author of Catch-22, that he hadn’t 
written anything as good since, Heller famously replied: “Who has?” Similarly, 
if JK Rowling were to appear on stage riding a dragon that spewed molten gold 
and breathed fire, the majority of the audience would likely mutter: “Not as 
good as Harry Potter.” And so to Richard Adams, whodied on Christmas Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/27/watership-down-author-richard-adams-dies-aged-96>
. No matter what he did before or since,he will forever be associated with 
Watership Down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/27/richard-adams-obituary>.

For some, Watership Down will trigger the earworm Bright Eyes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qLsvvZOaFH8>, as written and composed by Mike 
Batt (of Wombles fame) and sung by Art Garfunkel. To others, images of the 
somewhat lacklustre animated1978 film adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/30/watership-down-the-film-that-frightened-me-the-most>
 – for which Bright Eyes was the theme tune – may come to mind. But those of us 
who read and loved Adams’s original book will be transported to quite a 
different place: a world of rabbits with their own traditions, customs and 
legends, but not outwardly anthropomorphic (no waistcoats, pocket watches or 
two-legged walking here). There is something unique about the novel, so 
multi-layered and complete. Since its publication, we’ve had William Horwood’s 
moles in Duncton Wood, and attempts at similar approaches with deer and crows 
and the like, but none has achieved quite what Adams did with rabbits.

Watership Down author Richard Adams: I just can’t do humans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/04/richard-adams-watership-down-interview>
What many people may be unaware of is that Watership Down was first published, 
at the end of 1972, by one-man publishing outfit Rex Collings, well before the 
days of Kickstarter, print on demand or digital downloads. The book looked 
decidedly amateurish but went on to be snapped up by Penguin, who took the then 
extremely unusual step of publishing it under both the Puffin and Penguin 
imprints; in other words, for children and adults. The novel won immediate 
recognition with the Guardian children’s fiction prize and the Carnegie medal.

It’s easy to forget what a phenomenon Watership Down was at the time. Here was 
a book – over 400 pages long – read by young and old alike. It propelled Adams 
into the limelight like few other authors. The phrase “capturing the zeitgeist” 
might have been invented for it.

After the publication of his second novel, Shardik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/26/shardik-richard-adams-watership-down-beware-bear>
, Adams gave up his career as a civil servant to become a full-time writer. No 
book could ever hope to be as successful as Watership Down, and Shardik – its 
title the name of a huge bear – is a very different kind of story. It is, 
however, extremely well written and confirmed that Adams was no one-hit wonder.

His third novel, The Plague Dogs, about two dogs escaping from a government 
research facility and trying to evade recapture, contains yet more strong 
characters and well-paced action, but is rather let down by its ending. It 
becomes a discussion between two real-life naturalists, Sir Peter Scott and 
Ronald Lockley, the latter Adams’s friend. This thinly disguised and rather 
verbose polemic disrupts and, for many, destroys the tone of the book, but the 
story still has much to offer. Many more books were to follow, including his 
fourth, more adult-themed, novel, Girl in a Swing.

But it is clearly the rabbits for which Adams will rightly be remembered and I 
very much hope his death – at the ripe old age of 96, in a year of untimely 
deaths – will lead many to return to Watership Down or to visit it for the 
first time. Adams was a very special writer.

Philip Ardagh is a children’s author, commentator and reviewer.
 