
Rick Perry calls Charleston church shooting an 'accident'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/19/rick-perry-charleston-church-shooting-accident>
Rick Perry on Saturday commented again on the shooting deaths of nine people 
in a historic church in Charleston, South Carolina, an incident which he 
previously describedas an “accident” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/19/rick-perry-charleston-church-shooting-accident>
.

A campaign spokesperson subsequently said the candidate had misspoken, saying: 
“From the context of his comments, it’s clear Governor Perry meant ‘incident’.”

The suspect in the Charleston shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/charleston-shooting>, 21-year-old Dylann 
Roof, appeared in court on Friday. Roof is white; the nine people who died at 
the Emanuel AME church on Wednesday night, at a Bible study meeting, were all 
black.

On Saturday a law enforcement source confirmed to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/20/fbi-investigates-website-manifesto-charleston-shooting-suspect-dylann-roof>
 that the FBI was investigating a website which contained photographs that 
appeared to be of Roof and a racist manifesto which appeared to have been 
written by him.

Perry, a former Texas governor who is making a second run for the White House, 
made the controversial remarks on Friday. Speaking to the conservativeNewsmaxTV 
<http://www.rightwingwatch.org/content/rick-perry-charleston-shooting-accident-due-drug-use-manipulated-obama-ban-guns>
 about the motivation for the Charleston shooting, he also said: “It seems to 
me – again, without having all the details about this one – that these 
individuals have been medicated. And there may be a real issue in this country, 
from the standpoint of these drugs, and how they’re used.”

On Saturday, Perry attended the Faith and Freedom Coalition Conference in 
Washington, along with a number of Republican White House hopefuls. He told 
reporters: “I think we all come here today with heavy hearts for those 
individuals in Charleston – those Charleston Christians – who were gunned down 
in an absolute heinous hate crime inside of their place of worship.

“That deranged individual didn’t just take lives of black Americans – he 
gunned down nine children of God.”

Perry continued: “There is something more basic to our humanity than the color 
of our skin, our ethnic heritage, our nationality. It’s that we’re all made in 
the image of a loving God. And we cannot let hatred and violence break the ties 
that bind us together.”

Obama's strong words on Charleston shooting: 'I refuse to act as if this is 
the new normal'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/19/barack-obama-charleston-shooting-i-refuse-to-act-as-if-this-is-the-new-normal>
In his Newsmax interview, Perry also accused President Barack Obama of using 
the Charleston shooting tocall for legislation on gun control <http://“More 
than 11,000 Americans were killed by gun violence in 2013 alone,” Obama said in 
an afternoon appearance at a national conference of mayors in San Francisco. 
“If Congress had passed some commonsense legislation after Newtown, after a 
group of children had been gunned down in their own classroom, reforms that 90% 
of the American people supported … we might still have more Americans with us.” 
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/19/barack-obama-charleston-shooting-i-refuse-to-act-as-if-this-is-the-new-normal>
.

“This is the MO of this administration,” he said. “Any time there is an 
accident like this, the president is clear. He doesn’t like for Americans to 
have guns and so he uses every opportunity, this being another one, to 
basically go parrot that message.”


In Washington on Saturday, Perry was less strident on the issue.

“I think it is healthy for us as a nation to have conversations and defend our 
positions whatever they may be,” he said. “I do have an issue that the 
knee-jerk from the left is always ‘We’re going to take people’s guns away from 
them’, when in fact there may be a host of contributing factors here.”

The leading Democratic candidate for 2016, Hillary Clinton, also addressed the 
Charleston shooting on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/20/hillary-clinton-gun-control-institutional-racism>
. Speaking in San Francisco to the US Conference of Mayors, the former 
secretary of state called for “commonsense” gun control reform to keep guns 
from criminals and the mentally ill, while “respecting responsible gun owners”.
 