
US presidential hopeful Rick Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry> has said filmgoers should be 
able to take their guns into cinemas in order to help stop fatal shootings.

Speaking on CNN’s State of the Union on Sunday 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/07/26/politics/rick-perry-gun-free-zones-movie-theaters/index.html>
, gun rights proponent Perry was reminded by host Jake Tapper of the killings 
in Lafayette, Louisiana on Thursday evening at a screening of the Amy Schumer 
comedy Trainwreck. The former Texas governor, who is running for the Republican 
ticket for the 2016 presidential election, said “gun-free zones” were a “bad 
idea” and questioned whether allowing people to carry firearms in public spaces 
might have saved lives during recent fatal shooting incidents.

Amy Schumer and other Trainwreck stars react to Lafayette shooting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/24/hollywood-reacts-to-shooting-at-cinema-showing-trainwreck>
“I think that it makes a lot of sense to send a message across this country,” 
said Perry in response to a direct question from Tapper asking if he was 
suggesting that allowing filmgoers to carry firearms might be a “solution”. “If 
we believe in the second amendment, we believe in people’s right to protect 
themselves and defend themselves and their families.”

Perry added: “I will suggest to you that these concepts of gun-free zones are 
a bad idea. I think that you allow the citizens of this country, who have been 
appropriately trained, appropriately backgrounded and know how to handle and 
use firearms, to carry them. I believe that, with all my heart, that if you 
have the citizens who are well trained, and particularly in these places that 
are considered to be gun-free zones, that we can stop that type of activity, or 
stop it before there’s as many people that are impacted as what we saw in 
Lafayette.”

Presidential candidate and democrat Bernie Sanders has also spoken out about 
the shootings but believes that the tragedy should lead to a different 
conclusion. “Nobody should have a gun who has a criminal background or was 
involved in domestic abuse situations,” he said on NBC’sMeet the Press 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/meet-the-press/bernie-sanders-racism-economic-inequality-are-parallel-problems-n398581>
. “People should not have guns who are going to hurt other people, who are 
unstable. We need to make sure that certain types of guns used to kill people, 
exclusively, not for hunting, should not be sold in the United States of 
America.”

John Russell Houser shot 11 people, killing two and injuring nine, at the 
cinema in Lafayette on Thursday night before turning the gun on himself. The 
victims havesince been named as artistic entrepreneur Jillian Johnson, 33, and 
student Mayci Breaux, 21 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/24/lafayette-shooting-victims-mayci-breaux-jillian-johnson>
. A picture has emerged of Houser as a troubled man with racist and misogynist 
views who tried to blow up his home when it was foreclosed and sold at auction.



 