Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBrdSOrfNG1c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBrdSOrfNG1c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBrdSOrfNG1c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Rick Perry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry> has only been 
running for president since Saturday, but he has already shown he is the most 
rightwing Republican in the race.

So it was fairly predictable that Perry, like other Republicans seeking the 
nomination,would deny the existence of climate change 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/aug/12/rick-perry-climate-sceptics-president>
 and make the – totally false – claim that scientists are coming forward in 
droves to question whether global warming is real.

After all, climate denial is the Tea Party litmus test. 

But the Texas governor told an even bigger lie when he said on Wednesday that 
"trillions of taxpayer dollars" were being spent on climate research, and that 
climate scientists were "manipulating" information.

Successive inquiries have cleared scientists 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2010/jul/07/climategate-scientists-main-points?INTCMP=SRCH>
 of wrongdoing.

In response to a question, Perry told voters in New Hampshire:


I do believe that the issue of global warming has been politicized. I think 
there are a substantial number of scientists who have manipulated data so that 
they will have dollars rolling into their projects. And I think we are seeing 
almost weekly or even daily scientists are coming forward and questioning the 
original idea that man-made global warming is what is causing the climate to 
change. Yes our climate's changed, they've been changing ever since the earth 
was born. But I do not buy into a group of scientists who have in some cases 
found to be manipulating this information.

And the cost to the country and the world of implementing these anti-corbon 
programs is in the billions if not trillions of dollars at the end of the day. 
And I don't think, from my perspective, that I want America to be engaged in 
spending that much money still on a scientific theory that has not been proven, 
and from my perspective, is being put more and more into question.


If only. Barack Obama initially budgeted $2.6bn for climate science 
<http://www.climatesciencewatch.org/2010/02/02/president-obama%E2%80%99s-fy2011-budget-has-21-funding-increase-for-usgcrp-climate-science-research/>
 – the highest allocation for 20 years – and those funds will probably 
disappear in the debt crisis negotiations. And there has never been any 
evidence of "manipulation" by climate scientists. In fact, successive inquiries 
havecleared scientists 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2010/jul/07/climategate-scientists-main-points?INTCMP=SRCH>
 of wrongdoing.

But maybe that's the point. Perry's outrageous comments on climate change – 
like his earlier remarks about Obama's inability to command the respect of US 
forces – are a core part of his political strategy. Perry is trying to whip up 
the Tea Party faction, and convince them that he is their man.

The biggest threat to Perry's plan at the moment is Michele Bachmann – herself 
no slouch when it comes to climate denial 
<http://thinkprogress.org/green/2011/08/17/297902/michele-bachmann-man-made-climate-change-is-manufactured-science/>
.

Unlike other Republican candidates, Perry does not really need to defend his 
credentials on the environment – despite an early connection to Al Gore as 
chairman of his 1988 primary campaign in Texas. The governorhas a long record 
of denying the science of climate change 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/aug/12/rick-perry-climate-sceptics-president>
 and of trying to block the Environmental Protection Agency.

Where Perry is vulnerable to attacks from the right, however, is on other 
positions he took as governor - especially his policies on immigration.

The Texas governor supported a public programme to vaccinate young girls 
against a virus linked to cervical cancer. Perry also signed a law to make 
college education more affordable for the children of illegal immigrants. That 
stance puts him to the left of many Republicans, according to theNational 
Review.
 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/274629/five-questions-about-rick-perry-ramesh-ponnuru?page=3>

It's not a record Perry wants to open up to scrutiny – not at a time when 
success depends on appealing to the Tea Party. Which is why Perry has been 
working so hard to bury that record by making controversial remarks, or by 
re-directing the public towards his more orthodox Republican positions - like 
climate denial.
 