
Former Texas governor Rick Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-perry> has announced that he is 
dropping out of the race for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination.

Perry is first in the Republican field to exit the race. His campaign ran into 
financial trouble after he did not poll high enough to participate in the first 
presidential debate.

Perry laid off a number of campaign workers and shuttered offices in early 
voting states. Although he was sustained by a well-funded Super Pac, it proved 
not to be enough for his campaign to continue.

In his remarks announcing he would no longer be seeking his party’s 
nomination, Perry told attendees at a social conservative event in St Louis: 
“We have a tremendous field – the best in a generation – so I step aside 
knowing our party is in good hands, and as long as we listen to the grassroots, 
the cause of conservatism will be too.”

“I share this news with no regrets,” he continued. “It has been a privilege 
and an honor to travel this country, to speak with the American people about 
their hopes and dreams, to see a sense of optimism prevalent despite a season 
of cynical politics.”

Perry had been one of the most vocal critics of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/18/rick-perry-donald-trump-john-mccain>
 in the Republican field and assailed the billionaire as “a cancer on 
conservatism”. He criticized Trump, though not by name, on Friday.

“Demeaning people of Hispanic heritage is not just ignorant, it betrays the 
example of Christ. We can enforce our laws and our borders, and we can love all 
who live within our borders, without betraying our values,” he said.
The former Texas governor added: “It is time to elevate our debate from 
divisive name-calling, from soundbites without solutions, and start discussing 
how we will make the country better for all if a conservative is elected 
president.”

In the aftermath of Perry’s announcement, his fellow Republicans reacted 
graciously to his departure from the race. Louisiana governor Bobby Jindal who 
actively campaigned for Perry in 2012tweeted  
<https://twitter.com/BobbyJindal/status/642450329389273089>governor Perry “is a 
great friend, and has the best record of any governor anywhere, anytime” and 
Florida senator Marco Rubio released a statement praising Perry for his service 
commending “him for running an honorable, positive campaign”.

Even Donald Trump, who called Perry dumb less than two months ago, was polite. 
Hetweeted <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/642455022647812096> Perry 
“is a terrific guy and I wish him well- I know he will have a great future!”

Immediately after Perry finished speaking in St Louis, Mike Huckabee praised 
Perry in his speech at the Eagle Forum. The former Arkansas governor and 2016 
candidatepledged <https://twitter.com/daveweigel/status/642459273478471680>: 
“If I am the next president, Rick Perry will be part of the next 
administration.”

Perry’s 2016 campaign particularly emphasized the air force veteran’s service 
in the armed forces. The former Texas governor was one of only two candidates 
running to have served in the US military and he often campaigned  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/06/rick-perry-navy-seals-republicans-veterans-iowa>
with decorated veterans like former Navy Seal Marcus Luttrell, a Medal of Honor 
recipient whose exploits were memorialized in the movie Lone Survivor. In 
advance of his 2016 campaign, Perry also spent a considerable amount of time 
studying up on policy and brought on top conservative health care policy wonk 
Avik Roy to advise him.

However, his campaign never caught fire and Perry polled at zero percent 
nationally in the most recentCNN/ORC poll 
<http://i2.cdn.turner.com/cnn/2015/images/09/10/rel9a.-.gop.2016.pdf>.

In a statement, Jamie Johnson, a veteran Iowa Republican activist who served a 
senior role on Perry’s campaign even after other staffers left, praised the 
former Texas governor as “the most honorable public servant I have ever known”.

This marks Perry’s second unsuccessful bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/04/rick-perry-up-against-his-own-track-record-as-he-runs-for-president-again>
 for the presidency. He previously ran in 2011 where he briefly surged to the 
front of the Republican field. However, he stumbled prominently in a televised 
debate where he could not remember the third of three federal agencies he said 
he wished to abolish. Perry’s campaign never recovered.

Although the former Texas governor tried to emphasize his social conservative 
credentials in acontroversial ad  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0PAJNntoRgA>
where he said “something is wrong in America where gays can openly serve in the 
military but our children can’t pray in school,” it was unsuccessful. Perry 
finished fifth in the Iowa Caucuses with just over 10% of the vote and, after 
skipping the New Hampshire primary, eventually dropped out on the eve of South 
Carolina’s GOP nominating contest.

Perry became governor of Texas in 2001, ascending to the post after his 
predecessor George W Bush was elected president. He won re-election three times 
and served until 2014.

The Texas governor’s tenure in office was marked by staunchly conservative 
policies where Perry pushed to lower taxes and advocated for a state 
constitutional amendment to define marriage between a man and woman.

 He also faced controversy when he was indicted in 2014 for “abuse of official 
capacity” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/15/rick-perry-indicted-abuse-of-power>
 related to a veto threat that Perry issued for funding of state’s Public 
Integrity Unit after its supervisor, Travis County district Rosemary Lehmberg, 
was convicted of drunk driving.

Perry’s exit from the race leaves 16 candidates still contending for the 
Republican presidential nomination.
 