
The wonderfully named Troy Town Pottery 
<http://www.aaronangell.com/index.php?/troy-town-art-pottery/> in Hoxton, east 
London, is first and foremost the studio of the artistAaron Angell 
<http://www.aaronangell.com>, whose intricate ceramic sculptures – think of 
them as dioramas the size of a large ashtray – reflect what he calls, rather 
uncertainly, “a psychic compost of imagery”. But supported by various public 
grants, it also functions, under his guidance, as a space for artists who want 
to learn more about making work with clay. Among its recent visitors was Anthea 
Hamilton, who made the prototype for the giant pair of buttocks that comprised 
her Turner prize-shortlistedProject for Door (After Gaetano Pesce) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/30/gaetano-pesce-turner-prize-andrea-hamilton>
 at Troy Town. Angell had hoped to lower that piece into the tank of his 
axolotl, whose environment, courtesy of the parade of artists coming through 
his door, changes every six months. “But it exploded in the second firing,” he 
says, with a mournful shake of his head.

When Angell, who is 29, was at the Slade School of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, working in clay wasn’t an 
option available to students. “I don’t know if that pushed me to want to do it 
more,” he says. “But in my final year, it occurred to me that if you had the 
right set-up, you had this infallible way of making sculpture.”

You’re almost working blind. Even the weather can affect a firing

He duly returned to his secondary school in Caterham, spent three weeks 
shadowing its ceramics technician and began the journey that eventually brought 
him here. “The process is frustrating. Anyone can buy a bag of clay and a 
readymade glaze. But to do it properly, to make your own glazes as we do, you 
have to fail sometimes. That makes it a romantic, fatalistic thing. You’re 
almost working blind. Even the weather can affect a firing.”

He likes clay’s human scale, its lack of preciousness, the fact that it comes 
from the ground. But he hates to be called a ceramicist, not least because he 
also paints: “Artist will do.”

Angell is a co-curator of a forthcoming exhibition at Tate St Ives: That 
Continuous Thing: Artists and the Ceramics Studio, 1920 – Today 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-st-ives/exhibition/continuous-thing-artists-and-ceramics-studio-1920-today>
. In the gallery he’ll oversee, he will show his own sculptures, historical 
pieces (one dates from 2000 BC) and a selection of work by artists who have 
visited Troy Town, as well as the tank that is home to his axolotl, complete 
with five rotating environments. “I’ve put so much work into it,” he says. 
“It’s a feast of arrangements.”

Later in the year, he is to be an artist-in-residence, supported by the Tate, 
at theLeach Pottery in St Ives <http://www.leachpottery.com>; looking further 
ahead, he will have solo shows at Glasgow’s Gallery of Modern Art and atRob 
Tufnell <http://www.robtufnell.com/Artists'%20pages/artist.html>’s new London 
space in a former ladies’ lavatory below Trafalgar Square. Things are busy.

The atmosphere at Troy Town, however, remains almost uncannily quiet and 
peaceful, for which I blame the axolotl. In her tank, she strolls blithely back 
and forth, blissfully unaware of her impending new role as a star of the art 
world.

Three more to watch

■ Samara Scott <http://www.samarascott.com> makes liquid sculptures from 
(among other things) paint, food colouring and nail polish. Most recently, she 
used biodegradable dyes to colour theMirror Pools in London’s Battersea Park 
<http://pumphousegallery.org.uk/programme/samara-scott>.

■ Charlotte Prodger 
<http://generationartscotland.org/artists/charlotte-prodger/> uses video and 
audio to examine shifting representations of the self in the 21st century. Her 
work can be seen in theBritish Art Show 8 in Southampton 
<https://britishartshow8.com> until 15 January.

■ Mandy Payne <http://www.mandypayneart.co.uk> uses acrylic and aerosols, on 
concrete rather than canvas, to paint urban landscapes.Last Orders (2016) is in 
the Contemporary British Painting prize exhibition at Huddersfield Art Gallery 
until 22 January.
 