
Comedian Rob Delaney has raised tens of thousands of dollars in a bid to oust 
Republicans who tried to distance themselves fromDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> following his recent scandals.

Delaney, star of the TV show Catastrophe, established a fund on ActBlue 
<https://secure.actblue.com/contribute/page/oct7fund>, a fundraising site for 
the Democratic party, to raise money for opponents of Republicans who retracted 
their endorsement from Donald Trump in the past week after a recording of Trump
making lewd remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 during an Access Hollywood appearance about groping women surfaced.

The fund has raised $68,294 from 1,176 donors in the four days since its 
launch.

“That’s what it took for you to disavow him?” Delaney said in a blogpost 
announcing the fund titledNo Getting Off the Train 
<http://robdelaney.tumblr.com/post/151577393553/no-getting-off-the-train>. 
“Since I’m not a total moron, I know that what really happened is that it 
finally became clear to anyone who knows how elections work that Trump was 
definitely going to lose.

“So the same drive for self-preservation that led these turd balls to endorse 
him in the first place,” he continued, “has compelled them to pull the ripcord 
when Access Hollywood revealed their pussy tape and gave them the opportunity 
to pretend they care about women or something.”
rob delaney (@robdelaney) 
#MAGA <https://twitter.com/hashtag/MAGA?src=hash> Please read, RT & punish 
defectors! 🇺🇸https://t.co/lqpeqhrWMs <https://t.co/lqpeqhrWMs> 
#MakeAmericaGreatAgain 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/MakeAmericaGreatAgain?src=hash> 🇺🇸 
pic.twitter.com/PwjowAH64D <https://t.co/PwjowAH64D>
 <https://twitter.com/robdelaney/status/785242453444009984> October 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/robdelaney/status/785242453444009984> 
The list includes more than a dozen names and the money will be distributed 
evenly among their opponents. Some Republican heavyweights are featured on the 
list such as former presidential nominee John McCain, whorevoked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/john-mccain-donald-trump-sex-boast-tape>
 his endorsement on Sunday, and New Jersey congressman Scott Garrett, who 
originally said Mike Pence wouldmake a better nominee 
<http://www.nj.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/10/njs_garrett_pence_would_be_stronger_republican_nom.html>
 after the video was released but later addedhe would still vote 
<http://observer.com/2016/10/despite-unease-with-trumps-words-garrett-says-he-will-still-vote-for-party-nominee/>
 for Trump.

Delaney is vocal about politics and, while he voted for Bernie Sanders in the 
primary campaign,he said 
<http://robdelaney.tumblr.com/post/147914220213/who-im-voting-for-and-why> he 
will be voting for Hillary Clinton for her policy on healthcare and her 
potential supreme court justice picks.

He has encouraged his 1.4 million Twitter followers to donate and has also 
called on Trump and his supporters to pledge to the campaign.
rob delaney (@robdelaney) 
.@realDonaldTrump <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump> Sir, I made a fund to 
help defeat Republicans who are un-endorsing you! Please RT!
https://t.co/lqpeqhrWMs <https://t.co/lqpeqhrWMs>
 <https://twitter.com/robdelaney/status/785219141313626113> October 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/robdelaney/status/785219141313626113> 
Several celebrities have chimed in to express their disdain towards Trump and 
have encouraged voters to register and ensure that the real estate mogul does 
not win the election. A litany of stars including Scarlett Johansson, James 
Franco, Julianne Moore and Don Cheadle, among others,released a video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/22/robert-downey-jnr-offers-up-a-naked-mark-ruffalo-to-enocurage-americans-to-vote-video>
 saying Mark Ruffalo – also in the video – would appear naked in his next movie 
if people registered to vote.
 