
The former CIA director and defense secretary Robert Gates has criticised the 
Obama administration and congressional leaders of both parties for a “somewhat 
laid-back” response to the discovery ofRussian interference in the US 
presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/clinton-putin-email-hack-revenge>
.

Leak reveals Rex Tillerson is director of Bahamas-based US-Russian oil company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/leak-rex-tillerson-director-bahamas-based-us-russian-oil-company>
Speaking to NBC’s Meet the Press on Sunday, Gates said a “thinly disguised” 
operation by Russia had aimed to undermine the credibility of the American 
election and was to weakenHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>.

“Given the unprecedented nature of it and the magnitude of the effort, I think 
people seem to have been somewhat laid-back about it,” he said.

The CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
, FBI, the Director of National Intelligence and other agenciesagree 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/clinton-blames-putins-personal-grudge-against-her-for-election-interference/2016/12/16/12f36250-c3be-11e6-8422-eac61c0ef74d_story.html?utm_term=.2bc4bfeaf8e7>
 that Russia sought to influence the election in favour of Donald Trump. This 
week, the White Housesaid it believed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/white-house-putin-russia-hacking-us-election-trump>
 President Vladimir Putin played a direct role.

Trump has rejected and ridiculed such assertions – as has Putin’s government. 
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has ordered a 
review of all relevant intelligence information.

On Sunday, senators John McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain>, Chuck Schumer, Lindsey Graham 
and Jack Reed repeated their call for an investigation by a bipartisan select 
committee.

“The fact that they’re hacking our political system and trying to influence 
the outcome, as it seems to be, that is serious, serious stuff,” Schumer told a 
press conference in New York.

The senators released an open letter to the Senate majority leader, Mitch 
McConnell, requesting support for the select committee. Gates said he was 
unsure if the aim was to swing the election to Trump.

“Whether it was intended to help one or other candidate, I don’t know,” he 
said. “But I think it clearly was aimed at discrediting our elections and I 
think it was aimed certainly at weakening Mrs Clinton.”

Gates worked for Republican and Democratic presidents, as CIA director under 
George HW Bush and secretary of defense under George W Bush and Obama. Asked by 
NBC host Chuck Todd if the White House, leaders of both parties and Trump had 
shown enough urgency, he answered flatly: “No.”

He added: “It seems pretty clear to me that they’ve developed really reliable 
information that the Russian government was involved.”

Appearing on CNN’s State of the Union, McCain criticized Obama, saying the 
president had “no strategy and no policy”.

“We need a select committee, we need to get to the bottom of this,” he said. 
“We need to find out exactly what was done and exactly what the implications of 
the attacks were, especially if they had an effect on our election. There is no 
doubt they [the Russians] were interfering.”

On Friday, Obama told a press conference his administration had not acted 
during the election because it did not want to appear partisan. It has been 
reported that the White Houseexpected Hillary Clinton to win 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/why-didnt-obama-do-more-about-russian-election-hack-n696701>
.


White House faces exodus of foreign policy experts ahead of Trump's arrival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/national-security-council-exodus-foreign-policy-michael-flynn>
Obama also said he told Putin to “cut it out” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/barack-obama-final-press-conference-election-hacking>
 – a month before the first release of hacked Democratic party emails by 
WikiLeaks. He haspromised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-retaliation-russia-hacking-us-election>
 unspecified retaliation. US intelligence agencies believe Russian or 
Russian-sponsored actions included the hack of such emails, which were covered 
extensively in themedia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/24/debbie-wasserman-schultz-resigns-dnc-chair-emails-sanders>
.

Gates said Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> had carried out 
“a thinly disguised, covert operation intended to discredit the American 
election and to basically allow the Russians to communicate to the rest of the 
world that our elections are corrupt, incompetent, rigged, whatever, and 
therefore no more honest than anybody else’s in the world, including theirs”.

Gates – who was involved 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/world/americas/tillersons-company-exxon-mobil-follows-its-own-foreign-policy.html>
 in Trump’s controversial nomination of the ExxonMobil chief executive, Rex 
Tillerson, a close associate of Putin, to be secretary of state – repeated 
criticisms of the gap between Obama’s “rhetoric” and action on foreign policy. 
Putin, he said, had acted after seeing “the United States withdrawing from 
around the world”.

McCain detected “a sign of a possible unraveling of the world order that was 
established after world war two that brought in one of the most peaceful 
periods in the history of the world”. This, he said, was down to “an absolute 
failure of American leadership”.

From the Democratic side, Donna Brazile, the acting chair of the Democratic 
National Committee who wasthe subject of reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/donna-brazile-hillary-clinton-debate-question-podesta-emails-cnn>
 based on the hacked emails, appeared to criticise Obama’s decision not to 
highlight the cyber-attack during the election, telling ABC’s This Week: “When 
I saw the president, I was a little disappointed that, you know, we were under 
constant attack.”

She added: “The attacks did not stop after Obama spoke to Putin.”

One of the main targets of the cyber-attacks, Clinton’s campaign chair, John 
Podesta, gave his first interview since the election.

“The Russians clearly intervened,” he told NBC. “I think it was distorted. A 
foreign adversary directly intervened into our democratic institution and tried 
to tilt the election toDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.”

Podesta has been critical 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/john-podesta-something-is-deeply-broken-at-the-fbi/2016/12/15/51668ab4-c303-11e6-9a51-cd56ea1c2bb7_story.html?tid=a_inl&utm_term=.a258abe4a730>
 of the way the FBI handled the cyber-attack and has accused it of putting less 
emphasis in public on Russian espionage than on its own investigations into 
Clinton’s use of a private email server.

“I think it had a direct effect on this election,” he said.

Podesta also said it was an “open question” whether Trump advisers colluded 
with Russia. “It’s very much unknown whether there was collusion,” he said. “I 
think Russian diplomats have said post-election that they were talking to the 
Trump campaign.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fus-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20will%20retaliate%20against%20Russia%20over%20election%20hacking%2C%20vows%20Barack%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fus-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20will%20retaliate%20against%20Russia%20over%20election%20hacking%2C%20vows%20Barack%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fus-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio&media=>
US will retaliate against Russia over election hacking, vows Barack Obama – 
audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/16/us-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio>
“Not what Mr Trump knew, but what did ‘Trump Inc’ know and when did they know 
it? Were they in touch with the Russians? I think those are still open 
questions.”

Donald Trump faces Senate backlash over ‘cabinet of billionaires’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/donald-trump-senate-backlash-cabinet-of-billionaires>
Senior Trump advisers Reince Priebus and Kellyanne Conway rejected such 
questions. “Even this question is insane,” Priebus told Fox News Sunday. “Of 
course we don’t interface with the Russians.”

Conway told CBS’s Face the Nation Obama’s intention to retaliate against 
Russia “seems to be a political response”, due to pressure from the Clinton 
camp.

In July, Trump suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hillary-clinton-emails-dnc-hack>
 that Russia should hack Clinton and reveal the whereabouts of 30,000 “missing” 
emails.

Priebus, the Republican National Committee chairman who will be chief of staff 
in the Trump White House,has said previously his organization was not hacked 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/reince-priebus-rnc-hacked/story?id=44110357>. 

The electoral college 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/how-the-electoral-college-works-donald-trump>
, in which Trump beat Clinton 306-232 despite losing the popular vote by more 
than 2.8m ballots, will meet to confirm the president on Monday. Prospects of a 
revolt by sufficient Republican electors to send the choice to the House of 
Representatives are slim.




















 