
Matt Hall vividly remembers his job interview with Robert Rauschenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/may/13/art>. A mutual acquaintance 
had approached Hall, then sous chef at a restaurant on the island of Captiva, 
off Florida, to see whether he would be interested in managing the artist’s 
property nearby. As Hall approached his beach house, the artist emerged on to 
the balcony. “Mr Rauschenberg, so good to see you again,” Hall called up 
(Rauschenberg was a regular customer). “Oh, Matt, don’t call me Mr 
Rauschenberg. Call me Bob,” came the reply.

“I don’t know why,” remembers Hall, sitting in the lounge of a glorious beach 
house with a yellow and blue Rauschenberg collage hanging on the wall, “but I 
said, ‘Bob: backwards or forwards, it’s spelt the same. It reminds me of the 
joke about the dyslexic who tried to commit suicide: he jumped behind the 
train.’” Rauschenberg cackled for an inordinate length of time, Hall adds, 
given the poor quality of the joke. Finally, the artist explained himself: “I’m 
dyslexic. See you Monday, sweets.”

When you see art that’s made out of the stuff of the real world, that’s coming 
off the walls, that is his legacy

Rauschenberg has been a constant presence on Captiva ever since. Although he 
died in 2008, the 20-acre estate he created is now a retreat, where artists 
work together in a spirit inspired by his philosophy: open, collaborative, 
risk-taking. They stay in any of nine cottages and beach houses lapped by the 
Gulf of Mexico – one is built on stilts, with a balcony from which you can fish 
– surrounded by Rauschenberg’s art and piles of books. There’s even a resident 
chef: Rauschenberg was a foodie before the term was even invented. The artist 
and musicianLaurie Anderson <https://www.theguardian.com/music/laurie-anderson> 
came here just after her husbandLou Reed died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/28/lou-reed> in 2013, to recharge 
and start working again.

Arriving on Captiva earlier this month, it is clear what drew Rauschenberg 
here: the six-mile island is relaxed, sun-baked, and teeming with flora and 
fauna, from the tiny lizards darting everywhere to the manatees swimming in the 
bay. By night, rabbits, bobcats and great horned owls emerge in “the jungle”, a 
wooded area masterminded by the artist, where a bronze seat faces the sunset.

Rauschenberg started visiting in 1962, before moving to Captiva nine years 
later, describing it as “the foundation of my life and my work… the source and 
reserve of my energies”. His work by then had become ambitious and complicated; 
Captiva forced a return to simplicity, and the first things he produced were a 
selection of wall sculptures made from battered cardboard boxes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea0331620e3356eff3bb675d45f349280605008e%2F29_39_2972_3715%2F2972.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea0331620e3356eff3bb675d45f349280605008e%2F29_39_2972_3715%2F2972.jpg>
 Rauschenberg’s ‘muse wall’, a collection of objects and images that inspired 
him, in his print shop, Captiva, Florida, around 1979. Photograph: Emil 
Fray/Robert Rauschenberg Foundation 
For the world beyond Captiva’s white sands, however, a reacquaintance with 
Robert Rauschenberg is long overdue. In Britain, there has been no major 
retrospective of his work since 1981, while the last big US survey, at the
Guggenheim in New York <https://www.guggenheim.org/>, took place in 1997. That 
will change next month, whenTate Modern opens a London retrospective 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/robert-rauschenberg>; 
it will then move to Moma in New Yorknext May 
<http://press.moma.org/2016/01/robert-rauschenberg/>, and after that to the San 
Francisco Museum of Modern Art <https://www.sfmoma.org/>.

Rauschenberg left a bold and indelible mark on the 20th century. His combines 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Combine_painting>, which integrated the flotsam 
and trash of everyday life, including the artist’s own duvet inBed (1955) 
<https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/robert-rauschenberg-bed-1955>, were 
neither painting nor sculpture, and proved that anything could be the material 
of art. At Tate Modern, pride of place will be given toMonogram 1955–59 
<http://www.rauschenbergfoundation.org/art/art-in-context/monogram>, a 
horizontal canvas on which perches a stuffed goat with a tyre around its 
midriff; the work thrilled and scandalised when it was first shown atCastelli’s 
gallery in New York <http://castelligallery.com/about.html>, and rapidly became 
synonymous with the artist’s iconoclasm. Since then, his relevance has only 
increased, says Leah Dickerman, co-curator of the new retrospective: “When you 
open a gallery and see the art that’s made out of the stuff of the real world, 
that’s coming off the walls, that’s interdisciplinary in its approach, all that 
is the legacy of Rauschenberg.”

Little in Rauschenberg’s background suggested he was destined to be a great 
artist. Born in 1925, the son of an oil worker in Port Arthur, Texas, he 
struggled at school and was suspended after refusing to dissect a live frog (an 
early sign of his fondness for animals); a month later, he was called up for 
the draft. Rauschenberg realised his gift for drawing only when his pen 
portraits of comrades in the navy made him popular for the first time in his 
life; it didn’t strike him that being an artist was a real job until he saw 
three oil paintings at theHuntington art gallery <http://www.huntington.org/> 
in San Marino, California, includingThomas Gainsborough’s The Blue Boy 
<http://huntington.org/webassets/templates/general.aspx?id=14392>. “Behind each 
of them was a man whose profession it was to make them,” he told theart critic 
Robert Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2012/aug/07/robert-hughes-greatest-art-critic>
. “That just never occurred to me before.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a586375b94408f7d7268d10d4e4fa030ed10d99%2F74_881_4101_3127%2F4101.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a586375b94408f7d7268d10d4e4fa030ed10d99%2F74_881_4101_3127%2F4101.jpg>
 Monogram, which scandalised 1950s New York. Photograph: Moderna Museet, 
Stockholm/Robert Rauschenberg Foundation, New York 
After Rauschenberg was discharged from the navy, he made his way to Black 
Mountain College in North Carolina, where he laboured under the punishing 
tutelage ofJosef Albers <http://www.albersfoundation.org>, who had taught at 
the Bauhaus in Germany. “He’d pick up something of mine and say, ‘This is the 
most stupid thing I have ever seen, I don’t evenvant to know who did it,’” 
remembered Rauschenberg, quoted in Calvin Tomkins’ biography. (Architectural 
Digest magazine revealed 
<http://www.architecturaldigest.com/story/obama-white-house> that teacher and 
pupil were reunited by the Obamas, in one of the dining rooms at the White 
House, where a 1998 Rauschenberg painting hangs adjacent to two works by 
Albers.)

Even when he was more or less out as a gay artist, he wasn’t that public about 
it. He thought Andy Warhol was too swish

When he moved to New York two years later, Rauschenberg received an equally 
chilly reception from the hard-drinking abstract expressionists who hung out at 
the Cedar Tavern in the East Village. “Every time he went, [Jackson]Pollock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jackson-pollock> would ask him who he 
was and what he was doing there,” says Achim Borchardt-Hume, director of 
exhibitions at Tate Modern and co-curator of the new retrospective. “Always 
friendly but always forgetting.” They never acknowledged him as a peer, still 
less a successor.

There was something else that set Rauschenberg apart: he was gay. He had 
married the artistSusan Weil <http://susanweil.com/Susan_Weil/Susan_Weil.html> 
in 1950, with whom he had a son, Christopher, a year later; but the pair 
divorced in 1953, both realising that Rauschenberg was attracted to men. He 
travelled, worked and had an affair with the painterCy Twombly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/cy-twombly>. Then, in 1956, he 
embarked on a six-year relationship with his New York neighbour, abstract 
expressionistJasper Johns <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/johns>. (To 
fund their work, the two artists collaborated on a number of commercial 
projects, including window displays forTiffany & Co 
<http://www.tiffany.co.uk/Locations/FlagshipStore/NewYork.aspx>.)

In recent years, critics have either glossed over the sexuality of both men, 
or interpreted Rauschenberg’s work as a coded expression of gay desire: 
“Stuffed cocks and bound pillows and fabric sacks that do double duty as 
stand-ins for butt cheeks and scrotums,” the artist David Spiher wrote inan 
article excoriating New York’s Met 
<http://gaycitynews.nyc/gcn_506/rauschenbergisgay.html> for refusing to 
acknowledge Rauschenberg’s homosexuality in a 2006 show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecd0a81f74618272cbd1fdf0fdbf17d8e4466126%2F112_376_5418_3252%2F5418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecd0a81f74618272cbd1fdf0fdbf17d8e4466126%2F112_376_5418_3252%2F5418.jpg>
 Rauschenberg on Captiva, 1979. Photograph: Terry Van Brunt/Robert Rauschenberg 
Foundation 
Dickerman and Borchardt-Hume say their exhibition will be more direct. “I 
think in 2016 we can be very straightforward about it,” Dickerman says. “That 
he is a gay man in New York, pre-Stonewall, that this structures his social 
circle and ways of thinking, that it’s shaping part of his identity. But it’s 
not the totality, either.”

“I think when Rauschenberg came of age it was a different time,” says the 
film-maker Charles Atlas <http://eai.org/artistBio.htm?id=281>, one of the 
first to take up an artist’s residence on Captiva. “Even when he was more or 
less out as a gay artist, he wasn’t that public about it. Both he and Jasper 
were famous very young, and whenAndy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> came on the scene, they 
thought he was too swish.” Atlas laughs: “They were more or less the 
straight-acting gays. The social world really was not that tolerant of openly 
gay people. The gay world was a separate world.”

While Warhol was an enigmatic figure, Rauschenberg was outgoing, a man who 
loved to host big Thanksgiving dinners. As Hall points out, there are 
photographs all over the walls of the cottages on Captiva, and Rauschenberg is 
smiling widely in each one. He was also a heavy drinker. “He was very 
gregarious, but he wasn’t a mean drunk,” says Atlas, who met him around a dozen 
times. “He just got more friendly.” Hall remembers wild parties in the 1990s 
that spawned “stories I will take to the grave. He was just something to be 
around.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F754c1121ae62c4fdfecc4aa188778370c63e6c95%2F0_0_1360_3038%2F1360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F754c1121ae62c4fdfecc4aa188778370c63e6c95%2F0_0_1360_3038%2F1360.jpg>
 Bed, 1955, featuring the artist’s pillow and duvet. Photograph: The Museum of 
Modern Art, New York/Scala, Florence/Robert Rauschenberg Foundation, New York 
The Cedar Tavern crew may have spurned him, but Rauschenberg found supportive 
mentors in the composerJohn Cage <https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-cage> 
and choreographerMerce Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mercecunningham> – and, since the two men 
were a couple as well as collaborators, perhaps role models for living, too. “I 
think, in Cage, he recognised that all these possibilities were open in every 
way – in terms of art making, in terms of how you live your life, how you 
conduct your relationships,” Borchardt-Hume says. Rauschenberg started to work 
with them in 1952, ensuring that the performances of the Merce Cunningham 
Company were as avant garde in their approach to set, costume and lighting as 
they were when it came to Cage’s music and Cunningham’s choreography. First 
staged in 1964, towards the end of the trio’s working relationship,Winterbranch 
<http://www.mercecunningham.org/index.cfm/choreography/dancedetail/params/work_ID/83/>
 had the audience shielding their eyes against a sudden dazzling light, while 
the dancers were swathed in gloom. “It was very, very dark on stage,” Atlas 
remembers. “There were battery-operated lights held by various people in the 
wings, and the lighting design was very erratic. It had nothing to do with the 
dance.”

Rauschenberg took to performing himself: in the 1965 piece, Spring Training 
<http://www.rauschenbergfoundation.org/art/archive/photo1308>, he followed 30 
turtles with torches attached to their shells, walking on to the stage on 
stilts. (“The turtles turned out to be real troupers,” he noted at the time.) 
Both the Tate and Moma have recently extended their galleries to create new 
performance spaces, but they won’t be hosting these works; footage from 
Rauschenberg’s own performances will be shown instead. The eight works that 
Rauschenberg choreographed, with instructions such as “‘jerk leg up, roll 
forward in a convulsive manner”, were intended to be performed by the artist 
only.

The 60s brought a political dimension to Rauschenberg’s work. Retroactive I 
<http://www.rauschenbergfoundation.org/art/art-in-context> (1963) used the 
silk-screen technique he and Warhol borrowed from the commercial art world at 
around the same time, but to very different ends. Warhol’s silk screens ofJohn 
F Kennedy <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-f-kennedy> were ironic and 
detached; Rauschenberg’s use of Kennedy’s image, along with a picture of an 
astronaut and the Sunkist orange logo, have a more anxious sincerity. The silk 
screens, according to Borchardt-Hume, “have a very clear sense of, ‘This is the 
world I live in, and this is what I care about.’”

You could see the bartender’s eyes just get huge, going, ‘Oh my God, you’re 
Rauschenberg?’

By the end of the decade, the tone of his work had darkened. Originally 
commissioned for the cover of a magazine,Signs 
<https://www.moma.org/collection/works/67925?locale=en> is a collage of 
photographic images includingMartin Luther King Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> in his coffin, the 
moon landings, a race riot, the Vietnam war, and both Bobby and John Kennedy. 
“You have a sense that the buoyant optimism of the postwar period, the early 
1960s, had given way to a very different mood,” Borchardt-Hume says. “And I 
think Captiva seemed a reprieve from that.”

Compared with his combines, the more simple work Rauschenberg produced on 
Captiva was not well received. Borchardt-Hume argues that subsequent 
developments in art make mid-70s projects such asthe Jammers 
<http://www.rauschenbergfoundation.org/art/series/jammer>, inspired by Indian 
textiles, and Rauschenberg’s later works on metal, easier to appreciate in 
retrospect. An artist such asPhilippe Parreno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/philippe-parreno>, whose work 
currently fillsTate Modern’s Turbine Hall 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/hyundai-commission/hyundai-commission-philippe-parreno-anywhen>
, “would immediately cite Rauschenberg’s model of collaboration between artists 
and scientists, how people with different technological expertise can come 
together”.

Founded in 1966, Rauschenberg’s organisation Experiments in Art and Technology 
(Eat) 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/learn/online-resources/glossary/e/experiments-in-art-and-technology>
 was a kind of matchmaking service between artists, engineers and scientists, 
which at its peak had 6,000 members. His desire to use art as a means of 
breaking down barriers saw its grandest flowering in theRauschenberg Overseas 
Culture Interchange 
<http://www.rauschenbergfoundation.org/art/art-in-context/roci> (Roci), which 
began in 1984. This seven-year project saw the artist travel to countries with 
repressive regimes such as Cuba, Tibet and China, to work with local artists; 
he used his home on Captiva as collateral to fund it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15f7ef9d013d3a7fbe258364d1b34c90fe150d6%2F194_302_2769_3460%2F2769.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20was%20just%20something%20to%20be%20around%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Frobert-rauschenberg-just-something-be-around%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15f7ef9d013d3a7fbe258364d1b34c90fe150d6%2F194_302_2769_3460%2F2769.jpg>
 Rauschenberg with composer John Cage in New York. Photograph: Fred W 
McDarrah/Getty Images 
“Roci had a huge impact in China,” Dickerman says. “There is a generation of 
artists who saw him as a role model. Whether or not their work looks like his, 
the way he dabbled in an economy of ideas was very powerful to them.”

Back on Captiva, Hall agrees that “Bob was never an elitist.” Before a big 
gallery opening anywhere in the world, he would usually be found “on the end 
stool at the farthest satellite bar, engaged with the bartender. I would come 
and say, ‘Boss, they’re ready for you,’ and you could see the bartender’s eyes 
just get huge, going, ‘Oh my God, you’re Rauschenberg?’ And he’d go, ‘Yeah, 
very nice to meet you,’ throw a $100 bill down and go. That was Bob – he was 
down to earth, would talk to anybody. He was notorious in the streets of New 
York for just handing out $100 bills to people.”

Rauschenberg was not motivated by money, Hall says; he would open drawers in 
his beach house and find cheques for several thousand dollars. His Christmas 
gifts were mangoes or homemade hot sauce. “He had all these wonderful recipes 
that were never written down. It was just like him creating a piece of art: 
‘Let me put a little of this in it and taste it. Uh, let’s try and correct it.’”

Though Hall first worked for the artist as his gardener, Rauschenberg was keen 
to get his opinion, gradually involving him in the creation of his work. “He’d 
say, ‘Get yourself a drink.’ He always had the TV on, and you’d be sat there 
talking about anything, drugs, sex, rock’n’roll, politics, art – it didn’t 
matter. All of a sudden, he’d be looking at the blank canvas that was on the 
table and he’d kind of get quiet, and you knew that was time for him to go to 
work.”

Rauschenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/may/13/art> died on the 
island, in his light-filled studio, as he had wished, with his closest friends 
– including Hall and Darryl Pottorf, his partner of 25 years – by his side. The 
studio is at the top of steep stairs; his friends took his body down in an 
elevator. “He would always travel and I’d give him a kiss and say ‘Hey, babe, 
have a safe trip.’ He’d say, ‘OK, sweets, see you when I get back,’” says Hall. 
“But the finality of him leaving that last time, I can’t even describe it. It 
was brutal.”

Yet Rauschenberg’s legacy thrives, not just through his experiments or his 
openness of spirit, but because underneath it all there is a sense of sheer 
aesthetic delight. “Even if he hadn’t been that adventurous a person, he was so 
talented at making visual beauty – and that’s the key, really,” Atlas says. 
“The imitators: they’re just not the same thing. You can take all his ideas and 
combine them, but he made truly beautiful works of art.”

• The Rauschenberg retrospective 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/robert-rauschenberg> is 
at Tate Modern, London SE1, 1 December-2 April 2017 The show is atMoma, New York
 <http://press.moma.org/2016/01/robert-rauschenberg/> from 21 May-17 September 
2017 and at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art from 4 November 2017-25 
March 2018
 