
It may be Tesla’s Elon Musk who most often invites comparison to Marvel’s 
superhero Iron Man – the alter ego of billionaire inventor Tony Stark – but it 
isMark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> who 
might be the first to bring Stark’s technology to life.

Memorably, the Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> CEO 
sets himself annual goals such as learning Mandarin in 2010, eating only meat 
from animals he killed himself in 2011, or reading two books a month in 2015.

In January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/03/mark-zuckerberg-2016-artificial-intelligence-butler>
, the Facebook founder said that his 2016 challenge would be to build an 
artificial intelligence-based personal assistant for his home. In his Facebook
post <https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10102577175875681?pnref=story> 
announcing his aim, Zuckerberg said that “You can think of it kind of like 
Jarvis in Iron Man.”

In a Facebook conversation 
<https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10103170675742191> on Thursday, Zuckerberg 
invited suggestions for who should voice his real-life Jarvis (which, in the 
Iron Man and Avengers movies, stands for Just A Rather Very Intelligent 
System). Suggestions included actors Morgan Freeman, Benedict Cumberbatch and 
Paul Bettany – who voices Jarvis in the movies – as well as astrophysicist Neil 
deGrasse Tyson.

One person simply suggested Hodor, to which Zuckerberg responded “My AI needs 
a few more words than ‘Hodor’.”

Robert Downey Jr <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdowneyjr> – who plays 
Jarvis’s inventor Tony Stark in the Marvel movies – then commented, offering to 
voice it himself. “I’ll do in a heartbeat if Bettany gets paid and donates it 
to a cause of Cumberbatch’s choosing … that’s the right kind of STRANGE!”

Mark Zuckerberg tapes over his webcam. Should you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/22/mark-zuckerberg-tape-webcam-microphone-facebook>
Zuckerberg responded: “This just got real.”

Downey’s intervention brought some buzz to a thread that was already careening 
off the rails, with many in particular demanding that their AI home assistant 
speak with a British accent.

“You really are an F’n genius??? Turning to your billion member empire to ask 
their opinion is Awesome!!!,” read one response to Zuckerberg. “You should go 
with a British accent. Sean Connery would be cool. No! I’m not British but do 
cherish and love to hear them speak.”

Another wrote: “What about Michael Caine, because everything is better with 
british accent and he’s brilliant. But if you want to keep it american, why not 
Christofer [sic] Walken?”

“If it’s a lady, no one else sound better like JK Rollings /Rollins [sic],” 
wrote another. “The writer of Harry Potter … she’s full of life and wisdom and 
her voice reaches parts of our soul we never knew we had.”

Yet another said: “Every AI should have a broad Glaswegian accent. If anyone 
was messing with you, just whip out wee Jarvis and get it to say “Hawl, pal. 
Settle doon before a give you something tae worry aboot. Naebdy needs tae get 
done here.”

Asked for details on whether further negotiations with Iron Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man> have begun, however, Facebook did 
not respond.
 