
Reading this on mobile? Click here for the video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/video/2012/jul/09/robert-macfarlane-untrue-island-orford-ness-video?mobile-redirect=false>

Lying just off the Suffolk coast is a desert. Orford Ness is a vast shingle 
spit, some 12 miles long and up to a mile wide, which curls offshore round from 
Aldeburgh down to Hollesley. For most of the 20th century, the Ness was owned 
by the Ministry of Defence, for whom its natural security and secrecy made it 
the ideal military test site. Bomb ballistics, gun gears, phosphorous shells, 
nuclear detonators: for 80 years, the physics of death was tested and perfected 
out there on the shining expanses of flint.

Though it now belongs to the National Trust, the site still feels militarised. 
Across the Ness, enigmatic structures jut from the shingle: barracks, 
armouries, listening stations, beacons, watchtowers, bunkers, and two huge 
blast-chambers nicknamed the pagodas. It is an architectural rattle-bag that 
includes concrete brutalism, Dutch woodcraft,East Anglian tabernacle barns 
<http://eastanglianlife.org.uk/discover/our-buildings/a-tin-tabernacle/>, 
Nissen huts and a lollipop lighthouse.

The Trust pursues the finely named policy of "controlled ruination", which 
sounds like a South African rugby strategy, but in conservation terms means 
allowing entropy its play. Here, there is little of the painstaking repair work 
that goes on at most Trust-owned properties. When glass shatters or tarmac 
cracks, it is left unfixed. Rust spreads in maps. Buildings dilapidate. The 
splintered, the fissile, the ruderal: these are the Ness's textures.

The Ness is also a wild place. It is front-line North sea: big storms chew 
hard at it in winter. Its mixture of mudflat, salt marsh, grassland and shingle 
is hunted over by marsh harriers and peregrines. Avocets, curlews and whimbrels 
probe its rich mud. Lesser black-backed gulls breed on and around the pagodas. 
An eerie and intricate landscape, then, in which the military and the natural 
combine, collide and confuse. Brambles coil and loop like barbed wire. Orange 
lichen camouflages the concrete of pill-boxes.

I have been visiting the Ness regularly for nearly a decade now, drawn back by 
its juxtapositions and encryptions. It is without doubt the strangest place I 
know: a dreamscape co-designed byMR James 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/dec/29/mr-james-in-praise-of>, JG 
Ballard 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2008/jun/14/saturdayreviewsfeatres.guardianreview10>
 andAndrei Tarkovsky 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0NqF0AiIPJU&feature=related>. You reach the 
Ness – The Zone – by boat, ferried over the River Ore, and that brief crossing 
takes you through a frontier. "The first rule of Orford Ness," the ferryman 
told me once, "is never believe anything you're told about it." I didn't know 
whether to believe him or not.

Two years ago, Duncan Kent, one of the Trust wardens, approached me about a 
possible collaboration with the jazz musicianArnie Somogyi 
<http://www.arniesomogyi.com/>. Duncan wanted to commission a performance piece 
involving text and music, inspired by the Ness and having its first performance 
somewhere on it. No one knew what to call it. A jazz opera? A composed poem? A 
play for voices? We decided to worry about genre later, but settled on a name: 
Untrue Island.

The Ness, like other east coast spits (Spurn Head 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/england/sevenwonders/yorkshire/spurn/>, Blakeney Point 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/blakeney/>, Dungeness 
<http://deptfordvisions.com/2009/04/dungeness-what-a-strange-place/>), is a 
dynamic structure. Created and shaped by tide, current, shore-drift and 
weather, it is in continual slow migration, forming and reforming over time. 
Spurn Head, when mapped across centuries, appears to lash like a tail. The 
distal point of Orford Ness can extend and retract by miles within decades. 
Storms throw up new ridges and swales of shingle along its outer edge, 
fattening the spit.

Arnie and I agreed early on that we wanted the Ness's volatility as a 
landscape to be a formal principle of our work. Arnie's expertise as a double 
bassist was well suited to this, and it became clear that the eventual 
performance would include major elements of jazz improvisation.

Writing is mostly a deskbound and solitary business, but this collaboration 
kept me out of the study and in good company. Arnie and I spent days and nights 
on the Ness, in various seasons and various weathers. We were issued with 
electric bikes so we could whizz around the site, and an old Land Rover for 
transporting Arnie's double bass. Duncan gave us access to off-limits areas 
into which I'd long wished to pry: flooded and collapsing laboratories, 
abandoned control rooms. We came to know the site and its resonant place-names 
off by heart: Cobra Mist, Lab Three, the New Armoury, the Bomb Ballistics 
Building.

One December night, Arnie and I fished off the nose of the Ness until 3am. The 
sky was cloudless, the moonlight strong enough to read by, and Jupiter stood 
bright in the sky. We drank too much hot wine from Thermoses, and caught 
whiting to cook up for a hungover breakfast in the barracks. The next day Arnie 
heaved his double bass over to the New Armoury, and we tried out a seven-verse 
lyric that I'd written the night before, with a call-and-answer relation 
between spoken text and musical response. The acoustics of the Armoury – an 
open-ended atrium, with two big weapons-storage rooms coming off it – were 
booming and uncanny. With each footfall came the crunch of broken glass and 
metal.

Through the months of development, I was keeping notes of images, phrases and 
other splinters of found language; and Arnie was jotting down shards of 
melodies and half-heard harmonies. Slowly, these fragments began to assemble 
themselves into something larger: the artistic reverse of "controlled 
ruination", perhaps. Recordings and lyrics were emailed back and forth, 
overlaid and intercut. Inspirations were kept to hand:the Kevin Flanagan 
Quartet's settings of Gary Snyder's Rip-rap poems 
<http://www.flanaganingham.f9.co.uk/flanagan/quartet.htm>, the Richard Burton 
reading of Dylan Thomas's Under Milk Wood 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JgMRD84MTQY>, and Benjamin Britten's opera 
Peter Grimes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-juIqZGKdZA>, based on the dark 
poem of the same name by George Crabbe. Arnie acquired recordings made on 
location byChris Watson <http://www.chriswatson.net/>, who constructed tiny 
microphones that he could poke down between the flints of the Ness, and so hear 
the sound of the sea moving deep within the stones.

I have long been fascinated by the many languages of the Ness: the specialist 
dialects (military-technological, ornithological, geological, conservationist) 
that it has generated; the many voices (human, avian, mineral) with which it 
seems to speak. It is a profoundly polyglot place. Also fascinating to me is 
the discourse migration that has occurred between those voices: the mist that 
rolls in off the North sea; the mist-nets that the ornithologists use to trap 
and ring migrant birds; the Cobra Mist listening station, designed to eavesdrop 
on the Soviet Union. I took these multiple languages and overlapping lexes as 
my forms and themes when writing. "Listen to the Ness," whispers the first 
voice of the libretto (if that's what it is), "it speaks gull, it speaks wave, 
it speaks rust, it speaks lichen."

What at last transpired is a strange and hybrid thing. The audiences are 
ferried over the Ore, and then walk for a mile through the site – past 
sculptures by the artistsJane and Louise Wilson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/turner1999/Story/0,,201739,00.html> – to reach the 
New Armoury. The piece is an hour in length, consisting of part improvised jazz 
and part pre-composed music, the text part-spoken and part-sung, all by Arnie 
and his fellow musicians. But because the Armoury is open to the weather – 
doorless at both of its vast and ruined ends – the other performer will, of 
course, be the Ness itself.

• On Location, an event exploring British landscapes in words, sound and film, 
is at the British Library on Tuesday, featuring writers Alice Oswald and Marina 
Warner, and chaired by Madeleine Bunting. Details:bl.uk. <http://www.bl.uk.> 
Untrue Island runs until 30 July. Details:untrueisland.org.uk 
<http://www.untrueisland.org.uk>
 