
My husband, Robin Hamlyn, who has died aged 69, was for 30 years a curator at 
Tate Britain, latterly specialising in the work ofWilliam Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/william-blake>.

Robin was in part responsible for several notable acquisitions made by the 
Tate, among them the Oppé Collection,Millais’s Mariana  
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/millais-mariana-t07553/text-technique-and-condition>
and eight lost Blake prints, but he is best remembered for his comprehensive
Blake exhibition of 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/nov/09/artsfeatures.williamblake>, 
which represented the artist as the innovative printer and craftsman he was.

Born in Felixstowe, Suffolk, Robin was the son of Sydney Hamlyn, an 
illumination engineer, and Kathleen, a former medical secretary. He was 
grandson of the noted lighting designer Sidney William Hamlyn, who was the 
principal influence on Robin’s cultural development. He went to St Joseph’s 
college, Ipswich; then to Brighton College ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>. He trained as an architect but, 
increasingly disaffected, he embarked with relief on an MA in English art and 
literature at the Barber Institute, Birmingham, after our marriage in 1974. 
During that year he made a discovery that would result in his appointment to 
the Tate. This was the hitherto forgotten existence of an Irish Shakespeare 
Gallery (1793), which was intended to rival Boydell’s famous exhibition of 1789.

Martin Butlin, keeper of British Art at the Tate and distinguished Turner and 
Blake scholar, appointed Robin to his post. On Martin’s retirement, Robin 
inherited responsibility for the gallery’s Blake collection and maintained a 
programme of displays on aspects of the poet/artist’s work over many years.

Robin’s first major undertaking at the Tate was as project manager for the 
Clore Gallery - the showcase for the works of JMW Turner. The project took 
seven years and involved Robin in many battles with the architect James 
Stirling. The resulting Clore Gallery owes much to Robin’s doggedness.

He wrote copious scholarly articles, introductions and essays, and his last 
major achievement was a sumptuous Folio Society edition of Edward Young’s Night 
Thoughts (2005), for which Robin wrote exhaustive commentary.

By this time, those close to Robin were becoming aware of symptoms of the rare 
neurological condition amyloid angiopathy, which was, slowly, to rob him of his 
cognitive powers. The decline was long and devastating. To the end, Robin’s 
chief pleasure was listening to classical music. He was a proud father of our 
two children, Olivia and Francis, a warm colleague and was, in his own words, 
“a good hater”.

He is survived by our children, and by his sister, Carole, and brother, Adrian.
 