
Has the V&A gone a veteran rock group too far? Will its Pink Floyd exhibition 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/pink-floyd> next year put the public into 
interstellar overdrive or leave us comfortably numb?

This grand old Victorian museum has sensationally expanded its audiences and 
horizons in recent years with exhibitions dedicated to Kylie Minogue, David 
Bowie and – opening on 10 September – the greatpsychedelic rock age of the late 
1960s 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-records-and-rebels-1966-70#intro>
. While Kylie may be regarded as a camp fashion-pop detour,David Bowie Is... 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/david-bowie-is/david-bowie-is-blowing-our-minds/>
 proved a massive critical and cultural success, helping to generate a timely 
comeback for the star and enthusiasm from artists who count among Ziggy’s most 
passionate admirers.

Wish you were here: V&A announces details of Pink Floyd exhibition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/31/vanda-announces-details-pink-floyd-exhibition-museum-london>
Bowie, in other words, had credibility as art – heck, he was Britain’s Andy 
Warhol. The music featured in this autumn’sYou Say You Want a Revolution? 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-records-and-rebels-1966-70>
 is similarly cool, not to mention steeped in artistic associations from 
Warhol’s Factory to Antonioni’s Blow-Up. But Pink Floyd? The monoliths of the 
concept album? The titans of grandiose stadium pomp? Is a Pink Floyd exhibition 
art? Is it even style?

The Floyd’s most dedicated fans would have to admit that their cool phase 
<http://ultimateclassicrock.com/syd-barrett-last-show-with-pink-floyd/> and 
involvement in contemporary art ended when Syd Barrett left the group in 1968. 
The Lewis Carroll-tinted psychedelic whimsy of early songs such asArnold Layne 
<http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/pinkfloyd/arnoldlayne.html> and See Emily Play 
<http://www.songfacts.com/detail.php?id=1691> soon gave way to the melancholy 
cod-philosophy of Roger Waters’ lyrics, while the band’s innovative 1960s light 
shows (undoubtedly reflecting the experimental art of their time) developed 
into ambitious but also massively tasteless visual gigantism involvingflying 
pigs <http://ultimateclassicrock.com/pink-floyd-inflatable-pig-breaks-free/> and
marching hammers 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/0/03/Pinkfloydhammers.jpg>.

I was there. I watched the wall being built brick by brick. That’s not a Roger 
Waters lyric – it’s a genuine recollection of a concert. In my early teens I 
adored Pink Floyd. I collected their most obscure early singles, I lay in my 
room for hours listening toWish You Were Here 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wish_You_Were_Here_(Pink_Floyd_album)#/media/File%3APink_Floyd%2C_Wish_You_Were_Here_(1975).png>
. Punk? What was that? I was fascinated by this strangely intellectual – or was 
it pseudo-intellectual? – band whose music no living soul has ever tried to 
dance to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fdo-pink-floyd-belong-in-museum-v-and-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632122ff06245dc536f1a162c1585643f640a156%2F0_39_4811_2887%2F4811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rock's%20old%20masters%3A%20do%20Pink%20Floyd%20belong%20in%20a%20museum%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fdo-pink-floyd-belong-in-museum-v-and-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rock%27s%20old%20masters%3A%20do%20Pink%20Floyd%20belong%20in%20a%20museum%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fdo-pink-floyd-belong-in-museum-v-and-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632122ff06245dc536f1a162c1585643f640a156%2F0_39_4811_2887%2F4811.jpg>
 An inflatable pig floats over the V&A Museum to mark the announcement of the 
2017 Pink Floyd exhibition. Photograph: Peter Nicholls/Reuters 
It all ended when I saw them perform The Wall live at Earls Court in west 
London. As a huge wall was built in front of the group, I started to feel more 
alienated than Roger Waters can ever have intended. Surely live music should be 
more ... live? I went home and sought out some Bowie, Doors and Velvet 
Underground. Yet somehowPink Floyd <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pinkfloyd>
 have endured the stigma of their absolute unsexiness and unhipness. They shine 
on, these crazy diamonds.

I was recently talking to two fellow art critics. We were from three 
generations. The eldest saw Pink Floyd’s last ever gig with Syd Barrett in the 
1960s; I saw The Wall in the Thatcher era; but the youngest turned out to be 
their keenest fan of all.

It is Pink Floyd’s very lack of conventional style and their distance from 
youth culture – at least since about 1973 – that is fascinating. They are 
beyond taste. They may be a bizarre combination of Spinal Tap andEmile Durkheim 
<https://www.britannica.com/topic/anomie>, but there is something very honest 
about their odyssey of disillusion. Listening to Wish You Were Here made me 
dream of being a rock star because anything that promoted this depth of cynical 
despair had to be a profound experience.

Losing Barrett turned Pink Floyd from dreamy druggy jesters into tragically 
clear-eyed unpickers of the rock business. “Come in here, dear boy, have a 
cigar,” as one of the old singles I collected spits. The vaster their success, 
the more bitterly they denounced the cold and inhuman world they discovered: 
“And I think I need a Lear jet.”

Only Joy Division ever excelled them in misery. But Pink Floyd are more lucid 
and eloquent than Joy Division. Comfortably Numb isso monstrously direct 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/pictures/martin-scorseses-music-an-a-to-z-guide-to-the-directors-soundtracks-20140108/m-is-for-van-morrisons-comfortably-numb-from-the-departed-0775926>
 it seems obscene – a classic that chills the blood whoever records it. Does 
Roger Waters’ terrifying vision of modern life come under the category of 
“art”? Who knows – but it may be the truth, which is a lot more important.

•The Pink Floyd Exhibition: Their Mortal Remains 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/pink-floyd> opens at the V&A, London, in May 
2017
 