
The resignation of Britain’s ambassador to the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> is seen on both sides of the 
ever-widening Channel as a sobering reminder that the country is heading for 
the hardest of Brexits.


Regardless of whether he was pushed or chose to jump, Sir Ivan Rogers was more 
than just the government’s representative in Brussels. He was also Britain’s 
best hope of a negotiated compromise with other member states over the terms of 
its departure.

For hardliners in Westminster, the resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
 will be seen as a late Christmas present. The Tory right has long accused 
Rogers of offering “little butdoom and gloom 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/15/sir-ivan-rogers-led-david-cameron-european-doom-would-theresa/>
” by focusing on the gulf between what they believe could be achieved through 
determined British bargaining and what the other 27 governments want.

Sir Ivan Rogers’ sudden departure is a blow to Theresa May’s Brexit plans | 
Matthew d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/brexit-ivan-rogers> 
Rogers, a former private secretary to the Tory Europhile Kenneth Clarke, was 
accused of letting down David Cameron by not pushing harder for EU concessions 
during the run-up to the referendum. A newbook 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/All-Out-War-Britains-Political/dp/0008215154> on the 
periodclaims <https://twitter.com/WikiGuido/status/816277574238302212> Rogers 
threatened to resign several times during the painful process.

Revelations <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38324146> that our man in 
Brussels had recently warned that exit negotiations could drag on for a decade 
may have proved to be the final straw – both for exasperated ministers and 
beleaguered civil servants who saw little upside in being proved right.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fnigel-farage-calls-for-more-resignations-after-sir-ivan-rogers-quits-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Farage%20calls%20for%20more%20resignations%20after%20Sir%20Ivan%20Rogers%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fnigel-farage-calls-for-more-resignations-after-sir-ivan-rogers-quits-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel%20Farage%20calls%20for%20more%20resignations%20after%20Sir%20Ivan%20Rogers%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fnigel-farage-calls-for-more-resignations-after-sir-ivan-rogers-quits-video&media=>
Nigel Farage calls for more resignations after Sir Ivan Rogers quits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/03/nigel-farage-calls-for-more-resignations-after-sir-ivan-rogers-quits-video>
But just because Eurosceptics do not regard his departure as a surprise 
<https://twitter.com/DPJHodges/status/816278149419962374> does not mean it 
should be regarded as without consequence. The news is being met with 
consternation by many experts on European affairs who see it as a sign that 
Britain is no longer interested in hearing bad news, regardless of consequences.

“Hardline Eurosceptics criticised him for advising Cameron on the limits of 
what he could ask for in his renegotiation, but he told the truth – that the 27 
were not prepared to give more than they offered,” said Charles Grant, director 
of the Centre for European Reform.

“Those who tell the truth are not always popular and thus Ivan became 
unpopular with large parts of the Tory party. One may question whether he would 
have resigned if he had not felt that he lost the confidence of No 10.”

The pro-EU policy establishment is easily dismissed by Brexiters as another 
group of experts who are incapable of imagining the benefits of independence. 
Yet Rogers wasregarded in Brussels 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/camerons-sherpa/> as among one of the more 
Eurosceptic British occupants of the post in recent decades. A more confident 
British negotiating team should in theory have been happy to have an expert in 
its ranks who was capable of seeing where the room for manoeuvre lay.

“No other official or adviser or minister near the top of the British 
government came near to matching Ivan’s expertise on the EU,” said Grant. “He 
was one of the few people at the top of the British government who understood 
how the EU worked and what other EU leaders thought and felt. [Theresa] May and 
her ministers will sorely miss his expertise.”

The former EU commissioner Peter Mandelson said: “In terms of knowledge and 
experience of the EU, Sir Ivan Rogers is second to none in Whitehall. His 
resignation is a serious loss for us in Brussels.

“Our negotiation as a whole will go nowhere if ministers are going to delude 
themselves about the immense difficulty and challenges Britain faces in 
implementing the referendum decision.”

It looks as if Rogers was hounded from office not for the crime of disloyalty 
but because he was too negative – not capable of seeing the opportunities that 
May claims are around the corner.

Signs continue to abound that British Eurosceptics still inhabit an entirely 
different planet, let alone continent, from everyone else in 2017.

Earlier on Tuesday, Michael Gove’s thinktank Change Britain claimed 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/01/03/uk-will-create-400000-jobs-quits-customs-union-part-brexit-talks/>
 that far from destroying trade, leaving the EU customs union would create 
400,000 jobs by allowing hitherto unrecognised opportunities in the rest of the 
world – a claim dismissed as “fantasy figures” by the rival group Open Britain.

In this context, Rogers represented a dangerous tendency to try to bridge the 
divide. For politicians on either side, it will now be that little bit easier 
to shout past each other rather than seek common ground.

Grant concluded: “Britain’s partners will take this as a sign that May’s 
government is heading for a hard Brexit which puts sovereignty ahead of 
economic integration with the EU.”
 