
A hanged man was never more popular. One hundred years ago, the British 
government executed Roger Casement for his participation in a rebellion in 
Ireland, the Easter Rising of 1916. This year, schoolchildren and tourists by 
the thousands have visited Casement’s gravesite in Dublin. It is part of a 
centennial pilgrimage in honour of the Rising, the pivotal event in modern 
Irish history, marked by headstones, prisons, and rebel redoubts now hard to 
imagine in jostling traffic. As the First World War raged across Europe, Irish 
men and women joined the Rising in an attempt to break from a United Kingdom 
that had boundIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> for 115 
years. In fighting to establish an Irish republic, they battled not just the 
British government; they also faced the prospect of a civil war against Irish 
Protestant unionists in the northern province of Ulster who had already spent 
three years arming themselves against the prospect of political domination by 
Ireland’s Catholic majority. In the aftermath of the Rising, the British 
government executed 16 rebel leaders, including Casement. He was hanged and 
buried on August 3 in the yard of Pentonville Prison in London, England, a land 
and sea away from his current resting place.

Casement, the last man to be executed, was the first among traitors in the 
eyes of British officials. Many knew of Casement, an Irish Protestant born 
outside of Dublin, for his years of work as a Foreign Office official in Africa 
and South America. This was the Casement who had held a memorial service in a 
mission church in the Congo Free State in 1901 to commemorate the passing of 
Queen Victoria; the Casement who was knighted by Victoria’s grandson King 
George V in 1911 for his humanitarian campaigns on behalf of indigenous peoples 
on two continents; the Casement who retired from the Foreign Office in 1913 on 
a comfortable pension that financed his turn to rebellion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Froger-casement-gay-irish-martyr-or-victim-of-a-british-forgery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F278dbe4b3ebb767653ec2ababfd8c91c4fa4b10e%2F0_0_4503_5904%2F4503.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roger%20Casement%3A%20gay%20Irish%20martyr%20or%20victim%20of%20a%20British%20forgery%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Froger-casement-gay-irish-martyr-or-victim-of-a-british-forgery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roger%20Casement%3A%20gay%20Irish%20martyr%20or%20victim%20of%20a%20British%20forgery%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Froger-casement-gay-irish-martyr-or-victim-of-a-british-forgery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F278dbe4b3ebb767653ec2ababfd8c91c4fa4b10e%2F0_0_4503_5904%2F4503.jpg>
 An undated portrait of Sir Roger Casement. Photograph: Courtesy National 
Library of Ireland 
Just over half a century ago, in 1965, Casement’s remains were reinterred, 
following a state funeral, in Glasnevin Cemetery in Dublin. This traitor to the 
British crown and martyr for the Republic of Ireland remains a memory in 
motion, stirred by an unforeseen combination of circumstances.The achievement 
of legal equality for gays in Ireland in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/23/gay-marriage-ireland-yes-vote>, 
together with the United Kingdom’s recent Brexit vote to leave the European 
Union, may occasion a new life after death for Casement — as the symbol of a 
united Ireland. It is the role he had hoped to play even as the trapdoor opened 
beneath his feet.

Since his adolescence, Casement had been an Irish nationalist of the poetic 
variety. But his politics hardened after his experiences in the Congo Free 
State persuaded him that the Congolese and Irish peoples had suffered similar 
injustices, both having lost their lands to imperial conquest. Like many Irish 
nationalists, Casement turned to militancy in the years before the First World 
War, angered both by unionists arming themselves and London’s failure to act 
upon parliamentary legislation for “home rule,” which would have granted the 
Irish a measure of sovereign autonomy. In 1914, Casement crossed enemy lines 
into Germany. There, he attempted to recruit Irish prisoners of war to fight 
against their former British commanders and sought to secure arms from the 
Kaiser for a revolution in Ireland itself. Two years later — less than a week 
before the Rising began — Casement was arrested after coming ashore on the 
southwest coast of Ireland from a submarine bearing German weapons and 
ammunition. He was sent to London to be interrogated and tried for treason.

As the government reasoned, how could any right-thinking person defend a 
sodomist?

These days, Casement is chiefly known as the alleged author of the so-called 
Black Diaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/jul/25/henrymcdonald.theobserver>, which 
are at the center of a long-standing controversy over his sexuality. As 
Casement awaited execution in London, supporters in the United Kingdom and the 
United States lobbied the British government to commute his sentence. In 
response, British officials began to circulate pages from diaries, purportedly 
written by Casement in 1903, 1910 and 1911, which chronicled in explicit terms 
his sexual relations with men. Among mundane daily entries are breathless, 
raunchy notes on Casement’s trysts and, often, the dimensions of his sexual 
partners. An excerpt from February 28, 1910, Brazil:“Deep screw to hilt … Rua 
do Hospicio, 3$ only fine room. Shut window. Lovely, young — 18 & glorious. 
Biggest since Lisbon July 1904 … Perfectly huge.” UK law forbade any sexual 
relations between men, so, the government reasoned, how could any 
right-thinking person defend a sodomist? The diaries served to weaken support 
for clemency for Casement. In the aftermath of his execution a decades-long 
debate over the authenticity of the diaries ensued.

The leading participants in the debate are two biographers: Jeffrey Dudgeon, 
who believes that the diaries are genuine and that Casement was a homosexual, 
and Angus Mitchell, who thinks that the diaries were forged and that Casement’s 
sexual orientation remains an open question. The stakes of this debate were 
once greater than they are today. As the debate over the Black Diaries gathered 
momentum in the 1950s and reached a crisis point in the run-up to the 
repatriation of Casement’s remains to Ireland in the 1960s, Ireland was both 
more Catholic in its culture and less assured of its sovereign authority than 
it is today. The southern 26 counties of Ireland declared themselves the 
Republic of Ireland in 1949, but the British government continued to treat the 
Republic as a subordinate member of the Commonwealth, rather than a 
full-fledged European state, until 1968. In that year, responsibility for 
British relations with the Republic was assigned to the Western European 
Department of the newly amalgamated Foreign and Commonwealth Relations Office. 
Six of the counties of the province of Ulster have remained in the United 
Kingdom as Northern Ireland, riven by sectarian tension that the Republic and 
Britain have only ever brought to a stalemate. It is telling that the Irish 
government has been content to leave the diaries in the British National 
Archives rather than demand ownership and become accountable for their 
authenticity.

Outcry as secret gay life of Irish hero is 'proved'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/jul/25/henrymcdonald.theobserver> 
Casement’s path to political redemption was laid by the Gay Liberation 
movement. Dudgeon is not just a biographer but a protagonist in one of the 
movement’s crucial battles. In 1981, he challenged Northern Ireland’s 
criminalisation of homosexual acts between consenting adult men in a case 
against the United Kingdom brought before the European Court of Human Rights. 
The court ruled that the law at issue violated the European Convention of Human 
Rights, and this decision prompted the British government in 1982 to issue an 
Order in Council that decriminalised homosexual acts between adult men in 
Northern Ireland; England, Wales, and Scotland had already passed similar laws. 
In 1993 the Irish parliament to the south also decriminalised male 
homosexuality in order to bring the Republic’s law into compliance with the 
European Convention of Human Rights. And in 2015, the Republic became the first 
country in the world to legalise same-sex marriage by popular vote. The broader 
campaign forLGBT rights <https://www.theguardian.com/world/lgbt-rights> in 
Ireland has kept Casement much in the news and proudly represented him as a 
national son and father.

 In their biographies, Dudgeon and Mitchell present two Casements, each with 
strengths and weaknesses. Dudgeon offers meticulous, well-documented detail, 
but his book,Roger Casement: The Black Diaries 
<http://www.drb.ie/new-books/roger-casement-the-black-diaries>, is for 
insiders, reading at many points like the notes for a doctoral dissertation, 
without consistent chronological structure or contextual explanation for those 
unfamiliar with Irish history in general and Casement in particular. Mitchell 
likewise offers meticulous documentary evidence inRoger Casement 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/roger-casement.html>, but within a 
comparatively fluid and clear narrative history that depends problematically 
upon his assertion that the British government, from the Cabinet to the 
National Archive, has pursued an insidious, sweeping policy of individual 
defamation over the past century.

Were the Black Diaries forged? And if so, was it the work of the British 
government, seeking to destroy Casement for his betrayal and to deny Ireland a 
heroic martyr? It must be said that Dudgeon and Mitchell both magnify Casement 
out of proportion to his significance as a threat to the United Kingdom, a 
state that was attempting to survive a war on multiple fronts, with flagging 
morale at home, in 1916. The government had larger fish to fry than this man 
who never founded or led a political party, never engaged in assassination or 
led men into combat, and never wrote a popular manifesto or treatise. Moreover, 
as Dudgeon argues, it would have been a monumental, virtually impossible task 
in 1916 for officials and civil servants to forge diaries so comprehensive in 
their account of long-past events — when Casement was not under suspicion — 
that they could convince even Casement’s associates, who found themselves and 
their own interactions with Casement mentioned in the text. In a fascinating 
turn, Dudgeon offers the most successful refutation of forgery to date by 
systematically verifying the diaries’ contents, relentlessly revealing and 
cross-referencing new sources to pull together loose ends and flesh out 
identities from cryptic references and last names, such as that of Casement’s 
alleged boyfriend: “Millar.” Against the historical backdrop of a government 
marshalling limited resources in wartime, Dudgeon effectively charges that a 
forgery so verifiably true to life could not have been a forgery. He is 
probably correct.

Yet to travel further down this historical rabbit hole risks missing what is 
most significant about Casement at present: his potential reinvention as a 
symbol of Irish unity in the future. Casement has been resuscitated by an 
extraordinary combination of developments in the Republic of Ireland and the 
United Kingdom, not just the relative toleration of homosexuality, but the 
lurch toward Brexit in a popular referendum that found 52% of UK voters in 
favour and 48% opposed. The decisive support for Brexit was located in England 
and Wales, while both Scotland and Northern Ireland voted to remain in the EU, 
the latter by 55.8% to 44.2%. The Republic of Ireland and the UK have long 
agreed that the political division of Ireland will continue until the majority 
of Northern Ireland’s citizens vote to sanction secession. Even as Northern 
Ireland has moved steadily toward a Catholic majority (most of whom support 
secession), there is still a sizeable minority of Catholics who prefer 
continued union with Britain in the name of economic and political stability. 
After the Brexit vote, the disparate communities of Northern Ireland — 
Protestants and Catholics of all political stripes — may find new common ground 
in, of all places, Europe. Northern Ireland, like the Republic, benefits 
substantially from its relationship with the EU, and nationalists and unionists 
alike are worried about the loss of EU subsidies and markets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Froger-casement-gay-irish-martyr-or-victim-of-a-british-forgery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905a25072be85f37ec18ccd863ac5468639479bd%2F0_0_4817_3855%2F4817.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roger%20Casement%3A%20gay%20Irish%20martyr%20or%20victim%20of%20a%20British%20forgery%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Froger-casement-gay-irish-martyr-or-victim-of-a-british-forgery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roger%20Casement%3A%20gay%20Irish%20martyr%20or%20victim%20of%20a%20British%20forgery%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Froger-casement-gay-irish-martyr-or-victim-of-a-british-forgery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905a25072be85f37ec18ccd863ac5468639479bd%2F0_0_4817_3855%2F4817.jpg>
 Irish President Eamon de Valera speaking at the funeral of Irish nationalist 
Roger Casement at Glasnevin Cemetery in Dublin, 2nd March 1965. Photograph: 
Central Press/Getty Images 
In the days preceding his execution, Casement asked his family to bury his 
body near the home of relatives in County Antrim, in what is now Northern 
Ireland. This was the family that had taken young Roger in after an itinerant 
childhood and the deaths of his parents. “Take my body back with you and let it 
lie in the old churchyard in Murlough Bay,” he reportedly stated. Casement’s 
reinternment at Glasnevin Cemetery was, in fact, a compromise. In 1965 neither 
the Irish nor the UK governments wished to antagonise Ulster unionists with the 
burial of a republican martyr in their midst. Among the many tributes laid at 
Casement’s grave following his burial in Glasnevin was a sod of turf from the 
high headland over Murlough Bay.

The transfer of Casement’s remains from Pentonville to Glasnevin was conceived 
by the Irish and UK governments as a symbolic gesture of goodwill that would 
set the political stage for the Anglo-Irish Free Trade Agreement of 1965. The 
governments turned to each other for economic support because France had 
frustrated their attempts to gain entrance into the European Economic Community 
(EEC), the predecessor organisation of the EU. When both countries joined the 
EEC in 1973, this trade agreement lapsed. Once more, then, with Brexit, 
Casement’s bones have been stirred by Anglo-Irish relations with Europe. In 
Ireland, the effects are likely to be much different this time around. In 
representing Casement as a man of contradictions, biographers have assessed him 
in the terms of conflicts in Irish society that persisted long after his death: 
the sectarian divide between Protestants and Catholics, the troubles between 
Ireland and Britain, and the discrimination against male homosexuals enforced 
by religion and law. As these conflicts dissipate, Casement will be recast in a 
new light. The portrait of a man of contradictions will give way to a composite 
picture in which the majority of the people of Ireland may see themselves. 
Should Ireland reunite, whether in the aftermath of Brexit or in a more distant 
time, the moment of reconciliation, of acceptance and forgiveness, may well 
occur over a grave at Murlough Bay.

*****

Kevin Grant is a professor of history at Hamilton College and is currently 
completing a book on hunger strikes in the British Empire. He is the author of 
A Civilised Savagery: Britain and the New Slaveries in Africa, 1884–1926 (2005) 
and other works on empire and humanitarian politics.

 