
It's the video that used to be Exhibit A in the case against Mitt Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mittromney> – until about 24 hours ago, 
that is. Now both sides in the race to the White House may be content to see 
the footage go away for good.

Tomorrow marks the sixth anniversary of the ceremony in which 
then-Massachusetts governor Romney stood with the late Senator Ted Kennedy and 
signed a new healthcare bill into law. It was a remarkable moment in politics. 
Here was a pair of once desperately bitter political rivals setting aside their 
differences for the good of the people. The law itself represented a new 
approach to one of the country's most dogged social and fiscal problems.

But in terms of this year's Republican nominating race, the video was supposed 
to be pure kryptonite for Romney. The Republican base was universally thought 
to be the most conservative of all time. The similarities between the
Massachusetts <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/massachusetts> law and the 
president's reviled national healthcare law were too obvious, too strong for 
these voters to ignore. There's no way they would cotton to a candidate who 
cottoned to a Kennedy. And Romney couldn't talk his way out of it; the damning 
footage was right there.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH4iTtNGjFY4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH4iTtNGjFY4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH4iTtNGjFY4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
"Senator Kennedy. … His work in Washington, and behind the scenes on Beacon 
Hill, was absolutely essential," Governor Romney says, beginning a list of 
special thank-yous. Then he puts his speech down to join the audience in 
applauding the senator. Romney concludes his speech by saying, "It's now my 
pleasure to introduce my collaborator and friend, SenatorEdward Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-kennedy>."

In terms of the Republican primary race now ending, could there be any more 
toxic sentence in the English language than "It's now my pleasure to introduce 
my collaborator and friend, Senator Edward Kennedy"? It's as if Romney stood up 
and said, "I think they should make a bigger Mount Rushmore, except only for 
women, and the first two monumental sculptures should be giant heads of Nancy 
Pelosi and Hillary Clinton."

The video made it a certainty in many minds that Mitt Romney would not win the 
Republican nomination – at least not without performing elaborate and 
embarrassing acts of contrition for his sins of liberal trespass.

But that was 24 hours ago, in a race that has since been altered beyond 
recognition. First Rick Santorum dropped out, removing the candidate known for 
delivering the most lusty attacks on Romney from the right. Without Santorum, 
the Republican party line is now that Romney must be bolstered: if you care 
about defeatingBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, 
then for Pete's sake don't do anything that might hurt the Republican 
candidate. And that includes airing video that reveals him to be an ideological 
gecko estranged from the party base.

Then the Obama campaign today released an ad revealing that the core of their 
2012 strategy is to paint Romney as a Neanderthal-browed conservative. The ad, 
"Mitt Romney: Memories to Last a Lifetime," strings together sound bites from 
the primary races in which Romney gives sharpest expression to the Republican 
id. "If I'm president, I will repeal Obamacare, and I'll kill it dead on its 
first day" – stuff like that.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLSh7G48_wOI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLSh7G48_wOI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLSh7G48_wOI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The ad shows that the president is less interested than anyone in advertising 
the moderate credentials of his rival. Meaning that anyone waiting for the 
Obama campaign to make hay out of the Massachusetts healthcare anniversary 
should not hold their breath.

And explaining why, as the sixth birthday candle is pressed into Romney's 
healthcare cake, no one will be around to blow it out.
 