
In the center of the largest city in Latin America, amid a forest of closely 
packed towers, snakes an elevated highway of more than three kilometers, 
slicing from east to west. During the week the traffic rumbles past apartment 
blocks, and cars swing by the upper floors so closely that residents can almost 
touch them as they whip past – or, more frequently, as they idle in São Paulo’s 
notorious traffic. In the evenings and on Sundays, when it’s closed to vehicles,
paulistanos <https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/paulistano> descend on the elevated 
highway for cycling, walking, or partying. What was once a liability for the 
city’s development has now been reclaimed; what was once a scar is now almost 
beautiful.


São Paulo Biennial – artists react to Brazil's political turmoil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/12/sao-paulo-biennial-artists-react-political-turmoil>
This is the Minhocão, or “giant earthworm”: an ungainly, controversial, but 
sometimes treasured emblem of this splendidly untidy megalopolis of 11 million. 
And the highway growls in the shadows ofthis year’s São Paulo Biennial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/12/sao-paulo-biennial-artists-react-political-turmoil>
, the region’s most important contemporary art exhibition, which opened last 
week amid political protests. The short film Disseminate and Hold, by the artist
Rosa Barba <http://www.rosabarba.com>, introduces into Oscar Niemeyer’s serene 
white pavilion the everyday disorder of the elevated highway, backed by a 
charging, drum-heavy score by the German-Brazilian groupBlack Manual 
<http://www.ctm-festival.de/archive/all-artists/a-e/black-manual/>. It’s one of 
the finest works in the exhibition, and it subtly connects Brazil’s ambitious 
architectural past to its troubled political present.

“I’m always attracted by these non-pretty, functional places,” the Italian 
artist tells me when we meet for a drink at a rooftop hotel bar – whose 
privileged view of the sprawling city offers an apt backdrop. “And Brazil was 
always a rich place of history for me. The encounter with Brazil came through 
readings, throughVilém Flusser’s <http://equivalence.com/labor/lab_vf.shtml> 
history here, but also through the architecture. When I came here last year for 
research, I walked over the Minhocão after visiting theCopan building 
<http://www.uncubemagazine.com/blog/9980709> – a worn, serpentine tower 
designed by Niemeyer in 1966, closely hemmed in by the highway and the 
surrounding buildings. “I was so impressed how, in one second, when the traffic 
wasn’t allowed to enter anymore, the people immediately took it over.”

The Minhocão was completed in 1969, at the height of Brazil’s military 
dictatorship. (This past June, it wasofficially renamed 
<http://g1.globo.com/sao-paulo/noticia/2016/06/camara-muda-nome-do-minhocao-para-elevado-presidente-joao-goulart.html>
 the Elevado Presidente João Goulart, in tribute to the Brazilian president who 
was ousted by a military junta in 1964.) If your visions of Brazil tend more to 
the beaches of Rio or the moonscapes of Brasília, Barba’s film will introduce 
you to a rougher, more delirious urbanism. Shooting on foot or from the back of 
a car, Barba pans across Brutalist towers, filthy ribbon windows, demotic 
apartments festooned with graffiti. And yet its messy, unpredictable character 
is what makes São Paulo so intoxicating: this is a city where spaces fold into 
one another and lives collide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Frosa-barba-sao-paulo-biennial-disseminate-and-hold-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75fcaf59239b3cd35e8b0c62df48b5a3cf3d3dc7%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rosa%20Barba%20examines%20the%20everyday%20chaos%20of%20S%C3%A3o%20Paulo's%20'giant%20earthworm'%20highway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Frosa-barba-sao-paulo-biennial-disseminate-and-hold-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rosa%20Barba%20examines%20the%20everyday%20chaos%20of%20S%C3%A3o%20Paulo%27s%20%27giant%20earthworm%27%20highway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Frosa-barba-sao-paulo-biennial-disseminate-and-hold-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75fcaf59239b3cd35e8b0c62df48b5a3cf3d3dc7%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Barba pans across Brutalist towers, filthy ribbon windows, demotic apartments 
festooned with graffiti. Photograph: Courtesy of Rosa Barba 
Overlaying these shots of São Paulo in Disseminate and Hold is a text by the 
artistCildo Meireles <http://www.galerielelong.com/artist/cildo-meireles>, a 
Brazilian conceptualist and a key figure of cultural opposition to the 
dictatorship. As Barba pans up from the Minhocão to Niemeyer’s tower, a 
narrator reads Meireles’s words: “I remember that in 68, 69, 70, as we were on 
a tangent away from that which mattered” – bythat which mattered, he means 
democracy – “already we no longer worked with metaphors … We were working with 
the situation itself, the real.”

The narration helps to draw an imperfect but fascinating analogy between the 
public interventions of theBrazilian avant garde during the dictatorship 
<http://hyperallergic.com/62893/brazilian-art-under-dictatorship/> and the 
contemporary reuse of the Minhocão: a top-down imposition now rethought from 
the bottom up. “Somehow I thought that this voice of Cildo, the text excerpts, 
could be a strong voice from the street itself,” Barba explains. “It’s really 
part of his thinking of the public body. My favorite excerpt is when Cildo says 
that art can only exist if other people perform it. I was seeing myself 
performing his voice, and bringing it back to the public.”

The São Paulo biennial has always had a strong political focus, and Meireles 
was one of numerous Brazilian artists to boycott the exhibition of 1969 – the 
year of the Minhocão’s completion. The artists, some of whom had already gone 
into exile, stayed away in protest of the military government’s infamous
Institutional Act No 5 
<https://www.mtholyoke.edu/~athay20m/classweb/censorshipbrazil/page3.html>, 
which suspended habeas corpus, permitted censorship, and soon opened the way to 
torture. Barba’s film looks at this history too. We see Meireles’s file from 
the biennial archives, as well as a telegram from Lygia Clark 
<http://www.moma.org/lygiaclark>, exiled in Paris, and a postcard from Hélio 
Oiticica <http://moma.org/artists/7715>, who’d gone to London. All of them 
refuse to participate. Suddenly, against the roll of a snare drum, Barba cuts 
back to the Minhocão: we’re looking at traffic from an overpass, on which 
someone has spray painted TEMER JAMAIS (“Never Temer”), a rebuke to the new 
Brazilian president whose ascent has been described by many artists here as a 
coup.


The current upheaval in Brazil had consequences for Barba’s production, but 
Disseminate and Hold wears its political convictions lightly. “I tried to get 
material from the Cinemateca, and that weekpeople were fired 
<http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/ilustrada/2016/07/1795483-ministerio-da-cultura-demite-cupula-da-cinemateca.shtml>
,” Barba says. “It was quite impossible to pay people: for rental equipment, 
say. Money was transferred would get stuck, frozen for months, and then you’d 
have to negotiate what the exchange rate should be … Things were changing every 
week, and even people in the biennial didn’t know how to handle it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Frosa-barba-sao-paulo-biennial-disseminate-and-hold-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cb445f963f7637803bd9774d606cf442ee456b0%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rosa%20Barba%20examines%20the%20everyday%20chaos%20of%20S%C3%A3o%20Paulo's%20'giant%20earthworm'%20highway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Frosa-barba-sao-paulo-biennial-disseminate-and-hold-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rosa%20Barba%20examines%20the%20everyday%20chaos%20of%20S%C3%A3o%20Paulo%27s%20%27giant%20earthworm%27%20highway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Frosa-barba-sao-paulo-biennial-disseminate-and-hold-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cb445f963f7637803bd9774d606cf442ee456b0%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 The highway is known locally as the giant earthworm. Photograph: Courtesy of 
Rosa Barba 
“I was thinking: oh, should I connect it much more to what is happening now? 
But except for that one shot of TEMER JAMAIS, I actually felt it would be so 
much stronger if I didn’t close the circle. You are in it anyway. I felt that 
if I would go there I would close the bottle somehow.”

Barba was born in Sicily in 1972. She studied both film-making and fine arts, 
and you can see that double training in the attention given to her films’ 
display: rattling projectors sit in the gallery, and film strips are treated as 
both recordings and physical objects. She now lives in Berlin, and usesthe 
increasingly obsolete medium of celluloid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/oct/13/close-up-tacita-dean> to examine 
how technological change, political events, or economic transformations are 
manifest in cities and landscapes.Bending to Earth 
<http://www.meyer-riegger.de/en/data/artists/50/rosa-barba.html>, which was 
seen at the last Venice Biennale, orbits around desert sites for radioactive 
waste storage that, seen from above, appear as serene, monochrome squares. Her 
omnibus filmSubconscious Society 
<https://www.turnercontemporary.org/exhibitions/rosa-barba> passes from 
Manchester’sabandoned Albert Hall 
<http://untappedcities.com/2012/11/06/inside-manchesters-abandoned-albert-hall/>
 to the Thames estuary, which Barba filmed from the air as an uncanny 
collection of outdated industrial sites and abandoned funfairs. She shot it on 
the very last shipment ever made of Fuji 35mm film.

Subconscious Society netted Barba a major prize 
<http://www.fondationprincepierre.mc/en/prix/international-prize-of-contemporary-art/003/international-prize-of-contemporary-art.html>
 from the Fondation Prince Pierre de Monaco, which also funded this new 
Brazilian work. But in comparison to the languorous, often sublime films of the 
last few years, Disseminate and Hold is a more human-scaled work of art. 
Inhabitants of the apartments bordering the Minhocão speak of the highway’s 
place in their lives; they sit and kibitz on a highway divider, and by the 
film’s end they are dancing across the giant earthworm. Geography bears the 
scars of politics, but people can make an impact too.

Barba, at one point, struts down the Minhocão on a Sunday morning, camera in 
hand. The sun shines down, and the tangle of roads and buildings looks almost 
pastoral: with no cars, the road has become an unexpected place of relaxation 
in a very jittery city. “It becomes this public body, the street,” Barba 
attests. “It’s a performative manifestation all the time. You can expand the 
public’s voice – maybe in a much more powerful way – if you take over 
architecture in the city.”
 