
Few space missions can claim to be as dramatic as the European Space Agency’s 
Rosetta comet‑chaser <http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Space_Science/Rosetta>. 
Launched in 2004, it captured the public’s attention in November 2014 because 
of its placing of the Philae lander on the “duck-shaped” comet
67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko <http://sci.esa.int/rosetta/14615-comet-67p/> in 
search of the chemicals that made life possible on Earth.

ESA project scientist Matt Taylor is the public face of the mission. Born in 
Manor Park, north-east London, the son of a bricklayer, he has become instantly 
recognisable thanks to his tattoos. We spoke to him shortly before Rosetta 
completed its final task, crash-landing on to the comet’s surface.

How are you feeling now it is the end of the mission?
It’s the end of the operational mission, but the science is continuing and it 
will continue for many years. Some of the people here [at the EuropeanSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Operations Centre in Darmstadt, 
Germany] today are PhD students. They will continue their careers working on 
Rosetta data – there is so much of it.

Certain rock singers should have stopped when they were fully functioning, and 
that’s what we’re doing with Rosetta

Rosetta is being commanded to plunge into its target comet – why destroy it?
Science. That’s what this is all about. That’s the reason for doing this. It 
wasn’t to give my colleagues here in ESOC a toy to play with to fly around a 
comet, although they have done a very good job. It was for the science and that 
is what we are celebrating here. This final plunge is allowing us to get to a 
region above the comet that we would never have been able to get to otherwise. 
The plunge is the only way to get this low – to where the ice becomes the gas. 
It was one of the goals of the mission to study this and this is how to do it.

Couldn’t you have put it into hibernation and revived it in five years’ time?
It’s like rock bands: I’ve seen certain rock bands with certain singers who 
can’t sing any more. They should have stopped when they were fully functioning 
and that is what we were doing here. If we were talking about going into 
hibernation again, we don’t know whether the spacecraft will come back. We 
don’t know how it is going to function when it comes back, we don’t know what 
the quality of its voice is going to be or how rheumatic its hands are going to 
be when playing guitar. This way, we are getting something unique during the 
descent. So what better way to go out?

Why now?
Rosetta has been in space since 2004. It is ageing. Even when we came out of 
hibernation, we noticed some issues with the thruster system and the reaction 
wheels. So we were looking at different options for when we went out away from 
the sun again. The power is dropping fast; we’ve already switched off a number 
of payload items. This weekend [1-2 October], we start to move into conjunction 
[where the sun blocks the signal from the spacecraft]. The signal from the 
spacecraft will drop through the floor to 1kb/s. It’s only 41kb/s now [domestic 
fibre optic broadband can be 1,000 times faster than this]. This weekend is the 
wall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Frosetta-project-scientist-matt-taylor-interview-comet-european-space-agency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbbb0356dc1865871ad4129c721d9748d877731d%2F74_0_2456_3070%2F2456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rosetta%20project%20scientist%20Matt%20Taylor%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20think%20comets%20bring%20the%20funky%20organics%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Frosetta-project-scientist-matt-taylor-interview-comet-european-space-agency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rosetta%20project%20scientist%20Matt%20Taylor%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20think%20comets%20bring%20the%20funky%20organics%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Frosetta-project-scientist-matt-taylor-interview-comet-european-space-agency%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbbb0356dc1865871ad4129c721d9748d877731d%2F74_0_2456_3070%2F2456.jpg>
 Matt Taylor’s Rosetta-themed thigh tattoo. Photograph: Alamy 
What’s been the most surprising result from the mission?
That’s a tough one, because I should try to balance everything and keep 
everyone [on the individual instrument teams] equally happy. We’ve analysed 
this comet from kilometre scales down to micrometre and nanometre scales now. 
We are linking from the dust grains at the very smallest scales to the way 
these stuck together to make the comet as a whole. We have got that tracked now.

It is actually two comets stuck together, isn’t it?
The orientation of the layers can tell you when you have two different bodies. 
I make the analogy to onion skins: the “duck shape” of this comet can only be 
formed by two of these onions coming together. You could not get this shape by 
getting a big onion and chewing out the middle bit. This has to be two objects 
that have come together.

The mission set out to determine whether comets brought water and the organic, 
carbon-rich molecules necessary for life to Earth. What did the mission reveal?
It says that comets were not the dominant mechanism for delivering water to 
Earth. It does not say that they never hit the Earth, but they did not bring 
the majority of the Earth’s oceans. That water matches what we find in 
asteroids, so they did the majority of that delivery. But when you look at the 
other stuff in the comet – the really cool stuff – the amino acids and other 
organics that we have detected, this could have come to Earth from comets. It’s 
like when someone first invented beer: they put some water and other stuff 
together and it fermented. I think it’s like that for life on Earth. Asteroids 
bring the water, comets bring the funky organics.

Does the existence of water on comets make human exploration of space any 
easier?
Any time you put anything in space, you learn from it. It might not be 
directly applicable, however, to landing humans on Mars. It costs a lot to 
launch stuff into space, but what if that stuff is in space already? Comets 
contain water and all the material to make fuel, but are just a bit too 
difficult to use as a fuel stop, I think. They travel really fast and are 
difficult to orbit around, as demonstrated by Rosetta. However, they are all 
pieces that you can learn from. But can you connect Rosetta toMatt Damon on Mars
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/04/the-martian-review-matt-damon-shines-stranded-astronaut>
? Not directly.
Rosetta mission graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/rosetta-zip/giv-1406z1RKqHNgmAGi>
You were offered the job of Rosetta project scientist in summer 2013, just 
before the most active phases of the mission. Did you expect there to be so 
much public interest?
In terms of the mission, we knew it was going to be big. We knew it was 
special; it was exploration, it was danger. But we did not conceive that we 
would have this level of interest. In terms of myself, I didn’t expect this, I 
don’t welcome it, but it is part of my job to promote the mission, to tell 
everyone why this mission is important and to tell everyone why their tax money 
has gone into this.

The interest in me personally is something that I wasn’t expecting. My family 
didn’t expect it and don’t like it. I don’t particularly like it, but it is 
part of the job now. And that, I expect, will go away, frankly. Although the 
mission will continue scientifically, there will not be that level of interest 
because we haven’t got a live spacecraft. I will not be sorry to see it reduce. 
Maybe I’ll turnTwitter <http://twitter.com/esa_rosetta> off in the next couple 
of months and say, that was just part of the operational phase of the mission. 
There is something about the operational phase that makes it feel current.

What do you remember of Rosetta’s wake-up in January 2014?
Wake-up was the first milestone. We went from nothing to something. It was the 
anticipation of whether we have a mission at all. All the years of preparation 
and work was dependent upon those eight hours of the spacecraft autonomously 
warming itself up and finding Earth to re-establish contact. One of my memories 
was looking around and seeing one of the guys who was responsible for writing 
the hibernation exit software and that guy looked very relieved. I remember a 
lot of going: “Yeah, yeah!” but then thinking: “Oh God, we’ve got all this work 
to do.”

Rosetta mission: Philae's landing site on comet 67P – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2014/nov/13/rosetta-mission-philae-landing-site-comet-67p-pictures>
Is ESA looking at a follow-on mission?
We’ll see what comes in during the M5 call 
<http://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/call-for-m5-missions> [an opportunity to propose 
medium-size missions to ESA that closed on 5 October]. Maybe some of those will 
be minor body missions. We have yet to return samples from a comet, but maybe 
that’s too hard to do. The material is really volatile and needs to be kept 
really cold, –150C, all the way down to Earth. That is a real challenge. There 
are ideas being studied, but we wait for the scientific community to propose 
them. I leave it to them to give me a job, if they want me.

So what’s next for you?
I stay on Rosetta for a couple of years. This is the archive phase, where we 
make sure the data is the best quality. And I try to encourage my colleagues to 
continue to work together for the continued goal of science. My job will be to 
set up workshops and get people together and generate the momentum to keep this 
going.

Any regrets?
I think I will only be able to answer that question fully in a couple of 
years. I don’t think many of the mission’s milestones will sink in and process 
properly until then. There are parts that I can’t even remember clearly – maybe 
that is a psychological defence.
 