
Warwickshire moved level on points with the North Group leaders Yorkshire 
after thrashingNorthamptonshire by eight wickets in their Royal London One-Day 
Cup meeting at Edgbaston.

Northamptonshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonshire> scored 
254 for nine with Alex Wakely (70), Josh Cobb (50) and Ben Duckett (46) among 
the runs. But Warwickshire, who suffered a blow when Jonathan Trott was ruled 
out after hurting his back in the warm-up, made short work of the chase thanks 
largely to Sam Hain (88) and William Porterfield (92), who put on 180 for the 
opening wicket.

Ben Stokes’ absence leaves England with a hole to fill, says Trevor Bayliss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/26/ben-stokes-england-hole-to-fill-trevor-bayliss>
Also in the North Group, Leicestershire claimed their first victory in the 
competition since August 2014 after hammeringLancashire by 131 runs at Grace 
Road. Mark Pettini (92) and Mark Cosgrove (91) poweredLeicestershire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestershire> to 307 for eight from their 
50 overs after being sent into bat. Then career-best List A bowling figures 
from Neil Dexter (four for 22) helped dismiss Lancashire for 176 in reply, with 
more than 10 overs unused. The win was the Foxes’ first in the competition 
since beating Hampshire almost two years ago and saw them climb off the bottom 
of the standings, with Lancashire now occupying that position.

In the South Group, Essex remain top after chasing down a target of 325 to beat
Glamorgan by four wickets in a high-scoring match at Chelmsford. Colin Ingram’s 
brilliant 107 off 73 balls helpedGlamorgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/glamorganccc> make 324 for eight after 
winning the toss as they looked to pick up a first win in three matches in the 
competition. That looked a testing target for the hosts but they chased it down 
with five balls to spare with all of their batsmen making contributions. Nick 
Browne led the way with his highest List A score only to agonisingly be run out 
for 99.

Somerset remain level on points with Essex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essex> after a vintage Peter Trego century 
helped them to a four-wicket win overMiddlesex at Taunton. The visitors scored 
296 for nine after losing the toss – Nick Gubbins making 89 off 78 balls, Paul 
Stirling 58 and James Fuller a rapid 42 not out. There were two wickets each 
for Trego and Roelof van der Merwe. In reply, Somerset reached 297 for six with 
an over to spare, Trego hitting nine fours and a six in his 104, while Lewis 
Gregory contributed 69 and Van der Merwe 41.

At the Ageas Bowl, Daniel Bell-Drummond and Joe Denly led Kent to a 
five-wicket win overHampshire to boost their quarter-final hopes. The former 
England limited-overs batsman Denly continued his impressive recent form with a 
century, finally falling to Brad Wheal for 105 – with Bell-Drummond hitting his 
highest List A score for Kent with 91. Despite a collapse which saw the 
visitors lose five wickets for 13 runs, Kent easily reached a target of 230. 
Earlier, Matt Coles took six for 56 to rip through his former countyHampshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hampshire>, for whom Adam Wheater top-scored 
with 63.
 