
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> hope to shore up 
their defence of the US Senate in primary elections on Tuesday that are an 
important test of residual anti-establishment sentiment in both parties.


Senators Marco Rubio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio> in 
Florida and John McCain in Arizona are both predicted to win their battles to 
retain the GOP nomination when voting closes late on Tuesday.

But tighter-than-expected results, particularly from McCain’s conservative 
challenger Kelli Ward, could signal tough fights to come for both incumbents 
againstDemocrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> in November.

Rubio only decided to seek re-election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/22/marco-rubio-re-election-florida-senate-seat>
 in June, despite a failed bid for the presidential nomination, as party 
leaders saw him as a crucial bulwark against a possible Donald Trump-inspired 
attack on the party’s grip over Congress.

McCain, whose 80th birthday on Monday has become a surprise attack line for 
his opponent, also faces a tricky balancing act between acknowledging Trump’s 
popularity among primary voters and minimising a potentially toxic association 
when appealing to Arizona’s diverse general electorate.

“It’s not separating myself from it, or anything like that,” McCain told NBC 
on the eve of polling when asked about Trump. “It’s the people of Arizona who 
know me. I have 100% name ID, they all know me very well, I’ve been here for 
many years. So I don’t think their judgment is affected by anything but what 
they view of me, how they view me.”

McCain said he would also let the people of Arizona “make the judgment” about 
whether Ward was right to suggest he was too old to seek a sixth term in office.

Democrats also face their own internal challenges if they are to unite around 
sufficiently strong candidates to net to the four seats needed to take back 
control of the Senate.

In the Florida Senate primary, a challenge from progressive firebrand Alan 
Grayson has fizzled somewhat following domestic abuse allegations, and fellow 
Democratic congressman Patrick Murphy looks most likely to end up competing 
against Rubio.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fmarco-rubio-john-mccain-florida-arizona-senate-primaries-chances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fede0bb287f31f87aa122ece962ac493ea285aa17%2F63_317_2784_1670%2F2784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rubio%20and%20McCain%20likely%20to%20withstand%20anti-establishment%20mood%20in%20primaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fmarco-rubio-john-mccain-florida-arizona-senate-primaries-chances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rubio%20and%20McCain%20likely%20to%20withstand%20anti-establishment%20mood%20in%20primaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fmarco-rubio-john-mccain-florida-arizona-senate-primaries-chances%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fede0bb287f31f87aa122ece962ac493ea285aa17%2F63_317_2784_1670%2F2784.jpg>
 Senator Marco Rubio greets supporters on Monday, the final day before the 
Florida primary election. Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
Instead it is congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the controversial former 
chair of the Democratic National Committee, who isattracting most attention 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/293506-wasserman-schultz-goes-down-to-the-wire-against-primary-challenger>
 from liberal activists.

Tim Canova, her opponent in the primary for the strongly Democratic House 
district around Miami, has been endorsed by Bernie Sanders afterhis bitter 
battle against Wasserman Schultz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/23/dnc-emails-wikileaks-hillary-bernie-sanders>
 during the presidential race.


Strong support for the incumbent from party leaders such as Hillary Clinton 
should save her from fresh embarrassment, but Democrats will be looking to 
enthuse voters with a positive message about the status quo amid strong attacks 
from the right too.

Rubio, in particular, is seen as a potential key figure in the defence of the 
Senate and is looking to exploit recent unease about the effectiveness of 
Barack Obama’s flagship healthcare reforms.

Women poised to lead Democratic return to power in the Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/25/senate-women-democrats-majority-power>
“Patrick Murphy promised voters that Obamacare’s state exchanges would bring 
down costs and create more competition, but Floridians are finding themselves 
with fewer healthcare options and skyrocketing premiums they can’t afford,” 
said Rubio spokesman Michael Ahrens in a new attack.

“Only someone like Patrick Murphy who has consistently embellished the facts 
about himself could read the latest devastating headlines about the failure of 
Obamacare and declare it a success that should be expanded.”

Neither Rubio’s nor McCain’s brand of conservatism has proved radical enough 
for Republican voters in the past year, but these colourful national figures 
could be just the right side of the anti-establishment mood to make life hard 
for Democrats.

McCain’s likely opponent in November, congresswoman Ann Kirkpatrick – who 
hopes to become the first Democratic senator from Arizona since 1995 – has in 
turn been running adverts 
<http://www.dailykos.com/story/2016/8/10/1558786/-Ann-Kirkpatrick-s-new-ad-reminds-you-just-many-times-John-McCain-is-willing-to-lick-Trump-s-boots>
 reminding voters just how many times this “maverick” Vietnam veteran has been 
forced toexpress grudging support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/01/john-mccain-condemns-trump-khizr-ghazala-khan-comments>
 for Trump.
 