
A Russian court has sentenced the Ukrainian film director Oleg Sentsov to 20 
years in prison after a trial described by Amnesty International as “redolent 
of Stalinist-era show trials”.

Sentsov, 39, and his co-defendant Alexander Kolchenko, who received a 10-year 
sentence at the trial on Tuesday, were accused of planning terrorist acts in 
Crimea after the peninsula wasannexed by Russia last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/putin-confirms-annexation-crimea-ukrainian-soldier-casualty>
.

The trial was littered with irregularities: Sentsov said he had been tortured, 
while investigators dismissed the bruises on his body as being the result of a 
supposed penchant for sadomasochistic sex. The main prosecution witness 
recanted in the courtroom and said his evidence had been extorted under 
torture. He said no “acts of terrorism” were ever committed except for an arson 
incident in which nobody was injured and Sentsov denied involvement.

Ukrainian film-maker tells Russian court he will 'suffer or die' for his 
beliefs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/19/ukrainian-filmmaker-oleg-sentsov-russian-court-suffer-or-die-for-his-beliefs>
Nevertheless, prosecutors asked for him to be given a 23-year sentence and 
Kolchenko a 12-year term. On Tuesday, the panel of three judges in a Rostov 
military court handed down their verdict. When the judges asked the pair if 
they understood the verdict, they smiled and sang the national anthem ofUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>.

In an impassioned message to the court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/19/ukrainian-filmmaker-oleg-sentsov-russian-court-suffer-or-die-for-his-beliefs>
 last week, Sentsov said he had not been prepared to accept deals with the 
investigators, who tortured him and pressed him to confess. He said: “When they 
put a bag on your head, beat you up a bit, half an hour later you’re ready to 
go back on all your beliefs, implicate yourself in whatever they ask, implicate 
others, just to stop them beating you. I don’t know what your beliefs can 
possibly be worth if you are not ready to suffer or die for them.

“I am not going to beg for leniency. Everything is already clear. A court of 
occupiers cannot be just by definition.”

Sentsov directed the 2011 feature film Gamer, but stopped work on a new movie 
when Russia began to intervene inCrimea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/crimea>. He coordinated relief efforts for 
the Ukrainian soldiers who were blockaded inside their bases by Russian troops.

Heather McGill, a researcher at Amnesty International, said: “This whole trial 
was designed to send a message. It played into Russia’s propaganda war against 
Ukraine and was redolent of Stalinist-era show trials of dissidents. This trial 
was fatally flawed and credible allegations of torture and other ill-treatment 
have been ignored by the court.”

International film directors, including Ken Loach, Mike Leigh and Wim Wenders, 
have signed an open letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/10/ken-loach-mike-leigh-ukraine-russia-director-oleg-sentsov>
 to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, calling for Sentsov’s release and an 
investigation into claims of torture against him. Russian directors have also 
joined the appeals.

Andrei Zvyagintsev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/06/leviathan-director-andrei-zvyagintsev-russia-oscar-contender-film>
, whose most recent film, Leviathan, won a Golden Globe, said on Monday that he 
had read the documents from the court case and found them unconvincing. He 
asked the Russian authorities to “either release [Sentsov] or try him only for 
what you can prove irrefutably”.

Alexander Sokurov <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-sokurov>, the 
director of Russian Ark and other acclaimed films, described the case as rather 
fantastic. In a blog post, he wrote that Sentsov’s actions were “nothing more 
extremist than civil protest”.

Ken Loach, Mike Leigh and others call for release of Ukrainian director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/10/ken-loach-mike-leigh-ukraine-russia-director-oleg-sentsov>
The UK minister for Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
David Lidington, said he was deeply concerned about the verdict and described 
the charges as disproportionate and politically motivated.

Lawyers for Sentsov and Kolchenko said they always expected the court to issue 
a guilty verdict: innocent verdicts are almost unheard of in the Russian legal 
system. Their main hope is for some kind of prisoner exchange with Ukraine, 
possibly for Russian soldiers captured in the east of the country.

In Ukraine, the case has prompted a wave of criticism, and Sentsov’s Ukrainian 
lawyer is preparing a criminal case against the prosecutors, investigators and 
others involved in the trial, for the illegal kidnapping and torture of a 
Ukrainian citizen. The court ruled that Kolchenko and Sentsov automatically 
became Russian citizens after the annexation of Crimea, and tried them as such.

The Ukrainian MP Mustafa Nayyem wrote on Facebook that he believed Russian 
citizens should be admitted to Ukraine in future only after answering a 
question about whether they believed the sentence in the Sentsov case to be 
just.

The case has been seen as an attempt to discourage further dissent in Crimea, 
which was annexed after a speedily held referendum last spring. Themajority of 
residents supported joining Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/16/pro-russian-crimeans-celebrate-landslide-vote-union-russia-ukraine>
, but Russia has done everything to prevent the disgruntled minority from 
protesting. Many ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars have left for mainland 
Ukraine. A small group of people who gathered to celebrate the birthday of the 
Ukrainian poet Taras Shevchenko in March werearrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/13/crimea-still-erasing-its-ukrainian-past-a-year-after-russias-takeover>
ed for holding Ukrainian flags 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/13/crimea-still-erasing-its-ukrainian-past-a-year-after-russias-takeover>
.

Putin spent three days in Crimea last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/20/russian-biker-gang-recreates-second-world-war-as-epic-stunt-show-crimea>
, descending to the depths of the Black Sea in a bathyscaphe to inspect the 
wreck of a Byzantine trading ship and directing government officials to boost 
tourism in the region.

'A court of occupiers cannot be just': Ukrainian director's courtroom speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/25/ukrainian-film-maker-jailed-oleg-sentsov-20-years-speech>
Ukraine claims Russia is holding at least 10 of its citizens on various 
charges ranging from espionage to murder. The best known is the military pilot 
Nadezhda Savchenko, who is accused of being an artillery spotter for the 
Ukrainian forces and involved in thedeaths of two Russian journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/30/trial-of-ukrainian-pilot-accused-over-journalists-deaths-begins-in-russia>
. Herlawyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/20/russia-ukraine-pilot-savchenko> 
say she was abducted and brought across the border to Russia. She is due to go 
on trial in the southern Russian town of Donetsk, close to the Ukrainian 
border, in the coming weeks.
 