
A Russian man has been charged with hacking and stealing information from 
computers atLinkedIn <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/linkedin> and 
other San Francisco Bay Area companies.

The US attorney’s office in San Francisco announced Friday that a grand jury 
indicted 29-year-old Yevgeniy Aleksandrovich Nikulin, of Moscow,Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, a day earlier on charges including 
computer intrusion and aggravated identity theft.

Prosecutors say Nikulin used a LinkedIn employee’s credentials to access the 
company’s computers in 2012. Nikulin is also accused of hacking two other 
companies,Dropbox <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/dropbox> and 
Formspring, and conspiring to sell stolen user names, passwords and email 
addresses of Formspring customers.

He was arrested on 5 October by officials in the Czech Republic and remains 
there, according to prosecutors. Russian officials have said they are working 
to prevent his extradition to the United States.

Hacker advertises details of 117 million LinkedIn users on darknet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/18/hacker-advertises-details-of-117-million-linkedin-users-on-darknet>
LinkedIn has suggested that Nikulin’s arrest was tied to a 2012 breach of 
member information. In May, LinkedIn said the 2012 breach resulted in more than 
100 million of its users’ passwords being compromised, vastly more than had 
been previously thought.

Abraham Simmons, a spokesman for the US attorney’s office, declined to comment 
on whether the charges against Nikulin related to that breach.

Simmons said he did not know the name of Nikulin’s attorney. 

LinkedIn said in a statement that it appreciated the FBI’s ongoing work to 
“pursue those responsible for the 2012 breach of LinkedIn member information”.

The indictment alleges three unnamed co-conspirators, one of whom offered to 
sell the stolen Formspring user information to another for €5,500, or about 
$6,000 in current US currency.

The US has accused Russia of coordinating the theft and disclosure of emails 
from the Democratic National Committee and other institutions and individuals 
in the US to influence the outcome of the election. Russia has denied that.

There was no indication the LinkedIn case was connected to that accusation. 
 