
Some Donald Trump loyalists have bolstered the president-elect’s unsupported 
claims that US intelligence agencies could be perpetuating a “conspiracy theory”
after they reportedly concluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 that Russia interfered with the presidential election and strengthened Trump’s 
run for the White House.

CIA concludes Russia interfered to help Trump win election, say reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
On Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
, Trump dismissed reports in the Washington Post and the New York Times, which 
stated the CIA had “high confidence” that Russia had interfered with the 
election, as “ridiculous” and “another excuse” for his surprise victory over 
Democrat Hillary Clinton in November.

The president-elect followed up these remarks with a series of tweets 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808299841147248640>, in which he 
argued: “Can you imagine if the election results were the opposite and WE tried 
to play the Russia/CIA card. It would be called conspiracy theory!”
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Can you imagine if the election results were the opposite and WE tried to play 
the Russia/CIA card. It would be called conspiracy theory!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808299841147248640> December 12, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808299841147248640> 
On Monday, Carter Page, a former foreign affairs adviser to Trump who was 
reportedly investigated by the FBI over hisclose ties 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/01/us/politics/fbi-russia-election-donald-trump.html>
 to the Russian government, told an audience at the Sputnik news agency 
headquarters in Moscow that such claims were “a lot of speculation”.

Answering questions after a presentation titled “Departing from hypocrisy: 
potential strategies in the era of global economic stagnation, security threats 
and fake news”, Page said: “Although there’s a lot of purported evidence that 
may or may not be out there, there’s nothing hard that really pointed in that 
direction.

“And the security experts, having worked in the Pentagon and knowing a lot of 
people both from the technology standpoint but also from a national security 
standpoint and discussing this issue with them, it’s very easy to make it look 
exactly like it was country X, in this caseRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, that did this, but so I think 
that’s very much overestimated.”

Asked if he was suggesting the hacks were a setup made to look as if Russia 
was behind it, Page said: “It very well could have been.”

“I’ve talked with various IT experts that suggest that that could be a serious 
possibility, and these guys are pros that can make certain paths that can 
mislead, and we’ve seen many mistakes from an intelligence standpoint 
previously,” he said.

Page’s comments were mirrored by John Bolton, the former US ambassador to the 
United Nations and one of those reportedly in the running to become secretary 
of state in the Trump administration, whotold Fox News on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
 that claims Russia had interfered with the election could be a “false flag”.

“It is not at all clear to me, just viewing this from the outside, that this 
hacking into the DNC and the RNC was not a false flag operation,” Bolton said.

Bolton continued then hinted, without citing any evidence, that the Obama 
administration could be responsible for perpetuating the claim.

“I believe that intelligence has been politicized in the Obama administration 
to a very significant degree,” Bolton added.

Mitch McConnell backs Russia election hack inquiry, but scope remains vague
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/us-election-russia-mitch-mcconnell-donald-trump>
Alex Jones, the notorious conspiracy theorist who has claimed that the 9/11 
attacks were an “inside job” and that the Sandy Hook massacre was a hoax, also 
lent support to Trump’s claims on Monday. The InfoWars founder, whose support 
the president-elect actively sought during the campaign,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/RealAlexJones/status/808393500924510209>: “Absolutely no 
evidence has been produced to substantiate the conspiracy theory,” with a link 
to an article on his website, written by a contributor, which argued the CIA’s 
conclusions were an “ongoing effect by detractors on the left”.

On Monday, the Republican Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, opened the 
door to a bipartisan congressional investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/us-election-russia-mitch-mcconnell-donald-trump>
 into Russia’s alleged interference, which Senate Democrats and some in the GOP 
have been pushing for.

“Any foreign breach of our cybersecurity measures is disturbing and I strongly 
condemn any such efforts,” McConnell said. “This simply cannot be a partisan 
issue.”

But the senator from Kentucky refused to engage with Trump’s attack on the CIA 
and did not offer clear details of what the inquiry would entail.
 