
Vladimir Putin is attempting to destroy the US’s alliance with Europe, James 
Mattis, Donald Trump’s nominee to head the Pentagon, said during his 
confirmation hearing on Thursday.

Related: Donald Trump’s alleged ties with Russia overshadow Senate hearings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/mike-pompeo-cia-nominee-senate-hearing-trump-russia>

 “I think right now the most important thing is that we recognize the reality 
of what we [are dealing] with, with Mr Putin,” he told the Senate armed 
services committee. “We recognize that he is trying to break the North Atlantic 
alliance.”

Mattis and Mike Pompeo, Trump’s nominee to head the CIA, both expressed 
concern over Russia’s growing assertiveness around the world in confirmation 
hearings which took place during a tumultuous week for the transition team.

 Just 10 days before the inauguration, Washington has been rocked by 
allegations that Russia had aggressively sought to sway the election in Trump’s 
favor and had also gathered compromising material on the president-elect.

Trump has cast doubt on US intelligence assessments that Russia was 
responsible for political hacking before the vote. But addressing the 
intelligence committee, Pompeo stated unequivocally that he accepted the report 
released last Friday in which US spies concluded that Putin had meddled in the 
election.

The report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
 “has an analytical product that is sound”, Pompeo testified at his 
confirmation hearing. “This was an aggressive action taken by the senior 
leadership in Russia.”

 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Mattis addresses concerns over Russia at confirmation hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/12/james-mattis-russia-confirmation-hearing-video>
Pompeo also committed to “follow the facts wherever they lead” in terms of any 
CIA examination of Trump’s ties to the Russians.

Pompeo, a Kansas Republican congressman and former army officer, told the 
Senate intelligence committee that Russia had “reasserted itself aggressively” 
around the world and said he was and would be “clear-eyed” about Moscow.


Related: Donald Trump's truce with spy agencies breaks down over Russia dossier
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>

In his separate Senate hearing, Mattis, the recently retired Marine Corps 
general whom Trump has nominated as secretary of defense, said that Russia had 
“chosen to be a strategic competitor, an adversary in key areas”.

Mattis said he was “all for engagement” with the Russians, but he warned of an 
“increasing number of areas in which we will have to confront Russia”.

Pompeo hit out at Russia at practically every opportunity the panel afforded 
him, despite Trump’s stated interest in forging closer ties with Moscow. He 
said Russia’s goal in the election was to sow discord in the US and affirmed 
that Russia had intentionally targeted civilians in military attacks in Syria, 
which he said was “absolutely a violation of the law of war” – a contrast to 
the equivocal view offered on Wednesday by Rex Tillerson, Trump’s nominee to 
serve as secretary of state.

Contradicting Trump, Pompeo said Russia was “doing nothing to aid in the 
destruction and defeat of Isis”.

Notably absent from the open portion of Pompeo’s hearing – a classified, 
closed session was slated to follow – was any discussion of the CIA’s highly 
controversial drone strikes and counter-terrorism raids. Pompeo vaguely alluded 
to CIA counter-terrorism “beyond Isis and al-Qaida”, but he did not follow up, 
nor did senators press him to elaborate.


As a congressman, Pompeo suggested he supported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/mike-pompeo-cia-must-reject-torture-detainees-unlawful-interrogation>
 CIA torture methods, but on Thursday he affirmed that any return to torture 
would require a change in the law, and he gave Senator Martin Heinrich of New 
Mexico a “full commitment” that the CIA would comply with current anti-torture 
laws. Despite Trump’s stated enthusiasm for waterboarding and other torture 
techniques, Pompeo said he did not expect Trump to seek a return to torture.

During a minimally contentious hearing, Pompeo declined to strongly back a 
2016 Wall Street Journal op-ed heco-authored 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/time-for-a-rigorous-national-debate-about-surveillance-1451856106>
 advocating a return to sweeping metadata surveillance. Pompeo said he had “no 
intention of seeking such changes” to a 2015 law, the USA Freedom Act, that 
significantly circumscribed bulk domestic phone records collection.

But in an exchange that displeased the Democratic civil libertarian senator 
Ron Wyden, Pompeo said intelligence officials would be “grossly negligent” if 
they did not examine social media posts for potential threats. Angus King, a 
Maine independent, cited old tweets from Pompeo suggesting enthusiasm for 
WikiLeaks during the publication of leaks from the Democratic National 
Committee.


“I have never believed WikiLeaks to be a credible source of information,” 
Pompeo said.

Meanwhile, Mattis forcefully defended the US role in Nato, signaling, 
reassuringly to the Baltic members of Nato, that he supported a permanent US 
military presence in the region as a deterrent to Russia.

Mattis was also pressed sharply on his views concerning the recent expansion 
of combat service to women.

“I have no plan to oppose women in any aspect of our military,” Mattis said, 
responding to a blunt question posed by Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, a Democrat 
from New York, after reading several past statements expressing opposition. 
“I’m coming in with the understanding that I lead the Department of Defense, 
and if someone brings me a problem I will look at it. But I’m not coming in 
looking for problems.”

Gillibrand also asked Mattis if allowing gay and lesbian Americans to serve 
openly in the military “undermines” its lethality; Mattis did not answer 
directly.

“Frankly, I’ve never cared much about two consenting adults and who they go to 
bed with,” he said.

Related: Russia dossier: what happens next – and could Donald Trump be 
impeached? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-russia-dossier-what-happens-next>

Mattis will require a special waiver from Congress to serve since he has not 
been out of uniform for the requisite seven years. Senate Democrats expressed 
concerns that approving the waiver would set a precedent that undermined the 
constitutional principle of civilian control of the military, but voiced a 
willingness to make an exception.

“I am extremely concerned by the precedent that your assuming this office 
would set,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal, a Democrat from Connecticut. “But 
if ever there were a case for a waiver of that principle, it is you at this 
moment in our history.”

The support for Mattis, a revered Marine general, was quickly evident in a 
24-3 vote on the Senate panel for the waiver permitting his Pentagon 
stewardship. The three dissenters were all Democrats: Blumenthal, Gillibrand 
and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts.

The House armed services committee also voted on the waiver, passing it 34-28, 
a closer vote that perhaps reflected the fact Mattis had been due to testify 
before them on Thursday, too, before, according to a congressional aide, the 
testimony was canceled by the Trump transition team.

Later on Thursday, the full Senate voted decisively to approve the waiver in a 
81-17 vote. It will go to the full House on Friday.

Senate Democrats focused much of their questioning on trying to draw out key 
points of difference between Mattis and the president-elect.

Warren asked Mattis if he was willing to express his views on Russia “frankly 
and forcefully” to the future President Trump. Mattis said he was.

“I hope that that is right, because if you end up in this job, our national 
security may well depend in part on your willingness to voice your opinions 
even when others disagree and even when you are under pressure to remain 
silent,” Warren said. “We are counting on you.”

Several senators on the intelligence panel expressed concern about morale at 
the CIA amid Trump’s public denigration of US intelligence during the furor 
over Russian hacking. Pompeo showered the agency’s “world-class” workforce with 
praise and recounted times he had “seen them walk through fire” while he was a 
member of the House intelligence panel. He pledged to ensure their independence 
and influence with a Trump White House.

“I am confident the Central Intelligence Agency will play a role in this 
administration as it has for every previous administration,” he said.
 