
By nominating Rex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-trump-secretary-of-state-mitt-romney-out>
 as secretary of state, Donald Trump will ignite a battle in Congress over the 
two issues that look set to overshadow the opening chapters of his presidency: 
Russia and conflicts of interest.


Tillerson embodies both quandaries. The ExxonMobil executive has grown close 
to Vladimir Putin and his circle through a succession of oil deals. The fate of 
those deals would give him a private interest when he comes to negotiate with 
Moscow as secretary of state. Lifting sanctions would unshackle ExxonMobil’s 
planned multi-billion dollar operations inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, and boost Tillerson’s retirement 
fund.

Rex Tillerson to be Trump's secretary of state, say reports, after Romney 
reveals he is out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-trump-secretary-of-state-mitt-romney-out>
His confirmation hearings in the Senate will be a bitter and emotive struggle. 
For Trump’s legion critics, the opaque ties with Russia and hisglaring 
conflicts of interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/donald-trumps-conflicts-of-interest-business>
 represent existential threats to US democracy. Trump is giving the nod to 
Tillerson, therecipient of Moscow’s Order of Friendship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
, as aslaughter is underway in Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/syria-assad-forces-close-to-capturing-east-aleppo>
, likely to be one of the worst war crimes of the century so far, in which 
Russia is complicit.

Furthermore, confirmation hearings will run concurrently with a congressional 
investigation intowhat role Russian intelligence played in tilting the US 
presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 and giving Trump an edge. The legitimacy of his presidency, for a majority of 
the US electorate and much of the world beyond, will be at stake in those 
hearings.

At the same time as declaring, by characteristic tweet 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808469755749339136>, that a 
secretary of state nomination would come on Tuesday, Trumpalso casually revealed
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808529888630239232> how he would 
be dealing with his own deep conflicts of interest – by “leaving” his 
businesses and devolving their management to his two eldest sons, Donald Jr and 
Eric, while offering that the organisationwould do “no new deals” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-postpones-business-interests-press-conference-january>
 during his time in office.

The brief bulletins on Twitter came in place of a promised press conference on 
the future of his businesses that was to have taken place on Thursday, butwas 
then summarily cancelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-postpones-business-interests-press-conference-january>
. Just before midnight on Monday, Trumptweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808532286664822784> that he would 
face press questions “in the near future to discuss the business, Cabinet picks 
and all other topics of interest”. The timing was left vague. His spokeswoman 
said it would be left until next month.

Also left vague was what “leaving” the Trump Organisation would mean – 
stepping down from management or divesting his ownership stake – or whether 
selling his share would lessen his conflict of interest as president, if the 
decisions he takes in the Oval Office could enrich his children. It is also 
doubtful whether a vast sprawling empire like the Trump Organisation, with a 
presence in some 20 countries, can function without doing “new deals”. Entering 
agreements with governments and partners is what it does in its day-to-day 
operations.

US law allows the president to have a conflict of interest. However, if 
businesses in which he had a stake benefit from payments from foreign 
governments or foreign state-owned companies, he would risk violating the “
emoluments clause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-conflicts-interest-constitutional-crisis>
” of the constitution.

For his part, Tillerson could sell the ExxonMobil stock in his retirement 
fund, but the question would remain whether that sale would divest him of his 
loyalty to a company that has employed him for more than four decades, that 
operates almost as a state itself and outweighs the economies of most of the 
countries on the planet.

Trump's conflicts of interest: a visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
Trump’s decisions to choose Tillerson, and to keep his business empire in the 
family, represent acts of defiance of the traditionalists in the Republican 
party. Veteran senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham will make the Tillerson 
confirmation, and the investigation into Russian election meddling, trials by 
fire for the new president. It would take the revolt of just one more 
Republican senator to rob Trump of his majority.

The president-elect may have been encouraged in his choice of Tillerson by the 
endorsement of grandees from former GOP administrations, including James Baker, 
Condoleezza Rice and Robert Gates. Their encouragement may soothe nervous 
Republicans but they haveconflict of interest issues of their own 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/rex-tillerson-supporters-russia-exxon-ties-232524>
. Baker’s law firm represents ExxonMobil and Russian state-owned oil and gas 
companies. Rice and Gates are partners in an international consulting firm that 
was reportedlyhired by ExxonMobil 
<http://www.iraqoilreport.com/news/exxon-hires-ex-u-s-officials-to-navigate-iraq-9864/>
.

One by one, the party leaders that once despised Trump fell into line behind 
him as his campaign gathered its unexpected momentum. The president-elect is 
betting the Republicans will line up once more, for fear of missing the 
opportunity of running all three branches of government.

That is a high-stakes gamble. The scale of the business conflicts in the new 
administration and the blatant influence of Moscow in US politics makes this 
uncharted territory for all involved.
 