
All days are different; what’s the same is that I spend hardly any time in my 
study. It’s tiny. I love its turquoise walls and the window looking at flats 
across the road, but there are piles of paper on the floor and waves of guilt 
from unanswered letters and I’m rarely there except to use the printer. I write 
at the kitchen table, on a sofa, in a traffic jam, or in bed, looking out at 
the garden. Writing needs connection to the outside world and a lot of it seems 
to get done when you’re simply living. Research is just a grand name for things 
you’d do anyway because you need to know. My new book is dedicated to the 
wonderful, desperately neededFocus Homeless Outreach 
<http://www.candi.nhs.uk/services/focus-homeless-outreach-team> team in Camden, 
north London, where I live. I went round Camden’s homeless hostels, and haunted
St Pancras Old church <http://www.posp.co.uk/st-pancras-old-church/>, one of 
the first sites of Christianity in England.

I love our neighbourhood. Some people have been here for generations, others 
are newer, like us, such as the Kurds in the corner shop, Greeks next door, 
Afghans selling vegetables. We moved here five years ago, to a house with a 
brutally bare garden. Now it’s green, full of trees and birds which make their 
way into a lot of poems. Music does that, too. A singing group meets near here 
one afternoon a month, but I can’t commit to rehearsals, as I often work in the 
evenings. Two days a week I teachcreative writing at King’s College London 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/artshums/depts/english/modules/level6/6aaec095.aspx>. No 
writing is possible those days, but I memorise poems on the bus. I used to 
memorise while walking the dog. Now there’s no dog, and it’s the 168 to Holborn.

Writing poems happens in two stages, which I think corresponds to using two 
sides of the brain. It’s like sculpting: first the imagination, then the 
chisel. The first stage is molten. You’re alert to everything, inside and out. 
The whole world is your material: malleable, like wet clay. This is the blessed 
stage, connected and open, but as vulnerable as a hatching butterfly. Anything 
can shatter it.

Once you have a draft, you’re a different creature, ruthless, undeflectable, 
carving away what doesn’t belong, like Michelangelo freeing the image from the 
stone. Words often become more important when you cut them, mysteriously 
watermarking a line with their absence. Whole days go in a flash of redrafting, 
printing, scribbling corrections, printing again. Poets vary, but for me what’s 
essential is the dolphin-like move from page to screen, conscious to 
unconscious, and back. In physics, time and space are one. With poems, it’s 
form and content; everything turns on the relation between what the poem might 
be saying and the pattern in which it says it. You’re after a fusion of the two.

If I have a deadline, I may go to a cafe and turn off my phone. Being with 
other people, alone, somehow accelerates the process, maybe because poems come 
from and speak to real life, yet each is a boundaried precinct, both of and not 
of the world.

Like days, poems differ. A poem about a tiger wrote itself in my head through 
a single day. It started when I was being driven round the gulf of Vladivostok 
to a deer farm where a tiger had dined. I got the flow of vowel-sounds while 
examining tiger scratches on trees, and finished in an airline security queue. 
Another poem fought me for years. I kept simplifying, loosening, expanding and 
shrinking.

Here at home I wake early, go downstairs, make tea, looking out at the garden, 
and start work. The dark lantern of early morning reminds me of being a child, 
alone in my granny’s house with everyone asleep and the smell of peat on the 
air from last night’s fire. Prosper Mérimée complained of his lover George Sand 
in an unromantic dressing gown at dawn, “on her knees before the hearth with a 
candlestick beside her and a red madras around her head”. Despite writingCarmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2015/oct/19/carmen-140-years-bizet-royal-opera-house-in-pictures>
, he failed to understand that whatever you get up to at night, in the morning 
what you do is stoke the fire and write.

• Tidings: A Christmas Journey is published by Chatto & Windus. To order a 
copy for £8.18 (RRP £9.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/christmas-book-445724.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 