
The Rwandan president, Paul Kagame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paul-kagame>, has said that he did not want 
a third term in office but had to bow to entreaties from his people, who were 
not ready to say goodbye to the architect of the nation’s recovery from the 
1994 genocide.

Speaking at the World Economic Forum on Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> in the Rwandan capital, Kigali, the 
president said he was aware that changing the constitution to allow him to run 
again would draw international criticism but had little say in the matter.

 The changes, which technically allow Kagame to stay until 2034, were approved 
in a December referendum by a 98% majority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/20/rwanda-vote-gives-president-paul-kagame-extended-powers>
 that Rwanda’s tiny opposition and western diplomats said was suspiciously high.

 “By the way, I didn’t ask for this thing,” Kagame said of the third term 
during a panel discussion chaired by former British prime minister, Tony Blair, 
one of Kagame’s most high-profile international supporters.

 “I was actually trying to tell my people: ‘You know what, there’s room – 
can’t you find someone else? You need to take a risk and look for someone else.’

 “And they kept saying: ‘No. We are not ready to take risks. We want you to 
stay.’ I said: ‘But I’m having difficulties staying.’”

The US, a major donor to Rwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>, 
led the criticism of Kagame’s plans to seek re-election next year, saying it 
was another example of an African leader changing the democratic rules in order 
to extend their time in power.

 Neighbouring Burundi, which shares a history of ethnic fighting with Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/15/nowhere-to-run-burundi-violence-follows-escapees-across-borders>
, was plunged into chaos a year ago when its president, Pierre Nkurunziza,
sought a third term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/24/burundi-pierre-nkurunziza-wins-third-term-disputed-election>
, which the opposition denounced as unconstitutional.

 Kagame has overseen a remarkable economic recovery from the 1994 genocide, in 
which 800,000 ethnic Tutsis and moderate Hutus were killed by Hutu extremists.

 However, rights groups and political opponents – many of whom now live in 
exile – say this has been at the expense of civil liberties.
 