
The Rwandan president, Paul Kagame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paul-kagame>, is to seek a third term in 
2017, confirming a decision widely expected after the approval of 
constitutional changes.

He said in a televised address: “You requested me to lead the country again 
after 2017. Given the importance and consideration you attach to this, I can 
only accept. But I don’t think that what we need is an eternal leader.”

Kagame has been president since 2000, but he has effectively been in control 
since his forces marched into the Rwandan capital, Kigali, to end the 1994 
genocide.

He was originally limited to two terms, but Rwanda has approved changes to the 
constitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/20/rwanda-vote-gives-president-paul-kagame-extended-powers>
 that would effectively allow Kagame to stay in power until 2034. He can run 
for another seven-year term in 2017, followed by two five-year terms.

Kagame insisted for months that he had yet to make up his mind about whether 
to run in the election in 2017.

Is Kagame Africa's Lincoln or a tyrant exploiting Rwanda's tragic history?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/19/kagame-africa-rwanda> 
A referendum on the change, which drew the backing of 98% of those who voted, 
prompted criticism from western governments, which worry about the growing list 
of African leaders seeking to extend their tenure.

Neighbouring Burundi was plunged into chaos in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/05/violence-grips-burundi-president-nkurunziza-cleared-run-third-term>
 when the president, Pierre Nkurunziza, announced he would seek a third term. 
This led to months of street protests and violence in which more than 400 
people died. Nkurunziza laterwon in a disputed vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/24/burundi-pierre-nkurunziza-wins-third-term-disputed-election>
.

Rights groups acknowledge that Kagame has broad support for rebuilding Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>, but accuse the authorities of 
stifling the media and opposition voices, charges that the government denies.

The US, which has long praised Kagame for transforming the country since the 
genocide, said the president could best serve his nation by stepping down in 
2017.

The European Union criticised the speed at which the referendum vote was held, 
saying it did not give enough time for the public to consider the arguments. 
The vote took place about a month after the Rwandan parliament gave its final 
approval to the changes.

The Democratic Green party, the main opposition group in Rwanda – which is 
tiny and has no seats in parliament – had its attempt to block the 
constitutional amendments rejected in the courts.
 