
The first blow of the phoney war which always precedes a Ryder Cup has been 
landed byLee Westwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lee-westwood>, who has 
pointed towards the potentially “adverse” influence of Tiger Woods as a 
vice-captain of the USA.

Paul Casey’s FedEx finale may spring change in Europe’s qualification rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/21/paul-casey-fedex-cup-finale-european-tour-ryder-cup>
Woods has endured an infamously troublesome time as a Ryder Cup player but 
while injured this time, the USA captain Davis Love III asked him to become a 
member of the backroom staff. Westwood will play in his 10thRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> at Hazeltinein nine days’ time, 
with Europe seeking an unprecedented fourth win in a row.

“I don’t know what impact there will be from having Tiger around,”  Westwood 
said to ESPN.com 
<http://www.espn.co.uk/golf/story/_/id/17601971/lee-westwood-raises-ryder-cup-doubts-davis-love-iii-tiger-woods>
. “They have always struggled to find a partner for Tiger that’s been 
successful. He could have an adverse effect in the team room. People have 
always seemed to try to do too much when they have partnered him. It might be 
different if he’s one of the vice-captains, you don’t know.

“The captain is obviously building them up a lot and making a few interesting 
decisions. They have got a strong side and probably are favourites, but they 
haven’t won it for a while and they are playing in front of a home crowd. There 
is a lot of pressure on them. That is going to keep building in the next week 
or so and by the time the Ryder Cup comes around, it is going to be pretty 
intense for them.”

Trump and Brexit add yet more spice to Ryder Cup’s theatres of cultural war | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/21/ryder-cup-donald-trump-brexit-usa-europe>
Westwood also referred to Love’s captaincy in 2012 at Medinah, and the 
handling of his wildcard picks this time, as being potentially significant. 
Four years ago Europetriumphed in memorable style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/01/ryder-cup-europe-win-medinah> as 
the hosts capitulated during the singles matches. “I don’t know if something 
went wrong on the Sunday or the team didn’t play very well for some reason, but 
that will be in the back of their minds,” the Englishman said.

Westwood was similarly questioning of Love’s decision, thus far, not to pick 
Bubba Watson. The USA captain has one wildcard remaining, with Watson seemingly 
battling against Justin Thomas and Daniel Berger for the spot. “There seem to 
have been issues about team spirit and chemistry. Love has not picked Bubba 
Watson and I don’t know what that does for team spirit; he was first outside 
the points qualification and is No7 in the world.”
 