
It is early Sunday afternoon, and the northern end of Chiltern Street in 
London’s Marylebone presents an intriguing study in contrasts. On one side of 
the road, brunch is being served at celebrity hangout theChiltern Firehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/27/chiltern-firehouse-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
. A succession of chauffeur-driven cars arrive and disgorge passengers in 
search ofcrab-stuffed doughnuts 
<http://www.olivemagazine.com/recipes/chiltern-firehouses-crab-donuts/3960.html>
 and smoked mackerel with buttered mooli and fried eggs. On the other, someone 
has set up a trestle table outside a former barber’s shop called Mario’s – the 
striped pole is still in evidence – and is serving cups of tea from an urn, 
while a gentleman in butler’s livery circulates with a tray of rich tea 
biscuits.

The occasion is the opening of the Gallery of Everything 
<http://www.gallevery.com/> and its inaugural exhibition, Jarvis Cocker’s 
Journeys Into the Outside. The show is based ona 1998 documentary series 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TU8XqLs5knw> in which Pulp’s erstwhile 
frontman investigated the world of what is usually called outsider art – a 
contentious term that, since it was coined by writer Roger Cardinal in 1972, 
has been used to describe everything from art made by people with mental health 
issues to the work of folk artists. Cocker himself prefers to define it as “art 
made by people who haven’t gone through an art education system”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74e90098d46ee0d9d0cb270c12701c4f4bc08869%2F92_95_3190_1848%2F3190.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sacred%20works%2C%20secret%20tunnels%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker's%20journey%20into%20outsider%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sacred%20works%2C%20secret%20tunnels%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%27s%20journey%20into%20outsider%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74e90098d46ee0d9d0cb270c12701c4f4bc08869%2F92_95_3190_1848%2F3190.jpg>
 Untitled, circa 1976, by TV repairman turned artist and REM collaborator 
Howard Finster. Photograph: Gallery of Everything 
 “The French term for it, art brut, means raw art: the theory was you get 
cooked by culture but somehow these artists have managed to be outside it,” he 
tells me. “It might be that some of them have been institutionalised, or maybe 
they were just brought up in a remote area. As time goes on, it becomes more 
difficult for people not to be caught up in the dominant culture, because we’re 
all connected to the internet. When you see people who somehow operate outside 
that, you’re quite excited by it.”


However you define it, you’d have a hard time arguing that the artworks in the 
Gallery of Everything are anything other than incredibly striking: the 
intricate carvings of Karl Junker – a man with schizophrenia who spent his life 
idiosyncratically decorating a house in Lemgo, Germany – next to the 
hallucinogenic painting of the New York hustler and fortune tellerSt EOM 
<http://bombmagazine.org/article/902/st-eom> and the figurative sculpture of 
Nek Chand Saini <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/15/nek-chand>
, who began his career, as Cocker puts it, “nicking off in the middle of the 
night to build these little figures in secret” but ended it being exhibited all 
over the world, with his 18-acre sculpture garden in Chandigarh becoming 
India’s second-most visited tourist site, after the Taj Mahal.

Cocker’s interest began while he was a student at Central Saint Martins, when 
he chanced upon Cardinal’s book about the subject in the library. “After three 
years at an art college, the idea of people who made art from some inner 
compulsion, rather than wanting to show off, appealed to me. And that stayed 
with me after.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19c1871f6794353e8a051d5928bdb86803121560%2F0_0_4194_2701%2F4194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sacred%20works%2C%20secret%20tunnels%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker's%20journey%20into%20outsider%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sacred%20works%2C%20secret%20tunnels%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%27s%20journey%20into%20outsider%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19c1871f6794353e8a051d5928bdb86803121560%2F0_0_4194_2701%2F4194.jpg>
 Tête, 1985, by Roger Chomeaux. Photograph: Gallery of Everything 
He made Journeys Into the Outside with the film-maker Martin Wallace at the 
height of his pop star fame, embarking on a “road trip” to meet artists across 
Europe and America. It was shown only once, “after Queer As Folk at 11 at 
night”, but ended up an important and poignant visual document of a deeply 
strange world: all of the artists, already old when Journeys Into the Outside 
was made, have since died.

The best known might be Howard Finster, a former TV repairman and Baptist 
minister compelled to paint “sacred art” after seeing a vision while fixing a 
bicycle. His work – paintings in which naive figures jostle for space with 
idiosyncratically spelled text filled with references to the Bible and popular 
culture – and which fill the first room of the new exhibition – gained a wider 
audience, largely thanks to the patronage of rock bands. Finster’s fellow 
Georgia natives REM commissioned himto collaborate on the cover of 1984’s 
Reckoning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2011/sep/22/rem-rock-band-split?index=17>
, wrote the song Maps and Legends about him and filmed the video for their 
single Radio Free Europe inParadise Gardens 
<http://paradisegardenfoundation.org/>, a sculpture park Finster created near 
the city of Summerville that contains more than 46,000 pieces of art. He also 
painted the cover for Talking Heads’ 1985 album Little Creatures. “I think 
there’s an affinity between rock musicians and these kind of artists because 
most rock musicians are also self-taught. It’s not as if you go to a 
conservatoire – you just pick up a guitar and struggle to eventually make some 
kind of noise you find palatable,” says Cocker. “And having a band is like 
making your own little world, something you’re the boss of, something you 
control. When you’re on a stage, you make everybody live in your world, so 
maybe that has something to do with it as well.”

He’d made all these tunnels underneath his house. I went down on my own to 
explore them and got lost

Not all of his encounters with the artists went well. The most disturbing room 
in the exhibition is devoted to the work of WC Rice, a self-ordained minister 
who was given to fashioning crudely painted crucifixes and daubing slogans 
about hellfire and damnation on anything he could find, from wrecked cars to 
washing machines. If you think his work looks unsettling in the back room of a 
former barber’s shop, Cocker notes, that’s nothing to what it looks like in 
situ, in Rice’s garden in Alabama.“You drive into his area and see all these 
crosses and fridges saying, you know, ‘CESS PIT HELP ME JESUS BURN IN HELL.’ 
It’s got a bit of a Deliverance feeling about it. You did wonder what he was 
going to be like, but he was very polite.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7460727b4b90ce3810b9f8b9607d6c589f5611c%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sacred%20works%2C%20secret%20tunnels%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker's%20journey%20into%20outsider%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sacred%20works%2C%20secret%20tunnels%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%27s%20journey%20into%20outsider%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7460727b4b90ce3810b9f8b9607d6c589f5611c%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Deliverance … WC Rice’s Cross Garden in Prattville, Alabama. Photograph: Kelly 
Ludwig 
Another artist, Robert Garcet, famed for his structure called the Tower of the 
Apocalypse 
<http://curious-places.blogspot.co.uk/2011/01/tower-of-apocalypse-eben-emael-belgium.html>
, had apparently tired of interviewers “asking him when the world was going to 
end, so he took it out on me. He seemed to see me as a kind of symbol of the 
stupidity of modern media, so he had a massive go at me, which wasn’t very 
welcoming. He’d made all these tunnels underneath his house and I went down to 
explore them on my own and I got lost. I didn’t feel like I was really in 
danger, but you felt like you were in somebody’s … you shouldn’t really be 
looking at it.”

We can all go off on one, can't we? We all know friends who've lost it or got 
obsessed

Outsider art raises unique moral and ethical questions. James Brett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/sep/01/museum-of-everything-selfridges-review>
, the exhibition’s curator and the founder of the Gallery of Everything, has 
worked with outsider artists for more than 15 years. “It’s hugely important 
that it doesn’t become a freak show – I really try to make sure that we’re not 
doing it.” Brett doesn’t even like the term outsider art. “It sounds negative. 
It defines itself by an inside and an outside, so the artists – who are often 
vulnerable adults, or at least unusual – find themselves with a word that 
describes them that suggests an otherness that I felt wasn’t correct. So 
‘non-academic artists’ definitely describes them in one way, and ‘private 
art-making’ describes the core of it, because almost all of these artists 
started making art for a private purpose.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc56a3e41c520ee9802c5903c676c03f4945dcedd%2F0_85_7099_4661%2F7099.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sacred%20works%2C%20secret%20tunnels%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker's%20journey%20into%20outsider%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sacred%20works%2C%20secret%20tunnels%3A%20Jarvis%20Cocker%27s%20journey%20into%20outsider%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjarvis-cocker-journey-outsider-art-gallery-of-everything%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc56a3e41c520ee9802c5903c676c03f4945dcedd%2F0_85_7099_4661%2F7099.jpg>
 Art by Howard Finster and Nek Chand Saini at the Gallery of Everything. 
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Furthermore, there’s the issue of money. Brett is keen to create a British 
market for this work “because it will bring these artists equivalence” – 
everything in the show is for sale, at prices ranging from £1,000 to £50,000 – 
but even the notion of selling the work raises intriguing questions. What 
happens when an artist who created art purely out of compulsion discovers that 
there may be money to be made? If the power of their work rests, at least in 
part, on the fact that there are no commercial considerations involved in its 
creation, does introducing money into the equation fundamentally alter their 
art, destroying its authenticity? “You’re 100% right,” Brett says, nodding. “If 
I’m working with an artist, I need to make sure they’re not making work to 
order – it would be less strong if somebody wants to please. It’s a minefield.”

“It is a difficult area when you come to present the stuff,” agrees Cocker. 
“But these artists tap into something universal: the fact that everybody’s got 
the ability to create things. I think also that’s why people react to this art 
and have a fascination with it. You can see the amount of work that’s going 
into it, and you can appreciate that without knowing a backstory. We’ve all got 
that tendency – we can all go off on one, can’t we? We all know friends who’ve 
lost it or got obsessed or whatever, so I think it’s not just like, ‘Ooh, let’s 
look at these weird and wacky people.’ It tells you something about human 
creativity and what it can do,” he says. “Because almost all of the artists I 
met on that journey, the one question they could never answer was, ‘Why do you 
do it?’ That seemed to be a completely superfluous question – it was like they 
had to do it, and through doing it they would find some peace and contentment. 
And I think we’re all a bit like that. We all have to find something that we 
love to do that makes us feel OK in the world.”

• Jarvis Cocker’s Journeys into the Outside is at the Gallery of Everything 
<http://www.gallevery.com/>, London, until 20 November.
 