
The plan was simple. To spend the first night of our Islay pilgrimage sleeping 
in the open on Eileach-an-Naoimh (Rock of the Saints) among the 6th century 
monks’ hermit cells. We had decanted our kit from the rubber dinghy, explored 
the island, seen the saint’s grave and watched asGuy Grieve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2007/nov/09/usa.travel> from The Ethical 
Shellfish Company <http://ethicalshellfishcompany.co.uk/> anchored his fishing 
boat in a place of shelter. The sun shone, the sea pinks waved in the slight 
breeze. We looked over the still waters to Mull. We were content. Then came the 
midges. Insistent vicious clouds of them.

We slept that night among the diesel fumes in the tiny hold under Guy’s 
wheelhouse, safely off shore, insect bites and disappointment soothed by a 
supper of scallops and Lagavulin whisky.
 Allan Jenkins joins Howard Sooley on a fishing boat voyage to Islay 
Film-maker Howard Sooley <http://www.howardsooley.com/> and I have gardened 
together for 10 years, creating two beautiful biodynamic allotments. We have 
travelled through India for the Observer, seen the burning ghats of Varanasi 
and watched wild Durga Puja celebrations in Kolkata.


We met Guy Grieve when we made a fish cookbook for London’s J Sheekey 
restaurant. It was deep Hebridean winter, out on his rip, watching as he dived 
30m down in the cold dark waters off the isle of Mull. Among the top three 
things I will ever eat are the scallops he pulled from the sea that day, eaten 
raw off a knife blade, sitting precariously on slippery black seaweeded rock.
 Allan Jenkins in Islay Photograph: Howard Sooley 
Another obsession Howard and I share is the landscape and peated whiskies of 
Islay (I have a cask hunkered down in a bonded warehouse behind the Port 
Charlotte Hotel that I worry over like an anxious parent.) Their names conjure 
magic: Caol Ila and Ardbeg among others.

For five years now we have wanted to come into Islay from Mull by fishing 
boat, celebrating its scallops and whisky, twin tastes of the Hebridean sea. 
This summer, on the occasion of the Lagavulin distillery’s 200th birthday it 
finally came together. This film marks the trip. The world’s best seafood. The 
world’s best whisky. Shared with friends. Cheers.
 Lagavulin whisky in Islay Photograph: Howard Sooley 
With thanks to Lagavulin Scotch Whisky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/whisky> for supporting travel and 
accommodation while on Islay.
 