
Sainsbury’s has apologised to two men who say they were asked to follow a 
security guard out of a shop after another customer complained about them 
holding hands and putting their arms around each other.

Thomas Rees said he and his partner, Joshua Bradwell, had been left stunned 
after the security guard led them out of a Sainsbury’s branch in Hackney, east
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, and told them a woman had 
complained about their behaviour in the aisles.

After he tweeted his anger at the supermarket chain, he was offered an apology 
and a £10 voucher. But he has said he now feels uncomfortable at the prospect 
of returning to the shop and running into the security guard again or 
discovering other customers with intolerant views.

“We weren’t celebrating good news, we weren’t all over each other, we weren’t 
in the throes of passion – it was essentially just holding my boyfriend’s hand 
as I do every day,” he toldBBC News 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-37034082>.

Rees said he and Bradwell had just paid for their items on Monday evening when 
the security guard approached them and asked them to follow him outside. He 
said he was left “stunned and shaking” by what the guard told them.

The 32-year-old told Buzzfeed News 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/saraspary/gay-couple-who-held-hands-in-sainsburys-told-they?utm_term=.fj78NNqj3#.ooAMVVBJ2>
: “I just don’t understand why he needed to take us outside and why he needed 
to tell us. There was no sense of humility.

“I refuse to believe this would have happened to a heterosexual couple – we 
just stared in disbelief. The issue here is it felt like like 1960s Britain.”

After the incident, and despite doubts over whether to speak out about it, 
Rees decided to vent his anger on Twitter, writing: “To the bigot who 
complained about my bf & I holdin hands & the security guard at @sainsburys who 
felt the need to ‘talk’ to us outside [middle finger emoji].”
Thomas Rees (@doganddinosaur) 
To the bigot who complained about my bf & I holdin hands & the security guard 
at@sainsburys <https://twitter.com/sainsburys> who felt the need to 'talk' to 
us outside🖕🏻
 <https://twitter.com/doganddinosaur/status/762726330316296192> August 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/doganddinosaur/status/762726330316296192> 
Rees’s subsequent comments suggest he does not necessarily blame the security 
guard for the situation. He told the BBC: “I do feel for the security guard 
because he was clearly unable or poorly equipped to handle these situations.”

Rees is calling for Sainsbury’s to make sure that staff are properly trained 
to handle similar situations in the future. It is not the first time that the 
retail giant has faced criticism over allegations of homophobia. Activists 
staged a“kiss-in” protest at a Brighton branch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/15/sainsburys-brighton-kiss-in-protesters-lesbian-couple>
 in 2014 after two women were threatened with ejection after sharing a kiss.

A Sainsbury’s spokesperson said an investigation into the incident was 
continuing, adding: “We sincerely apologise to Thomas and Josh. We are an 
inclusive retailer and employer and do not tolerate discrimination in our 
stores. We will take appropriate action once we’ve concluded our investigation 
with our security contractor.”
 