
Sally Beauman, who has died aged 71, was that rare phenomenon – a writer whose 
prose sang and who could at the same time tell stories that captivated 
millions. Her first novel, Destiny, appeared in 1987, when critical hierarchies 
were far more rigid than today. The gilded lettering of its cover indicated 
romance or a romantic saga – a women-only genre distrusted even by feminists, 
and mocked under the block- or bonkbuster tag. This in turn meant that the 
critical accolade that might well have been her due was slow in coming.
 Destiny (1987) 
Headlines of record-breaking million-dollar advances for a first novel, true 
in her case, only abetted literary disdain. None of this worried readers: 
Destiny topped the New York Times bestseller list, as well as the charts in the 
UK, Canada, Australia and South Africa, and was translated into some 20 
languages. Like her beloved Brontës, Beauman had an uncommon gift for immersing 
readers in narrative and holding them there – whatever the subject – until the 
end. She could bring trailer parks in the deep American south or antique-laden 
aristocratic interiors to life. She could evoke shades of character. And she 
could write sex – no mean feat. She was always alive to the fact that sex was 
never simply sex.

Her second novel, Dark Angel (1990), was even better than the first – an early 
exploration of what was only beginning to be known as child abuse. Through the 
90s came a trio of mysteries or romantic thrillers, Lovers and Liars (1994), 
Danger Zones (1996) and Sextet (1997), which probed the ruthlessness of the 
press and political scandal. In 2001 there was a shift to different terrain. 
Commissioned by the New Yorker in 1994 to write a piece onDaphne du Maurier’s 
popular classic Rebecca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/20/rebecca-daphne-du-maurier-classic-literature>
, a novel she stated was an anti-romance, “a clever, cunning and subversive 
attack on the very genre to which it would be consigned”, Beauman found that Du 
Maurier would not leave her alone.

Perhaps there was some identification with the author and her dismissal by 
critics at play. In an article about Du Maurier, she wrote: “She was a 
‘romantic novelist’, and having shoved her into that particular wastebin, the 
critics could duly wash their hands of her. Thus was Du Maurier ‘named’ and 
categorised as a writer, much to her resentment. The tag was lazy and 
inaccurate, and the question of how women are named and categorised (and the 
ironies and inexactitudes inherent in that process) was of course central to 
the themes of Rebecca. Not one of the reviewers, busily pigeonholing, noticed 
that. Did these reviews affect sales? Not one jot.”

Sally Beauman's top 10 novels with a powerful sense of place
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jan/11/top10s.sense.place> 
Rebecca’s Tale (2001) came into being slowly. Beauman wanted to explore the 
absent Rebecca, the femme who had been fatale only to herself and who had come 
to us through the eyes of her husband, that Bluebeard of the gentry Max de 
Winter.

As Linda Grant wrote in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/sep/15/fiction.reviews>, “Rebecca’s 
Tale revisits the story … from the point of view of the one person denied a 
voice: Rebecca herself, the wilful, arrogant, promiscuous and mysterious first 
Mrs de Winter. She, not the wet and nameless narrator, was the character any 
reader with gumption admired and identified with.” Beauman’s tale had done “an 
extraordinary thing”: her Rebecca really was “the one Du Maurier had omitted”, 
yet she retained all the enigma of the original. While both women were great 
storytellers, Grant noted, Beauman “really is the better prose stylist”.

Two further novels followed, The Landscape of Love (2005) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jan/15/featuresreviews.guardianreview18>
 andThe Visitors (2014) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/08/visitors-review-search-tutankhamun-sally-beauman>
, the first in part a love-affair withEmily Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/16/my-hero-lucasta-miller-emily-bronte-manuscripts-british-library>
’s ability to evoke place, the second a re-creation of the disputed 
archaeologicaldig that unearthed Tutankhamun’s tomb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/01/tutankhamun-valley-of-the-kings-egypt-howard-carter-1922>
. By the time this last book appeared, Beauman’s imagination was entangled with 
death in a more immediate way. Her husband’s health had become precarious.
 Rebecca’s Tale (2001) 
She was born Sally Vanessa Kinsey-Miles in Paignton, Devon, where her mother, 
Gabriel, was staying with family while her father, Ronald, was in the RAF. She 
was brought up in the West Country. An only child, she adored her father, who 
taught her many skills including what became her formidable talents as a 
gardener. From Redland high school for girls in Bristol she went to Girton 
College, Cambridge. She read English literature and proved herself a remarkable 
actor, taking on lead roles in Strindberg, Büchner and Turgenev, as Christopher 
Beauman, the economist whom she met towards the end of her first year, fondly 
remembers. In 1966, they married, an act in part propelled by the rules that 
governed travel to the US with his Harkness fellowship for graduate school in 
Washington and New York. They were to split up in the early 70s and divorce in 
1976.

In America, Sally took work as a journalist and joined the staff of the newly 
launched New York magazine. Her first assignment was to followNorman Mailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/nov/12/guardianobituaries.usa> to East 
Hampton on one of his wild film-making expeditions. The year was 1968, the tone 
distinctly Tom Wolfe. Mailer “and a cast of hundreds … all flaunting garments 
guaranteed in their brevity to keep their owners out of every eating place in 
town, erupted on to the peaceful streets with all the brilliance and suddenness 
of a volcano on to a latterday Pompeii”.

She quickly became an associate editor and back in London in 1970 briefly the 
youngest ever editor of Queen magazine, before moving into freelance feature 
writing and interviewing for Vogue, the Daily Telegraph, the Sunday Times and 
the Observer. She was the first winner of the Catherine Pakenham award for 
journalism.

Alan Howard obituary
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/19/alan-howard> 
She met the great Shakespearean actor, Alan Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/19/alan-howard>, when interviewing 
him for the Telegraph magazine in 1970. Romance – and it needs to be called 
that with their two fiery temperaments – blossomed and lasted a lifetime. 
Together with their son, James, born in 1974, they lived for a period in 
Stratford and then in London, though with sporadic periods in New York or 
Greece when Howard’s productions travelled. Beauman’s two non-fictions, one a 
history of the RSC, and her early pseudonymous romances, came from their son’s 
childhood, a time ill-suited to the tempo of journalism. It was when our boys 
were at playschool that I first met her. We were neighbours and became fast 
friends.

She was a proud, loyal, fiercely private, beautiful and generous woman – at 
all ages. Her intelligence was incisive and broad. She could tell you 
everything, not only about the latest Man Booker list, but about gardening and 
furniture restoration or how to render a wall. In fact, she was often dressed 
in a paint-spattered shirt and jeans and could be found, between books, up a 
ladder touching up a ceiling – before donning more elegant attire to go to the 
theatre.

Her cooking was divine and as meticulous as the detailed emails that became 
legendary among her friends. She could lay out exemplary recipes, the best 
garden plants for shade, or precise routes through France, through the 
Cotswolds or to Barra, the island in the Outer Hebrides where over years she 
lovingly restoredSir Compton Mackenzie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/18/mackenzie-memoirs-banned-republished>
’s house, in which Alan, his grandnephew, had spent so many holidays as a boy.

Living with Rebecca
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/sep/12/fiction.daphnedumaurier> 
In his last years of failing health, she looked after Alan – they married in 
2004 – with a vehement devotion, exhorting the NHS to do its best. She outlived 
him by only 17 months. Few of her friends knew that a first bout of cancer had 
been overcome while Alan was still alive. The second could not be.

We often met over a cuppa to talk about life, literature and our writing. The 
last time I saw her before she went up to Northumberland to stay with her son, 
his wife, Lucy, and her two beloved grandchildren, she was very frail. But her 
voice grew stronger as we began to talk about the street we lived on, with its 
over-representation of writers and actors. Someone should write a book about 
it, I suggested. A brilliant idea, she laughed, concurring. But only Sally, 
with her remarkable powers of evoking place, could have written it.

She is survived by her son and grandchildren.

• Sally Beauman, writer, born 25 July 1944; died 7 July 2016
 