
Do you remember mixtapes? Did you ever sit next to a radio/stereo/computer 
with a notepad, a few tracks in mind, and a heart that beats? How about the 
thrill of receiving one? Well, we’ve asked some of our favorite authors to make 
us a mixtape.This month’s installment is from Samantha Hunt 
<http://samanthajhunt.blogspot.com.es/>, whose new novel, Mr. Splitfoot 
<http://www.hmhco.com/shop/books/Mr-Splitfoot/9780544526709>, comes out this 
week 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/360593/s/mr-splitfoot/>
. Put on your headphones, turn up the volume, and read on.

– The editors at Electric Literature

---

This mixtape examines corruption. It is a soundtrack to carry one through each 
stage of creepy cult life.

This mixtape is an instruction manual, How to Be a Deranged Cult Leader. My 
novel, Mr. Splitfoot, is two novels, fraternal twins. One is a walk through 
haunted places: the odd jewels of a backwater, the late Erie Canal or the verge 
of motherhood. The second exhumes the ghosts of American huckster faiths. In a 
fundamentalist group home, child con men talk to the dead. While writing Mr. 
Splitfoot, I built my own religion to understand how it’s done. I collected the 
things I love like outer space, geology, mountains, and vinyl records. I came 
up with the Etherists. Their holy texts sample the Bible, the Book of Mormon, a 
classic rock radio station at 2 AM in Troy, New York circa 1978 and Carl Sagan’s
Cosmos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/mar/26/science-writing-cosmos-carl-sagan>
. And while I like many things about the Etherists, their leader is a bad, bad 
man. Power corrupts, power corrodes a person’s insides. This mixtape examines 
that corruption. It is a soundtrack to carry one through each stage of creepy 
cult life.

Seduction

1. Have You Never Been Mellow? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t2S1nmxYmUg>, 
Olivia Newton John

The lyrics to this song could be printed in a recruitment brochure and your 
job would be done. “There was a time when I was in a hurry as you are. I was 
like you. I don’t mean to make you frown. I just want you to slow down.” But 
the part of this track that seals the deal (other than ONJ’s ethereal, hypnotic 
vocals) is the series of questions posed in the chorus, questions that any 
tired soul will be so grateful to hear asked. “Have you never been mellow? Have 
you never tried to find a comfort from inside? Have you never been happy just 
to hear your song? Have you never let someone else be strong?” While it’s 
unusual to acknowledge submission is beneficial, you, as a cult leader, might 
want to make it the first thing you say in the morning, the last words you 
whisper at night. Even if you don’t mean it. 

2. Trafalgar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M9qpERA1kJM>, The Bee Gees

A song both triumphant and melancholy that says, without us, you are lost and 
here is brotherly harmony in the form of Barry, Maurice and Robin. “I need 
someone to know me and to show me” is the hole each potential cult member 
strives to fill, while the refrain, “Trafalgar, Trafalgar, please don’t let me 
down” focuses on a word that makes no sense to an American cult member and so 
can be used in a mantra-like way, in accordance with the best cult-building 
advice: keep it vague, keep it mysterious. Stop making sense. Trafalgar. 
Trafalgar. Trafalgar. Trafalgar. Trafalgar.

Brainwashing/Hypnosis

3. Love Letters <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1gvnCVgguQ>, Ketty Lester

Nothing has the power to brainwash quite as effectively as love

Nothing has the power to brainwash quite as effectively as love. Consider the 
teenage crush an attempt to harness this wild force. Ketty Lester, the most 
beautiful woman in the world, with a voice as powerful, will assist you. The 
repetition and modulation of doo wop is the essence of hypnosis and Lester 
casts a spell with the lyric, “I’ll memorize every line and I’ll kiss the name 
that you sign.” That’s witchcraft. That’s good. Here’s an idea: you could spend 
an entire day playing all the versions of this song for your new 
recruit/convert. They are many and various: Dick Haymes, Joni James, Cilla 
Black, Bobby Darin, Peggy Lee, Elvis Presley, Billy Thorpe and The Aztecs, Joe 
Walsh, Alison Moyet, Boz Scaggs, Frankie Miller, Ketty Lester. After that the 
new recruit will either be in love with you or will have gone insane, which 
might be just as effective.

4. Rocket Man <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FCf23ZTFaDM>, Elton John

As this is the period of induction and conversion for your followers, think in 
terms of electricity. Think scientifically or, even better, scientifical as, in 
a cult, it’s best to use words that only kind of make sense. John’s Rocket Man 
is well suited to welcome new members to your fold as it is both familiar and 
completely strange. The lyrics are creepy. We’re told he misses the Earth so 
much, yet, it’s going to be a long, long time before he returns. Why? “I’m not 
the man they think I am at home.” Then who are you? “All this science I don’t 
understand.” No, of course you don’t. Good thing I’m here.

Take Control

5. Oh, Daddy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8jB3zzv2G6Y>, Fleetwood Mac

Here’s where the power dynamic really shifts. Now’s the time to exploit your 
followers’ self-hatred. Everyone’s got some and your job is to turn it up. “Oh, 
Daddy. How can you love me? I don’t understand why?” Once you explain how you 
have special powers to love even people as lowly and underserving and lost as 
your followers, you can expect to hear Christie McVie’s refrain in response. 
“Why are you right when I’m so wrong? I’m so weak and you’re so strong.” I 
know, might be an appropriate answer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8jB3zzv2G6Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8jB3zzv2G6Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8jB3zzv2G6Y&media=>
6. Into the Night <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q9TXjIadhq0>, Benny Mardones

This is also the time to begin planting ideas such as, God wants me to have a 
harem. Really, that’s what God said and for this Benny Mardones could come in 
handy. “She’s just sixteen years old…but if I could fly I’d take you up, I’d 
take you into the night and show you love.” Which brings me to…

The Spiritual Honeymoon

7. Baby Give it Up <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IeqtAB1WgEw>, KC and the 
Sunshine Band

What works better than a pop-fueled dance track to convey the message, You are 
awesome! No one belongs here more than you! Just keep doing what you do 
(especially if that involves swallowing lots of drugs and signing over your 
bank account to me!) This song is pure affirmation. “Everybody wants you. 
Everybody wants your love.” And who can forget the mysterious album cover art? 
KC, in his bright blue jazz shoes, has caught a woman in his arms. While her 
shapely gams are exposed, her entire head is covered by a magenta scarf sending 
an important message, You can dance but try not to think too much.

Sex

8. Sex Planet <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PgEAAGiifDM>, R. Kelly

Up next, freaky orgy. “Jupiter, Pluto, Venus and Saturn…I’ve got the 
control…once I enter your black hole…We’ll be gone for hours. I won’t stop 
until I give you meteor showers.” I appreciate how Kelly, like my cult inMr. 
Splitfoot, exploits the mysteries of outer space in his pursuit of pleasure. 
Remember, followers like to feel they are doing something more important than 
just getting the leader off. They are on a mission.

I love Linda Thompson. She survived life in a cultish sect of mystical Sufis 
where all the food was prepared by women

Thorns 

9. Walking on A Wire <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7o3h7eyVRp8>, Richard 
and Linda Thompson

Linda Thompson is one of the reasons I wrote Mr. Splitfoot. I love her. She 
survived life in a cultish sect of mystical Sufis where all the food was 
prepared by women. She built a family and a career only to lose her voice as 
her marriage dissolved and she still has a great sense of humor and love. I am 
very interested in what it means for women to be silent. Cults are excellent 
places to study this and this song raise questions about the boundary of the 
self. So, now that you have followers, it’s time to put them to work. Whether 
it’s selling roses by the side of the road or producing toxic gases in your 
chemistry lab, everyone must suffer for progress. Except you. And this song’s 
lyrics, “This grindstone’s wearing me. Your claws are tearing me. Don’t use me 
endlessly,” could be helpful in realigning any followers who might wonder why 
they are doing all the work.

Disguising your income

10. Arab Money <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bcuAw77J8_Y>, Busta Rhymes

A perfectly confusing song for cult life. BR raps parts of the Qur’an. 
“Alhamdulillah” (all Praises to God) rhymes with: “My billions piling.” Could 
be a helpful piece when obscuring the source of your wealth, especially if you 
are, say, drugging your followers, removing their kidneys and selling the 
organs on the black market.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbcuAw77J8_Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbcuAw77J8_Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbcuAw77J8_Y&media=>
Spiritual Zombie/Divine Madness/Paranoia

11. Moon Maiden <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=98qq5Cvrst8>, Duke Ellington

Just Duke and a celeste. Duke’s vocal debut, on the occasion of the Apollo 11, 
is accompanied by an instrument that sounds like a fairy tale gone deeply dark 
and twisted. Just like you. So this is where things start to fall apart. Did 
you take too many drugs? Probably. And even if you didn’t, all this 
power-tripping has pickled your brain. Aliens are all around. No one can be 
trusted and there are girls on the moon. But, they might want to kill you.

12. Le Goudron <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2XQq_qmwBMg>, Brigitte Fontaine

Really you should have been playing Fontaine’s records right from the start. 
She’s hypnotic and her lyrics only kind of make sense. “Time is a boat and the 
world is a cake.” Plus, she’s French anyway so likely no one will understand. 
Playing her records, you can pretend you are equally interested in hearing 
women’s voices speak, women’s thoughts, while the whole time you’re actually 
keeping dangerous female ideas trapped in a vinyl groove. This helps to 
convince your female cult members of their great value in your harem because 
who else is going to do all the cooking and cleaning? You? No, I didn’t think 
so and speaking of cooking…

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Destruction

13. Cooking With Satan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cr7Qyag0vqE>, Sun City 
Girls

The ATF is at your door or else you’re stirring up the cyanide Flavor-aid. It 
is important to invent an enemy so that your followers don’t realize the enemy 
is you.

The Ashes

14. Le temps de vivre <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RjEk0AMpI90>, George 
Moustaki

15. Dream Baby Dream <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1FFIFsK1duw>, Suicide

Years later when you are sitting alone in a Stewart’s convenience store, 
sipping fifty cent coffee and a microwaved hamburger, waiting for your 
sentencing hearing to begin, these songs will be playing on the satellite radio 
specifically tuned to crush what is left of your sorry, sorry soul.
 