
Samsung’s next software update for the Galaxy Note 7 smartphone will render 
the devices useless in order to prevent any more from catching fire and 
exploding.

A problem with the device’s lithium ion battery led some units to combust, in 
some cases injuring their owners and causing damage to property. The issues 
continued even afterSamsung recalled 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37253742>, replaced and refunded some of 
the units, leading to asecond more expansive recall of 1.9m devices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/13/samsung-galaxy-note-7-recall-expanded>
.

The Note 7 was banned from so many airlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/samsung-galaxy-note-7-airlines-asia-us-europe-ban-exploding-smartphone>
 that the company isopening stalls in airports where owners can swap or refund 
it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/18/samsung-airport-booths-passengers-galaxy-note-7-phones>
 before boarding their flight.

Although more than 93% of the devices have been returned as part of the 
exchange program in the United States, some units remain “in the wild”.

The software update, which Samsung confirmed would be released in mid-December 
in the US, will prevent the phones from charging and functioning as mobile 
phones, essentially turning them into useless mementos from a disastrous 
product launch. “Customer safety remains our highest priority,” said the 
company ina statement 
<https://news.samsung.com/us/2016/12/09/samsung-taking-bold-steps-to-increase-galaxy-note7-device-returns/>
.

Such an update has been expected for months, and follows efforts by Samsung’s 
partners to prevent people from using the Note 7. Facebook, for example, issued 
a software update in October to prevent the Gear VR virtual reality headset – 
which acts as an accessory to compatibleSamsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> phones – from working with the 
Note 7. This was to ensure no one accidentally strapped an exploding phone to 
their eyes.

Not everyone’s happy about the update as it will leave some people without 
their main communications device.

Verizon issued a statement saying it would not push the update to its 
customers to avoid the added risk it could pose to Galaxy Note 7 users who 
don’t have another device to switch to.

“We will not push a software upgrade that will eliminate the ability for the 
Note7 to work as a mobile device in the heart of the holiday travel season. We 
do not want to make it impossible to contact family, first responders or 
medical professionals in an emergency situation,” said the company in a 
statement.
 