
Samsung is dealing with yet another major crisis after the tech giant was 
implicated in a government corruption investigation inSouth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>.

Samsung recalls 2.8m washing machines after reports of explosions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/04/samsung-washing-machine-recall-explosion-risk>
The scandal follows the recall of 1.9m exploding Galaxy Note smartphones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/samsung-suspends-sales-galaxy-note-7-phone-warns-turn-it-off>
 in September and 2.8m faulty washing machines in October, both officially 
recalled by regulators after major safety concerns.

Now, according to media in South Korea 
<http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/biz/2016/11/123_217773.html>, where 
Samsung is the biggest national employer, the company’s offices have been 
searched by prosecutors investigating aconfidante of President Park Geun-hye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/30/south-korea-rasputin-like-friend-president-park-geun-hye-returns>
. Samsung is suspected of secretly funding dressage training for the daughter 
of Choi Soon-sil, Park’s friend of 40 years. According to theYonhap news agency 
<http://english.yonhapnews.co.kr/national/2016/11/08/69/0302000000AEN20161108001352315F.html>
, Samsung allegedly gave $3.1m to a company that Choi owned in Germany.

Park has faced public outcry and and an investigation into whether Choi 
manipulated government decisions, despite having no official government role. 
Tens of thousands of protesters demanded Park’s resignation in Seoul over the 
weekend.

Investigators are looking into whether Choi interfered in the nomination of 
senior officials, and used her relationship with Park to force companies to 
donate money to two not-for-profit foundations she set up and used for personal 
gain.

In an attempt to defuse the situation, Park has granted lawmakers the power to 
name her new prime minister, a move considered a major political concession. 
She told the speaker of the national assembly that she would ditch her own 
nominee and accept a deputy appointed by the opposition-controlled legislature 
and “let him control the cabinet”.

The raid on Samsung’s offices, following similar raids on eight banks last 
week, could spur a backlash against the company.

According to Korea Times 
<http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/biz/2016/11/123_217773.html>, 
investigators will summon the executives from Samsung and other companies for 
questioning, to find out whether they made any deals to resolve any pending 
business issues with President Park in return for the donations.

Samsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> did not respond to a 
request for comment.

It’s not the first time Samsung headquarters have been raided. They were 
searched in 2008 by prosecutorsinvestigating allegations 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/businesspro-samsung-probe-dc-idUSSEO32677620080114>
 the company created slush funds to bribe officials.

“Samsung has become an embarrassment to Korea, where saving face is still a 
factor in reputation management,” said crisis management expert Jonathan 
Bernstein. “Samsung’s board of directors has to firmly take charge of the 
company’s direction now in order to reassure both internal and external 
stakeholders.”

The case be a test for South Korea’s chaebols – vast, family-owned 
conglomerates that have helped transform the country into an economic 
powerhouse. These corporate giants have a reputation for exerting an enormous 
influence over the government, as revealed by whistleblower and former Samsung 
manager Michael Kim.

“Samsung definitely controls the careers of prosecutors in Korea, destroying 
the careers of those that take any action against the company,” he toldthe 
Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/tax-evasion-bribery-and-price-fixing-how-samsung-became-the-giant-that-ate-korea-8510588.html>
 in 2013.

During campaigning in the presidential elections in 2012, candidates including 
Park vowed to curtail these powerful business dynasties. However, as polling 
day approached, Park pulled back on her plans to tackle the chaebols.

Samsung Group, the parent company of Samsung Electronics, is the biggest of 
all the chaebols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/20/samsung-galaxy-s6-woes-of-samsung-crown-prince-lee-jae-yong>
, accounting for aboutone-fifth of the country’s gross domestic product 
<http://pc2018.com/south-koreas-biggest-companies/>. 

Samsung declined to comment due to the ongoing investigation. 
 