
The daughter of a victim of the 2012 Sandy Hook elementary school massacre has 
added her voice to achorus of outrage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/07/ben-carson-oregon-community-college-shooting-comments>
 over comments made by Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson following 
the mass shooting in Oregon one week ago.

Erica Lafferty, whose mother, Dawn Hochsprung, was the principal of Sandy Hook 
elementary school and was shot and killed in the December 2012 attack, objected 
to astatement 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2015/10/06/ben-carson-gun-control-snowden-trump/73370350/>
 by Carson that he would be “much more comfortable” with a child in 
kindergarten if the child’s teacher were trained and armed.

“Ben Carson’s comments are insensitive to anyone who has ever been personally 
affected by gun violence,” Lafferty said in a statement emailed to the 
Guardian. “Are gun extremists in this country so morally bankrupt that their 
solution to ending school shootings is asking kindergarten teachers to be 
trained in how to attack a gunman?

“My mother was an elementary school principal, not a marine who signed up to 
be on the frontlines of a shootout.”

Twenty children, all aged six or seven, and six school teachers and staff were 
killed at Sandy Hook, in Newtown, Connecticut. Lafferty is active inEverytown 
for Gun Safety <http://everytown.org/>, a nonprofit group to end gun violence 
founded in 2014.

Lafferty also objected to a separate comment Carson made about how he would 
stand up to a gunman in a mass shooting situation.

The candidate, who is polling in second place in the Republican field and led 
his rivals in fundraising last quarter, spoke out about guns after a shooter at 
Umpqua Community College killed nine people last Thursday and injured nine 
others before taking his own life.

“I would not just stand there and let him shoot me,” Carson on Tuesday, when 
asked by a Fox News host what he would do if confronted by someone who “walks 
up and puts a gun at you”.

Hochsprung was one of the first people to confront Adam Lanza, the gunman at 
Sandy Hook. Witnessessaid 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/12/24/becky-virgalla-_n_2357284.html> that 
before she was shot dead she yelled, “Shooter, stay put!” and in doing so saved 
lives.

“My mother did not just ‘stand there’ and let herself get shot,” Lafferty said 
in the statement.
 