
The essential thing to bear in mind about Bath is that it is different from 
all English cities. It is not merely beautiful and historic like, say, York, 
Chester, and Chichester, the other three out of four cities which the 
Government has declared pre-eminently important. True, Bath is beautiful and 
historic, but more significant still, it is a work of art. For this reason it 
is unique and irreplaceable.

It was almost wholly built within 100 years (1725-1825). The architects John 
Wood, father and son, began it, and subsequent architects completed it along 
their plan. Its buildings great and small are all of a uniform stone, nearly 
all in thesame classical style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/apr/06/bath-heritage-architecture>
, and in a green setting of hills, woods, and fields visible at the end of 
every street.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbath-architecture-james-lees-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa7df95e7b52855473c09160fdc7c2342a1134f8%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saving%20Bath%20from%20the%20beastly%20bulldozer%20-%20archive%2C%2021%20May%201973&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbath-architecture-james-lees-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saving%20Bath%20from%20the%20beastly%20bulldozer%20-%20archive%2C%2021%20May%201973&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbath-architecture-james-lees-milne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa7df95e7b52855473c09160fdc7c2342a1134f8%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Pulteney Bridge in Bath. Photograph: Adrian Sherratt 
The fact that Bath is the creation, or if you prefer, the evolution of genius, 
may be bad luck on those of its inhabitants who are indifferent or even hostile 
to art. It cannot be helped. These people must lump it in the same way that a 
vandalistic owner (if there be such a person) of an historic country house 
today has to suffer the disadvantages of not being allowed by Act of Parliament 
to demolish in order to develop the site for a factory. Life is unfair. It 
always has been, and always will be. The vandalistic owner’s alternative to 
preserving his historic house is to clear out and hand it over to someone else 
qualified to do so. Well, that should be, but unfortunately is not the 
situation facing the corporation and officials of a city which happens to be a 
work of art.

What has been happening in Bath within the past decade and a half? It has been 
wantonly and systematically mutilated - to use a mild word. The plums - the 
Royal Crescent, the Circus, Queen Square - are still there of course, and will 
presumably remain. But the periphery and even the lesser streets in the centre 
are being bulldozed and replaced by blocks monstrously out of scale and 
character with the eighteenth century nucleus. The magical ethos of the once 
intact Georgian city has already been dispelled for ever.

Having acknowledged this deplorable state of affairs let us not be too 
despondent. Much of Bath still survives and our efforts must now be 
concentrated on preserving what is left, and ensuring that the right people do 
the preserving.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbath-architecture-james-lees-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5d1af00a5ed4d0b6e8c41adc9cd4adfee6f7336%2F0_241_2881_1729%2F2881.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saving%20Bath%20from%20the%20beastly%20bulldozer%20-%20archive%2C%2021%20May%201973&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbath-architecture-james-lees-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saving%20Bath%20from%20the%20beastly%20bulldozer%20-%20archive%2C%2021%20May%201973&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbath-architecture-james-lees-milne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5d1af00a5ed4d0b6e8c41adc9cd4adfee6f7336%2F0_241_2881_1729%2F2881.jpg>
 The Circus, Assembly Rooms and other streets in Bath, 2009. Photograph: Matt 
Cardy/Getty Images 
Mercifully public opinion has been stirred within the past two years. The 
enlightened minority of Bathonians have made such a din of protest that at last 
Whitehall has stepped into the breach. We can take comfort in the fact that a 
working committee has this year been set up to formulate a long-term 
conservation programme for Bath. On this committee the Department of the 
Environment as well as several preservation societies are represented.

I do not know what the outcome of this committee’s deliberations will be. I 
only know what it ought to be. I am positive that ultimate authority for the 
preservation and maintenance of Bath’s architecture should rest with the 
central Government. Just as the Government appoints trustees and a staff of 
picture experts to look after the paintings in the National Gallery, so it 
should delegate to architectural experts of national status the care of Bath’s 
buildings. Meanwhile it should call an immediate halt to all further demolition 
and development until the committee’s recommendations are adopted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbath-architecture-james-lees-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad6f233cd07b583a8fd847c14a8439ec3952e12b%2F0_65_4944_2970%2F4944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saving%20Bath%20from%20the%20beastly%20bulldozer%20-%20archive%2C%2021%20May%201973&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbath-architecture-james-lees-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saving%20Bath%20from%20the%20beastly%20bulldozer%20-%20archive%2C%2021%20May%201973&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbath-architecture-james-lees-milne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad6f233cd07b583a8fd847c14a8439ec3952e12b%2F0_65_4944_2970%2F4944.jpg>
 The Great Bath in the English city of Bath. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images
If the centre of Bath is to be saved then it must revert to what it used to 
be, a place fit to live in. To achieve this a first step should be the strict 
limitation of private and commercial traffic in its streets. A system of public 
transport should be launched. The jargon to which we are constantly treated by 
the city architect and his paid adviser that Bath “must move with the times” 
and “must not become a museum piece” is sheer rot.

On the contrary Bath, if it is to be preserved, can no more move with the 
times than a portrait by Gainsborough. Bath is a museum piece, if by that 
expression a masterpiece of urban architecture is meant. I would like to see 
Bath become a dormitory to its great commercial neighbour Bristol. Let it be 
the commuters’ paradise. Working people, rich and not so rich, have to live 
somewhere. And many would like to spend their evenings, weekends, and holidays 
in a beautiful, peaceful community with every cultural amenity at their 
doorstep.

Of course the restoration and adaptation of the many derelict houses will cost 
a lot of money. The Government recently contributed to the millions needed for 
the retention in this country of a Titian which was in no danger of 
destruction. Surely therefore it can raise the ready to save and make 
serviceable a unique city which is in very real danger of disappearing. 
Moreover, unlike the Titian the salvaged Bath would bring a handsome financial 
return as a residential and tourist city. This argument alone ought to appeal 
to a nation of shopkeepers.

James Lees-Milne, architectural historian and pre-eminent diarist, worked for 
the National Trust for many years.
 