
Care catering isn’t seen as comparable with Michelin-starred gastronomy nor 
with the offerings in bars, restaurants and hotels around the country. But 
thanks to a pioneering new training programme, the face of food in the care 
industry could soon be given a much-needed makeover.

“People think retirement home food is slop,” says Gareth O’Hara, one of 12 
students to complete the pilot course for a new NVQ qualification at north 
London’s state-of-the-art training facility,Hospitality House 
<http://www.hospitalityguild.co.uk/Hospitality-House>. “That honestly couldn’t 
be further from the truth.”

In his kitchen at Cardiff’s Sunrise residential care home, O’Hara and his team 
are coming to the end of a busy lunch shift spent creating a three-course meal 
for 90 residents, each with varying dietary requirements. Dinner is also three 
courses, as is breakfast, and the kitchen provides a variety of snacks 
throughout the day and night. But despite the volume of food involved, every 
plate sent to the dining room is meticulously designed and beautifully 
presented.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fretirement-home-food-catering-revamp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb049364c243cea83d8334dbafba64b84c3414c69%2F0_56_2456_3069%2F2456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20not%20'slop'%3A%20the%20revolution%20transforming%20care%20home%20catering&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fretirement-home-food-catering-revamp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20not%20%27slop%27%3A%20the%20revolution%20transforming%20care%20home%20catering&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fretirement-home-food-catering-revamp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb049364c243cea83d8334dbafba64b84c3414c69%2F0_56_2456_3069%2F2456.jpg>
 Gareth O’Hara commuted the 160 miles to London and back again, every Monday 
for the 20 weeks of the course. Photograph: Sunrise Senior Living 
O’Hara came to Sunrise five years ago after cutting his teeth as a chef at a 
hotel in nearby Bridgend. “I started there as a dish washer, but I enjoyed 
spending time in the kitchen and was eager to learn more, so they trained me 
up. I remember feeling really satisfied when I mastered my first dish,” he 
smiles. “Thai fish cakes with chilli jam.”

O’Hara learned by experience in his first job and it was no different at 
Sunrise. “In many respects, catering is catering regardless of the industry, 
but when it comes to care catering there’s a whole world of additional 
considerations.”

Don't make a meal out of care home catering
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/28/dont-make-a-meal-out-of-care-home-catering>
Dysphagia, for example, is a condition that makes it difficult to swallow both 
solid and liquid food and affects 13.5% of the elderly population. “Even a 
glass of water can be a huge challenge to some residents,” O’Hara explains. 
“Food needs to be pureed, but it also has to look attractive and appetising. 
Nobody wants to eat mush every day.”

Using various technical tricks, and a lot of moulds, O’Hara and his team are 
able to recreate almost any dish using texture modification. “The residents 
here are big fans of the fruit dishes we prepare, but sandwiches and even 
cooked breakfasts can be pureed and then presented as ‘normal’.”

Residents with dementia present another challenge. “There’s a huge amount of 
science involved here,” says O’Hara. “These residents don’t respond well to 
normal food or to regular crockery and cutlery, and this is something we have 
to be very mindful of when creating menus.”

The same goes for residents requiring nutritional fortification, or extra 
calories, due to reduced appetites or specific illness. “Here you have to find 
a balance between creating meals that contain the right calories and nutrients, 
but which aren’t so filling they will put residents off eating for the rest of 
the day,” says O’Hara. “It’s a challenge.”

The NVQ level 2 diploma in professional cookery in health and social care 
catering – whose pilot scheme O’Hara completed – was launched in April last 
year, the result of a collaboration between theNational Association of Care 
Catering <http://www.thenacc.co.uk/> (NACC), the Hospital Caterers Association 
<http://www.hospitalcaterers.org/> and Barnet and Southgate College 
<http://www.barnetsouthgate.ac.uk/>. 

O’Hara commuted the 160 miles to London and back again, every Monday – his day 
off – for the 20 weeks of the course, and was named Care Catering Hero at the 
NACC’s annual awards this year. “If a chef could be cloned, it would be him,” 
the judges agreed unanimously – and it’s not hard to see why. But what 
motivates him most is challenging negative images of care catering – coming 
from both the public and colleagues in the hospitality industry – and 
increasing the profiles of those who work in the sector.

Care home residents need tailored nutrition – here are some guidelines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/aug/05/care-home-residents-need-tailored-nutrition-guidelines>
“I’d like to see care homes accredited in the same way that restaurants are, 
with rosettes or Michelin stars,” he says. “Chefs in traditional catering 
environments have to make food look and taste good, but we have a raft of other 
factors to take into account.”

The NACC says care catering has not received the high-profile recognition 
enjoyed by other sectors of the catering industry and, according to chair Neel 
Radia, “the care sector itself has not shouted loud enough”. It is hoped that 
professional accreditation in the form of the new NVQ will provide a platform 
for talents such as O’Hara to be recognised.


Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 