
Sixty years ago, to echo Professor Colin Pritchard (My part in a war crime in 
Suez <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/01/my-part-in-a-war-in-suez>
, Letters, 2 November), I was in the first term of my O-level year at a London 
grammar school, too young for national service though I had been eager to join 
the Royal Navy. Our form master required all boys to write a news diary to 
encourage us to think critically about current affairs. My then best friend and 
I set to, his family Daily Mirror readers, mine the Express, while my 
nonconformist history master encouraged us to read the Manchester Guardian. By 
the start of the autumn term, when we schoolboy diarists began our chronicle, 
British and French armed forces were deployed in the eastern Mediterranean to 
“take back control” (in the vernacular) of the Suez canal from the Egyptians 
after its nationalisation. But it would be half-term before the Israelis 
launched their attack across the Sinai against Egypt and the Anglo-French 
forces played their part in the tripartite plot by bombing the canal zone. The 
duplicity of British and French governments in calling for the disengagement of 
the Egyptian-Israeli forces was patent, even to 15-year-olds in Marylebone – 
yet to learn of the centuries of efforts by western powers to control the 
Middle East. It would take perhaps a decade for one of the schoolboy 
chroniclers to realise the duplicity of the United States in its Suez policy, 
just one of the stages in the long history of American intervention in the 
Middle East – an area then officially defined as stretching from Morocco to 
Pakistan.
Professor Michael Dunne
Brighton

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 