
Hugo award winning science fiction author Ann Leckie has blasted a Hungarian 
sci-fi magazine for translating short stories and publishing them without 
paying the authors.

Living to be 500 years old would be wonderful – but only for the rich | Ann 
Leckie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/16/living-500-year-would-be-wonderful-bill-maris>
In March 
<http://hungarianglobe.mandiner.hu/cikk/20160331_hungarian_sf_magazine_galaktika_published_short_stories_without_the_authors_consent?utm_source=mandiner&utm_medium=link&utm_campaign=mandiner_sci-fi_201609>
, journalist Pintér Bence conducted an investigation for Mandiner Magazine, 
which found that, in 2015 and 2016 science fiction magazineGalaktika  
<http://galaktika.hu/>had published Hungarian translations of numerous short 
stories available online or from anthologies, without seeking permission from 
the authors or informing them they had done so. Galaktika, which was revived in 
2004, is financed and published by Metropolis Media, which also publishes 
sci-fi books and novels.

After being contacted, the agencies, estates and publishers of several 
high-profile authors, including Terry Pratchett, George RR Martin, Robert 
Heinlein, Kim Stanley Robinson and Connie Willis told Mandiner that they had 
not given permission for the reprinting of their works. Short stories by 
authors not normally associated with sci-fi, including one by Moshin Hamid that 
ran in the Financial Times and another by Zadie Smith from the New Yorker, were 
also translated and published without the authors’ permission.

Leckie, who found one of her own stories had been printed, wrote on her website
 <http://www.annleckie.com/2016/09/28/galaktika/> that she felt authors had 
“been hesitant to make noise about it, because if Galaktika folded, Hungary 
wouldn’t have any other prominent venue for short sf. I’m going to be straight 
with you, though … I have come to the conclusion that while this sort of thing 
seems reasonable on the surface (if a big magazine went down, that would be bad 
for writers!), when you look closely you start to see how skeevy it is.”

A followup investigation by Mandiner in July 
<http://sci-fi.mandiner.hu/cikk/20160714_piracy_by_galaktika_they_are_doing_it_since_2004>
, into Galaktika’s archive extending back to when it was revived in 2004, found 
evidence that the magazine had run stories without gaining permission from 
authors at least once every year.

While authors Theodora Gross, Daniel Keohane, Mark A Rayner, Ruth Nestvold, 
Eugie Foster and Kelly Link gave permission for their stories to be translated 
and reprinted, several authors came to an agreement with Galaktika only after 
the publication came to their attention. In one case, Galaktika refused to pay 
one unnamed author because their short story was reprinted more than five years 
before. “But if you have another short story that we could publish, we would 
pay you larger amount than what we usually pay,” an email from Galaktika read. 
“We usually pay 10-20 USD for a story. Now we would pay you 30 USD. I know that 
this is a very small amount but our budget doesn’t allow more. You are 
absolutely correct that you are entitled to a compensation but please let me 
remind you these: our market is unfortunately much, much smaller than in 
English speaking countries.”

In July, Galaktika editor István Burger made a public statement 
<http://www.sfwa.org/2016/09/the-galaktika-situation/> where he said the 
magazine’s practices were formed during “an unfortunate verbal agreement”. The 
agreement, Burger said, was with an unnamed “leader of one of the most 
respected literary agencies”, who Burger had approached when he revived the 
magazine, to get advice about seeking permissions for publishing short stories.

Burger, who also owns Metropolis Media, said the verbal agreement with the 
unnamed individual was that because the magazine planned to publish books as 
well, the magazine could “consider short stories in Galaktika sort of an 
advertisement in which authors are introduced to Hungarian readers, so that we 
could publish their novels afterwards. The money we would pay for the rights 
for the novels contains the price of short stories. So agencies don’t have to 
deal with rights of short stories for $10 which is as much work as to get the 
rights of a $1000 novel. During this conversation it became obvious that 
agencies don’t want to deal with $10-20 so I didn’t want to bother the others 
with similar requests. Of course in case of longer stories and novels we made 
contracts.”

Leckie called this “utter bullshit” and said the idea of short stories being 
advertisements for authors was “suspiciously like the claim that ‘exposure’ is 
a valuable commodity that writers should be more than happy to get in lieu of 
actual money. Sadly, one cannot eat exposure, or pay rent with it.”

“While any author is of course within their rights to allow a magazine to 
publish their work without payment, and there is absolutely nothing wrong with 
any given writer choosing to do that with any given story, the key words there 
are ‘writer’ and ‘choosing’. Editors can’t just print anything they want 
without paying or asking permission because the author will get exposure and 
besides the magazine can’t really afford to pay.”

According to the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America website 
<http://www.sfwa.org/2016/09/the-galaktika-situation/>, the Hungarian literary 
agency, Kátai & Bolzai is representing multiple authors affected and managed to 
secure a per-story fee of $75 for 37 stories by 16 different authors, including 
Martin and Stanley Robinson. But as of mid-September, Kátai & Bolzai was 
reportedly still working on an arrangement for other clients with authors 
involved.

“SFWA formally recommends that authors, editors, translators, and other 
publishing professionals avoid working with Galaktika until the magazine has 
demonstrated that existing issues have been addressed and that there will be no 
recurrence,”a statement from SFWA reads 
<http://www.sfwa.org/2016/09/the-galaktika-situation/>, ending on the note that 
it was “saddened” by Galaktika’s actions, given it once sold 94,000 copies a 
month in Hungary, compared with an estimated 1,000 a month now.
 