
It’s not hard to warm up an audience by promising to scrap irritating European 
regulations. That’s exactly what Andrea Leadsom, the environment secretary, 
focused on at theOxford Farming Conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/andrea-leadsom-vows-to-scrap-eu-red-tape-for-farmers-after-brexit>
 yesterday morning, promising to ditch “rules that hold us back”. Top of 
Leadsom’s list are EU billboards that spoil the countryside, and greater 
“common sense” on what constitutes “a bush, a hedge or a tree”.

Related: Andrea Leadsom promises Brexit bonfire of regulation for farmers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/andrea-leadsom-vows-to-scrap-eu-red-tape-for-farmers-after-brexit>

Leadsom’s free market agenda, however, offers more of the same to the many 
hard-pressed small farmers in Britain. The real problem with the EU’s common 
agricultural policy (CAP), especially as it works in the UK, is that it 
promotes socialism for the rich and free markets for the poor. In 2015, the top 
100 recipients of the CAP received £88m in agricultural subsidies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/29/the-queen-aristocrats-and-saudi-prince-among-recipients-of-eu-farm-subsidies>
 – that’s more than the amount paid to the bottom 55,000 recipients combined.A 
report last year 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/09/29/common-agricultural-policy-millions-eu-subsidies-go-richest-landowners/>
 found that a Saudi prince, the Duke of Westminster, the billionaire James 
Dyson, a super-rich Tory MP and many others on the “rich list” received tens of 
millions of pounds in CAP subsidies.Iain Duncan Smith’s in-laws got £159,000 
<https://www.desmog.uk/2015/07/27/landed-gentry-jackals-claiming-billions-farm-subsidies>
 and the Queen claimed £686,000.

Meanwhile, many small and medium-sized farmers struggle just to stay in 
business. Small-scale farmers who own less than five hectares get nothing, 
which helps explains why a tiny 0.25% of the UK’s population own all of our 
agricultural land.

The UK’s interpretation of CAP is much worse than it needs to be. While other 
EU countries give subsidies to small farmers, and institute a cap on payments 
to large farms, the UK doesn’t. Presumably this is what Leadsom meant when she 
told farmers: “Over the past six years we’ve done everything we can to reduce 
[the EU’s regulatory] burden.”

Without radical action, UK farming will become even more concentrated 
post-Brexit <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v38/n12/james-meek/how-to-grow-a-weetabix>. A 
stark report byparliament’s environmental audit committee 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmenvaud/599/59902.htm>
 warned that Brexit could “carry a triple jeopardy for UK farmers”: loss of EU 
subsidies, trade barriers, and competition from “countries with lower food 
standards, animal welfare standards and environmental protection”, which in 
turn risks downward pressure on UK regulation.

Andrea Leadsom’s answer is deregulation and more market. Let large landowners 
and agribusiness thrive

Leadsom’s answer is deregulation and more market. Let large landowners and 
agribusiness thrive. For everyone else, if you can’t get big, then get out of 
agriculture. It’s the same message the government has pushed for years – both 
here and in the developing world where many of our food needs will be 
increasingly met, at a huge cost to those countries’ abilities to feed their 
own populations.

Yesterday Global Justice Now and New Economics Foundation laid out a very 
different vision 
<http://www.globaljustice.org.uk/news/2017/jan/4/campaigners-challenge-government-support-small-farmers-after-brexit>
 of how support for small farmers could create a farming renaissance in Britain 
– as well as saving money for the taxpayer.

The first step is to eschew the notion that because one system of subsidies 
has failed, that such a system will always fail and we must simply fall back on 
the free market. This would cause a race to the bottom in which environmental 
laws are lost, and small farmers continue to go to the wall.Farming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/farming> is hard – and if we want 
small farmers, we need to support them.

We propose giving all active farmers a universal payment of £5,000, tied to 
minimum standards that could gradually increase overtime, fostering better 
farming and environmental practices. New producers would receive a bonus 
payment of £5,000 to encourage new entrants and revitalise the industry. The 
rest of the scheme would consist of grants for regional infrastructure, to help 
farmers develop regional supply chains, and additional subsidies linked to 
“public goods”, such as exemplary action around climate change, job creation, 
soil quality, healthy food and biodiversity.

Such a system would leave the majority of farmers better off than they are 
currently. It would encourage new farmers, create jobs, better income 
distribution across the UK and improve farming practices. What’s more, the 
total cost would be 33% lower than at present, providing more money for other 
parts of the public sector in the UK.

The government has given few indications of their long-term strategy towards 
farming. But taking cheap shots at EU regulation won’t convince the majority of 
farmers that Brexit offers a better future for their families for very long. 
It’s time for politicians to stop paying lip service to the importance of small 
and medium-scale farming, and start actually setting out a new deal for those 
constituencies.
 