
It's cheerful news for seaside paddlers, ocean swimmers â€“ and the tourist 
trade. The water temperature off Britain's south-west coast has hit a 
seven-year high and is continuing to climb.

According to the Plymouth Coastal Observatory 
<http://www.channelcoast.org/southwest/programme_background/?link=data_manage 
ment_team.html>, the water at Start Bay in south Devon has been measured at 
20.4C (68.7F), while the ocean off Perranporth, north Cornwall, has come in at 
20.1C (68.2F).

Mark Wiggins, from the observatory, said the mild UK winter gave sea 
temperatures a head start. Since the summer began, the lack of wind and the few 
ocean swells have meant the temperature has climbed steadily. "It's very 
pleasant out there," said Wiggins.

Experts from Plymouth Marine Laboratory <http://www.pml.ac.uk> said that the 
temperature in deeper water a little further out to sea had not yet increased 
to record-breaking levels.

It is staying at around the 17C/18C (63F/64F) mark. But Tim Smyth, a scientist 
at the laboratory, said that if no storm arrives, the temperature of even deep 
water could break records. He said: "We were looking at an average year until 
June, but over the last six weeks temperatures have risen quickly. It is not 
surprising because there has been a lot of sunlight and calm weather, but also 
crucially mild nights, so less heat is lost."

Tourism bosses in the south-west hope the temperatures will persuade 
holidaymakers to choose British seaside resorts over trips abroad.

Malcolm Bell of Visit Cornwall <http://www.visitcornwall.com> said: "We 
estimate that 10-15% of people leave their holiday decisions until the last 
moment and this might bring them our way. With temperatures about 25C (77F) and 
the sea at 20C (68F), it is close to perfect for Brits who don't like the heat 
of the Mediterranean."
 