
We push our kayaks off the slipway for our first tremulous paddle up and down 
Loch Alsh, shores peppered with sprays of sea-pinks. The boats flush stalking 
herons and they launch themselves from the reed banks. A line of flotsam marks 
the point where currents meet and a scatter of gulls and terns take their 
pickings and gangs of Eiders skim their wing-tips on the surface.

There are four paddlers here in Kintail for five days of sea-kayaking on 
Scotland’s wild west coast with Erin, a Cornish water baby practically born in 
the surf and also a professional expedition leader. Only three hours on the 
water today and we’re back gliding under the bridge toEilean Donan castle 
<http://www.visitscotland.com/info/see-do/eilean-donan-castle-visitor-centre-p248371>
. The island was settled by a Celtic monk in 617 and has a bloody history of 
clan warfare and rebellion but it’s better known for its cinematic role, 
featuring in a slew of movies from James Bond to Highlander.

With day one orientation complete, and nobody capsized, we’re all cautiously 
encouraged but reminded of just how precarious we feel in those slivers of air 
and fibreglass. We unload the kayaks, cook and eat together and discuss the 
weather, the wind and the tides. It’s not quite the land of the midnight sun 
but even this early in the season I walk out at 10.30pm after dinner and it’s 
as bright as it was at 6pm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436282708211%2Fb6dd48c0-6524-4346-8770-288d59b3446b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sea-kayaking%20along%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20west%20coast%3A%20an%20adventure%20in%20the%20Highlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sea-kayaking%20along%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20west%20coast%3A%20an%20adventure%20in%20the%20Highlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436282708211%2Fb6dd48c0-6524-4346-8770-288d59b3446b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kayaks parked and tents pitched. Photograph: Rupert Shanks 
In search of Scotland’s best beach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/10/scotland-beach-swimming-wild-camping>
The light is theatrical, freighted and atmospheric as if a storm were coming 
in. Pipistrelles, unusually visible, jink between the Downie Birches at the 
river’s edge. Above our base at the Kintail hostel a wave of mist is suspended 
on the crenellated saddle of the high ridge. Tomorrow we embark on a three-day 
expedition into Loch Hourn, the deep, fjord-like northern loch that borders the 
remote wilderness of Knoydart.

It’s a glorious day of bright sunshine, the van and fully-loaded trailer 
climbs up and over the dramaticMam Ratagan Pass 
<http://www.visitscotland.com/info/see-do/ratagan-pass-and-glenelg-p521591> 
with it’s The Lord of the Rings-esque views north to Glen Shiel and back to 
Kintail. As we drive by, a tiny Roe fawn appears fleetingly, sun-dappled and 
blinking in a forest clearing. We drop down into the lush, deciduous valley of 
the Glenelg peninsula with its views to Skye, Eigg and Rùm and follow the coast 
road as far as it goes to Corran, unload, pack the boats and carry them down to 
the shore.

Loch Hourn is surrounded by a spectacular amphitheatre of rugged mountains and 
opens onto the Sound of Sleat with views to Broadford in Skye and the 
alpine-like shards of Skye’s famous Cuillin range beyond. Skirting the tiny 
islands at the mouth of the loch, we glide over its glassy surface. The water 
is clear to 20ft and beneath us an aquatic forest of marine sea grass, dun 
bladderwrack, purple dulse and thick ribbons of emerald kelp sway and billow 
from their hold-fasts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436282802557%2F0367adcb-8225-40c5-b3fa-4395fd232454-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sea-kayaking%20along%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20west%20coast%3A%20an%20adventure%20in%20the%20Highlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sea-kayaking%20along%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20west%20coast%3A%20an%20adventure%20in%20the%20Highlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436282802557%2F0367adcb-8225-40c5-b3fa-4395fd232454-1020x612.jpeg>
 Rock on … a seal relaxing. Photograph: Rupert Shanks 
Inquisitive seals pop their heads out of the surf, twitch their whiskers at 
us, watch curiously for a while then flop back into the water. We’re in their 
element, no threat, just unusual primary-coloured sea creatures. Suddenly, and 
obligingly, a 10-pointer stag frames himself majestically on the headland and 
we fiddle to focus our cameras before he plops down in the heather.

UK wilderness adventures: bothy to bothy in the Highlands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/21/walking-bothy-highlands-sutherland-scotland>
As Erin puts it, we “bimble” along the edge of cliffs where the sealife clings 
and gathers and there are hundreds of moon jellyfish, shoals of cloud bellows, 
drifting marine phantasms and phosphorescent pink sea stars that writhe and 
convulse on the rocks. We gather a few mussels and whelks from the rocks and 
carry them in little piles on our spray-decks.

That night we camp on Eilean Muinean, a tiny spit with 360-degree views around 
the crucible of Knoydart’s wild crags, and push the mussels delicately into the 
edges of our driftwood fire to poach in their juices and hinge-open slowly to 
reveal delicious little smoky jewels. I dive into the freezing loch to cast-off 
the hot hours working in the boat– it’s good for a douse but too cold to swim 
for long. A ringed plover is settled on her eggs in a little scrape in the 
pebble beach and we tiptoe around her to eat. Wind, sun and six hours of 
paddling take their toll and we peel off one by one into the tents to sleep as 
deeply as the occasional shrieking Arctic Tern will permit.

The wind is up in the morning, eddies spin the kayaks around on spiralling 
columns of water, currents make us aquaplane. We’re skating suddenly on black 
ice, veering off-course. We drop our skegs, little fins that stabilise the 
boats, and wrestle beyond the swirling cauldron to enter a flat calm bay, the 
mountains, cliff and forest above mirrored on the water’s surface. I’m leading 
and the bow barely disturbs the reflection. Suddenly I have the vertiginous 
feeling that I’m upside down. Is the water above me? Am I paddling through the 
cliff, through the mountain, among the trees?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436282886764%2F6422734d-e72b-4597-81cb-e771f20bb0d9-1020x311.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sea-kayaking%20along%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20west%20coast%3A%20an%20adventure%20in%20the%20Highlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sea-kayaking%20along%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20west%20coast%3A%20an%20adventure%20in%20the%20Highlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436282886764%2F6422734d-e72b-4597-81cb-e771f20bb0d9-1020x311.jpeg>
 Mam Ratagan Pass. Photograph: Michael Tait 
As we approach our final landing point, someone cries out and we spin to see a 
pod of porpoises cresting no more than 8 to 10 metres from us. We sit, paddles 
up, rapt for 10 minutes as they arc around us, blowing and diving, making their 
way up the deep channel into the loch.

A shocking pink and deep purple tunnel of rhododendron blooms kaleidoscope 
past the van on the road into Plockton. Everyone’s windswept, sunburned and 
aching after four days’ paddling but langoustines and fish from the loch await, 
as well as local cheese and beer. We’re all in high spirits, the expedition has 
been a waking dream, more dimensional and invigorating than any of us could 
have imagined. Erin asks what had been our highlight so far and everyone 
murmurs quietly, as if saying it out loud might dispel the truth of it, 
“porpoises”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436282940839%2F0c36b4f7-82d6-4e4d-8880-52657b233680-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sea-kayaking%20along%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20west%20coast%3A%20an%20adventure%20in%20the%20Highlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sea-kayaking%20along%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20west%20coast%3A%20an%20adventure%20in%20the%20Highlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsea-kayaking-highlands-west-coast-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436282940839%2F0c36b4f7-82d6-4e4d-8880-52657b233680-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Call of the wild … a stag on the headland. Photograph: Rupert Shanks 
Shuna: the overlooked jewel off the west of Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/07/shuna-scotland-island-cottage> 
It’s our last day, the most challenging. We’re crossing the bridge to 
Broadford in Skye and we’ll paddle the Sound of Sleat, the body of water 
between the island and the mainland. There are 20mph south-westerly winds 
predicted, strong tides and currents, easy by a seasoned kayaker’s standards 
but at the edge of our limits. We drop in and coast the first few miles, 
practising turns and speed-work in the bays to the familiar amused audience of 
craning seals. An otter tumbles and basks in the kelp and we sit watching the 
delightful dance until we can no longer distinguish her from the weed.

We’re out in the channel now and near the rocky headlands, the peaks are four 
feet high, there’s backwash and strong currents to contend with. The waves 
broadside the boats in the turns and the alarming lateral motion threatens to 
tip us into the Sound. I find myself constantly stabilising with the paddle but 
I’m making slow progress. It’s nerve-wracking and I feel certain I’ll pitch in. 
Erin calmly sidles her boat up to me and says: “You’re doing fine, keep 
paddling strongly.” It’s good advice; I paddle hard, correcting the drift and 
finally we get around the third headland and onto the wind- and tide-driven 
waves.

We’re turbo-charged now and propelled across the bay on great surges of power, 
surfing the waves onto our final soft and sandy shore. I realise the sea only 
permits collaboration, there are no solo artists out here. There’s a 
relationship to be had and we’ve only just been introduced. I’m reminded of the 
famous last line of Casablanca: “Louis, I think this is the beginning of a 
beautiful friendship.”

• The trip was provided by Wilderness Scotland (01479 420020, 
wildernessscotland.com 
<http://www.wildernessscotland.com/adventure-holidays/sea-kayaking/west-coast-explorer/>
). The five-night West Coast explorer costs £775, staying in hostels or wild 
camping, depending on weather, and including all meals, guide, equipment and 
transport from Inverness railway station. Departures include 22 August 2015, 
and 11 June, 16 July and 20 August 2016
 