
In 2009, as part of the extensive celebrations in Ireland for his 70th 
birthday,RTÉ broadcast a documentary 
<http://www.rte.ie/archives/exhibitions/681-history-of-rte/708-rte-2000s/289812-heaney-at-70/>
 about Seamus Heaney. Towards its close, Heaney, who has died aged 74, was 
asked whether anything in his work seemed appropriate to him as an epitaph. He 
demurred at first but, when gently prodded, quoted what he had translated from 
Oedipus at Colonus by Sophocles when his friend the great Polish poetCzesław 
Miłosz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/aug/16/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
 died in 2004. Telling the story of the old king who dies and vanishes into the 
earth, the play's Messenger says, in Heaney's version: "Wherever that man went, 
he went gratefully." That, said Heaney, would do for him too.

The gratitude is not so much, surely, for the leaving of life, but for the 
work well done. Heaneysuffered a stroke 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/8158697.stm> in 2006 and his volume 
Human Chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/22/seamus-heaney-human-chain-faber> 
(2010) is painfully shadowed by ageing and mortality. But it is also deeply 
informed by a spirit of resilience and acceptance and, in the extraordinary 
love poem Chanson d'Aventure, which describes his ambulance drive to hospital 
with his wife, Marie, by the sense of renewal and new reward, even at a late 
stage, in human relationships.

Mortality and domestic relations, affection and obligation, had preoccupied 
Heaney throughout his work, and were frequently sounded together. One of his 
most popular poems,Mid-Term Break 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/mid-term-break/>, from his collection Death of 
a Naturalist (1966), handles the death of his younger brother Christopher in a 
road accident in 1953, when Heaney was still a schoolboy; that loss is returned 
to again in the superb late poemThe Blackbird of Glanmore 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o6gWx7iUbk0>, in District and Circle (2006), 
which is also concerned with intimations of the poet's own mortality.

The deaths of many in the Troubles feature in numerous Heaney poems, notably 
in North (1975), where, in the now famous sequence of "bog poems", they are 
brought into alignment with the iron-age bodies recovered from the bogs of 
Jutland, which Heaney had encountered in PV Glob's book The Bog People. In the 
collections Field Work (1979) andStation Island 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v06/n20/paul-muldoon/sweaney-peregraine> (1984), Heaney 
encounters ghosts. With these poems, and others, he became one of the great 
modern elegists.

But Heaney was also an excellent poet of familial love and, notably, of 
enduring married love. There are numerous poems of filial affection, for both 
mother and father, and wonderful poems for his children and, latterly, his 
granddaughter. One of his finest poems,Sunlight 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1995/poems-1-e.html>
, in North, was written for his aunt Mary, who was partly responsible for his 
upbringing. Chanson d'Aventure marked a late stage in the marital relationship 
he had vividly portrayed for years after his marriage to Marie Devlin in 1965: 
from the difficulties evoked in Summer Home (in Wintering Out, 1972), a poem of 
regret and self-recrimination, through the stabilities, accommodations, 
supportiveness, sources of strength and erotic tenderness and arousal recorded 
in such poems as The Skunk and An Afterwards in Field Work (1979), andThe 
Underground 
<http://www.poetryarchive.org/poetryarchive/singlePoem.do?poemId=1394> and La 
Toilette in Station Island.

Especially in its bleak treatment of the Troubles, Heaney's poetry is full of 
broken things, but it is also a poetry of the continuities that sustain us 
against mortality. His resourceful, disciplined equilibrium finds one of its 
best expressions at the end of A Kite for Michael and Christopher, in Station 
Island, when the poet-father hands the emblematic kite on to his sons:

Before the kite plunges down into the wood
and this line goes useless
take in your two hands, boys, and feel
the strumming, rooted, long-tailed pull of grief.
You were born fit for it.
Stand in here in front of me 
and take the strain.

The way his work faces the worst but steadies itself against it, too, must be 
the greatest single reason for Heaney's huge readership. He presumably had his 
popularity in mind when he called himself, in Station Island, a "poet, 
lucky poet".

The eldest of nine children of Margaret (née McCann) and Patrick Heaney, a 
Catholic farmer and cattle dealer, he was born at Mossbawn farm near the 
village of Castledawson in County Derry. Seamus was an early beneficiary of the 
1947 Northern Ireland Education Act, attending St Columb's college in Derry, 
where his contemporaries included the politician John Hume and the critic and 
academic Seamus Deane. He studied English language and literature at Queen's 
University Belfast, graduating with a first-class degree in 1961. He taught for 
a brief period in Belfast and joined the writers' workshop known as the Group 
initiated by the poet and criticPhilip Hobsbaum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/07/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
, who taught at Queen's. After Hobsbaum left the university, Heaney was 
appointed to a lectureship in English in 1966 and he became chairman of the 
Group, whose other members includedMichael Longley 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/michael-longley> and Bernard MacLaverty. 
An important impetus to the burgeoning of poetry in the north, it would 
eventually also include the poets Paul Muldoon, Medbh McGuckian and Ciaran 
Carson.

In 1964 Karl Miller published three of Heaney's poems in the New Statesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/interactive/2013/may/18/seamus-heaney-death-naturalist-annotations>
, where they were noticed by the Northern Irish-bornCharles Monteith 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituarycharles-monteith-1619286.html>
, one of the directors of the publishers Faber and Faber. When he received 
Monteith's letter soliciting a manuscript, it was, Heaney said, "like getting a 
letter from God the Father". Two years later, Faber published Death of a 
Naturalist. It received exceptional acclaim, and Heaney almost immediately 
became a poet keenly watched, followed and imitated. By then, he had married 
Devlin, with whom he would have three children, Michael, Christopher and 
Catherine Ann.

Heaney took part in some of the first protest marches following the RUC 
assault on the civil rights march in Derry on 5 October 1968, and he 
contributed articles on the issue to the Listener.

The Heaneys spent an important year in the US, at the University of California 
at Berkeley, in 1970-71, and Heaney got to know the contemporary poetry of 
America's west coast. On their return, he resigned from his post at Queen's, 
became a freelance writer and moved with his family to the Republic of Ireland. 
They lived in a rented cottage in a relatively remote, beautiful part of County 
Wicklow, on what had once been a vast estate owned by the family of the 
playwright and poet JM Synge. The Glanmore cottage was to prove, both at that 
time and later, after the Heaneys bought it in 1988, not just a bolthole from a 
busy Dublin life – it had no telephone – but also a source of poetic power. It 
was the secluded site of a great deal of often nocturnal and, he once told me, 
almost trancelike, poetic composition.Glanmore Sonnets 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/178023> and Glanmore Revisited are the 
most obvious products of that place and state, and appropriate testimony to it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fo6gWx7iUbk0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fo6gWx7iUbk0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fo6gWx7iUbk0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o6gWx7iUbk0>

Inevitably, the move south by a significant Irish Catholic writer from the 
north was read as having emblematic import; and inExposure 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/best-poems/seamus-heaney-3/exposure-9/>, which 
appears at the end of North, Heaney figures himself as "a wood-kerne / Escaped 
from the massacre". He spent several years hosting a books programme on Irish 
radio and in 1975 took up teaching again, this time at Carysfort College, a 
Catholic teacher-training college in Dublin. Heaney bought a house in the city 
– "by a famous strand," he says in a poem: that is, Sandymount, along which 
Stephen Dedalus walks in an early episode of James Joyce's Ulysses.

In 1980 Heaney published Preoccupations, the first of several collections of 
critical essays. His literary criticism came to assume great authority. Heaney 
wrote in richly rewarding ways about Wordsworth, Yeats, Dante, Patrick 
Kavanagh, John Clare, Sylvia Plath and Elizabeth Bishop.

Developing an international reputation, notably in America, Heaney initiated a 
long relationship with Harvard University 
<http://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2012/05/a-poem-for-harvard/>, where he 
had a visiting professorship in 1979. He held the Boylston chair of rhetoric 
and oratory there (1985-97), teaching one semester a year, and he then 
continued the contact in a less formal capacity. He was professor of poetry at 
Oxford from 1989 to 1994 and the resulting lectures were collected as The 
Redress of Poetry in 1995. In that year he won the Nobel prize in literature. 
During hisNobel lecture 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1995/heaney-lecture.html>
, he dwelt at some length on the politics of Northern Ireland, condemning both 
"the atrocious nature of the IRA's campaign of bombings and killings" and "the 
ruthlessness of the British army on occasions likeBloody Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bloodysunday> in Derry in 1972". Heaney's other 
accolades over the years included the TS Eliot, Forward, David Cohen and 
(twice) Whitbread prizes. In 1996 he was made a commandeur de l'Ordre des Arts 
et des Lettres. In 2004 Queen's University opened its Seamus Heaney Centre for 
Poetry.

There is no doubt Heaney took great delight in his success. He was an adept, 
even charismatic, performer before an audience – as a reader of his own poems 
in academic auditoriums, as a public lecturer, and as a radio and television 
broadcaster; and he certainly understood, from very early on, the mechanisms 
involved in the creation and maintenance of a successful public reputation. In 
a sometimes envious literary world this led to some cavilling, notably upon the 
2008 publication of Stepping Stones in which Heaney, already a much-interviewed 
poet, discussed his life and career with his friend and fellow poetDennis 
O'Driscoll <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/04/dennis-odriscoll>.

The book was clearly intended as the alternative to an autobiography, and if 
Heaney's way with his readership was absolutely not Samuel Beckett's or even 
Heaney's friendBrian Friel <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/brianfriel>'s 
ways of withdrawal and silence, the book is, in the event, an exercise not in 
egotism or hubris but in self-questioning, self-definition, self-analysis, 
self-evaluation and, only finally, self-justification. As such, it suggests 
Heaney's conception of his role as a writer always included a strong element of 
the pedagogic. What he commended in the poetMarina Tsvetaeva 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/marina-tsvetaeva> – "the good force of 
creative mind at work in the light of conscience" – can be commended in him too.

When he wrote about Yeats in an early essay – one of many in which Heaney 
returns to the work of his great Irish poetic forebear – he used the word 
"exemplary" of that poet's demeanour at a particular point in his life, and 
Heaney's own life had the character of an experiment that was also available 
for scrutiny. For all the "luck" of the career, it was a life lived with a 
strong awareness of social and cultural responsibility. If the even-handedness 
of some of his explicit political remarks could seem almost diplomatic at times 
(politicians, including Bill Clinton, have been fond of quoting him), he was 
also, when the occasion demanded, a forceful articulator of an Irish political 
conscience before a primarily English audience. This was notably the case at a 
prizegiving in 1988, at which he chastised the English press for their 
reporting of NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, and 
in the last of his Oxford lectures, Frontiers of Writing, in which he analysed 
his perturbed feelings when he stayed in a Tory cabinet minister's room in an 
Oxford college at the time of the IRA hunger strikes in 1981.

Heaney's major public commitment in Ireland was to the Field Day Theatre 
Company, of which, along with Friel and Stephen Rea, he became a director. 
Formed initially to stage contemporary plays outside the commercial theatre, 
Field Day developed, through various publications, into a controversial agency 
of agitation in Irish cultural politics. In 1983 it published Heaney's Sweeney 
Astray, a translation from the medieval Irish tale Buile Suibhne, and in 1990 
it staged The Cure at Troy, his version of Philoctetes by Sophocles. Both make 
clear, if coded, reference to contemporary Irish political life. Heaney 
published a further dramatic translation, of Sophocles's Antigone, as The 
Burial at Thebes, in 2004, and itpremiered at Dublin's Abbey theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/apr/07/theatre> that year.

Translation was a major element of his later work: notably his outstandingly 
successful version, published in 1999, of the longAnglo-Saxon poem Beowulf 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AaB0trCztM0>, and his version of a Horatian 
ode, Anything Can Happen, which commemorated the events of 9/11.

Given his eminence, Heaney was exceptionally approachable: gregarious, 
generous, courteous and convivial. He was a formidably, spontaneously eloquent 
man gifted with a wonderful verbal memory: he once recited the whole of one of 
Philip Larkin's less well-known poems to me, and another time several prose 
paragraphs from the philosopher EM Cioran. Nevertheless, his social manner was 
entirely relaxed and relaxing. He was a benignly mischievous raconteur and took 
great delight in telling, and hearing, jokes. He was very funny indeed, and to 
spend any time at all in his company was to laugh a great deal.

One of my happiest memories is of stopping off at a cinema in the Dublin 
suburb of Tallaght on the way to Wicklow with him to catch an afternoon showing 
of Robert Zemeckis's 2007 animated movie of Beowulf, which boldly attempts to 
sex up the text on which it is somewhat loosely based. The only other audience 
members were, weirdly, a party of ribald boy scouts. The various incongruities 
were striking, and hilarious.

Where he encountered envies, resentments and hostilities, Heaney appeared to 
handle them with equanimity and aplomb, even if the eventual dissolution of 
some old allegiances clearly caused distress. He was, though, a man of whom it 
could be said, as Yeats wanted it said of him, "his glory was he had such 
friends". These included international literary greats, such as Miłosz, Bishop, 
Ted Hughes, Robert Lowell, Joseph Brodsky and Derek Walcott, but Heaney also 
had a great deal of time for younger writers, whom he encouraged and quietly 
promoted.

For all the strength of personality manifest in Heaney's life, it is of course 
to the poetry that we will return. This is always, as it were, a life 
altogether elsewhere; and the elsewhere in Heaney is characteristically the 
life of memory, and specifically the memory of his childhood place, the 
townlands of his origins whose Irish names – Anahorish, Broagh, Toome, 
Mossbawn, Bellaghy – are now such an indelible part of English-language poetry, 
as are their accents, rhythms and people. There is a real sense in which his 
poetry is permanent homesickness, as the place is returned to again and again, 
but always with a difference, until its topography becomes the register of an 
immensely complex psychological, emotional, cultural and political terrain; 
until the place has become, in fact, in the title of one of Heaney's 
collections of lectures, the "place of writing".

Crucial to the worldview of that place of origin was an earlier phase of Irish 
Catholicism, and although the religion itself had for Heaney long given way to 
the secularism characteristic of his literary generation, his categories of 
discrimination in writing as well as in ethics – almost, you might say, his 
categories of consciousness itself – continued always to carry a distinctively 
Catholic inflection. For all his later secularism, Heaney's imagination 
continued also to be suffused by images of an afterlife. This is figured most 
powerfully in his later work by allusions to and evocations of Virgil, and 
especially of the descent into the underworld in Book VI of the Aeneid, part of 
which Heaney translated in Seeing Things (1991), and which is conjured, 
absorbed and refracted in the sequence Route 110 in Human Chain.

In such places, the Aeneid seems to constitute a kind of displaced 
Catholicism, supplying a supportive mythology for a poet whose secularism 
continued to require such a thing. In the sequence Squarings, in Seeing Things, 
however, he finds an image all his own for an afterlife that is the almost 
miraculously continued life of a County Derry landscape:

At any rate, when light breaks over me
The way it did on the road beyond Coleraine
Where wind got saltier, the sky more hurried
And silver lamé shivered on the Bann
Out in mid-channel between the painted poles
That day I'll be in step with what escaped me.

He is survived by Marie, Christopher, Michael and Catherine Ann, and his 
grandchildren.

• Seamus Justin Heaney, poet, born 13 April 1939; died 30 August 2013
 