
A futuristic plan to build a floating techno-libertarian city in a French 
Polynesian lagoon has left some local residents worried they could be the next 
unsuspecting inhabitants of a peaceful planet in a science-fiction movie.

 “It reminds me of the innocent Ewoks of the moon of Endor who saw in the 
Galactic Empire a providential manna,” said Tahitian TV host Alexandre 
Taliercio. “They let them build what they wanted on earth and in orbit, but 
that’s not to say that the Empire shared the blueprints of the Death Star with 
them.”

 The proposal for a seastead – an autonomous oceanic colony; think 
homesteading, but wetter - took a significant step on Christmas Day, when a 
Silicon Valley groupannounced 
<http://www.seasteading.org/2016/12/2017-year-seasteading-begins/> it had 
reached an agreement with the French Polynesian government, with officials 
poised to explore serving as the group’s host.

 Seasteaders said it was a breakthrough that could change the world, but 
Taliercio worried that rich Americans simply wanted to use his home to dodge 
taxes.

Related: The tech winners and losers of 2016 (hint: Facebook – and Facebook) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/20/2016-tech-winners-losers-facebook-peter-thiel>

 “These millionaires,” he said, “lulled by an illusory desire to free 
themselves from the existing states, seem to have much more to gain than we do.”

 The idea of seasteading – escaping the laws, regulations, and taxes of life 
on terra firma by establishing an outpost in international waters – has long 
enchanted libertarians.

 “The question of whether seasteading is possible or desirable is in my mind 
not even relevant. It is absolutely necessary,” the billionaire PayPal founder 
Peter Thiel said at a2009 seasteading conference <https://vimeo.com/7577391>.

 After Thiel helped launch the Seasteading Institute 
<http://www.seasteading.org/2008/04/introducing-the-seasteading-institute/> 
with a $500,000 investment, seasteading became themovement 
<http://archive.wired.com/science/planetearth/news/2008/05/seasteading?currentPage=all>
 of the moment in Silicon Valley, where regulation and government bureaucracy 
are anathema and the billionaire’s success as an investor – his current fortune 
is largely due to his early stake in Facebook – has given him the reputation of 
a visionary.

 The logistical and financial challenges of establishing a colony in 
international waters, however, proved steep. So this year the Seasteading 
Institute begannegotiations 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/silicon-valley-seasteading-institute-2016-9> 
with French Polynesia, which is a part of France, but has significant autonomy.

 On 30 November, French Polynesia’s cabinet gave president Edouard Fritch a 
mandate 
<http://www.presidence.pf/index.php/cm/3265-conseil-des-ministres-du-30-novembre-2016>
, and he will travel to San Francisco in January to sign an agreement to 
develop a “special governing framework” for “seazones”, according to Randolph 
Hencken, the Seasteading Institute’s executive director.

Hencken said by email that the agreement stipulated that the institute must 
prove that seasteading will provide economic benefits and not harm the 
environment, and that the government will not provide any subsidies.

 “Our seasteading collaboration with French Polynesia was initiated by the 
Tahitians themselves and will bring jobs, economic growth, and environmental 
resiliency to the region,” Hencken said.

 Hencken predicts a close relationship between the seastead and the islands. 
In an interview withBusiness Insider 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/silicon-valley-seasteading-institute-2016-9> in 
October, he suggested that he would be able to take a speedboat to French 
Polynesia to take yoga classes and go to restaurants. The islands would also 
provide a construction base, he said, further reducing costs.

 While Hencken argued that seasteading would be a boon for French Polynesia, 
exemption from taxes is a key factor in the seasteading movement.

 In his 2009 speech, Thiel argued that “anything that can be done to create 
much larger numbers of countries will be very good”, largely because the 
proliferation of nations would drive down marginal tax rates.

 “If we want to increase freedom, we want to increase the number of countries.”

It is that attitude that draws the suspicion of local residents like 
Taliercio, who questioned whether “facilitating the tax evasion of the world’s 
greatest fortunes” would be healthy for South Pacific nations.

 “I grew up in what is for the rest of the world a terrestrial paradise, but I 
can testify today that the other side of the picture is not glorious and makes 
me sad,” Taliercio said. “The unemployment rate is distressing; the 
impoverishment of the population is palpable everywhere; our social protection 
system is in deficit and is in peril.”

 Indeed, French Polynesia’s GDP is just $5.6bn, or about the equivalent of two 
Peter Thiels <http://www.forbes.com/profile/peter-thiel/>.

 Alexandre Le Quéré, a Tahitian radio journalist, poked fun at the idea on 
Polynésie 1ère 
<http://la1ere.francetvinfo.fr/polynesie/emissions-radio/le-plus-de-l-info/iles-artificielles-vrai-projet-delire-futuriste-01122016-422401.html>
, a local media outlet. He quipped that proponents of the “futuristic delirium” 
of seasteading wanted a “Noah’s Ark to the Wall Street gravy”. Le Quéré also 
expressed concern that the project could produce “chaos” for the local 
population.

 Hervé Raimana Lallemant-Moe, a researcher in international and environmental 
law at the Université de la Polynésie Française, pointed out that the island 
nation was “particularly vulnerable” due to its isolation, size, economy, and 
the threat of climate change, and that the population was generally opposed to 
large projects on environmental grounds.

 “It is clear that the people do not think that the creation of artificial 
islands should be a priority,” he said.

The president’s office declined to comment on the plan to the Guardian, but a 
statement 
<http://www.presidence.pf/index.php/cm/3265-conseil-des-ministres-du-30-novembre-2016>
 cited the potential for economic development as a benefit to the country. The 
government also mentioned the importance of “the presence of serious investors” 
and named Thiel as a backer.

Thiel’s spokesman told the Guardian that he was not “involved in the French 
Polynesia seasteading efforts”.

 Marc Collins, a Tahitian businessman and former minister of tourism, said 
that the negative reaction to the project was to be expected.

 “Tahitians are sick and tired and hearing of these mega, massive projects 
that go nowhere,” he said. “There is a predisposition of the population to be 
very cautious.”



But Collins, who invited the Seasteading Institute to consider French 
Polynesia after reading about the group’s attempts to find a host country in
Wired 
<https://www.wired.com/2015/05/silicon-valley-letting-go-techie-island-fantasies/>
, said he believed the project was in the best interest of his country, was 
much smaller than the mega-projects, and would not involve government subsidies.

Collins hopes that the seastead will boost the economy, bring the country into 
more contact with technological innovators inSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley>, and help combat the 
“brain drain” that sees educated Tahitians leave the islands in search of work.

 “If anyone knows how to live on the oceans it’s Tahitians,” he said. 
“Polynesians are the original seasteaders.”
 