
Secret beaches

West Beach, Newhaven is a small sandy beach nestled between miles of stony 
beaches. It hasjust received "village green" 
<http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/10487794.Campaigners_joy_after__village_green__ruling_over_Newhaven_beach/>
 status in order that the public can have access to it again – for the first 
time since 2008, when it was closed due to safety concerns.

Tidemills, Bishopstone <http://tidemills.webs.com/> is the remains of the 
largest Tide Mill in Sussex and the surrounding village: quite a spooky place 
dating back around 300 years. It leads down onto a wide open expanse of beach by
The Buckle in Seaford and is good for ramblers and history buffs. It's between 
Newhaven and The Buckle at Seaford East; access and parking is from the A259 at 
Mill Drove between Bishopstone and Newhaven. It is one of the last areas of 
accessible undeveloped coast in the western direction for many miles.

Yellowave <http://www.yellowave.co.uk/> (Yellowave Beach Sports Venue, 299 
Madeira Drive, Brighton) is a purpose-built sandy beach area with beach 
volleyball, beach tennis and a great little cafe, too. Next to it is theVolks 
Electric Railway <http://www.volkselectricrailway.co.uk/> (Return tickets £3.50 
adults, £2 kids), which is brilliant to go on with the kids. It travels a short 
distance on the seafront from Brighton Pier to Brighton Marina and is the 
oldest operating electric railway in the world.

Where to eat and drink

The Lion and Lobster Pub <http://www.thelionandlobster.co.uk/> (24 Sillwood 
Street, Brighton), just behind the Brighton-Hove border seafront, down a 
residential side street and moments from the sea, is a cosy pub, with an 
outdoor first floor area that feels like you're still indoors.The Golden Galleon
 <http://www.vintageinn.co.uk/thegoldengalleonseaford/> (Exceat Bridge, 
Seaford) is a great pub just outside Seaford on the Exceat Bridge, on the River 
Cuckmere. There are plenty of great walks around there, withFriston Forest 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/fristonforest> just over the road, and a short walk 
along the river to the beach at the bottom of Seaford Head.

Brasserie Pascal <http://www.brasserie-pascal.co.uk/> (6 Queens Place, 2nd 
Avenue, Hove) is a great French restaurant that is a short stroll up First 
Avenue opposite Hove beachfront. Very nice for light lunches or a la carte 
evening dinner.

Woodies Diner <http://www.woodiesdiner.com/> (366 Kingsway, Hove is right near 
the beach so there's sea salt in the air! It's a 50s-style American diner doing 
unusual fast food such as chilli fries, and a cougar burger with peanuts, 
coconut milk and chilli. Seconds from the beach in Hove,Sour Dough Bakery (12 
Victoria Terrace, 01273 727227, no website) has artisan bread and pastries, 
great beach picnic food.Marrocco's <http://www.marroccos.co.uk/> (8 King's 
Esplanade) is a great seaside Italian seafood restaurant, best known locally 
for its 24 flavours of homemade ice-cream. Queues are to be expected at the 
slightest glimmer of sunshine but all part of the fun.

The Front Room (42 High Street) is a new coffee house in the heart of 
Seaford's Old Town – one minute from the beach – that's set in the original 
front room of a 19th-century townhouse. It serves speciality teas and coffees, 
and there's a fantastic walled garden at the back. A little taste of Brighton 
chic in Seaford.

Brighton music scene
 Mystery Jets performing at Concorde 2. Photograph: Carolina Faruolo/Lebrecht 
Music & Arts/Corbis 
The Green Door Store <http://thegreendoorstore.co.uk/> (Trafalgar Arches, 
Lower Goods Yard, Brighton) is just one of many Brighton venues and one of my 
favourite live music venues in town. It's an underground venue in the arches 
beneath Brighton train station, and brilliant for new music.

Right on the beach, the new Brighton Music Hall 
<http://brightonmusichall.co.uk/> (127 Kings Road Arches, Brighton) features 
young musical talent (and tons of our students) in a public place to showcase 
their skills, on a stage on the beachfront. Live music all day, every day, 
weather allowing.

Concorde 2 <http://www.concorde2.co.uk/> (Madeira Shelter Hall, Madeira Drive) 
is one of the most unique venues in Brighton. It is right on the seafront, 
usually very windy, and there's nothing else around for 20 minutes each way. 
This award-winning live music and club venue has been restored to its Victorian 
gothic (interior not music genre) glory. It plays host to the best contemporary 
bands playing in the south east. We are lucky enough to host the Brighton 
Institute of Modern Music (BIMM) end of term gigs here, three times a year. Our 
students have to pass tough auditions to make it onto this stage.

Things to see and do

Seaford Head Golf Course <http://www.seafordheadgolfcourse.co.uk/> (Southdown 
Road) is a great public golf course on the cliffs. The 18th tee is at the top 
of Seaford Head, with the fairway running all the way down parallel to the sea. 
There is an amazing view of theSeven Sisters 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_Sisters,_Sussex> chalk cliffs from the 13th 
too.

Brighton and Hove pride themselves on a cyclist-friendly status. There are a 
host of cycle lanes along the coast and you can cycle freely on the seafront.
Littlehampton Dutch Bike Company(9 Kingsway, Hove, 01273 774061) has bikes 
available for daily hire.

A stone's throw from the beach in Hove is the superb independent shop, i gigi 
General Store <http://www.igigigeneralstore.com/> (31a Western Road) selling 
gifts and homeware (it also has a cafe; and two doors down has a great women's 
wear boutique).

• Adam Bushell, college manager of BIMM <http://www.bimm.co.uk/> Brighton 
music college, and a professional drummer for over 20 years. BIMM Brighton and 
BIMM Manchester have introduced "No Fee" diploma courses, for enrolment 
this September.
 