
Some say they now want to run for office. Others plan to write to their local 
mosques to express solidarity with American Muslims and refugees, or to start 
preparing for the midterm elections in Congress. They are organizing in secret
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> groups they consider 
safe spaces with tongue-in-cheek titles like Pantsuit Nation and Bitches For 
Hillary – not just to mourn but to mobilize.

“This is a huge wake-up call,” said Meghan Myszkowski, 36, of Donald Trump’s 
win last week.

Myszkowski, a single mother and who runs a social media agency in Pasadena, 
California, is a member of several invitation-only Facebook groups where 
disappointed voters – particularly women – are pledging to ignite a novel 
liberal comeback in the US.

Facebook's fake news: Mark Zuckerberg rejects 'crazy idea' that it swayed 
voters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-us-election-mark-zuckerberg-donald-trump>
Pantsuit Nation was started during the Democratic primary and now has 3 
million members, all by invitation only. A new group, Still Stronger Together, 
was created last Wednesday, just 12 hours after the election result became 
clear, and already has more than 6,000 members.

 It specifically urges members to suggest ideas for fighting back against what 
they fear could be a wild conservativeagenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-policy-immigration-agenda-healthcare>
 from President-elect Donald Trump.

“Liberals were in an echo chamber and not listening to people outside the 
bubble. I want to start organizing for people to donate to Planned Parenthood, 
the ACLU, the National Organization for Women. A friend of mine has started 
designing shirts with the proceeds going to these groups and we are talking 
about it in the secret groups. It’s a start, at least,” Myszkowski said.

In her concession speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concession-speech-full-transcript>
, Hillary Clinton gave a nod to such groups and called for them to be part of a 
comeback, saying: “And to the millions of volunteers, community leaders, 
activists and union organizers who knocked on doors, talked to their neighbors, 
posted on Facebook – even in secret, private Facebook sites – I want everybody 
coming out from behind that [to] make sure your voices are heard going forward.”

Prior to the presidential election, Pantsuit Nation was a rallying place for 
support for Clinton. Since her defeat it has become a haven where devastated 
Clinton voters commiserate, but also seek advice about related problems and 
brainstorm about next steps.


One female member in Pennsylvania posted that she went jogging after the 
election and passed a group of workmen, one of whom yelled: “We own your pussy 
now” – a reference to the audio tape thatsurfaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 during the campaign of then candidate Trump boasting about grabbing women, 
unbidden, by the genitals.

Many Pantsuit Nation posters called themselves “blue dots in a sea of red” 
after voting for Clinton in deeply Republican areas such as Wyoming, Kentucky, 
Tennessee or Mississippi. They have been sharing stories of Trump voters 
gloating aggressively at them in the workplace since his victory, or harassing 
them because they are Mexican. They then receive moral support and advice from 
other members.

As the Thanksgiving celebration approaches, many posts discuss how – or even 
whether – to face gathering around the dinner table with family members who 
voted for Trump.

“It’s been a way to touch base with people who are struggling with hate crimes 
and it’s a resource to get support because I feel like liberals are going off a 
cliff,” said Ivory Rieger, 46, a supermarket business analyst in Portland, 
Maine. She joined Pantsuit Nation about three months before the election and 
joined Still Stronger Together last week.

She said she was an enthusiastic voter but was now inspired to become a lot 
more vocal and active in protest against the Trump agenda.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
“We are going to kick up a lot of dust and I’m hoping these groups can be a 
galvanizing power to get boots out on the ground. The Democratic party needs to 
be resculpted,” she said.

She said a lot of her extended family had voted for Trump, and she understood 
that her relatives in more rural areas felt they had stalled economically and 
were struggling to afford basics like insurance.

Criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/bernie-sanders-democratic-party-progressives-grassroots>
 that the Clinton campaign did not fully understand or reach those people 
outside urban areas “is a fair point”, she said.

She called for a progressive version of the grassroots Tea Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/05/us-midterm-elections-2010-tea-party-movement>
 to emerge from the passion and resolve ignited by Democrats’ stunning election
losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/us-congress-election-results-senate-house-democrats-republicans>
.

Other members of secret groups are urging pressure on politicians who opposed 
Trump to push back against his legislative agenda, and calling for a new 
grassroots movement to get out the liberal vote in the 2018 midterm elections 
in Congress.

Natalie Miller, a yoga teacher in Takoma Park, Maryland, co-founded the secret 
feminist group Bitches for Hillary during the Democratic primaries, when 
arguments between supporters of Clinton and those of Bernie Sanders became 
uncomfortably fierce. It currently has 10,000 members.

Since the election result, she said of the online community, “I see people 
comforting one another, people angry and venting and I see those interested now 
in taking different types of action, whether that’s looking to the midterms or 
examining the workings of the electoral college.”

She said Bitches had become “a refuge” for Democrats “stranded in Trump 
country”.

It was originally a group in which women and some feminist men could gather 
online to discuss Clinton’s campaign without beingattacked 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/blogs-trending-35422316> by the type of aggressive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/08/harvard-students-hillary-clinton-bernie-sanders-2016-election>
 Sanders supporters known as “Bernie bros 
<https://newrepublic.com/minutes/128747/sanders-campaign-knows-bernie-bros-problem>
”, who often resorted to misogyny and racism.

Don't call Clinton a weak candidate: it took decades of scheming to beat her
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/hillary-clinton-defeat-republicans-trump-comey>
“Bitches for Hillary arose in the very painful fight between Bernie bros and 
Hillary feminists. We got sick of explaining sexism 101, getting harassed 
online or even doxxed,” said Miller.

Now the group’s members are soul-searching, she said, and figuring out a 
political comeback for progressives rooted in “social justice and economic 
fairness”.

Adam Poltrack, an adjunct lecturer in New York, created the secret group Still 
Stronger Together – a play on Clinton’s election slogan “Stronger Together”.

He had only two main criteria for invited members: be civil and include a 
suggestion for a practical way forward when you post, he said.

“Like half the country, I was devastated by the election result. For a good 12 
to 24 hours, I think people were in despair, thinking: do I emigrate to Canada 
or what? Once that abated, the solution for me was to stay and fight the Trump 
agenda with everything I have. I created the group and it blew up pretty 
quickly,” said Poltrack.

He said members so far have suggested organizing “Two dollar Tuesday” to 
donate to progressive causes every week; non-Muslims registering as Muslims in 
case Trump makes people register by religion; and Democrats becoming online 
“pen pals” with Trump supporters to try to bridge the political divide.

“Trump should be a galvanizing and unifying force for those of us in 
opposition. And as a male, white millennial, I wanted to make sure this isn’t 
just going to be slacktivism, it’s going to be real action,” he said.
 