
Dating <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/dating> can be a minefield – 
and for a single teacher, especially so. We all know that balancing work and 
family life is like walking a tightrope in a high wind for those with partners, 
children and pets, but it isn’t easy for those of us with little more than a 
pot plant depending on us either.

Secret Teacher: I'm my school's go-to gay guy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/oct/29/secret-teacher-school-gay-tell-pupils>
Dating is like searching for a house: it becomes a second job and takes a huge 
amount of time and effort to, er, seal the deal. Even one date a week is tough. 
You have to find a time you’re both free, get ready even though you’re 
knackered from teaching all day and then spend the evening trying to smile and 
not yawn. Dating on a school night isn’t ideal, but weekdays seem to be the 
preferred option for first dates – it’s less intense than committing your 
Friday or Saturday to a near-stranger, I suppose.


But I’m getting ahead of myself here – the first obstacle in the teacher’s 
hunt for love is actually finding someone to go on date with. If you want to 
date in 2016, there’s really no getting away from the fact that most single 
people are online. Whether it’s Tinder, Soulmates or some other website 
promising a happy ever after, an online presence means a much bigger pool of 
potential matches.


This is tricky because teachers always have to be careful about what they 
share online. Most make the decision to completely lock down any social media 
profiles to ensure that, as far as possible, no parent, pupil and maybe even 
colleague is privy to any of it. Some schools’ staff codes of conduct actually 
require this.

But there’s no point ramping up the security settings on a dating site to Fort 
Knox levels – the idea is that the more people that see it, the better your 
chances. So the challenge is to create a profile that isn’t incriminating, but 
still allows you to appear human. It’s hard. Photos where you’re drinking (or 
drunk) have to be avoided, as do those with too much skin on display – beach 
shots are an absolute no-no.


Secret Teacher: even on maternity leave, teaching doesn't stop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/dec/12/secret-teacher-maternity-leave-teaching-doesnt-stop>
I even find myself second guessing the list of likes and dislikes: if I add 
mojitos to my list of loves, will I come across as irresponsible? If I put 
Monday mornings on my list of hates, does that speak badly about my job? You 
need to create a version of yourself that feels real but wouldn’t cause alarm 
bells if it was found by a parent.

Once I’ve ummed and ahhed over my profile and uploaded and deleted 67 
different photo options, the grief continues. There’s always the nagging worry 
that I could match with a relative of one of the children I teach. Statistics 
are probably on my side here, but to eliminate the possibility, there are some 
questions I ask early on after matching. These include whether they have 
children and where they live (roughly). I think I’ve got away with this and 
weaved it into conversation rather than sounding like making these exchanges 
sound like interrogations.


When I’m finally on a date, I have to stop myself from talking shop too much. 
This can be tricky because people – and this doesn’t apply just to dates – are 
usually quite interested in tales of the job. But I try to keep the 
child-related chat to a minimum so I can fool my dates into believing that my 
work hasn’t completely taken over my life.


Location is also an issue. If you live near your school, you don’t want to go 
on a date and end up bumping into any students or parents. That happened to 
friend of mine recently, when a parent came into the bar that she and her date 
were in. She quickly moved to another venue, but still isn’t sure if that 
parent saw her.


Secret Teacher: we all feel like a failure sometimes, but we must have hope
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/02/secret-teacher-feel-like-failure-sometimes-must-have-hope>
Should you manage to get through all of this, find a suitable person, go on 
some dates without bumping into a pupil or falling asleep at the table, and 
actually get serious, there is one final – major – hurdle to jump.


If you work with children under 8, as I do, you have to keep the 
disqualification by association guidance in the back of your mind. If someone 
in your household is disqualified from registration as a childcare provider (or 
would be), you may also be disqualified by association. Even if I wasn’t a 
teacher, I’d hope that my new partner hadn’t been convicted or cautioned for 
violent or sexual offences in the past, but my job wouldn’t potentially rely on 
it.


Ultimately, as a teacher, there’s a lot to consider while walking the line 
between public and private in the dating world. But it’s worth putting yourself 
out there, not least to ensure that the job doesn’t rule every part of your 
life.


Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 