
Eagerly anticipated “selfie drone” the Lily Camera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/13/lily-drone-personal-videographer-selfie>
, which promised to be able to follow owners around and automatically 
photograph them, has been cancelled by its designers.

The drone secured at least $34m of pre-orders since going on sale on the 
manufacturer’s website in June, but the costs of development continually 
outpaced the speed with which Lily could raise funds.

Lily’s founders, Antoine Balaresque and Henry Bradlow, informed customers that 
due to failures to secure financing in order to manufacture and ship products, 
they would be forced to shut down the company and offer refunds to customers. 
They said: “We have been delighted by the steady advancements in the quality of 
our product and have received great feedback from our Beta program. At the same 
time, we have been racing against a clock of ever-diminishing funds.”

When the drone was first available for pre-order, it promised class-leading 
capability for half the final expected cost. Buyers could pay $499 to pre-order 
the drone, which was to have a 1080p video camera and a 12 megapixel still 
camera strapped to a drone with a 20-minute battery life. The downside was that 
the pre-order amount was charged immediately, which the company said “helps us 
reduce risk”.

As well as the basic drone functionality, the Lily distinguished itself with 
selfie features: owners would have worn a tracking device, which would let the 
drone follow them around, filming and snapping shots all the while.

But none of that came to pass. Balaresque and Bradlow wrote: “We are very 
sorry and disappointed that we will not be able to deliver your flying camera. 
We hope our contribution will help pave the way for the exciting future of our 
industry.”

The death of the Lily underscores the risk for consumers in funding 
pre-release technology. While the Lily did not directly turn to crowdfunding, 
steering clear of platforms such as Kickstarter in order to raise funds 
directly through pre-orders, the outcome has been reminiscent ofprominent 
Kickstarter failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/19/trouble-kickstarter-massive-projects-hit-rocks-coolest-zano>
 such as the Zano drone.

Launched in 2015, Zano was a British “nano drone” that raised £2.3m on 
Kickstarter, then declared bankruptcy before the year was out. Like the Lily, 
it was sold on its selfie ability: “Taking your selfies to new heights” was one 
tagline.

Unlike the Lily, however, a few Zanos made it out to purchasers – 600 of the 
15,000 that were pre-sold – but users reported widespread technical errors.

 * Google’s research sibling X shuts down drones project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/12/googles-research-sibling-x-shuts-down-drones-project>
 