
Democrats prepare to battle Trump nominees

Senate Democrats may not be able to block Donald Trump’s cabinet nominees. But 
that won’t stop them trying. Eight in particular are being targeted as 
“troublesome”, including Rex Tillerson (state), Jeff Sessions (attorney 
general) and Steve Mnuchin (treasury). ” “We have asked for fair hearings on 
all of those nominees,” minority leader Chuck Schumer told reporters on 
Wednesday. “There are a lot of questions about these nominees.” Sessions was 
grilled by Senator Dick Durbin about his history on making racially insensitive 
comments, which he reportedly said would not be an issue. “Certainly there are 
elements in his background that raise questions,” Durbin said after their 
meeting. Confirmation hearings are scheduled to begin on 11 January, with
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> hoping to secure two 
days of hearing for each nominee.

Democrats prepare for confirmation battle over ‘troublesome’ Trump cabinet 
nominees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/democrats-prepare-for-confirmation-battle-over-troublesome-trump-cabinet-nominees>

Four arrested for ‘anti-Trump’ beating

Chicago police have arrested four people in connection with a video that 
emerged on Facebook Live showing a gagged man being brutally beaten up while 
assailants shout: “Fuck Donald Trump.” Chicago police department superintendent 
said the man in the video had “mental health challenges” and the four suspects 
would be charged in the next 24 hours. The men in the video scream “fuck white 
people” and force the victim to say “fuck Trump”. A knife is placed to his head 
and used to cut his clothing. Police commander Kevin Duffin said that the 
incident may be investigated as a hate crime but added that officers were 
trying to determine “whether or not this is sincere or just stupid ranting and 
raving”.

Four arrested over Facebook Live video of man tortured amid anti-Trump taunts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/facebook-live-stream-video-man-attacked-chicago-trump>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffacebook-live-stream-man-attacked-chicago-police-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facebook%20live-stream%20of%20man%20being%20attacked%20is%20sickening%2C%20say%20Chicago%20police%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffacebook-live-stream-man-attacked-chicago-police-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facebook%20live-stream%20of%20man%20being%20attacked%20is%20sickening%2C%20say%20Chicago%20police%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffacebook-live-stream-man-attacked-chicago-police-video&media=>
Facebook live-stream of man being attacked is sickening, say Chicago police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/05/facebook-live-stream-man-attacked-chicago-police-video>
Trump rift with Republicans over Assange

Leading Republicans broke with Trump on Wednesday after the president-elect 
appeared to put more faith in WikiLeaks founderJulian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> than in US intelligence 
agencies. In a series of tweets, Trump backed Assange’s claim that Russia was 
not the source of the DNC leaks, putting him at odds with American intelligence 
agencies. House speaker Paul Ryan called Assange “a sycophant for Russia” on a 
conservative radio show, and Senator Tom Cotton told MSNBC that he supports 
intelligence officers over Assange. Barack Obama deported 35 Russian diplomats 
last month in response to reports by intelligence agencies that the Kremlin had 
hacked the DNC. Trump, who has repeatedly praised Putin, was critical of the 
move, and has continued to cast doubt on the veracity of the evidence of 
Russian interference. The president-elect is set to have an intelligence 
briefing on Friday.

Republicans voice disdain after Trump tweets support for Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/republicans-break-donald-trump-tweet-julian-assange-dnc-hacks>

Covering Obama’s second term

As part of the Guardian’s series on Obama’s legacy, former Washington bureau 
chief Dan Roberts recalls his time covering the outgoing president’s second 
term. Reporting for the Guardian on this difficult second act was complicated 
by our own walk-on part in the drama, Roberts writes. A conference call in June 
2013 with White House national security staff about thebulk collection of 
mobile phone records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/nsa-phone-records-verizon-court-order>
 was the first of several awkward conversations involving a young whistleblower 
called Edward Snowden.

Obama’s second term: a president faces the limits of his power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/barack-obama-second-term-achievements-sandy-hook>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fmississippi-black-church-burned-vote-trump-race&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20church%20burning%20in%20Mississippi%20stirs%20debate%20over%20Trump%20and%20race%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fmississippi-black-church-burned-vote-trump-race>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20church%20burning%20in%20Mississippi%20stirs%20debate%20over%20Trump%20and%20race%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fmississippi-black-church-burned-vote-trump-race&media=>
Black church burning in Mississippi stirs debate over Trump and race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2017/jan/04/mississippi-black-church-burned-vote-trump-race>
Apple aims to please China government

Apple has removed the New York Times app from its app store in China, as a 
spokesperson said it was in “violation of local regulations”. The Chinese 
government enforces vast censorship of any foreign website that may pose a 
threat to the communist government, which includes Google, Twitter, Facebook, 
YouTube and Instagram. The New York Times’s website has been blocked since 2012 
after the paper published an expose of the wealth of former prime minister Wen 
Jiabao and his family. Apple’s compliance with the rule indicates how far the 
company will go to remain active in its third-largest market. In 2016Apple 
publicly rebuked the US government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/22/tim-cook-apple-refusal-unlock-iphone-fbi-civil-liberties>
 for attempting to force the company to unlock an iPhone that belonged to a 
suspected terrorist. Apple CEO Tim Cook said at the time that complying with 
the government request would be “setting a dangerous precedent that threatens 
everyone’s civil liberties”.


Apple removes New York Times app in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/apple-removes-new-york-times-app-in-china>

America gets taste of its own medicine?

While accusations of the Russian government attempting to interfere with the 
US election are troubling and should be taken seriously, the US is no stranger 
to election manipulation, writes Owen Jones. “The US is a world leader in the 
field of intervening in the internal affairs of other countries,” he writes. 
The US has intervened in a number of foreign elections, with the post-cold war 
Russia among the most notable.


Americans can spot election meddling because they’ve been doing it for years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/americans-spot-election-meddling-doing-years-vladimir-putin-donald-trump>

Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

Will Ben McAdoo’s laid-back approach help the Giants top Green Bay?

New York Giants’ young coach Ben McAdoo is far from a rookie – he has coached 
nine teams over the last two decades. But some were surprised by his lenient 
approach to star receiver Odell Beckham Jr flying to a party in Miami days 
before a playoff game; his predecessor Tom Coughlin, who won the Super Bowl 
twice, would not have tolerated such behavior, writes Dave Caldwell. But his 
laid-back approach seems to be working as the Giants enter the tie with the 
Green Bay Packers with a record of nine wins in their last eleven games.


Will Ben McAdoo’s laid-back approach help the Giants top Green Bay? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/ben-mcadoo-giants-rookie-coach-packers-nfl>


In case you missed it ...

A mysterious radio wave discovered a decade ago has been traced to its source, 
likely a dwarf galaxy some 3bn light years from Earth, astronomers said. The 
discovery could help solve questions that have plagued astronomers over what 
causes high energy surges of long waves at the far end of the electromagnetic 
spectrum.

Source of mysterious deep space radio wave discovered for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jan/04/radio-wave-source-discovered-space>

 