
Sessions for AG, say reports, while Flynn picked for national security adviser

Michael Flynn has been offered the position of national security adviser to 
President-elect Donald Trump, a senior Trump official has said. Meanwhile Trump 
is reported to have chosen the Alabama senator Jeff Sessionsfor the job of 
attorney general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
. As national security adviser, the former military intelligence chief Flynn 
would have the direct ear of a president with no national security experience. 
Flynn’s views on Islam and relationships with Russia make him a controversial 
figure. He tweeted in February that fear of Muslims is “rational” and 
frequently appears on the Russian state-funded news network RT. Flynn was a 
vocal critic of the Obama administration and broke with most national security 
officials by supporting Trump during the campaign. The announcement was met 
with concern from Human Rights Watch, who raised Flynn’s refusal to rule out 
the use of torture. It remains unclear if he has accepted the position but he 
was photographed sitting in on a meeting between Trump and Japanese prime 
minister, Shinzo Abe, on Thursday.

Jeff Sessions is Trump’s choice for attorney general, reports say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>


Michael Flynn said to be offered job of Trump national security adviser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/david-petraeus-secretary-of-state-donald-trump>

Abe calms fears over Trump

Japanese PM Shinzo Abe attempted to calm nerves over a rupture in US-Japan 
relations by saying he was confident he could trust Trump following their 
90-minute meeting, Trump’s first face-to-face with a foreign leader. Abe said 
he had “great confidence” in Trump and a spokesperson said the relationship had 
gotten off to an “extremely good start”. Japan is one of many US allies alarmed 
by Trump’s rhetoric during the campaign, in which he said that Japan should pay 
more towards its own security, and he would be comfortable with Seoul and Tokyo 
developing nuclear weapons – a statement Trump now denies making. Trump’s 
stance on trade was also likely discussed as Trump campaigned on a promise to 
scrap the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal, which Abe supports. The deal, 
however, appears to bedead in the water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/12/tpp-trade-deal-congress-obama>
 regardless of Trump’s stance.

Shinzo Abe says Japan can have confidence in Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/japan-confidence-trump-president-shinzo-abe>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjapan-shinzo-abe-great-confidence-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Japan's%20Shinzo%20Abe%20has%20%E2%80%98great%20confidence%E2%80%99%20in%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjapan-shinzo-abe-great-confidence-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Japan%27s%20Shinzo%20Abe%20has%20%E2%80%98great%20confidence%E2%80%99%20in%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjapan-shinzo-abe-great-confidence-donald-trump-video&media=>
Japan’s Shinzo Abe has ‘great confidence’ in Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/18/japan-shinzo-abe-great-confidence-donald-trump-video>
Trump spokesman: what Muslim registry?

A spokesman for the Trump administration released a statement yesterday saying 
that the president-elect had “never advocated” creating a registry for tracking 
people based on their religion, despite video evidence showing otherwise. Jason 
Miller, communications director for the transition team, released the statement 
in response to a flurry of questions on the issue in which he said it was 
“completely false” to say that Trump ever advocated for a registry. However, in 
avideo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/20/donald-trump-track-muslim-americans-video>
 recorded in Iowa last year, Trump was asked if Muslims should be put into a 
registry, to which he responded: “They have to be.” Fears around the 
implementing the database were reignited after prominent Trump supporter Carl 
Higbietold Fox News’s Megyn Kelly 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/18/us/politics/japanese-internment-muslim-registry.html>
 that the US’s second world war Japanese internment camps could be used as a 
precedent for setting up a Muslim registry. People For the American Way, a 
progressive advocacy group, released a statement saying Republicans at every 
level should condemn any hint at returning to Japanese internment camps and 
called the Muslim registry unconstitutional and un-American.

Spokesman claims Donald Trump never called for Muslim registry despite video 
evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/trump-camp-denies-muslim-ban-registry>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-track-muslim-americans-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%3A%20we%20need%20to%20track%20all%20Muslims%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20archive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-track-muslim-americans-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%3A%20we%20need%20to%20track%20all%20Muslims%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20archive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-track-muslim-americans-video&media=>
Donald Trump: we need to track all Muslims in America – archive video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/20/donald-trump-track-muslim-americans-video>
May, Merkel, Obama discuss Islamic State

Barack Obama met with British prime minister Theresa May and German chancellor 
Angela Merkel on Friday to discuss the threat posed by Islamic State fighters 
who are now on the retreat. Fears have been raised that squeezing out the 
Islamic State in Syria and Iraq could push fighters to relocate to Africa or 
into Europe. Friday’s “Quint” meeting with other world leaders will be held in 
Berlin and will feature French president François Hollande, Italian prime 
minister Matteo Renzi and Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy.

May meets Obama and Merkel for talks on Islamic State threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/18/theresa-may-obama-amerkel-islamic-state-threat-berlin>

Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

Cardinal-elect: church stands by refugees

Cardinal-elect Joseph Tobin said he would “meet the challenge” to fulfill the 
Catholic church’s priority of helping migrants and refugees resettle in the US, 
in the face of an incoming vehemently anti-immigration administration. Tobin, 
who wasrecently elected to cardinal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/pope-francis-rejects-rightwingers-with-us-cardinals-appointment-archbishop-blase-cupich>
 by Pope Francis and will formally take the position on Saturday, won a battle 
with Vice-President-elect Mike Pence over his refusal to resettle refugees. In 
an interview with the Associated Press, Tobin said that continuing its work 
over the next four years would be “challenging” but added: “The ethical 
reflection of a nation isn’t reduced to the government ... I have a lot of 
faith in the American people.”

Catholic leader ready to help refugees settle in America despite Trump policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/trump-immigrant-refugee-policy-catholic-church>

Levy brags about breaking ‘dirtbag’ Paterno’s leg

Detroit Lions linebacker DeAndre Levy touted breaking longtime Penn State 
coach Joe Paterno’s leg as his “proudest moment in college”. Levy, a vocal 
activist, called Paterno “a dirtbag” and said people “gotta stop prioritizing 
sports over humanity”. Paterno is accused of covering up sexual abuse by his 
assistant coach Jerry Sandusky, who was convicted of 45 counts of sexual abuse 
in 2012. Levy accidentally broke Paterno’s shinbone in a sideline tackle in a 
2006 college game.

DeAndre Levy: my proudest moment was breaking ‘dirtbag’ Joe Paterno’s leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/18/american-media-journalism-donald-trump>

In case you missed it…

Sex education should be giving us the information we need to feel in control 
of our bodies and make informed decisions about them, say Mona Chalabi and Mae 
Ryan, but it’s failing. In episode four of Vagina Dispatches, the two 
journalists speak to their moms, friends and sex educators to find out why.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fsex-education-vagina-dispatches-episode-four&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vagina%20Dispatches%3A%20what%20you%20didn't%20learn%20in%20sex%20ed%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fsex-education-vagina-dispatches-episode-four>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vagina%20Dispatches%3A%20what%20you%20didn%27t%20learn%20in%20sex%20ed%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fsex-education-vagina-dispatches-episode-four&media=>
Vagina Dispatches: what you didn’t learn in sex ed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2016/nov/17/sex-education-vagina-dispatches-episode-four> 