
“To see something spectacular and recognise it as a photographic possibility 
is not making a very big leap,”Stephen Shore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/stephen-shore> once said. “But to see 
something ordinary, something you’d see every day, and recognise it as a 
photographic possibility – that’s what I’m interested in.”

 Shore’s vision of the ordinary world is now so pervasive an influence on 
photography that it almost goes uncommented on. But back when he first unveiled 
it in New York in 1972, with a solo show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, his 
colour images of everyday America caused consternation and derision. “The press 
coverage, what little there was of it, wasuniformly terrible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2005/nov/13/photography.shopping>,” 
he once told me. “People just did not exhibit colour images then. I remember 
the great Paul Strand taking me aside and advising me in no uncertain terms 
that it would be a disastrous career move. I am often asked what it was that 
people objected to exactly in the show and the answer is: all of it. 
Everything.’’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fstephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436440838184%2F591bf09b-e660-40d4-a794-20efa83dc80b-2060x1638.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shady%20character%3A%20how%20Stephen%20Shore%20taught%20America%20to%20see%20in%20living%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fstephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shady%20character%3A%20how%20Stephen%20Shore%20taught%20America%20to%20see%20in%20living%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fstephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436440838184%2F591bf09b-e660-40d4-a794-20efa83dc80b-2060x1638.jpeg>
 Ginger Shore, West Palm Beach, Florida, 14 November 1977. 
 In this context, it is doubly fascinating to wander through the Stephen Shore 
retrospective in Espace Van Gogh in Arles, France 
<https://www.rencontres-arles.com/CS.aspx?VP3=CMS3&VF=ARLAR1_213_VForm&FRM=Frame%3AARLAR1_217&LANGSWI=1&LANG=English>
, where the first rooms are devoted to work that predated his controversial 
embrace of colour. They remind us that he was always a conceptualist at heart, 
but one who (like the great American traditionalists before him) saw the world 
in black and white.

 The first image is a photograph of a photograph being taken: a man with his 
back to Shore’s camerainstructs a school football team where to look as he 
takes their group portrait 
<https://fbexternal-a.akamaihd.net/safe_image.php?d=AQAJlIj-BhkP3UDp&w=470&h=246&url=http%3A%2F%2Fassets.loeildelaphotographie.com%2Fuploads%2Farticle_photo%2Fimage%2F146905%2FEarlybw_1.jpg&cfs=1&upscale=1>
, one hand in the air, the other poised at the shutter of his camera. Shore’s 
shadow, and the shadows of other onlookers, fall across the foreground, giving 
an oddly amateur feel. This is intentional. Shore’s images often have the 
appearance of snapshots (and, unlike William Eggleston, he doesn’t mind the 
term), yet they are anything but. He has likened taking a photograph to his 
other passion, fly fishing, saying they both require intelligence, 
concentration, delicacy and attention.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fstephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436440894643%2Fe5d9c8aa-7472-4cce-bd00-1fe7fc7ea564-2060x1639.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shady%20character%3A%20how%20Stephen%20Shore%20taught%20America%20to%20see%20in%20living%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fstephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shady%20character%3A%20how%20Stephen%20Shore%20taught%20America%20to%20see%20in%20living%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fstephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436440894643%2Fe5d9c8aa-7472-4cce-bd00-1fe7fc7ea564-2060x1639.jpeg>
 Post Falls, Idaho, 25 August, 1974 
 These early black-and-white images show Shore’s precocious awareness of 
photography as a conceptual medium. In one large grid of 32 images arranged in 
rows of four, hephotographed a car parked in a desolate desert landscape from 
various distances <http://stephenshore.net/photographs/F/3/1.jpg>. In six 
shots, it fills the frame in an oddly ominous way, as if it has just been 
abandoned after a car chase. In others, it looks lost in the vastness. For 
another series, he shot his travelling companion, Doug Marsh,every half an hour 
<http://peneloped.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/IMG_0141.jpg> on a regular day 
in Amarillo, Texas.

 If this formalism looks forward to the more obsessive serialism of his 
American Surfaces, where he photographed the food he ate every day and the 
details of the bland motel rooms he stayed in, there are also street 
photographs that betray the influence of Garry Winogrand and Robert Frank.A dog 
in a window next to a huge Stars and Stripes 
<http://www.fisheyemagazine.fr/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Capture-d%E2%80%99ecran-2014-10-08-a-13.49.59-720x498.png>
 is, at first glance, pure Frank – but there is something more seemingly casual 
about Shore’s eye.

 It is this casualness, coupled with an unerring instinct for composition, 
that soon became his signature, and one writ large in epic 70s series such as
American Surfaces 
<http://stephenshore.net/photographs/E/index.php?page=1&menu=photographs> and 
Uncommon Places 
<http://stephenshore.net/photographs/D/index.php?page=1&menu=photographs>, both 
of which are now landmarks of modern American photography and receive due 
attention here. Like his contemporaryEggleston <http://www.egglestontrust.com/>
, Shore shot the commonplace and made it seem suddenly arresting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fstephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436454926335%2F2d79cc7d-d40f-4370-a11b-a304ff0be306-2060x1643.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shady%20character%3A%20how%20Stephen%20Shore%20taught%20America%20to%20see%20in%20living%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fstephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shady%20character%3A%20how%20Stephen%20Shore%20taught%20America%20to%20see%20in%20living%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fstephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436454926335%2F2d79cc7d-d40f-4370-a11b-a304ff0be306-2060x1643.jpeg>
 Broad Street, Regina, Saskatchewan, 17 August, 1974 
Shore is an altogether quieter photographer, but there is quirky humour in his 
images of vernacular buildings 
<http://cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/0185/8874/files/shore_4.jpg?665> and signage 
that has often been overlooked. His eye lights on a barber’s shop window 
announcing the delights of Tyrone, the Great Contour Haircutter, and on a neon 
pharmacy sign that reads, perhaps without irony,Strange Drugs 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/0a/86/d0/0a86d0e888e294419a07b5b2b8a8e0c9.jpg>
. There is a sense of someone discovering a whole new world of surprises under 
his nose: an America so obvious as to go unnoticed. It is now definably Stephen 
Shore’s America, though it nods toRobert Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/aug/29/robert-frank-the-beauty-and-horror-of-1950s-america-in-pictures>
’s and, even more so, to Walker Evans’s America.

 “I do think about why people are all of a sudden looking at my work,” he told 
me 10 years ago, “and it occurs to me that it may have needed a distance in 
time for people to see what I was actually looking at. People need time. It’s 
much easier to look at the past than to look at the present.”

 Now, the America he photographed in the 70s seems impossibly distant, its 
quirkiness having given way inexorably to a bland uniformity of malls and 
brands. That may be one reason he revised the medium of black and white for his 
series of street photographs, New York City, made between 2000 and 2002. They 
are more epic in scale and more traditional in feel, with Winogrand, once more, 
the abiding presence, but the quietude Shore brings to even the frenetic 
streets of Manhattan is striking.

The fly-fishing comparison still holds, and his images, though no longer 
surprising, still evince intelligence, concentration, delicacy and attention. 
It’s the earliest work that intrigues the most, though, insofar as it shows the 
tentative emergence of a modern American master.

 * Rereading: Stephen Shore 
<http://www.rencontres-arles.com/C.aspx?VP3=CMS3&VF=ARLAR1_213_VForm&FRM=Frame:ARLAR1_275#/CMS3&VF=ARLAR1_213_VForm&FRM=Frame:ARLAR1_217>
 is at Les Rencontres d’Arles, France, until 20 September.  