
Shared ownership has had a bad press in recent years, with negative stories 
aboutlack of security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2013/sep/03/hidden-dangers-shared-ownership>
,high service charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2013/aug/31/shared-ownership-housing-solution>
 andnegative equity 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/property/house-and-home/property/shared-ownership-dreams-shattered-7878446.html>
. It is beset by complexity, with more hoops to jump through than just buying a 
house outright. But there is another problem with shared ownership that is 
rarely discussed.

Shared ownership was meant to be a stepping stone to outright ownership, yet a 
study by Cambridge University in 2012 found shared owners to beless mobile than 
outright owners <http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/a-problem-shared>. Too many 
shared owners part-buy their properties and then stay put. This prevents others 
taking their first steps on the housing ladder and confounds the original 
purpose of shared ownership.

A key element of mobility for shared owners is staircasing – the ability to 
increase the share of the property you own. Most shared owners buy between 25% 
and 75% of their home, but buying extra shares improves your chances of buying 
outright in the longer term, and then moving to a bigger or better place.

So why does this happen? A new report has identified the blockages to 
staircasing and suggests recommendations to improve the scheme. The report, by 
GatewayHousing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> Association, 
includes a survey of shared owners and a survey of the London Home Ownership 
Group – the main providers of shared ownership in the capital.

Income and savings were a key factor in owners' decisions to buy more shares: 
those who had staircased had an average income of £10,000 more than those who 
had not, and they also had greater access to savings and inheritances. Selling 
up and moving on from a shared ownership home isfar easier if you own 100% of 
the property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/editors-blog/2013/sep/06/shared-ownership-home-ownership-young-people>
, but for many owners the up-front fees involved in staircasing, such as 
valuation and solicitor fees, were a major turn-off.

Housing providers could encourage owners to staircase simply by discounting 
some of these fees and setting them against future capital receipts. Shared 
owners should also receive better financial advice and be able to access online 
calculators that would allow owners to see quickly and easily the costs of 
staircasing.

One key finding was that housing providers know far less about their shared 
owners than social housing tenants. The challenge is to gather more detailed 
intelligence and to target owners with suitable advice and support. For 
example, if landlords know when fixed-rate mortgages are about to expire they 
can contact owners with suggestions about re-mortgaging and increasing the 
percentage of the property the resident owns.

The benefits of encouraging more people to buy a larger stake in their home is 
obvious. It would improve mobility for residents and allow them to sell up and 
move on, and it would also raise money for the housing provider that could be 
used to provide new homes for the large numbers of people on waiting lists for 
shared ownership properties.

The report also calls for housing providers to improve the branding of shared 
ownership and to simplify it as a productso that it has greater appeal for 
Generation Rent. Arecent report by Shelter 
<http://england.shelter.org.uk/professional_resources/policy_and_research/policy_library/policy_library_folder/homes_for_forgotten_families_towards_a_mainstream_shared_ownership_market>
 showed that shared ownership has the potential to provide decent homes for 
thousands of people in the "squeezed middle". For London, this means those on 
salaries of £20,000 and £45,000 a year. Shelter says that nearly four out of 
five of these households would still be unable to buy, even if they used Help 
to Buy, yet more than nine out of 10 would be able to afford shared ownership.

Read more:
• The hidden dangers of shared ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2013/sep/03/hidden-dangers-shared-ownership>
• Shared ownership reveals the void in young people's housing options 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/editors-blog/2013/sep/06/shared-ownership-home-ownership-young-people>

Colin Wiles is an independent housing consultant and commentator 
<http://www.wilesconsulting.co.uk>. Read the full report on shared ownership 
here <http://gatewayhousing.org.uk/moving-on-up-report>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Interested in housing?
Join the housing network <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> 
for more news, analysis and comment direct to you.
 