
“Bigger and better” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/31/lake-district-national-park-yorkshire-dales-food-pubs-walks>
 orloyalty dividing “land grab” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/01/yorkshire-dales-expand-lancashire-national-parks-extension-leck-fell>
? Whichever way you see the expansion of the Yorkshire Dales national park – by 
24% and, controversially, into part of Lancashire – we’d like to celebrate it 
by showcasing your photography.


As the Guardian’s North of England editor Helen Pidd wrote on Monday, 1% of 
the newly enlarged Yorkshire Dales is now actually in Lancashire’s Upper Lune 
valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/01/yorkshire-dales-expand-lancashire-national-parks-extension-leck-fell>
, with a much larger chunk “snaffled from Cumbria”. Many readers saw the funny 
side...
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2561148> cheltsam  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2561148> 02 August 2016 8:51am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/80364682> 
The battle for Leck Fell may be won, but the war for Middle Pennines is just 
about to begin.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15917894> TheBananaBender  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15917894> 02 August 2016 9:01am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/80365319> 
Should there be sanctions against Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> after this land grab

But here we want to get away from the politics (and emotion that goes much, 
much deeper than that we’re sure) and towards what makes the park – and the 
also-expanding Lake District national park – great in the first place: natural 
beauty.

Yorkshire Dales expand into Lancashire in national parks land grab
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/01/yorkshire-dales-expand-lancashire-national-parks-extension-leck-fell>
We want to see pictures from your favourite parts of the parks, including, we 
hope, the new areas Mark Corner of the Yorkshire Dales Societytold the BBC 
“should be on everyone’s bucket list” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-36905517>. Now that England has 188 
square miles of new national park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/31/lake-district-national-park-yorkshire-dales-food-pubs-walks>
, there’s surely more of an excuse to go exploring with your camera.

Have you visited recently or do you have old photographs that are memorable? 
Do you go out specifically to take photographs or are you an amateur snapper 
who just likes to capture the moment while out walking? Either way, share your 
pictures with us and we’ll publish some of the best in a gallery on the 
Guardian website.


How to contribute

Share your work by clicking on the blue “Contribute” button on this article. 
You can also use theGuardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 and search for “GuardianWitness assignments”.

 * GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/series/guardianwitness> is the home of 
readers’ content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, 
and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others.  