
Britain’s beach resorts and rural hotspots are expecting a bumper summer as 
millions more UK tourists opt to holiday at home and overseas tourists are 
lured by the favourable exchange rate post-Brexit.

A 10% drop in the value of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/brexit-fallout-the-economic-impact-in-six-key-charts>
 against the euro means that a holiday in a eurozone country will cost a family 
of four £245 more now than it would have done before Britain voted to leave the 
EU. This is based on figures from TravelSupermarket, which found that British 
holidaymakers will take an average of £513 spending money per person in 2016, 
or £2,052 per family of four.

The sharp rise in the cost of holidaying abroad is likely to lead to a further 
5% of British people, or 2.5 million, deciding to holiday at home this year, 
with Cornwall proving the most popular destination, followed by London, and the 
Lake District, a survey by online deals site vouchercodes.co.uk found.

The nearest benchmark we have is the 2008 financial crisis, when there was a 
boost in staycations
Sandra Matthews-Marsh, VisitKent 
The boost to domestic tourism follows a record-breaking first quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/may/20/london-record-visitor-numbers-2015-31-5-million>
 that saw overnight visits in England rise 10% to 7.3m and spending on domestic 
overnight holidays up 23% to £1.8bn, VisitBritain figures show

“The nearest benchmark we have is the financial crisis of 2008, when there was 
a boost in staycations. I anticipate the same thing happening [this time],” 
said Sandra Matthews-Marsh, chief executive of VisitKent. “We are beginning to 
see an uplift in people staying at home and putting off big spending decisions, 
including big holidays [abroad].”

At the same time, the fall in the value of the pound has led to a surge in 
interest from overseas tourists. Search engineCheapflights 
<http://www.cheapflights.co.uk/> said that in the few days after the 
referendum, flight searches to the UK from the US doubled, with increases of 
61% from China, 49% from Canada and 31% from Europe. Similarly, online travel 
agency Opodo reported a 38% rise in searches for flights to the UK from US 
markets and 20% from Asia.

British people determined to holiday abroad but yet to book should consider an 
all-inclusive deal to keep costs down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbrexit-and-the-uk-tourist-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc91c38f3d069f602748ba4253b133dcb5b5e06b0%2F0_334_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sharp%20rise%20in%20cost%20of%20holidays%20abroad%20leads%20to%20staycation%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbrexit-and-the-uk-tourist-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sharp%20rise%20in%20cost%20of%20holidays%20abroad%20leads%20to%20staycation%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbrexit-and-the-uk-tourist-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc91c38f3d069f602748ba4253b133dcb5b5e06b0%2F0_334_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Walkers in Glenridding in the Lake District. The Lakes are among the most 
popular destinations for UK tourists looking for a staycation. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
“The prices for many of these will have been set well before the drop in the 
pound and by knowing your food, drink and entertainment are already paid for 
before leaving the UK, you are insulated from any increase in holiday costs. We 
are already seeing an increase in popularity in this holiday option by savvy 
deal hunters,” said Bob Atkinson of TravelSupermarket.

But tour operators are warning that the cost of holidays and flight prices 
will rise in 2017 if the pound continues at its low level.

Despite the post-Brexit boom in staycations and inbound tourism, British 
tourism organisations are concerned that some Europeans may feel uncomfortable 
visiting the UK in the wake of Brexit. In response, VisitBritain is boosting 
its efforts this summer to target European media. More than 70 journalists from 
key markets including France, Germany and the Netherlands will be visiting the 
UK in the coming months as part of a campaign to “show why this summer is a 
great time to come to Britain”. Chief executive Patricia Yates said the message 
of welcome would be heavily promoted at this week’sTBEX travel bloggers summit 
in Stockholm <http://tbexcon.com/> and a bloggers’ conference being held in 
Inverness in September.

The biggest concern is people’s attitude to coming because of annoyance at the 
result of the vote
Malcolm Bell, VisitCornwall 
In addition, individual tourist boards across the UK are planning their own 
publicity drives. Matthews-Marsh said: “We have huge numbers of tourists coming 
through the tunnel, so we will be doubling our efforts through the media, and 
working with cross-channel ferries on promotions.”

In the capital, a spokesman for VisitLondon said a social media campaign 
launched by the mayor’s office,#Londonisopen 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/londonisopen>, was just the start of a series of 
initiatives to reassure visitors.

Visit Cornwall is working with local accommodation providers to host travel 
writers and bloggers from German-speaking countries and the Netherlands.

“Perception is all, particularly in tourism, which is a discretionary 
activity,” said chief executive Malcolm Bell, who received an email immediately 
after the vote saying, “I’m never coming to Britain again.”

“The biggest concern is people’s attitude to coming because of annoyance at 
the result [of the vote] or because they feel they are not going to be 
welcome,” said Bell. “The horrible thing going on now with racial abuse is not 
playing well. Also, it doesn’t help that [politicians are] almost using EU 
workers as a bartering tool. It’s not giving the UK a good image.

“We need to get the message out that Brexit was a political decision not an 
anti-European decision and that people will still have a great time.”

His concerns were echoed by the chief executive of Jamie Oliver’s Fifteen 
restaurant in Cornwall, after the business revealed it had suffered 
cancellations from overseas visitors immediately after Britain voted to leave 
the EU.

“We lost 10% of bookings in the first 10 days after the vote. Dutch and German 
customers were saying they no longer wanted to come. Someone mentioned that 
they heard there are racist mobs,” said Fifteen’s Matthew Thomson.

“I’m disappointed but not surprised. The level of anti-European messaging [in 
the run-up to the campaign] was so high. Now, the onus is on businesses such as 
ours to shout from the rooftops how keen we are to welcome visitors from across
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, and that we can give a 
outstanding experience,” he said.
 