
Sheffield is famous for its cutlery, in which my interest is fleeting, usually 
around mealtimes. But it has also just been awarded the accolade ofBest Value 
City Break 
<http://www.welcometosheffield.co.uk/visit/news/2015/aug/18/sheffield-remains-best-value-in-uk-for-bank-holiday-city-break>
 in the UK by TripAdvisor, which annually rates the most affordable British 
cities for an overnight stay. In other words, Sheffield probably has a lot more 
to offer than spoons. I gave myself two days to find out what, and in that time 
I discovered boutique hotels, open spaces, excellent pub trails, art and 
culture. The first thing I found, however, was a bear pit.

If you’re the kind of person who takes a mini-break in order to wind down, a 
walk through theSheffield Botanical Gardens <http://www.sbg.org.uk/> is a 
perfect start to your visit. Quiet, contemplative and packed with plants from 
all over the world, meandering paths lead you through Asian, Mediterranean and 
Himalayan herbaria… until you chance upon afully restored bear pit 
<http://www.sbg.org.uk/portfolio-items/bear-pit/>. It dates from 1836, but has 
been resolutely bear-free since the 1870s, when local legend has it that a 
child fell in to it and was eaten by a cross one.

Today it houses a 7ft-tall grizzly made of steel, part of a citywide art 
installation that reflects Sheffield’s vibrant cultural scene.Going Public 
<https://www.shu.ac.uk/sia/events/event-listing.html?event=172>, which runs 
until December, is showing little-seen works from various private collections 
at venues all over the city, from theMillennium Gallery 
<http://museums-sheffield.org.uk/museums/millennium-gallery/home> to the 
cathedral.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fwhy-sheffield-is-best-value-city-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F154c93d613ebebd25326499869d4015263244d3b%2F150_210_2281_3047%2F2281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheffield%E2%80%99s%20real%20steal%3A%20a%20cutting%20edge%20city%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fwhy-sheffield-is-best-value-city-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheffield%E2%80%99s%20real%20steal%3A%20a%20cutting%20edge%20city%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fwhy-sheffield-is-best-value-city-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F154c93d613ebebd25326499869d4015263244d3b%2F150_210_2281_3047%2F2281.jpg>
 Little and large: the bearpit in Sheffield Botanical Gardens. 
I arrived in the latter just in time for the weekly mother and toddler singing 
group, which was ensconced in a corner. The staff were busy preventing the kids 
from coming face-to-face with entirely inappropriate artworks, such asMarthe, a 
melting, headless figure that looked like an aborted experiment involving a 
human candle.

I noticed a man in a dog collar and sought his counsel. “What do your regulars 
think?” I asked. “That’s not the weirdest,” he replied. “Follow me.” In a small 
side chapel suspended upside down above the pews was the eviscerated torso of a 
man. Behind us the children began to sing “Hickory Dickory Dock”. “That’s a 
Jake and Dinos Chapman,” I said, because I recognised it from somewhere. 
“Apparently, yes,” said the chaplain. “I prefer the nativity scene we’ve got in 
the crypt.”

For a city founded on knives, it all seemed appropriately cutting edge. Beyond 
its ho-hum high street (a TK Maxx; a Zizzi, its never-exotic menu curling up 
and dying inside a glass poster-holder by the door) the city felt contemporary 
and progressive, yet never less than proud of its heritage. A perfect example 
was the Winter Garden – a tropical greenhouse whose curved larch frame has won 
architectural awards – and is the biggest urban glasshouse in Europe. It 
conjoins the Millennium Gallery, home to the “world’s largest metalwork 
museum”, which tells the story of Sheffield’s history with the stainless stuff. 
A retired steelworker called Vincent told me that you could always tell when 
someone is from Sheffield: “Because t’first thing they’ll do is pick up thy 
cut’lry to see where it’s made.”

Whatever your preconceptions of Sheffield, they are probably out of date. More 
than a mere snooker venue, theCrucible 
<http://www.sheffieldtheatres.co.uk/whats-on/?filter=crucible>, under the 
stewardship of Michael Grandage, Sam West and now Daniel Evans, has grown a 
reputation for producing some of the most innovative theatre work anywhere 
outside of London. Earlier this year, the city’s Curzon and Showroom cinemas 
had a public row over when they could screenForce Majeure, a Swedish arthouse 
film. Boutique hotels, such as Brocco on the Park, meanwhile, have made 
Sheffield a viable spot for a romantic mini-break.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fwhy-sheffield-is-best-value-city-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444217216461%2F6701007f-ed45-4fff-af84-4691a74f1361-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheffield%E2%80%99s%20real%20steal%3A%20a%20cutting%20edge%20city%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fwhy-sheffield-is-best-value-city-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheffield%E2%80%99s%20real%20steal%3A%20a%20cutting%20edge%20city%20break&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fwhy-sheffield-is-best-value-city-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444217216461%2F6701007f-ed45-4fff-af84-4691a74f1361-1020x612.jpeg>
 Off the leash: enjoying a pint at Brew Dog, Sheffield. Photograph: Jaye Cole 
And between old favourites such as the Fat Cat and upstarts like BrewDog 
Sheffield, the city is one of the best places pint for pint in the country. 
Take the smart quarter of Kelham Island, with its views of distant hills and 
mills. It’s not a real island, more a strip of land between the River Don and a 
manmade goit, where the water once drove its millwheels to prosperity. It was 
the industrial heart of the city but its works are long gone, replaced by hip 
bars, gastro pubs (I can recommend the Milestone for its pan-fried duck hearts) 
and stylish apartments.

I sat in the sunshine and had an artisan craft beer on the very spot where 200 
years ago – or even 50 – real men with hammers would have would have hit me 
with them for being such a ponce.

Yet you get a real sense that their city is looking forward, not back. Later I 
ate at Marco Pierre White’s new restaurant in the heart of the city. The food 
was modern, fashionable and chic. The service was relaxed, friendly and bright. 
The cutlery was made in Sheffield.

Jon Holmes’s new book, A Portrait of an Idiot as a Young Man, is out now 
(Orion Books, £12.99). To order a copy for £10.39, go tobookshop.theguardian.com
 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306429/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846
 