
This is my friend and muse, an artist called Arita Shahrzad 
<http://www.aritashahrzad.com/>. When it comes to capturing nuance and sadness, 
she has the perfect lips and eyes. I don’t actually take the pictures I 
produce. I’ve used photography for a long time, but I’m not technically 
trained. My role is more conceptual. I do the composition, the framing, the 
post-production and calligraphy. I’ve also posed in several pictures. It’s not 
like I get a cameraman in to do it all.

This image of Arita is taken from my Women of Allah 
<https://teachartwiki.wikispaces.com/Shirin+Neshat,+Women+of+Allah+Series> 
series. It explored martyrdom in relation to women in the Islamic Republic of 
Iran. I’m fascinated by how martyrdom was encouraged and institutionalised 
during the 1979 revolution. It has deep political ramifications, but I also 
wanted to explore the psychological effects of martyrdom. These Iranians were 
caught between self-sacrifice, devotion, love of god – and cruelty, violence 
and death. We often think of women with an Islamic background as being passive 
and submissive to men, but here they were really empowered by bearing arms.

Women of Allah is supposed to be sympathetic, but also disturbing. Every image 
tried to frame that paradox: the woman who gives birth, is attractive and 
believes in God, but is also very brutal, very violent, a killer. I 
experimented with many poses – woman with a child, in decorative veils – but in 
every one she had a gun. I must have made about 80. What I like about this one, 
called Speechless, is that the weapon looks like jewellery, but it’s targeting 
the viewer. It’s usually printed larger than life so when someone stands in 
front of it, the gun points straight at their stomach.

At the time we shot this, I didn’t have a big artistic career: I was just 
having fun with the women. They weren’t real guns. I would rent them from 
theatrical suppliers. We shot on film, so things like light were really 
important, because the setup was so basic. There were imperfections, even in 
the final prints, because everything was so primitive. But we didn’t mind.

While the series did have a journalistic element, I wanted to push the 
conceptual side, even make it surrealist. I’m very interested in the use of
calligraphy and decorative motifs in Islamic art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/24/art-of-quran-exhibit-smithsonian-sackler-washington>
. So I’d take a motif from, say, a Persian carpet and use that in a photograph. 
In every shot, you will find just the sort of repetition, abstraction,symmetry 
and composition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland/2015/feb/10/muslim-rule-and-compass-the-magic-of-islamic-geometric-design>
 that’s innate to classical Islamic art.

The lines you see across Arita’s face are verses by the Iranian poet Tahereh 
Saffarzadeh, in which she addresses her brothers in the revolution, asking if 
she can participate: “O, you martyr / hold my hands / I am your poet / I have 
come to be with you / and on the promised day / we shall rise again.” I wrote 
them out by hand. The meaning of those words, combined with the beauty of 
Arita’s face, is disrupted by the violence of the weapon.

Shirin Neshat’s CV
 Photograph: Tim Knox 
Born: Qazvin, Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, 1957


Educated: University of California, Berkeley

Influences: “My extreme nostalgia for Iran, but also Cindy Sherman and Frida 
Kahlo.”

High point: “Having my work bought by Cindy Sherman.”

Low point: In 2002 I got really exhausted. I felt like I’d become a servant to 
collectors and the market.”

Top tip: “Art comes from experience of life. You have to go out there and 
live.”
 