
Is the Irish government too cowed to do anything about the country’s largest 
media tycoon enlarging his empire?

Denis O’Brien, reputedly Ireland’s richest man, is the largest shareholder in 
the country’s largest newspaper publisher, Independent News & Media (INM).

That company has now agreed a deal to add seven more newspaper titles to its 
stableby acquiring the Celtic Media Group (CMG) 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/media/inm-group-agrees-deal-to-buy-irishowned-regional-newspapers-35017815.html>
.

They include the Anglo-Celt in Cavan, the Meath Chronicle and the Connaught 
Telegraph in Mayo. In all, it extends INM’s footprint to five more counties.

INM is already the major player at national level. It publishes Ireland’s two 
largest-selling titles, theIrish Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent> and Sunday Independent, 
plus the Sunday World and the Dublin Herald. It also has 50% of the Irish Daily 
Star.

O’Brien’s other media company, Communicorp, owns Ireland’s two leading 
commercial radio talk stations: Newstalk and Today FM. In addition, it owns 
Dublin’s 98FM, SPIN 1038, TXFM and SPIN South West.

And he has plenty of non-media holdings too, including a Dublin hospital, a 
prestigious Galway hotel and Siteserv, which provides services to the Irish 
state including the (controversial) installation of water meters. And he has 
many business interests elsewhere in the world.

In such circumstances, it is fair to ask whether the Irish government should 
simply nod through a further expansion of O’Brien’s media assets. Diversity and 
plurality are surely threatened.

The National Union of Journalists, which called in April this year for a 
commission to investigate media ownership in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/apr/08/nuj-calls-for-commission-to-investigate-media-ownership-in-ireland>
, has rightly registered its alarm at INM’s Celtic Media deal.

In its first statement on the matter, the NUJ said it was “gravely concerned” 
about the acquisition 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/news/new-threat-to-media-diversity-ireland/>. In a 
follow-up statement, the unioncalled for a full investigation into the impact 
on employment, competition and media diversity 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/news/nuj-seeks-naughten-pledge-on-sale-of-regional-newspapers/>
.

It urged Ireland’s communications minister, Denis Naughten, to use his powers 
in order to examine the deal, which is subject to approval by his department 
and by the competition commission.

As the NUJ pointed out, the announcement of the deal, for an undisclosed sum, 
coincided with a decision by INM to outsource editorial functions to the UK, 
with a loss of up to 27 permanent and contract jobs.

Celtic Media staff – numbering around 100 – will doubtless be concerned about 
the potential for future staff cutbacks at their papers too.

The publisher is owned and managed by a team that acquired the group in 2012 
through a management buyout for a reported €5.5m. It is headed by a former 
Irish Independent business editor, Frank Mulrennan, and it is understood that 
he will rejoin INM.

Robert Pitt, INM’s chief executive, said: “We are very pleased that Celtic 
Media Group’s publishing titles are becoming part of INM’s portfolio of 
regional and digital titles.

“There are clear synergies arising from this transaction, which fit well with 
INM’s strategy to remain as a key player in the delivery of printed news 
content on a national and regional basis.”

He has previously said consolidation was needed in the national print sector 
in order to secure the viability of newspapers that face falling print 
circulation and a challenging advertising environment.

But the question for Minister Naughten is whether it is appropriate for INM, 
already the largest newspaper publisher on the island of Ireland (it has the
Belfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> Telegraph in the north), to 
grow larger still.
 