
“I’ll meet you at 5pm on the Arduaine Point jetty,” the island’s owner, Eddie 
Gully, had said in the handwritten letter he’d sent me a few weeks earlier. A 
study of a map revealed our mainland rendezvous to be a mere 100 miles 
north-west of Glasgow. Perversely, that’s probably the reason Shuna has stayed 
under the radar for so long: most tourists in search of Hebridean enchantment 
head further north to well-known islands of Mull and Skye. Those who do stay 
south make for Islay or Jura, and fail to spot the tiny cluster that is the 
Slate Islands, one of which is Shuna (not to be confused with the island of the 
same name in Loch Linnhe to the north).

It took just 10 minutes in Eddie’s trim vessel for the Boat House, one of five 
Isle of Shuna cottages 
<http://www.sawdays.co.uk/britain/scotland/argyll-bute/isle-of-shuna-cottages>, 
to heave into view. Tucked behind a rudimentary harbour and dwarfed by the mass 
of Shuna’s wooded hills, our accommodation was a dainty blue lozenge, its 
seaward end – almost entirely of glass – a flash of light in the sunshine. My 
two companions and I bundled gleefully up its stairs to a bright, modern living 
area with a swish kitchen and a balcony for breakfasting in the company of 
swallows. A few minutes’ training from Rob and Kathryn James – the island’s 
affable managers and its only permanent population – in operating the little 
ex-military assault boats, and Shuna and its salty environs were all ours.

Over the week we became aware of the distinct cadences of Shuna, whose only 
timetable is the rising and setting of the sun. It has no televisions or radios 
to disturb the peace. Its otters, buzzards, porpoises, seals and deer are there 
again tomorrow if you miss them today. The only event we could set our watches 
by was Rob dropping off a printed weather forecast each morning so we could 
gauge whether it was safe to take the boats out. It was it usually fine, so we 
circumnavigated the island, also acquainting ourselves with the modest hills 
and defiant hamlets of Luing, Shuna’s more substantial neighbour to the west.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fshuna-scotland-island-cottage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425553545185%2Fb211e328-eee4-451c-8e0f-7407430cb7ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shuna%3A%20the%20overlooked%20jewel%20off%20the%20west%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fshuna-scotland-island-cottage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shuna%3A%20the%20overlooked%20jewel%20off%20the%20west%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fshuna-scotland-island-cottage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425553545185%2Fb211e328-eee4-451c-8e0f-7407430cb7ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The lounge of the Boat House 
Exploring on foot we found that, although only three miles long by 
one-and-a-half wide, Shuna does not give up its treasures easily. We moseyed 
happily for hours through scrub birch and oak copses, but somehow overlooked 
the little cove that harbours the island’s shipwreck (an elderly wooden ferry 
hauled up to moulder away). Later in the week, intent on seeking out some 
ancient graves, we marched up sylvan hill and down marshy dale but had to 
content ourselves with some iron age burial mounds and a brace of ruined mills 
from Shuna’s more populous past. We weren’t too upset, for the walk had 
included red deer sightings, a mammoth rockpooling session and the gorgeous 
sight of Shuna Castle burnished by an early summer sun.

Ah yes, Shuna Castle. Built in 1911 by adventurer and philanthropist George 
Alexander MacLean Buckley, with no expense spared, the crenellated pile was 
abandoned in the 1980s and, like the ferry and mills, is now crumbling away. 
That’s not to say that Shuna lives in the past: the Boat House is lit by LEDs 
and most of the electricity for the island’s five holiday properties comes from 
solar panels and a small wind turbine.

“We’ve got plans to go 100% green,” said Eddie, who was born and brought up on 
the island.

Eddie’s joy at Shuna’s many charms was infectious, and not the least of them 
is its isolation. It gave the feel of an adventure to our midweek trip to 
replenish provision. We sailed north past a sprinkling of isles encrusted with 
toothlike rocks and speckled with impossibly remote houses. BeyondArdmaddy 
Castle <http://www.gardens-of-argyll.co.uk/gardens/ardmaddy-castle-garden.html>
, on the mainland, we cruised, our little outboard motor throbbing away, until 
we landed, an hour after we had set out, atBalvicar 
<http://www.balvicarstores.co.uk/> on Seil.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fshuna-scotland-island-cottage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425553702652%2F8b4e0364-93f7-4877-8054-543aca6ce942-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shuna%3A%20the%20overlooked%20jewel%20off%20the%20west%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fshuna-scotland-island-cottage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shuna%3A%20the%20overlooked%20jewel%20off%20the%20west%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fshuna-scotland-island-cottage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425553702652%2F8b4e0364-93f7-4877-8054-543aca6ce942-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An evening return to Shuna on the ex-military assault craft provided with the 
cottage. Photograph: Dixe Wills 
“I like your assault craft,” cried a man on a nearby yacht, and we nodded our 
thanks nonchalantly, as if she’d been ours for years.

One challenge she wouldn’t take on, however, was the nearby Corryvreckan 
Whirlpool <http://www.whirlpool-scotland.co.uk/>. In 1947, this, the 
third-largest whirlpool in the world, nearly claimed the life of an injudicious 
George Orwell, so we opted to pay a local skipper, called Duncan, to call at 
the ramshackle jetty outside our front door and take us across Corryvreckan’s 
impressively turbulent brine.

And so the days passed in a timeless haze. When we weren’t exploring, we were 
pootling about on sit-on kayaks, being taken out on a venerable racing 
catamaran, or learning archery from Rob and Kathryn, with the castle as a 
picturesque backdrop.

Here, a kindly gust took one of my arrows right into the heart of the target. 
“Bull’s-eye!” I exclaimed triumphantly, though I might just as well have been 
referring to our choice of holiday.

• The holiday was provided by Sawdays (0117-204 7810, sawdays.co.uk 
<http://www.sawdays.co.uk/britain/scotland/argyll-bute/isle-of-shuna-cottages#back>
) and Isle of Shuna (01852 300434,islandofshuna.co.uk 
<http://islandofshuna.co.uk/>). The Boat House sleeps six from £820 a week, gas 
and fuel for assault craft extra. Rail travel was supplied by Virgin Trains 
(0871 9774222,virgintrains.co.uk <http://www.virgintrains.co.uk/>) which 
travels London-Glasgow from £21 single. ScotRail (0330 3030111,scotrail.co.uk 
<http://scotrail.co.uk/>), has singles from Edinburgh to Glasgow from £12.50 
 