
Sinn Féin has refused to nominate a new deputy first minister in Northern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, triggering the 
collapse of the power-sharing government and fresh elections.

Theresa May earlier held talks with the first minister, Arlene Foster, and 
Martin McGuinness, whoresigned as deputy first minister last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-to-resign-as-northern-ireland-deputy-first-minister>
, in a late effort to save the Stormont government, stressing that it had a 
role to play in Brexit negotiations.

May’s spokeswoman said: “She spoke to both Arlene Foster and Martin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness> to encourage them to 
use what time was left today to try to find a resolution to the situation in 
Northern Ireland, outlining the importance of finding a way forward – 
particularly in the context of wanting to make sure that Northern Ireland has a 
voice in the UK’s exit from the European Union as we approach the critical 
period before triggering article 50.”

A short time later, Foster said at Stormont: “Northern Ireland does not need 
an election, it needs stable government.” She saidSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> had “forced an election that 
risks Northern Ireland’s future and stability and which suits nobody but 
themselves”.

McGuinness, who is being treated for a rare condition that attacks the heart 
and other organs, resigned last Monday in protest at Foster’s refusal to step 
aside while a public inquiry is held into an energy scheme whose costs have 
spiralled out of control.

If Sinn Féin fails to nominate a new deputy first minister by 5pm on Monday, 
the UK’s Northern Ireland secretary, James Brokenshire, will have to set a date 
for fresh elections. Under the complex rules of power-sharing in Northern 
Ireland, a government cannot survive if one section of the community refuses to 
participate.

McGuinness tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/M_McGuinness_SF?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author>
: “In conversations this morn with the British PM & her sec. of state I said 
society & I felt badly let down by both [Foster’s] DUP & the British govt.”

It is unclear whether McGuinness will stand as a candidate in the forthcoming 
elections. Sinn Féin is keen for his name to be on the party’s slate in the 
city of Derry, but it is understood his family is concerned about the impact of 
an election campaign on his health.

The main parties represented in the devolved parliament have already started 
electioneering even before the official start of the campaign. Over the weekend 
Foster attended a party rally at a hall belonging to the Orange Order in her 
native Fermanagh, and Sinn Féin revealed its slogan for the contest – “Get 
even”.

At a social club run for the benefit of ex-IRA prisoners in west Belfast, the 
Sinn Féin finance minister, Máirtín Ó Muilleoir, said: “People are looking for 
an opportunity to say they have zero tolerance when it comes to corruption, 
zero tolerance to bigotry, and that they want respect and equality. That is 
what will be on Sinn Féin’s ballot paper.”

The cross-community Alliance party said it wanted the campaign to focus on 
allegations of corruption and cronyism associated with the renewable heating 
incentive scheme as well as other scandals.

Naomi Long, the Alliance leader, said: ”Our party isn’t to blame for the snap 
election called as a result of the DUP’s and Sinn Féin’s mess. But, unlike 
some, we are not running scared of an election. We will be facing the people 
confident, and offering the electorate an alternative to the secrecy, 
corruption and cronyism that they are sick of at Stormont.”

On Sunday Brokenshire had said no alternatives to power-sharing were being 
contemplated, including direct rule or joint authority between London and 
Dublin.

However, given the bad blood between the DUP and Sinn Féin, negotiations to 
form a post-election government are expected to be long and tortuous, with no 
guarantee that the parties will agree to form a coalition.

The hardline unionist assembly member Jim Allister predicted that efforts to 
build a new coalition could fail. “Those who have chosen to believe the lie 
that Sinn Féin wants to make Northern Ireland work have had a rude awakening 
over the past few days,” he said. “Sinn Féin will be seeking further 
concessions after the election, when there is nothing more for unionists to 
give.”
 