
Sir Howard Bernstein, the veteran chief executive of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> council who transformed the former 
“Cottonopolis” into the UK’s second city, is standing down after 45 years at 
the town hall.

The 63-year-old, nationally regarded as a star of British local government, 
ended speculation over his future by saying the time was right to hand over the 
reins.

Bernstein said it had been a “privilege to serve the city during such a 
pivotal period”, adding: “I’m incredibly proud of what the city has been able 
to achieve in this time and to have played a part in it.”


Joining the council as an 18-year-old junior clerk in 1971, Bernstein rose 
through the ranks at a time of huge change for Manchester. From establishing 
Manchester airport as a limited company to overseeing the post-IRA bomb rebuild 
in 1996, Bernstein went on to secure the hosting of the Commonwealth Games in 
2002 and has played a key role in raising billions of pounds of investment in 
the city.

He has also been a vocal cheerleader for George Osborne’s “northern 
powerhouse” agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/05/northern-powerhouse-fund-condemned-including-routine-potholes-budget>
, becoming the former chancellor’s most influential ally outside Westminster, 
as Manchester led the way in grasping devolved powers over areas such as 
transport, planning and housing.

Bernstein said his decision to step down was partly the result of a need to 
create an orderly succession process, but he insisted he was not retiring.

“It’s hard,” he said. “Do I wish I was 55 again? Yes, I do. Would I look 
forward to another eight years? Yes. But the platform we have got in Manchester 
for change and growth is unprecedented in generations. Whoever takes over from 
me, the long term future of this city is very, very strong.”

He described Manchester as a “premier league world city” but said there 
remained significant challenges to address “to ensure everyone who lives here 
has the opportunity to share in, and contribute to, its growing success.”

Described in reverential terms by those who have worked with him, the chief 
executive helped restore Manchester’s swagger from the top of town hall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fsir-howard-bernstein-tand-down-from-manchester-council-chief-executive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41b6e4aedbfa877ddc22c539d27bd1fd66916fd0%2F0_63_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Howard%20Bernstein%20to%20stand%20down%20from%20Manchester%20council&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fsir-howard-bernstein-tand-down-from-manchester-council-chief-executive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Howard%20Bernstein%20to%20stand%20down%20from%20Manchester%20council&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fsir-howard-bernstein-tand-down-from-manchester-council-chief-executive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41b6e4aedbfa877ddc22c539d27bd1fd66916fd0%2F0_63_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Fireworks illuminate the sky during the opening ceremony of the Commonwealth 
Games in July 2002. Bernstein was instrumental in Manchester’s hosting of the 
event. Photograph: Reuters 
With a penchant for vivid socks and snappy scarves, Bernstein was a picture of 
sartorial style not usually associated with local government.

“He would be standing up giving a speech at the height of summer wearing a 
black scarf – year-round, he was synonymous with it,” said one business leader 
who has worked closely with Bernstein. He said the only day Bernstein had ever 
taken off work was his 60th birthday.

“He was well known for poring over his iPad late at night sending emails off 
to people round the world, getting them to dance to his tune,” the business 
leader added. “It’s a cliche about getting things done but he’s the most 
business-focused council chief executive I’ve ever seen. He’d jump on a plane 
to seal deals himself rather than get the business or landowner to do it.

“He’s great at having high-level conversations with top businesspeople, prime 
ministers, but if he gets on with you, you could drop him a text and he would 
always prioritise what you wanted to get done.”

Osborne, whose northern powerhouse initiative has faltered under Theresa May’s 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/01/theresa-may-confusion-northern-powerhouse-labour-andy-burnham-steve-rotheram>
, led tributes to Bernstein. “I have worked with lots of very clever civil 
servants in Whitehall and come across lots of officials in local government. 
But he is one of the very, very best public servants I’ve ever come across,” he 
said. “I just think in lots of different ways he’s the star of British local 
government and frankly I can’t think of anyone who comes close to him.”

Andy Burnham, the Labour home affairs spokesman and mayoral candidate for 
Greater Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester>, said: 
“Sir Howard is one of the most incredible people I’ve ever met. He gave 
[Greater Manchester] a new sense of ambition. We’ll carry it on.”

Lord O’Neill, the commercial secretary to the Treasury, who is from 
Manchester, said: “He was … a relentless supporter of our efforts to rebalance 
the economy and build a northern powerhouse – and his good work has helped 
create a dynamic, modern city that is the envy of others both across the 
country and beyond.”


Sir Richard Leese, the leader of Manchester city council, whose partnership 
with Berstein has lasted 18 years, said the chief executive’s devotion to 
Manchester was unparalleled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fsir-howard-bernstein-tand-down-from-manchester-council-chief-executive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bc105ad46e6027e1bcc417a986380298a58e235%2F1133_0_2631_3288%2F2631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Howard%20Bernstein%20to%20stand%20down%20from%20Manchester%20council&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fsir-howard-bernstein-tand-down-from-manchester-council-chief-executive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Howard%20Bernstein%20to%20stand%20down%20from%20Manchester%20council&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fsir-howard-bernstein-tand-down-from-manchester-council-chief-executive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bc105ad46e6027e1bcc417a986380298a58e235%2F1133_0_2631_3288%2F2631.jpg>
 George Osborne described Sir Howard Bernstein as a star of British local 
government. Photograph: Jonathan Brady/PA 
He said: “Sir Howard is widely recognised as one of the great local government 
chief executives. Having someone of his talent, vision and drive dedicate his 
career to the city has been an undoubted plus for Manchester. Working with him 
over many years, addressing challenges and attempting to capture opportunities 
for the city, has been a pleasure.


“He will be a hard act to follow but part of his legacy will be the quality of 
the team, the strength of relationships and the depth of organisational 
ambition his successor inherits. Our new chief executive will need to be 
someone with the strategic vision, innovative ideas, partnership working skills 
and gravitas to help lead Manchester forwards into an exciting new phase.”

In July, Bernstein led a delegation of senior Manchester figures to Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/30/manchester-northern-powerhouse-china-investment-football-golden-goal>
 to drum up Chinese investment for the city, after the launch of the north of 
England’s first direct flight to mainland China, from Manchester airport.

In an interview with the Guardian in Beijing, Bernstein said he had been “very 
reassured” about the prospects of Chinese investment in Britain despite the 
British vote to leave the European Union.

He warned that the NHS would collapse if May’s government withdrew from EU 
freedom of movement laws. “Places like Manchester have welcomed people from 
different parts of the world for centuries and managed very very comfortably to 
ensure people can co-exist and play a full and active part in the city – it’s 
one of the things which I celebrate in Manchester,” he said.

“I’m very, very clear about what free movement of labour can do for a city. I 
don’t see how some of our public services, the health service in particular, is 
capable of being sustained if we don’t have people from different parts of the 
world.”
 