
Sir Robin Chichester-Clark, who has died aged 88, was the epitome of the “big 
house” unionists who dominated political and public life in Northern Ireland in 
the decades after partition in 1922. He represented Londonderry in the House of 
Commons from 1955 until 1974 and earned the distinction of being the only 
member of his party to serve at any ministerial level in a British government. 
While in opposition he held several shadow posts underEdward Heath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/18/guardianobituaries.conservatives>
, who appointed him minister of state for employment in his 1970 administration.

Until 1966, the Ulster Unionists held all 12 Northern Ireland seats at 
Westminster but the election of the nationalistGerry Fitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/aug/26/obituaries.uk> in West 
Belfast that year fractured the longstanding monopoly and signalled the 
beginning of a new and more turbulent era for unionism.

Since partition, there had been a “convention” that Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> affairs were not discussed in 
London, an arrangement that suited Whitehall ministers and officials wary of 
any contact that might ignite the ever-glowing embers of crisis in Belfast.

But, with the private encouragement of the Labour prime minister, Harold Wilson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1995/may/25/obituaries>, and the 
vociferous support of a cadre of Labour MPs formed into theCampaign for 
Democracy in Ulster <http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/crights/nicra/nicra781.htm>, 
Fitt challenged the prevailing order, raising long-held grievances about voting 
rights, religious discrimination and other contentious issues.

As leader of the unionist MPs it fell to the innately moderate 
Chichester-Clark to defend his party’s partisan record. Having lost the fight 
to save the convention, he and his colleagues secretly consulted the RUC 
inspector-general, seeking material from special branch to discredit Fitt, whom 
they had come to regard as an IRA agitator. In the end Chichester-Clark 
appeared quite a woeful figure in the Commons when he could only cite Fitt’s 
preference for an Irish passport as evidence of his subversive leanings.

When the campaign for civil rights in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> accelerated after a violent 
encounter between marchers and the RUC in October 1968, Chichester-Clark, as 
the Conservative spokesman on NI affairs, had the impossible task of defending 
the increasingly repressive security policies being pursued in Belfast and 
countering the universal scorn of the Commons, where the need for urgent and 
far-reaching reform at Stormont was now accepted on both sides of the house.

Given the traditional unionist links with the Conservative party, 
Chichester-Clark was first disappointed and then disillusioned as even the 
moderate unionist case for gradual reform he advocated was comprehensively 
rejected. His hurt was all the more acute because his older brother, James, the 
Stormont prime minister between 1969 and 1971, later made a life peer asLord 
Moyola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/may/20/guardianobituaries.northernireland>
, was struggling to advance cautious reform against the stridency of his 
uncompromising party hardliners and a backdrop of intensifying civil disorder.

When Heath became prime minister in 1970 and refused to ease the pressure for 
reform at Stormont, Chichester-Clark’s credibility and influence was further 
undermined

After Stormont was prorogued in favour of direct rule from Westminster in 1972 
<http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/aia/bac.htm>, and the government held fruitless 
talks with the IRA in London, he felt completely betrayed. When his government 
then entered into theSunningdale agreement 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/december/9/newsid_2536000/2536767.stm>
 with the Irish Republic in 1973, his disillusion was complete.

With discontent growing among his constituency party members in Northern 
Ireland, Chichester-Clark decided to get out before he was disowned, but his 
failure to secure an alternative Conservative candidacy in Britain to contest 
the 1974 general election finally ended his political life. He was knighted 
later that year.

Named Robert, but known as Robin, he was born at Moyola Park, the family’s 
sprawling ancestral estate at Castledawson, Co Derry, at the foot of the 
Glenshane Pass. His father, James Lenox-Conyingham Clark and mother, Marion 
(nee Chichester), had changed their names by deed poll in 1924 to the simpler 
Chichester-Clark. He had two siblings, James and Penelope.

Robin was initially educated at home by governesses but later was sent to 
Selwyn House prep school near Broadstairs, Kent. For part of his time there, 
the school was evacuated to Wales. When he left in 1940 he enrolled at the 
Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, before reading law and history at Magdalene 
College, Cambridge.

He first worked in journalism then public relations, representing Glyndebourne 
Opera in 1952-53. He joined the Oxford University Press, where he remained 
until, following in the footsteps of his father and grandfather, becoming the 
MP for Londonderry in 1955.

After leaving politics, Chichester-Clark set up as a management consultant and 
was active at board level with a broad range of organisations, both commercial 
and artistic. He was also involved in fundraising for the Royal Philharmonic 
Orchestra.

He is survived by his second wife, Caroline (nee Bull), whom he married in 
1974, and their two sons, Adam and Thomas; and by three children, Emma, Mark 
and Sophia, from his first marriage, to Jane (nee Goddard), which ended in 
divorce.

• Robert (Robin) Chichester-Clark, politician, born 10 January 1928; died 5 
August 2016
 