
I’m weird. I’m a weirdo.

You think you know me? You don’t know me.

Yuh cyaan read me. Doh’ even try to read me.

Actually scrub that bit. Because this is my autobiography. Sort of.

You think you know Chris Gayle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-gayle>
. World Boss. The Six Machine. Destroyer of records. King of the party scene. 
And Modest.

As I was saying. You think you know me. You don’t know me. Sometimes I’m 
happy. Sometimes I’m sad. Sometimes when I’m feeling happy I’m also a bit sad. 
Sometimes I’m completely legless in a bar. Sometimes I’m not. I’m complicated 
in ways you cannot understand. Ways that when you put it like that sound just 
like many other sportsmen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fsix-machine-i-dont-like-cricket-i-love-it-by-chris-gayle-digested-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d6638c1f35277a771d777fa52542bd0f70f26c3%2F739_630_2973_3685%2F2973.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Machine%3A%20I%20Don%E2%80%99t%20Like%20Cricket...%20I%20Love%20It%20by%20Chris%20Gayle%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fsix-machine-i-dont-like-cricket-i-love-it-by-chris-gayle-digested-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Machine%3A%20I%20Don%E2%80%99t%20Like%20Cricket...%20I%20Love%20It%20by%20Chris%20Gayle%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fsix-machine-i-dont-like-cricket-i-love-it-by-chris-gayle-digested-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d6638c1f35277a771d777fa52542bd0f70f26c3%2F739_630_2973_3685%2F2973.jpg>
 Illustration: Matt Blease 
People think I’m arrogant. I’m not. I can’t help being the best batsman who 
ever lived. I can’t help it that girls love me. I love the girls, too. I’m a 
hot man and if I meet hot women I owe it to them to let them feel the World 
Boss wood. People have written many untrue things about me. They don’t know me. 
They say I have plenty threesomes. World Boss has never run a three in his 
life. World Boss only deals in sixes. Saves time.

Did I mention I am the Six Machine? The only man in the history of the world 
to havescored two Test triple hundreds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/nov/16/chris-gayle-300-west-indies>, to 
have hit twice as manyT20 sixes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eh7um6qfvt4> 
as anyone else, to have hit a double century in limited overs, to have hit the 
fastest century. The only man in the history of the world who is so needy he 
has to remind everyone he is the only person in the history of the world to 
have scored two Test triple hundreds, to have hit twice as many T20 sixes as 
anyone else, to have hit a double century in limited overs, to have hit the 
fastest century on almost every page. Sometimes I think World Boss doesn’t 
begin to describe me. Call me Universe Boss.

I wake up in the morning and I am back in Rollington Park in Jamaica where I 
was born. I am six years old. We live on next to nothing. My mum is strict.
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> is my way out. There are 
some good people. There are some bad people. These are the interesting bits of 
my story. Unfortunately they are cut all too short as my Tourette’s about being 
World Boss cuts in again.

World Baass. Universe Baass. Multiverse Baass.

I am the Six Machine. I am the only man in the history of the world to have 
scored two triple centuries etc. I am the only cricketer in the history of the 
world to have his own pole-dancing room in his house. I have a girl. I can’t 
remember her name. We’ve been together for nine years. Though mostly it 
probably sounds as if we’ve been apart. She doesn’t like World Boss’s 
pole-dancing room. But luckily loads of other women do. So it hasn’t been a 
total waste of money.

I get picked for the West Indies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/west-indies-cricket-team>. In the early days 
I am the junior member of the dressing-room so I learn to keep silent. This too 
is quite interesting. But then I worry you might have forgotten I am World 
Boss. The only cricketer in the history of the world etc...

You think you know me. You don’t know me. Everywhere World Boss goes there are 
women who want me. People think Indian women don’t want me. Indian women love 
me. I love Indian women. Nice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fsix-machine-i-dont-like-cricket-i-love-it-by-chris-gayle-digested-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77b67d8e9654c61becc0fd072f0ab72d4c775b18%2F0_0_1200_1847%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Machine%3A%20I%20Don%E2%80%99t%20Like%20Cricket...%20I%20Love%20It%20by%20Chris%20Gayle%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fsix-machine-i-dont-like-cricket-i-love-it-by-chris-gayle-digested-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Machine%3A%20I%20Don%E2%80%99t%20Like%20Cricket...%20I%20Love%20It%20by%20Chris%20Gayle%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fsix-machine-i-dont-like-cricket-i-love-it-by-chris-gayle-digested-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77b67d8e9654c61becc0fd072f0ab72d4c775b18%2F0_0_1200_1847%2F1200.jpg>
People say I disrespect cricket. They don’t know me. I am the only player in 
the history of the world etc. It’s not my fault I make cricket look easy. I 
could have been a fast bowler. I didn’t want to run. I could have been a 
wicket-keeper. I didn’t want to bend. I am the Six Machine with the Big Blade.
Geddit. People say I am not polite to other cricketers. World Boss tells it as 
he sees it. Brian Lara just wasn’t very good. Kevin Pietersen just isn’t very 
good. They seek out records. Records come to the World Boss.

You think you know me. You don’t know me. People say I’m a mercenary. They say 
World Boss just travels the world raking in the cash for different T20 
franchises. That’s not true. World Boss just likes to spread the Six Machine 
love. World Boss can’t help it if he also gets paid a fortune. World Boss does 
some good things with his money. World Boss spends the rest on getting pissed 
and having a good time.

World Boss likes to party hard. In Australia, World Boss got some flak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/04/chris-gayle-reporter-drink-blush-network-ten-big-bash-melbourne>
 for inviting a woman TV presenter out during an interview and saying, ‘Doh 
blush baby’.World Boss is misunderstood. That woman was gagging for it. World 
Boss just want to make her happy. Same when World Boss asked another woman 
interviewer if her lady garden matched her hair. That’s not being 
disrespectful. That’s just me being interested in a sexy lady. Freddie Flintoff 
say I’m a fool. World Boss takes no notice of a man who takes Viagra. World 
Boss always has wood in his hand.

You think you know me. You don’t know me. World Boss is the only cricketer in 
the history etc.

Digested read, digested: I think I know you.
 