
The acclaimed Icelandic author Sjón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/11/sjon-bjork-moonstone-boy-who-never-was-interview>
 has been named as the third of 100 writers who will contribute to artistKatie 
Paterson’s Future Library <http://futurelibrary.no/>, an artwork spanning 100 
years which will see each manuscript locked away unseen until 2114, when the 
collection of 100 texts is finally revealed.

Margaret Atwood was Future Library’s first contributor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/27/margaret-atwood-scribbler-moon-future-library-norway-katie-paterson>
, handing over her piece of writing, Scribbler Moon, to Paterson in 2015.David 
Mitchell followed up this spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/30/david-mitchell-buries-latest-manuscript-for-a-hundred-years>
 with From Me Flows What You Call Time. Both authors passed on their 
manuscripts in the middle of Oslo’s Nordmarka forest, where Paterson planted 
1,000 trees in 2014. In 2114, the trees will be cut down to make the paper on 
which the 100 manuscripts will be printed – and, finally, read.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsjon-iceland-future-library-2114-katie-paterson-installation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47fb420b30a7c94e80cb60ed65935254e6054714%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sj%C3%B3n%20is%20Future%20Library's%20next%20recruit%20to%20become%20a%2022nd-century%20author&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsjon-iceland-future-library-2114-katie-paterson-installation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sj%C3%B3n%20is%20Future%20Library%27s%20next%20recruit%20to%20become%20a%2022nd-century%20author&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsjon-iceland-future-library-2114-katie-paterson-installation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47fb420b30a7c94e80cb60ed65935254e6054714%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Katie Paterson, left, and David Mitchell, centre, visit the Nordmarka forest 
in Norway in May 2016. Photograph: Kristin von Hirsch/Bjørvika Utvikling 
Sjón: I’m one of the few people who’ve had Björk as a backing singer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/11/sjon-bjork-moonstone-boy-who-never-was-interview>
Scottish artist Paterson, who herself will never read the writing she has 
asked the authors to contribute – the project will be kept going by a trust – 
calledSjón <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sjon> a “visionary author”. The 
project’s first non-English-language contributor, the Icelandic author has been 
translated into 35 languages, and won prizes including the Icelandic literary 
prize and the Nordic Council’s literature prize for novels including Moonstone: 
The Boy Who Never Was and The Blue Fox.

“Sjón creates a world of metamorphosis: his poetic works weave together 
history and myth, folklore, ancient storytelling, the surreal and the magical, 
through the language of past and contemporary Icelandic,” said Paterson. “His 
writing is dynamic and melodic, and like Future Library, interlaces the human 
and natural world through stretches of time. In addition to writing poems, 
novels, plays, librettos, lyrics, and children’s books, Sjón often collaborates 
with other artists and musicians, so I am very excited about the possibilities 
his contribution will bring to this hidden library growing through the trees.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F97512418&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F97512418> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F97512418&media=>
 Video:Katie Paterson explains her Future Library project 
<https://vimeo.com/97512418> 
Katie Paterson, the cosmicomical artist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/apr/06/katie-paterson-cosmicomical-artist>
The author professed himself delighted to have been chosen as the latest 
contributor, having watched Atwood and Mitchell’s turns. “I sat out here green 
with envy and hoping my turn would come sometime in the next 50 years, before 
I’m 104,” he said. “There are so many beautiful things about it – the fact the 
forest will be growing as the writers contribute to the project. That this is 
an actual living thing, growing, waiting.”

The “beauty” of the Future Library <http://www.futurelibrary.no/>, he told the 
Guardian, was how it “makes you confront questions” about how an author writes, 
and how their work is received. “Most of the time at the back of our minds when 
we’re writing, we’re thinking about reception, about our fears and our hopes 
that our works will survive through the decades and into the centuries ahead,” 
he said. “How much do you rely on the reception of your work? Does it matter, 
and how big a part is it of my way of writing? Is it all about vanity, about 
instant shaming or instant praise?”

Am I a writer of my times? Who do I write for? Will there be people in the 
future who understand the language?
Sjón 
The Future Library, Sjón believes, has “strong game-like qualities”. “It 
wasn’t until I was invited to contribute to it – and had gladly accepted to do 
so – that I started to understand the depth of its challenge. Like the best of 
games the Future Library makes the player aware of the skills and flaws he or 
she brings to the playing field, in this case it tests the fundaments of 
everything an author must deal with when sincerely engaging with the art of 
writing: Am I writer of my times? Who do I write for? How much does the 
response of the reader matter to me? What in a text makes it timeless? And for 
some of us it poses the hardest question of all: Will there be people in the 
future who understand the language I write in? It is a game I look forward to 
playing with enthusiasm and earnestness,” he said.

The author pointed out that only 330,000 people speak Icelandic, and that 
“there’s no guarantee that in 100 years, Icelandic as a literary language will 
still be around”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fsep%2F19%2Ficelandic-writer-sjon-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Icelandic%20writer%20Sj%C3%B3n%3A%20'It%20will%20be%20a%20good%20thing%20for%20Iceland%20that%20our%20image%20has%20been%20tarnished'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fsep%2F19%2Ficelandic-writer-sjon-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Icelandic%20writer%20Sj%C3%B3n%3A%20%27It%20will%20be%20a%20good%20thing%20for%20Iceland%20that%20our%20image%20has%20been%20tarnished%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fsep%2F19%2Ficelandic-writer-sjon-video&media=>
Video: Sjón discusses Iceland’s changing culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2011/sep/19/icelandic-writer-sjon-video>
“Being the first non-English writer from a language spoken by few – that’s 
what we call it here – for me of course I really have to face the question of 
language,” he said. “We will see. I feel a duty to write in that language and 
not English.”

He also highlighted the likely change in the concept of the book, in 98 years’ 
time. “We don’t have a clue where the book will be in 2114. Will there be 
books? Or will [the headlines] be, ‘in Norway they are producing a book like 
they did in the old days?’ Will it be morally wrong to destroy trees in 2114, 
because we have discovered that trees are emotional beings?” he asked.

A poet and librettist, as well as a novelist, Sjón has yet to decide what form 
his contribution will take – and even once he does, he won’t reveal it. “I’ve 
already started thinking about this and rolling it around in my mind. I still 
haven’t decided what kind of text I will write,” he said. “I don’t know if it 
will be a big work or a small work. Katie says it’s completely up to me if it’s 
a one-word piece or a novella or a single poem. That’s also part of the game. 
But if you do that, is it because you don’t want to risk saying more, or 
because it’s all you have to say? We’ll see.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsjon-iceland-future-library-2114-katie-paterson-installation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05b40f94b7e6d6ffb8736a63c8477ac363dcd78d%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sj%C3%B3n%20is%20Future%20Library's%20next%20recruit%20to%20become%20a%2022nd-century%20author&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsjon-iceland-future-library-2114-katie-paterson-installation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sj%C3%B3n%20is%20Future%20Library%27s%20next%20recruit%20to%20become%20a%2022nd-century%20author&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsjon-iceland-future-library-2114-katie-paterson-installation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05b40f94b7e6d6ffb8736a63c8477ac363dcd78d%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘Will it be morally wrong to destroy trees?’ … logs in the Nordmarka forest, 
Oslo. Photograph: Giorgia Polizzi  