
Sky has offered to pay around £40m a year in broadcasting rights for a Twenty20
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> tournament with teams billed as 
cities rather than counties when the new format gets under way in 2017.

The England and Wales Cricket Board chairman, Colin Graves, is known to be set 
on introducing a city-based T20 series and the additional revenue from Sky 
would allow for each team to pay big wages to lure international stars similar 
to those in the IPL and Australia’sBig Bash League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> and enable Sky to market 
the broadcasting rights globally.

While the ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> says no final decision 
has been made, theObserver understands they are close to final proposals that 
would see a revamp of the domestic T20 competition based around eight 
city-based teams.

Sky is keen for the tournament to be played in a three- or four-week block at 
the height of summer, with matches in the evenings so they can be broadcast 
after the end of any international matches taking place at that time.

There is real opposition among the counties to the idea, though Warwickshire 
have played as Birmingham Bears, and it is understood that some of Sky’s 
additional money will be offered as a sweetener to accept a cut in the number 
of Championship matches down to 12 as a way of making room for the competition. 
The ECB is exploring whether the franchise tournament could run in addition to 
a Twenty20 competition played by all 18 counties.

It is likely that city-based teams would be owned by either the ECB or by the 
county doing the hosting rather than by private companies, as are theIPL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl> franchises. The success of the Big Bash 
League and the increased viewing figures that has attracted has prompted both 
the ECB and Sky to consider the merits of a similar tournament in England.

They have recently recruited Mike Fordham, one of the leading figures involved 
in launching both the IPL and the Caribbean Premier League. Fordham, who is a 
vice-president at IMG, a global sports and media business, was involved in 
drawing up IMG’s proposals for how franchise cricket might work in England and 
which suggested any such tournament could end up being worth over £1bn.

Both the ECB and Sky declined to comment.
 