
For more than 150 years trains have been rumbling through the small 
Northumberland town of Blyth. But since 1968 it’s been freight, not commuters 
or day-trippers, taking this speedy route to Newcastle. Local campaigners have 
long been pushing to get passengers back on the rails - and now, with 
Northumberland county councilhaving allocated funds for the project 
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/news/north-east-news/northumberland-county-council-voted-favour-11075941>
, it looks like it’s finally full steam ahead.

What swayed the council seems to be the strong economic case for 
re-introducing Blyth’s passenger services. Campaigners argued that the line 
will kickstart regeneration in the town, opening up job opportunities in 
Newcastle for Blyth’s residents. The line should also boost the local economy, 
with the newly connected Blyth attracting more residents and businesses.

These arguments apply equally to many small towns across the country, as shown 
by aUniversity of Lincoln 
<http://irep.ntu.ac.uk/374/1/202861_secondarycentresofeconomicactivityexecsummary2009.pdf>
 study (pdf). Researchers found that travel time to larger urban areas is a key 
factor in a town’s economic success. But there is the potential for transport 
to deliver even greater benefits for small towns if councils start to see it as 
part of a wider picture.

Building around transport hubs, rather than at the edge of towns, can reduce 
urban sprawl and cut road congestion.

Too often, people aren’t getting the full benefit from their towns’ transport 
links because their homes are only accessible by car. When councils focus their 
housebuilding efforts on the edge of towns, it means the train station is a 
long drive away for many residents.

The Hampshire market town of Fareham has regular trains to London, Brighton, 
Cardiff, Southampton and Portsmouth, yet was named themost car-dependent town 
in the country 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/motoring/news/10986871/Fareham-named-as-Britains-most-car-dependent-town.html>
. The town’s urban sprawl means the train station is only easily accessible by 
car, contributing to pollution and road congestion for residents.

A new paper 
<http://www.cpre.org.uk/resources/housing-and-planning/housing/item/4345-making-the-link>
 by theCampaign to Protect Rural England <http://www.cpre.org.uk/> argues that 
small towns will see huge benefits if planning for housing and transport are 
combined. What’s needed is a new culture in planning, with development focused 
on high-density housing around transport hubs rather than low-density housing 
on the edge of towns.

It looks like the government is cottoning on to this approach: in a recent 
planning policy consultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/488276/151207_Consultation_document.pdf>
 it identified 680 sites for high-density development around train stations. 
But while many of these sites are in cities, it’s small towns that stand to 
benefit most from links to urban areas.

If this approach is carried out well, we could see compact, vibrant 
communities where shops, amenities and public transport links to larger 
employment centres are accessible by foot or bike. Less car use means the 
potential for green spaces instead of car parks and reduces road noise, which 
the government estimates has a social cost of between £7bn and £10bn a year.

It is estimated 
<http://inrix.com/press/traffic-congestion-to-cost-the-uk-economy-more-than-300-billion-over-the-next-16-years/>
 that congestion will cost the UK economy £307bn between 2013 and 2030. 
Building around transport hubs, rather than at the edge of towns, can reduce 
urban sprawl and the attendant problems of car reliance on road congestion. 
This approach to development is also more environmentally sustainable, cutting 
pollution and stopping towns sprawling out over the countryside.

Without a radical overhaul of transport, UK suburbs face poverty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jul/25/uk-suburbs-need-radical-transport-solutions-ease-poverty>
The challenge is how to apply this approach to smaller towns. A Prince’s 
Foundation survey found 
<http://www.housing-communities.org/Housing-Communities_DIGITAL.pdf> that 
communities’ main concern about development is that there will be too many tall 
or large buildings, and it’s true that the term high-density development can 
conjure up images of tower blocks looming over market squares. But the key is 
good design that fits in with towns’ existing character. High-density housing 
needn’t mean tower blocks – it could mean mansion blocks or well-built terraced 
houses.

London boroughs have pioneered novel approaches to allocating new housing in 
line with transport: in decisions about where to build houses, areas are graded 
on a scale which takes into account factors such as walking time to public 
transport, as well as number and frequency of services at nearby stops. We need 
to see local authorities and emerging sub-national transport bodies working 
together to apply similar methods to smaller towns.

Investment in transport and well-placed, quality housing can give small towns 
a huge boost – but only when they are planned together. If planning and 
transport bodies think about the whole picture, our small towns will see the 
benefits.

Trinley Walker is policy and research adviser at the Campaign to Protect Rural 
England

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.


 <>

 