
In 2007, editors of Wired magazine coined the phrase "Quantified Self" 
<http://www.wired.com/tag/quantified-self/>. They predicted a world where 
people would seek self-knowledge through self-monitoring. That world is now a 
reality with the advancements in wearable technology, specifically smartwatches 
and their biosensors. Health and technology are converging to become ubiquitous 
in patients' and physicians' lives. This intersection of health and technology 
is changing how long-term chronic conditions can be monitored and treated. 
Google, Apple, and Samsung are racing to develop devices and platforms that 
track, aggregate and monitor a wide range of biometrics.

Exponential growth

In 1972, the first digital watch was created; it could store 24 digits – a 
first in user programmable memory. Today's smartwatches can monitor and store 
fitness statistics, check vital signs and even remind you to take medication. 
Smartwatches have explosive potential in the healthcare space thanks to their 
sensors, ability to sync to mobile health platforms and transmit sensor data to 
the cloud.Smartwatches <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/smartwatches> 
will start to go beyond just monitoring and tracking personal wellness and will 
help to predict and diagnose disease.

According to IMS Research <https://technology.ihs.com/>, the wearables market 
is poised to grow from 14m devices shipped in 2011 to as many as 171m units 
shipped by 2016. And in a more recent estimate,ABI Research 
<https://www.abiresearch.com/> foresees the wearables market at 485m annual 
devices shipped by 2018.

The urge for wearables and smartwatches is fuelled by the more than 75% of all 
patients expected to use digital services in the future. And according to 
McKinsey, it's a myth that only young people want to use digital services. Its 
research shows that patients from all age groups are willing to use digital 
services for healthcare.

More specifically, according to BI Intelligence, 35% of consumers are 
interested in smart sensor-enabled wrist wear and 40% are interested in medical 
devices that transmit data.

Nikefuel band, fitbit and jawbone were some of the early activity trackers, as 
well as platform services such as Tictrac that came on the scene to aggregate 
health data into dashboards for users. The dashboard showcases such information 
as activity, heart rate and sleep.

The next generation of smartwatches will employ additional technology 
including the accelerometer, magnetometer, gyroscope, compass, heart-rate 
monitor, altimeter and an ambient light sensor, to name a few. Inside their 
wearables,Samsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> and Google 
are already detecting body temperature as well as location, and integrating 
voice commands. Apple's vision is to find a way to load more into its new 
devices and platforms.

Google Fit/Google Wear <https://developers.google.com/fit/>

Google announced and introduced the Google Fit platform at its 2014 Google I/O 
conference. Its focus is to aggregate health data from wearables, trackers and 
health apps and put it in one central repository. This data will be aggregated 
through open APIs which allow sharing of information.Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> fit may also be built into 
Android Wear – its operating system for smartwatches.

Apple iWatch/Healthkit <http://www.apple.com/ios/ios8/health/>

All indications point towards Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> putting a huge push behind 
digital health and the forthcoming iWatch/Healthkit. Analysts are predicting 
that this could be the next iPhone/iPad. According to MacRumors, the iWatch 
will deliver an impressive number of advanced health-related capabilities. The 
iWatch is said to include 10 different sensors to track health and fitness, 
providing a comprehensive picture of health and making the health-tracking 
experience far more accessible to the broader population. The iWatch in 
conjunction with healthkit will aggregate as many as 50 to 60 different 
biometrics, providing statistical analysis, graphs and trends.

Samsung Simband/Sami <http://vimeo.com/96830740>

Samsung has already invited developers to help to create hardware and software 
for its new health initiative, the Samsung Simband/Sami. Simband's proof of 
concept sensors include photo sensing, pulse, EKG and blood data (eg blood 
oxygen levels and blood flow), respiration, galcinic skin response (GSR) and 
body temperature. All this information can then be integrated into its 
cloud-based data platform Sami.

Self-tracking is becoming part of the overall treatment paradigm. Patients are 
sharing and monitoring health data more than ever before with their clinicians. 
And the percentage of physicians who report patients sharing their health 
measurement data has already hit an all-time high. Physicians all around the 
world are "prescribing" mhealth apps. Similarly, smartwatches will be the 
natural evolution in patients taking on a more active role with their health 
and helping physicians to diagnose illness and perhaps even curb chronic 
conditions through monitoring real-time biometric data. Smartwatches are going 
to be essential to the future of health and wellness.

Chris Duffey is senior vice president and group creative director at 
healthcare communications network Sudler & Hennessey

This article is part of the Beveridge Revisited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2014/jul/07/-sp-beveridge-report-revisited-where-now-for-the-welfare-state>
 series from Guardian Society Professionals, revising Sir William Beveridge's 
five great social evils for the 21st century.Click here to find out what the 
evils are and read more from the Beveridge Revisited series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/series/beveridge-revisited-21st-century-evils>
.

Are you a member of our online community? Join the Healthcare Professionals 
Network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> to receive 
regular emails and exclusive offers.
 