
We filmed this sequence over a period of two years, in two trips to Galapagos 
of about 18 filming days each, adding up to around 400 hours of field time. The 
edited material from Galapagos lasts less than nine minutes. It contains the 
first ever footage of snakes hunting dragon-like marine iguanas en masse, one 
of the most thrilling examples of animal behaviour I have had the privilege to 
film.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fanimal-magic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsnakes-versus-dragons-how-we-filmed-this-sequence-for-planet-earth-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94c871caf33efe7725ce48aab3c07a0d0ab99b50%2F0_0_3413_5120%2F3413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Snakes%20versus%20dragons%3A%20how%20we%20filmed%20this%20sequence%20for%20Planet%20Earth%20II&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fanimal-magic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsnakes-versus-dragons-how-we-filmed-this-sequence-for-planet-earth-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Snakes%20versus%20dragons%3A%20how%20we%20filmed%20this%20sequence%20for%20Planet%20Earth%20II&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fanimal-magic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsnakes-versus-dragons-how-we-filmed-this-sequence-for-planet-earth-ii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94c871caf33efe7725ce48aab3c07a0d0ab99b50%2F0_0_3413_5120%2F3413.jpg>
 A hatchling has run the racer gauntlet and made it to safety Photograph: 
Elizabeth White/BBC NHU/©Elizabeth White 
When baby marine iguanas hatch in Galapagos, they normally lie just beneath 
the surface of the sand to absorb as much heat as they can before they reveal 
themselves to the world. It is assumed that they do this to power their muscles 
to outrun any predators that might be lying in wait. This is especially 
important on Fernandina, the largest pristine tropical island in the world, 
where the absence of introduced species means there are large numbers of racer 
snakes.

For those marine iguanas that emerge to find themselves surrounded by an 
amphitheatre of rock alive with racers, speed and luck are the only ways to 
avoid an early death. It is understandable that so many people have been 
fascinated and terrified by this footage. One snake hunting prey is usually 
enough to transfix us and engage our instinctive mammalian fear of snakes. But 
a mass of them hunting is the stuff of nightmares! I think the reason this 
sequence has generated so much attention is because people are naturally 
rooting for the cute and innocent hatchling iguanas, which face a truly 
horrifying situation. So when one little marine iguana miraculously escapes the 
inescapable the relief we feel is tangible.

The location – Fernandina island in Galapagaos – is a truly remarkable place. 
The purity of its essence and the beauty of its stark, raw, pristine state is 
otherworldly and humbling to a degree. It is a great privilege to be given the 
chance to witness such an extraordinary place and be allowed by the Galapagos 
National Park to film there. I am indebted to them for their trust in me and 
honoured to be able to portray a small window into the life of this place for 
people around the world to appreciate.


The iguanas’ small size and turn of pace made their flight from the racers 
very challenging to film. Often they would explode into a sprint pursued by a 
mass of snakes and we would lose the action behind a lump of lava or other 
obstacle.

Planet Earth II: the most amazing places, chosen by producers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/nov/08/planet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places>
Although I filmed much of this sequence, several others contributed crucial 
elements. It was down to the producer of this episode Elizabeth White that we 
went with this behaviour at all. She liked the idea of creatures finding new 
ways to survive by adapting to new circumstances, something that is synonymous 
with island life, so perfect for the first episode on Islands. Assistant 
cameraman and assistant producer Tom Crowley, cameraman Paul Stewart and 
assistant cameraman Freddy Deeble all contributed, using a moving camera rig to 
inject dynamic energy. I was also joined by my two assistants Jose Masaquisa 
and Roberto Pepolas and the expertise of veteran Galapagos National Park guard 
Simon Vilamar was invaluable.

For more behind-the-scenes footage and details of forthcoming episodes, visit 
thePlanet Earth II <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02544td> website.

 