
I moved to Belfast when I was 16. I'm only here about four months a year, but 
it definitely feels like home. I love flying in, seeing the sea and all the 
houses. It's small enough that you can see where all your friends live.

Belfast's big thing is the Titanic Experience <http://titanicbelfast.com/> 
(titanicbelfast.com). The ship was built here and the visitor centre is one of 
Ireland's most popular attractions. I usually avoid touristy places – my Dad's 
been trying to get me to go to the Ulster Folk & Transport Museum for years 
without success – but everyone loves the Titanic.

People here are really friendly and connected to nature. We're surrounded by 
sea, farms and fields, and folk like to buy local produce.St George's Market  
<http://www.belfastcity.gov.uk/tourism-venues/stgeorgesmarket/stgeorgesmarket.aspx>
(belfastcity.gov.uk/tourism-venues/stgeorgesmarket 
<http://www.belfastcity.gov.uk/tourism-venues/stgeorgesmarket/>) on Saturdays 
is the place to go for Northern Irish fish, meat and cheese.

I like to run up Cave Hill 
<http://visit-belfast.com/things-to-do/member/cave-hill-country-park> in the 
morning. It's made of basalt and has an awesome view – you can see the whole of 
the Belfast Lough and, on a clear day, the Isle of Man and Scotland, too. Then 
I go to theAvoca Cafe <http://avoca.ie/home/explore/stores/?id=11> on Arthur 
Street for breakfast. It does the best porridge, and great coffee, smoothies 
and scones.

Another good breakfast spot is Maggie Mays 
<https://www.facebook.com/maggiemaysbelfast> on Botanic Avenue, especially for 
the Ulster Fry. It's like a regular fry-up but it includes soda and potato 
bread. Carb overload!

The Cathedral Quarter is a cool place to go in the evening. My favourite bar is
The Spaniard <http://thespaniardbar.com/main/index.html>. The seafood tapas is 
popular but I'm all about the pulled pork. And they do good vodka cocktails.

Belfast nightlife isn't super-messy but there are places to avoid. Thompsons 
<http://www.clubthompsons.com/>, where I was last night, say … it's a very 
young crowd.

The best music venue is the Ulster Hall 
<http://belfastcity.gov.uk/tourism-venues/ulsterhal> as it's good-looking but 
tiny, so you really feel part of the show. Big bands play there – I saw the Red 
Hot Chili Peppers a couple of years ago.

Don't just hang out in Belfast. Go to nearby Holywood, on Belfast Lough, for a 
blast of nature. In winter, it's nice to walk along the beach and then warm up 
in one of the coffee shops.Homebird <https://www.facebook.com/HomebirdCafe> is 
my boyfriend's Mum's cafe, so I have an interest, but it does amazing waffles. 
TheDirty Duck <http://thedirtyduckalehouse.co.uk/> is a cool locals' pub.

The cycling around Belfast is amazing. There's a 100-mile loop we do down the 
Ards peninsula, past empty beaches, across on the ferry at Portaferry, back up 
the other side of the lough, through the city, up Black Mountain and back. 
Coast, city and mountain all in one ride. You can also go on more mellow guided 
bike tours around Belfast.

It does snow occasionally, and when it does we go to Stormont 
<http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/Visit-and-Learning/Stormont-Estate/> 
(niassembly.gov.uk). Yep, the government building! It has really good hills 
alternating with flats so you can build up quite a bit of speed. We don't build 
kickers; we just ride on the picnic tables! There's a dry slope in Craigavon 
but I've only been there once. They wouldn't let me get the rails out so I've 
never been back.

The Northern Irish surf scene is super-small but friendly. We go to Portrush, 
an hour north of Belfast, to surf at West or East Strand, depending on the 
conditions – you'll need a 5mm wetsuit in winter. Be sure to swing by the 
Giant's Causeway, seven miles to the east, while you're on the north coast.

The exact location of my favourite beach is a secret. But it's in between 
Crawfordsburn and Bangor. Helen's Bay gets super-rammed in summer but this spot 
is always quiet. There's a concrete dock you can jump and fish off, and the 
views are immense.

If you want somewhere central to stay the Ten Square Hotel 
<http://www.tensquare.co.uk/> is a good bet.
 