
Ohio governor John Kasich announced he is running for president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/21/john-kasich-announces-presidential-bid-republican-ohio-governor>
 on Tuesday, making him the 16th candidate for the Republican party nomination.

It’s a happy occasion for the number 16. Kasich’s bid comes 16 years after he 
last ran for president. The candidates are running for the 2016 election. And 
did we mention there are 16 of them?

Without further ado, here is a list of 16 things you could do with the 16 GOP 
hopefuls. We are waiting to hear back from the Republican National Committee on 
the feasibility of each.

US presidential candidates: who's running in 2016?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/14/2016-presidential-candidates-democrats-republicans>
1) Enter them all in The Celebrity Apprentice. Each show welcomes 16 
contestants, and it would be a great opportunity to test the business chops 
many claim to have. One problem might be convincing NBC to let Donald Trump 
back on TV. The networksevered all ties 
<http://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-draft/2015/06/29/nbc-to-donald-trump-youre-fired/>
 with the former Apprentice host following his now infamous“Mexican rapists” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
 comments.


2) Set up four teams of four crack Vietnam vets who have been framed for 
crimes they didn’t commit and are now on the run from the military: the A-Team, 
the B-Team, the C-Team and the D-Team. They fight crime and survive as soldiers 
of fortune and love it when a plan comes together. Also, one person in each 
team has a fear of flying. This could hinder their election prospects, given 
the need for cross-country travel.

3) Carry out a military gun salute as performed for army, marine corps and air 
force lieutenant generals, and navy and coast guard vice-admirals. Actually, 
such salutes use 15 guns, so the salute could be turned into a 15-gun firing 
squad plus one unlucky candidate.

4) Dress them up as the most important chess pieces and have them play each 
other. Mike Huckabee andRick Santorum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rick-santorum> are religious: they could 
be bishops. Jeb Bush, the frontrunner in the race, would be the queen. If 
anyone can ride a horse, then that person is a knight. The pawns would be Fox 
News reporters.

5) Assign each one a psychological type, of which, according to the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, there are 16. With any luck, each candidate, upon 
assessment, will turn out to be a different one. And with the help of a team of 
psychologists, the most suitable candidate for president is selected.

6) Assign one candidate to each of the 15 baseball teams in either the 
National League or the American League. Chris Christie – who was recentlynamed 
MVP in a charity softball game 
<http://nesn.com/2015/06/chris-christie-squeezes-into-baseball-uniform-wins-charity-game-mvp-photos/>
 – could be a major asset. Bush could follow in his brother’s footsteps as a 
franchise owner. Huckabee isknown for talking in baseball cliches 
<http://onpolitics.usatoday.com/2015/04/09/huckabee-rand-paul-big-leagues-president/>
. One candidate gets to be an umpire.

7) Based on an eight-hour sleep pattern, there are 16 waking hours in the day. 
Each presidential hopeful is assigned one hour per day in which to impress the 
electorate. The hour can be spent either dancing, weight-lifting or singing.

8) Two eight-person rowing teams are established. But instead of “rowing” in a 
nautical sense, they have to “row” in the acrimonious verbal dispute sense. 
Whoever creates the most uproar advances to the debates.

9) Re-shoot all seven Harry Potter movies using Santorum and co to play the 15 
characters – according tothis 
<http://blog.onthebox.com/2011/11/30/15-harry-potter-characters-that-never-made-the-movies/>
 – who were in the books but never made it to celluloid. One person acts as 
director and producer.

10) Sixteen is the atomic number of sulfur. The smell of odorized natural gas 
– that pungent, eggy smell – is attributable to sulfur, as are the scents of 
garlic and even skunks. The 16 candidates are assembled; the one that emits the 
most sulfuric scent is chosen to run for office.

11) There are 16 racetracks in the popular video games Mario Kart 64 and Mario 
Kart: Double Dash!! One Republican races each track in an exciting eliminator 
competition.

12) Form a 15-person hurling team. You play with big sticks and wear little 
protective padding. It can get quite rough. A good opportunity to adjudge 
bravery. One person with asthma is excused.

13) Er ... form a 15-person rugby union team. Rugby is an aggressive, physical 
game full of gnarled, burly characters, played with little protective padding. 
One person who forgot their gym gear is excused.

14) Set up a choir. A 16-person choir.

15) Set up a troupe of line-dancers. Sixteen of them.

16) Get the 16 candidates to come up with a 16th thing that you can do with 16 
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>.
 