
It would be easy, but misleading, to say that social care is in crisis. 
Somehow in many parts ofEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/england> the system staggers 
on, using devolution to its advantage. A number of councils have adopted 
improved ways of working.

However, the sustainability of the system is increasingly being called into 
question. Whether it’s theAdass budget survey 
<https://www.adass.org.uk/budget-survey-2016/>, research by the King’s Fund and 
Nuffield Trust 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/projects/sustainability-social-care-services>, or 
my report for theCarers Trust 
<https://carers.org/care-act-carers-one-year-commission> on the Care Act, the 
message is broadly the same: the system is running on empty, and people are 
suffering the consequences.

Why has this not exploded into a major political issue? Most MPs acknowledge 
that social care is unfinished business, but this has not translated into 
sufficient political pressure. At a basic level, this is because most people 
make no distinction between social care, care and support and what the NHS 
does. It still comes as a shock to many families that social care is not free. 
Most people make no care plans because they have discounted the chances of ever 
needing it.

Today the most visible advocate for social care funding is the NHS England 
boss, Simon Stevens. He told the NHS Confederation conference earlier this year 
that social care, rather than the NHS, should be at the front of the queue for 
financial aid. Of course there is a healthy dose of self-interest in this. 
Health and social care are two sides of the same coin – underinvest in one and 
you undermine the other.

The untimely death of the Adass president, Harold Bodmer, has robbed social 
care of an important voice. In hisinaugural address 
<https://www.adass.org.uk/spring-seminar-2016/harold-bodmer-new-presidential-speech>
 to his fellow directors Bodmer called for a “social movement” for social care, 
saying:

What we save will impact on people. Let’s not deceive ourselves about this. 
The key is how we do it, how we have an honest debate with the public about the 
resources we have available and what this means.

Bodmer’s challenge was the right one. There is an urgent need for a sustained 
effort to raise the profile of social care and turn it from the preoccupation 
of care charities, care businesses and care commissioners into a social 
movement.

Amid the gloom there are always surprises. I visited Winchester to find out 
more about theArgenti consortium <http://www.argenti.co.uk/about-us/>, a 
partnership between PA Consulting and Hampshire county council aimed at 
developing a new approach to technology enabled care (TEC).

The partnership has taken a developmental approach, framing the tender as 
being about delivering a reengineered service where TEC is integral, not a 
bolted on afterthought.

The team at Hants and PA recognised that to succeed they had to redesign 
services, be innovative in the way they identified people for the service, and 
provide credible evidence of the benefits. Bringing together the right 
expertise to redesign business processes, understand what the technology could 
do and manage the change was key.

They developed a benefits realisation model that is an integral part of social 
workers’ assessment and care planning. Using this approach, an audit of 650 
older people who had TECfound its deployment made an average net saving of £840 
for the local authority over the course of a year 
<http://www.paconsulting.com/our-experience/hampshire-county-council-using-telecare-for-savings-and-improving-services/>
.

A separate piece of analysis  
<http://www.paconsulting.com/our-experience/argenti-using-technology-to-drive-social-care-transformation/>
compared the weekly cost to local authorities of all older people with TEC in 
January 2014 with the weekly cost of their service a year later. The same 
comparison was undertaken for all older people supported to live at home 
without TEC.

The results from this analysis identified that packages of care for people 
with TEC increased at a lower rate than for people without it. TEC also 
appeared to be the most effective at delaying an increase in care for people 
with a small to medium (up to £150 week) package of care. These findings 
supported those from the original audit.

Of course, the job of councils is not simply to buy telecare kit in a smarter 
way, but to transform the care offer using technology. It is therefore 
important not to be dazzled by the kit, but to realise its benefits. I have
written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/oct/29/spending-review-social-care-cuts-nhs>
 about the need for service redesign before, with examples in Kent, Shropshire 
and North Tyneside.

This month I will be chairing a thinktank convened by the TEC industry’s trade 
body, theTSA <https://www.tsa-voice.org.uk/>, bringing together social care and 
health commissioners, along with industry and business process redesign 
experts, to draw up a practical agenda for realising the benefits of TEC. The 
thinktank’s report will be launched at theInternational Technology Enabled Care 
Conference <http://itecconf.org.uk/> in October.

There is no single simple solution to the challenges facing social care. But 
those councils looking to do things differently need to think about the 
contribution technology enabled care can make. It can make a difference.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 