
It is testament to the appeal of the Ramsbottom Festival  
<http://www.ramsbottomfestival.com/>that, after the soggiest summer in a 
century, this boutique Lancashire event attracted thousands of people who 
couldn't give a fig for the rain.

Now in its second year, a celebration of music 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/the-northerner/2012/aug/14/ramsbottom-festival-music>
, poetry, comedy and food took over a little Northern town nestled in the 
shadow of the West Pennines. Steam trains on theEast Lancashire heritage railway
 <http://www.eastlancsrailway.org.uk/> ferried festival-goers to the site at 
Ramsbottom Cricket Club for three days of indie, ska and folk beats.

The weekend got off to an auspicious start. Inspiral Carpets, 
<http://www.inspiralcarpets.com/> a key part of the Madchester scene in the 
late 1980s, threw themselves into their set with gusto. More than twenty years 
have passed since the classicThis is How It Feels debuted in the UK; on Friday 
night, it seemed like yesterday.

A merciful god kept the rain away on Saturday, allowing families and people of 
all ages to dance their cares away to the likes of the harmoniousRoddy Woomble 
<http://www.roddywoomble.com/> and the rousing Session A9 
<http://www.sessiona9.com/>. Curiously, Miles Hunt and Erica Nockalls of The 
Wonder Stuff <http://www.thewonderstuff.com/> were on stage early doors at 
5.50pm. Judging by the audience's rapturous reception to their repertoire, 
including the timelessSize of a Cow, the pair would have benefited from a more 
high-profile slot.

But later performers did not disappoint. Both The Leisure Society 
<http://www.theleisuresociety.co.uk/> and Admiral Fallow  
<http://admiralfallow.com/>are surely destined for wider fame. The only 
let-down of the day was headlinerI am Kloot <http://iamkloot.com/>. While the 
band clearly had its supporters in the crowd, some ticketholders were seen to 
leave early, most probably for the warm embrace of a local hostelry.

Although the weather was not so kind to semi-rural Ramsbottom on Sunday, and 
the line-up not so obviously recognisable, there were few complaints. Food 
stalls offered Tibetan, Thai, Spanish and traditional Lancashire food while the 
beer tents could hardly keep up with demand for ale from the localIrwell Works 
Brewery <http://www.irwellworksbrewery.co.uk/>. The chill in the air didn't 
deter some hardy punters from samplingHolden's Ice Cream of Bolton  
<http://www.holdensicecream.co.uk/>although others preferred hearty British 
grub cooked up by theEagle and Child pub <http://eagle-and-child.com/>.
 Thea Gilmore. Photograph: Kirstie Hunt for the Guardian 

With three stages this year (one more than 2011), there were places to shelter 
from the showers.Helen Clements 
<http://ramsbottomfestival.com/artists/helen+clements>, performing on the A&L 
Stage clearly has a bright future ahead of her whileRachel Sermanni 
<http://www.rachelsermanni.net/> over on the main stage was utterly charming. 
By the evening, the storm clouds had passed allowing unalloyed joy while 
watchingThea Gilmore <http://theagilmore.net/> followed by the darling of the 
folk scene,Seth Lakeman <http://www.sethlakeman.co.uk/>.

A review of the Ramsbottom Music Festival wouldn't be complete without 
mentioningSilent Disco <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silent_disco>. Surely this 
is the most fun you can have in a tent, particularly when the DJs includeClint 
Boon <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clint_Boon> and Mike Joyce (yes, THAT Mike 
Joyce) <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mike_Joyce_(musician)>. But next year, 
please can we have bigger tents, both for the silent disco and the beer. This 
is the North West, we need somewhere to shelter from inclement weather.

For those people whose idea of a music festival is anathema, Ramsbottom has 
something else to tempt tourists. A new exhibition at theHeritage Gallery  
<http://www.ramsbottomheritage.org.uk/heritagecentre.html>offers a revealing 
peek into the past. Using objects and images from theRamsbottom Heritage Society
 <http://www.ramsbottomheritage.org.uk/>'s collections and Bury Art Museum 
<http://www.bury.gov.uk/index.aspx?articleid=2537>'s permanent displays, Shop 
Local, Shop Ramsbottomâ€“ a 200 Year History' builds a picture of ordinary people 
working in and buying from the local shops over two centuries.
 Just the thing to keep a festival-goer going: Chadwick's Original Bury Black 
Puddings stall on Bury market. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 

Ramsbottom is proud of the fact that even today, in a world where high streets 
are dominated by chain stores and brand names, it provides an individual 
shopping experience. Independent retailers dominate the market town, from 
butchers and bakers to antique emporiums and artisan coffee shops.

According to the exhibition, daily shopping for fresh food, writing a weekly 
order to be delivered to their homes and collecting the 'dividend' twice a year 
used to be important parts of peoples' lives:

From the 1820s, shops spread from the Market Place selling everything that 
townspeople needed including many goods which were made in the town. Small 
shops lined the main streets as today, but only hints of those in the side 
streets still remain.



A meticulous trawl through the census and the picture archives has thrown up 
the most fascinating element of the exhibition: a 'through the ages' depiction 
of a former industrial town transformed into a thriving and popular modern 
destination.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2abwDuNMuwU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2abwDuNMuwU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2abwDuNMuwU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Here's festival director David Agnew of The Met  <http://themet.biz/>in Bury 
talking on YouTube about this year's events.
 