
The Somerset <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/somerset> spinner Jack Leach 
revealed he was “as shocked as anyone” when the legality of his bowling action 
was called into question but is confident a slight modification will prove to 
be a benefit as his career progresses.

It emerged on Tuesday morning that Leach had been overlooked as a mid-tour 
call-up by England to India owing to concerns over his slow left-arm action 
despite being an obvious choice after taking 65 County Championship wickets 
last season.

England selected the Hampshire all-rounder Liam Dawson, who replaced the 
injured Zafar Ansari, and he made his Test debut in Chennai, whereEngland were 
beaten by an innings and 75 runs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/england-india-cricket-test-series-defeat>
 as they went down to a 4-0 series defeat.

Leach has been honing an amended action after tests at the end of the season 
in Loughborough before concerns were flagged up at an England Lions training 
camp in Dubai.

Jack Leach spins Somerset to critical victory against Yorkshire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/yorkshire-somerset-county-championship-division-one-day-three-match-report>
“When I did the test and they told me, I was as shocked as anyone,” said 
Leach, who has worked on his action with the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board’s Peter Such and the Somerset 
bowling coach, Jason Kerr, in tinkering with his action.

“It was only a very small thing in terms of my body position and it wasn’t 
helping me bowl a doosra or anything like that. After that I just worked my 
nuts off, to be honest.”

The 25-year-old first employed his new action on 3 December in a one-day match 
against the United Arab Emirates in Dubai, where he took three for seven in 6.2 
overs, and followed it up in the four-day game against Afghanistan in Abu Dhabi.

He added: “I’ve made a hell of a lot of progress and I was pleased with the 
way it went out in the UAE. The important thing is that I’ve come to terms with 
it and I feel like I’m going to be a better bowler in the future for sorting it 
out.”

The Somerset director of cricket, Matthew Maynard, is similarly relieved the 
problem has been quickly resolved and sees no reason why Leach cannot represent 
England.

He said: “Jack had a tremendous season for Somerset and is an outstanding 
player and team member. Whilst he was picked up for a minor abnormality in his 
bowling action during routine testing at the end of the season, this was 
quickly addressed with remedial work. I have every confidence that he will be 
playing for England in the future and that there is no major issue with his 
bowling action.”

Such, the ECB’s lead spin-bowling coach, said: “Jack really has worked like a 
Trojan since the initial assessment. He’s only made slight modifications but 
they make a big difference, and we’ve seen really significant progress.”
 