
One year ago I arrived at the doors of local government through the council 
graduate scheme. I had a lot of faith in its inner and outer workings despite 
knowing the pressures it was under; there was, and still is, a drive in the 
workforce to achieve better outcomes for people. But I have begun to question 
whether that drive is enough.

There are a lot of people working in local authorities with the skills, 
competence and knowledge to deliver great services under significant political 
and financial pressures. But in the face of cuts, many of them are leaving. 
Restructure after restructure has led to significant job insecurity and staff 
with years of knowledge abandoning councils for the voluntary or private 
sector. Staff turnover is not always a bad thing: new blood leads to new 
thinking. But in local government, local knowledge is essential.

Witnessing a rapid decrease in the number of senior managerial roles also 
makes me worry about my own career trajectory. Bright, young graduates onthe 
NGDP scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/nov/10/ngdp-local-government-graduate-scheme-how-to-apply>
 are told we are the future of local government, the chief executives of 
tomorrow. Not long into the scheme I began to wonder whether in five or 10 
years time there would be enough of these senior roles left for us to step 
into. Without them, many of my peers could leave local government and the 
public sector will haemorrhage the leadership and management training it has 
invested in us, not to mention the skills and knowledge we have acquired along 
the way.


Local government is sinking into austerity – but I still love my job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/may/12/local-government-is-sinking-into-austerity-but-i-still-love-my-job>
The Tower Hamlets saga – which saw a mayor ousted from office over corrupt 
practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/jun/10/tower-hamlets-the-rise-and-fall-lutfur-rahman>
 – has also made me concerned that some places don’t have enough scrutiny or 
transparency to hold local politicians to account.Local media, a fast-declining 
industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/jul/21/newspaper-industry-declines-hyper-local-media>
, is losing it’s ability to do so. With talented and experienced people exiting 
the public sector, how will council employees have the knowledge or courage to 
make prudent long-term decisions about how services are delivered, or predict 
future demand on services in a pragmatic rather than a political way?


So what’s to be done? As local government is told to rein in its reach, the 
private sector is extending its role in delivering services. Many people are 
uncomfortable with this, and with private finance initiatives andG4S scandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/22/g4s-convictions-deaths-employees-racial-overtones>
 ringing in my ears at first I questioned whether the private sector hadthe 
right values to deliver public services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/apr/02/private-companies-public-service-ethos-profits>
 in a meaningful way. However, when I commissioned an employment support 
service with an organisation in the private sector I was pleasantly surprised, 
and got a strong impression that they did want to put people before targets. 
There is value in working with the right private sector companies. And if 
skills and expertise in the public sector continue to erode, we will have to 
look to the private sector to plug some gaps whether we like it or not.

The past year has challenged my thinking about the role of local government. 
It cannot be all things to all people, and needs to prioritise what it 
delivers. But more importantly it has made me anxious about whether the public 
sector is a place to establish a long term and viable career. Without competent 
and driven people working in local government we won’t be able to face new 
challenges as they are thrown up.


Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> here for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 