
 The Australian-South Sudanese sprinter Mangar Makur Chuot – the runner who 
rosefrom a refugee camp to the cusp of the Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/14/from-a-refugee-camp-to-rio>
 – will not run in the Rio Games, and appears set to walk away from the sport 
forever, after an appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport was dismissed.

Chuot, who had been selected for the Games last December by the South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> Athletics Federation but was 
dumped from the team – and notified by email – by the country’s national 
Olympic committee eight days out from the opening ceremony, has been told by 
the court he will not run for his homeland in the Games.

In the days leading up to its first Games, South Sudan’s Olympic team has been 
mired in controversy, with the original team selections ignored and Olympic 
bosses conceding that an advertising arrangement with the Games sponsorSamsung 
may have influenced team selection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/allegations-emerge-of-south-sudan-rio-team-selection-being-swayed-by-advertising-deal>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fdear-australia-mangar-makur-chouts-olympic-dream-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dear%20Australia%3A%20Mangar%20Makur%20Chout%E2%80%99s%20Olympic%20dream%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fdear-australia-mangar-makur-chouts-olympic-dream-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dear%20Australia%3A%20Mangar%20Makur%20Chout%E2%80%99s%20Olympic%20dream%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fdear-australia-mangar-makur-chouts-olympic-dream-video&media=>
Dear Australia: Mangar Makur Chout’s Olympic dream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/14/dear-australia-mangar-makur-chouts-olympic-dream-video>
Hopes for a rapprochement between South Sudan’s Olympic committee, Games 
officials in Rio and Chuot, allowing him to run, appear unlikely.


And Chuot has said he will walk away from the sport, following his second 
Olympic disappointment. His campaign for the London 2012 Games was derailed by 
injury.

“I wish to thank the people of Southern Sudan and Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia> for their 
overwhelming support in this very difficult time,” Chuot said in an online post.

“Please understand I cannot be associated with a sport that can ... abandon 
its own stated rules so casually. At this point leaving the sport I love 
appears the only option to be able keep my personal integrity. Thank you for 
all your support.”

South Sudan Olympics chief says advertising deal swayed Rio team selection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/allegations-emerge-of-south-sudan-rio-team-selection-being-swayed-by-advertising-deal>
Chuot, a dual citizen of Australia and South Sudan, grew up in what was then 
Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>, a country seized by a brutal 
and long-running civil war. His father was killed in his country’s fight for 
independence and, with his mother and siblings, he escaped as a child to the 
Kakuma refugee camp in Kenya.

His family was selected for resettlement in Australia in 2008.

Discovered running in a park as a teenager by coach Lindsay Bunn, Chuot became 
the Australian champion over 200m in 2014.

But he opted last year to run for South Sudan in Rio, the world’s newest 
nation at their first Olympics,in honour of his father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/14/from-a-refugee-camp-to-rio>
. He had planned to wear his father’s name, as well as the black swan of his 
adopted home Western Australia, on his singlet at the Games.

Chuot returned to South Sudan last December to win its national championships 
in the 100m and 200m, and set a national record for the 200m in the recent 
African Championships.

Last December, he was formally notified of his selection by the South Sudan 
Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federation in the 
country’s team for the Games.

He received his Games accreditation and, until July 20, was in discussions 
with the national Olympic committee about his travel to Rio, before he was 
informed by email – eight days before the Games began – that he was not 
competing, because there were not enough places for him.

South Sudanese refugee knocked out of Olympics a week before Games begin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/29/south-sudanese-refugee-knocked-out-of-olympics-a-week-before-games-begin>
The national Olympic committee chose athletes who had not been nominated by 
the athletics federation. The federation responded by “de-registering” the 
athletes, ostensibly to prevent them running.

The national Olympic committee secretary, Tong Chor Malek Deran, conceded that 
he felt pressured to choose one of the athletes, sprinter Margret Rumat Rumar 
Hassan, despite the fact she was not the fastest runner in the country, because 
she was the face of a global advertising campaign by the principal Games 
sponsor,Samsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung>.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKE1myHdqlWM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKE1myHdqlWM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKE1myHdqlWM&media=>
“We have selected Margret as she is Olympian (Nanjing [Youth Olympics] 2014) 
her activity was shown during our recognition by IOC in Kuala Lumpur [at the 
meeting whereSouth Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> was 
admitted to the Olympic Games] and moreover she has been contracted by Samsung 
to commercial on way to Rio, so we are to complete her story to Rio,” he told 
South Sudanese athletes by email.

“We choose her because already we have signed a contract with Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung>, that she is an Olympian,” he 
said in an interview.

There is no suggestion Hassan has acted improperly; however, she is not the 
fastest female sprinter in South Sudan. At the recent African Games in Durban, 
she ran 27.61s in the women’s 200m heats, and Viola Lado ran 26.98s to set a 
new South Sudanese national record.

From a refugee camp to Rio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/14/from-a-refugee-camp-to-rio>
Samsung has declined to answer questions from the Guardian about the nature of 
its contract with Hassan or the South Sudan National Olympic Committee but said 
in a statement that it did not influence team selection.

“Samsung does not have any sponsorship agreements with the South Sudanese 
Olympic team and Samsung was not involved in the South Sudanese national 
Olympic committee’s decisions,” the company said.

On Wednesday evening at the ad hoc Court of Arbitration for Sport in Rio de 
Janeiro, the court was told that the National Olympic Committee had defied the 
Olympic charter to select athletes who had not been proposed for selection.

Rule 44.4 of the Olympic charter 
<https://stillmed.olympic.org/Documents/olympic_charter_en.pdf> states: “An NOC 
shall only enter competitors upon the recommendations for entries given by 
national federations.”

The court dismissed Chuot’s appeal against his non-selection but has not yet 
issued its grounds.


The court did not decide whether the National Olympic Committee did breach the 
rules.
 