
The ICC has confirmed a ball-tampering charge against Faf du Plessis, only 
hours after South African cricket teammateHashim Amla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hashim-amla> mocked the controversy as 
ridiculous.

Du Plessis has pleaded not guilty and the ICC is yet to confirm when he will 
appear before match referee Andy Pycroft to plead his case.

ICC chief executive David Richardson laid the charge on Friday, alleging du 
Plessis had breached the rules by changing the condition of the ball in the 
second Test against Australia in Hobart.

South Africa ripped through Australia’s batting in both innings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/south-africa-complete-second-test-rout-of-australia-to-wrap-up-series>
, dismissing them for 85 and 161.

“The alleged incident happened on Tuesday morning when TV footage appeared to 
show du Plessis applying saliva and residue from a mint or sweet – an 
artificial substance – to the ball in an attempt to change its condition,” the 
ICC said in a statement.

“All level two breaches carry an imposition of a fine between 50% to 100% of 
the applicable match fee and/or up to two suspension points, and three or four 
demerit points.”

No hiding place for Australia's embarrassment after latest batting shambles | 
Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/no-hiding-place-for-australias-embarrassment-after-latest-batting-shambles>
Three years ago, du Plessis was fined 50% of his match payment 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2013-10-26-faf-du-plessis-fined-for-ball-tampering-incident>
 when he rubbed the ball on the zipper of a trouser pocket.

Match referee David Boon said at the time he was satisfied it wasn’t a 
deliberate attempt to manipulate the ball’s condition.

Earlier on Friday afternoon, Amla spoke to the media at the MCG with teammates 
standing behind him in a show of support for du Plessis.

“The reason everyone is here is to stand together, really, and to show 
solidarity to something ... we thought was actually a joke,” Amla said.

“It’s not April, but the allegation against Faf was ... a really ridiculous 
thing.
“As a team, we’re standing strong, we’ve done nothing wrong. It’s basically a 
joke.”

It was then put to Amla the ICC was investigating his captain.

“Whether it is or not, we’ve done nothing wrong and I know Faf has done 
absolutely nothing wrong,” he said. “I chew bubblegum while I’m on the field – 
you want me to brush my teeth after lunch?

“We’re standing out on the field for two hours ... there was no malicious 
intent whatsoever.”

As officials tried to change the topic, Amla and some journalists had a testy 
exchange about the subject.

“Is it proven or what? Because that’s something that is really new to us,” 
Amla said. “I’ve had sweets in my mouth, bubblegum in my mouth, butong, nuts – 
I’m not sure what the big deal is.

“To a lot of people, it’s sounding more like sour sweets.”
South Africa play Victoria in a day-night one-dayer at the MCG on Saturday, 
using a pink ball to prepare for the third Test in Adelaide.
 