
Australia’s under-siege Test side are at risk of hitting an unprecedented low, 
having handed South Africa a series victory with yet another crippling batting 
collapse in Hobart.


Australia’s dependence on Steve Smith was laid bare for the second time in the 
second Test at Bellerive, where the Proteas completed an innings-and-80-run win 
before lunch on day four – the home side’s fifth straight Test defeat.


South Africa claimed an unassailable 2-0 lead in the series on Tuesday, 
rolling Australia for 161 at 11:53am local time to mark their third consecutive 
Test series win in Australia.

Australia slump to innings loss as South Africa claim series – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/15/australia-v-south-africa-second-test-fourth-day-live>
Further ignominy for Smith could come under lights at Adelaide Oval. Never 
before in the history of the sport has Australia been whitewashed in a Test 
series on home soil. Based on how the pink ball hooped around in Adelaide last 
year, there’s likely to be a result in the final Test that starts next Thursday.

The hosts tumbled towards a fifth straight Test loss during a collapse of 8-32 
in 19.2 overs, with Kyle Abbott snaring six wickets and Kagiso Rabada striking 
four times in the stunning session.


It was the latest of many woeful batting performances in recent years that has 
left coach Darren Lehmann, selectors andCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia boss James Sutherland 
under immense pressure.

Smith dug in, taking 40 minutes to score his first runs on day four, but would 
have been struck with a sense of deja vu as he watched Australia slip from 
129-2 to 150-7. The skipper was eventually caught behind on 31. Rain offered 
more resistance than Australia’s batsmen, with the entire second day abandoned 
without a ball being bowled.

Smith had finished 48 not out on day one, when Australia posted a paltry total 
of 85 after being sent in by Faf du Plessis. It was the nation’s lowest Test 
total on home soil since 1984.

Wade backs Peter Handscomb for Test call-up after Australian collapse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/wade-backs-peter-handscomb-for-test-call-up-after-australian-collapse>
“We’ve got to find a way to be a bit more resilient and spend some time out in 
the middle. Whether it’s seaming, swinging or spinning we’re having some 
trouble,” Smith said in the post-match ceremony. “Guys have to find ways to get 
themselves in ... it was just about trying to fight and spend some time out in 
the middle and bat for the day.”

Asked to deliver a message to the Australian public, Smith called on them to 
“stick with us, we’re doing our best ... trying to turn it around”.


Selectors are expected to settle on a squad for the third Test later this week 
but changes are fully expected, with Adam Voges likely to be dropped. “That’s 
up to selectors. When you lose five Test matches in a row, things are going to 
be talked about,” Smith said when asked about potential changes.
 