
What is happening?

An international tribunal in The Hague overwhelmingly backed the Philippines 
in a case on the disputed waters of theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, ruling that rocky outcrops 
claimed by China - some of which are exposed only at low tide – cannot be used 
as the basis of territorial claims. It said some of the waters in question are 
“within the exclusive economic zone of thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>, because those areas are not 
overlapped by any possible entitlement of China”. The tribunal furthermore 
found that China had violated the Philippines’ sovereign rights in those waters 
by interfering with its fishing and petroleum exploration and by constructing 
artificial islands.

Why is that important?

Control of the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> is the most contentious and 
explosive diplomatic issue in east Asia, with China asserting sovereignty over 
maritime areas that span 3.5m square kilometres but are also claimed by 
Vietnam, Taiwan, Malaysia, Brunei, the Philippines and Japan. Washington has 
become deeply involved, backing those against China and conducting military 
patrols.

Although the case was raised <https://www.pcacases.com/web/view/7> by the 
Philippines, it will affect all these countries as it effectively punches a 
series of holes in China’s all-encompassing “nine-dash” demarcation line, a 
dotted marker in Chinese maps that stretches deep into the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea. It effectively declares large 
areas of the sea to be neutral international waters.

The South China Sea is thought to have significant oil and gas reserves and is 
a route for about $4.5tn (£3.4tn) in trade. There are giant fisheries and lanes 
for half of all commercial shipping. The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has
vowed to “resolutely defend” his country’s interests 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-nuclear-summit-usa-china-southchinase-idUSKCN0WX2WQ>
 in the region.

South China Sea locator 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/china/giv-125155V39z4Uvk6la/>
The lead up to the ruling was fraught. China’s foreign minister called the US 
secretary of state, John Kerry, by telephone last week andwarned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/06/south-china-sea-john-kerry> 
against moves that infringe on China’s sovereignty. And Beijing conducted 
military drills,deploying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/05/south-china-sea-beijing-begins-military-drills-ahead-of-key-territorial-ruling>
 at least two guided missile destroyers and a missile frigate.

Bonnie Glaser, the director of the China Power Project at the Center for 
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) thinktank in Washington, said a 
ruling that questioned or rejected China’s “nine-dash line” would not 
invalidate all of Beijing’s claims to land or maritime zones in the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea. “[But] it would really limit the 
amount of water that the Chinese could have any legal sovereignty claim to.

Who made the judgment?

The Philippines raised the case in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/22/philippines-south-china-sea-beijing>
 in a five-judge permanent court of arbitration in The Hague, arguing that 
Beijing’s claim violated UN conventions.

Beijing has rejected the court’s authority to rule on the case and has also 
attempted to discredit its work as biased by pointing to the fact thata judge 
from China’s regional rival Japan 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/06/21/beijing-japanese-judge-means-south-china-sea-tribunal-is-biased-china-philippines-maritime-claims/>
 was involved in its creation.


What has been happening in the meantime?

China has upped activities in the South China Sea in recent months to further 
entrench its presence in the region. It has used dredging ships to pour sand on 
coral reefs and turn them into islands. On these islands the Chinese military 
has installed missile launchers, runways, barracks and other security 
facilities.

The court was asked to investigate whether these reclaimed areas are indeed 
considered “islands” under international law, which are granted exclusive 
economic zones. ThePhilippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> 
said many should be considered “rocks”.

The UN Convention of the Law of the Sea normally stipulates a 200 nautical 
mile zone of the coast for economic exclusivity. But China claims 90% of the 
area, a much larger zone.

The Philippines refers to the area of the South China Sea that it controls as 
the West Philippine Sea. Manila haswelcomed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/we-have-short-memories-japan-unites-with-former-foes-to-resist-chinas-empire-of-sand>
 former second world war enemy Japan to conduct joint military exercises and 
also former coloniser United States to land fighter jets in the archipelago 
nation.

How is China likely to react?

Experts are divided on how China will react to the verdict. Some believe China 
could push back aggressively if the court comes down firmly against its 
interests.

China reacted angrily to the verdict in the immediate aftermath. Xinhua, the 
country’s official news agency, hit out at what it described as an 
“ill-founded” ruling that was “naturally null and void”.

China has long argued its sovereignty to the area under the “nine-dash line”, 
in which its vessels sailed as far back as the Han dynasty 2,000 years ago.

Possible forms of retaliation include landing fighter jets on airstrips 
Beijing has built in disputed areas, declaring an air defence identification 
zone, or ADIZ, over the South China Sea or kicking off a dredging campaign at 
Scarborough Shoal, which is claimed by both the Philippines and China.

There is a precedent for violence. During the 1970s and 1980s, China and 
Vietnam used force several times, resulting in dozens of deaths and several 
sunken ships.

Glaser, the CSIS expert, said she believed Beijing would seek to avoid 
“destabilising actions”, particularly withChina set to host the G20 in September
 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/china/policies-politics/article/1958837/countdown-g20-100-days-china-take-international-lead>
. “They are just dead set on having a successful meeting … it is Xi Jinping’s 
reputation at stake,” she said.


“[But] there is the potential that things go the other direction and that is 
that the Chinese think that they are being bullied, they are being victimised 
and that the party must defend China’s sovereignty and every inch of China’s 
territory. In which case we could see some rather provocative moves.

“The notion that they might start landing fighters … would really escalate 
tensions between the US and China and make the region very nervous.”


Ashley Townshend, a fellow at the University of Sydney’s United States Studies 
Centre, said he believed Beijing would seek a “middle path: a way to not 
capitulate but also a way to not escalate”.


That would probably involve continuing to conduct military exercises in the 
region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/05/south-china-sea-beijing-begins-military-drills-ahead-of-key-territorial-ruling>
 as a way of showing strength without further inflaming tensions.


“China has tended in this context [of the South China Sea] to seize the 
initiative when it views an opportunity and it hasn’t tended to push ahead when 
it meets opposition,” Townshend said.

How will the Philippines react? 

Rodrigo Duterte, the Philippines’ newly elected president, has left experts 
guessing as to how he might respond to a ruling that is likely to be in his 
country’s favour. “The Philippines is a completely unknown quanity here. We 
just don’t know what Duterte is going to do,” said Glaser. “He’s a wild card.”


Duterte has vowed to ride a jet ski into disputed areas of the South China Sea 
<http://politics.com.ph/duterte-to-ride-jetski-plant-flag-in-spratlys-and-challenge-china-suntukan-o-barilan/>
 in defiance of Beijing. But it is also possible that he will seek to minimise 
the court’s ruling in order to improve ties with China.

Duterte has backed multilateral talks to settle the row. Closer relations with 
Beijing would give Manila access to Chinese loans and much needed investment in 
infrastructure, and could also help ease tensions in the region.

Who has China got on its side?

Russia has backed Beijing’s position that direct talks should take place. 

And portraying itself as the victim of a US conspiracy to contain its rise 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-07/04/c_135487255.htm>, Beijing has 
scoured the globe for supporters in its case, no matter how disconnected they 
might be from the subject. In late May the foreign ministry in Beijingsaid 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-05/26/c_135391041.htm> Vanuatu, Lesotho 
and Palestine had joined its side.

“Countries that harbour no selfish interests and understand the South China 
Sea sympathise with and endorse China’s just position on this issue,” 
spokesperson Hua Chunying said.

Townshend said China had good historical reasons to be concerned about “more 
powerful external countries ganging up on it and telling it what it is entitled 
to do and not do”.

“[But] it is very difficult for China to play the victim card when you look at 
the scale and speed and content of what it has built and put on the islands.”
 