
SpaceX launched its first rocket since a big explosion last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/spacex-explosion-launch-site-florida>
, when one of the private spaceflight’s rockets annihilated a $200m satellite 
in a spectacular and costly setback.

“Falcon 9 operation is nominal,” an engineer declared about a minute after the 
Saturday morning launch from Vandenberg air force base in southernCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, as clapping broke out behind 
him.

About two minutes and 48 seconds into flight, the rocket’s engine shut down 
and the engineer announced: “Everything looking good.”

Saturday’s launch was SpaceX’s first since September, when a Falcon 9 rocket 
exploded on its launchpad at Cape Canaveral in southern Florida. The explosion 
destroyed the rocket and its payload, an Amos 6 communications satellite that
Facebook wanted to use 
<http://www.space.com/33937-facebook-satellite-lost-in-spacex-rocket-explosion.html>
to provide internet to parts of Africa.


The accident grounded SpaceX’s fleet of reusable rockets, which had been 
steadily buildinga record of landings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/01/spacex-falcon-9-explosion-tesla-elon-musk-nasa>
.

On Saturday the Falcon 9 rocket landed successfully on a barge in the Pacific 
Ocean, the first landing on a new drone ship there, prompting the engineers to 
burst into cheers.

The latest launch was first scheduled for last Sunday, but intense storms 
forced delays. Commissioned by the telecom company Iridium, the rocket carried 
10 communications satellites into space, the first of an intended satellite 
“constellation” the Virginia-based tech giant means to use to replace its 
current global network of phone and data relays. Iridium has contractedSpaceX 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/spacex> for $468m over seven launches.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
SpaceX rocket explodes on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/sep/02/spacex-rocket-explodes-on-the-launch-pad-at-cape-canaveral-video>
In an investigation into last fall’s explosion, SpaceX engineers concluded 
that a fault in the function of a helium tank caused the accident. The 
subsequent inquiry and safety delays pushed back the company’s scheduled test 
of its new Falcon Heavy rocket and new tests of previously used rockets.

Elon Musk, the tech billionaire and CEO of SpaceX, told CNBC 
<http://video.cnbc.com/gallery/?video=3000565513&play=1> last year that the 
problem surprised engineers.

“It’s never been encountered before in the history of rocketry,” he said. 
Giving few details about how helium might have frozen oxygen fuel to a 
dangerous temperature for the rocket engine, Musk said: “This is the toughest 
puzzle that we’ve ever had to solve.”

Internal financial documents, reported by the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/exclusive-peek-at-spacex-data-shows-loss-in-2015-heavy-expectations-for-nascent-internet-service-1484316455>
, showed that such accidents can have dramatic consequences for a private 
spaceflight company. The documents showed that SpaceX suffered a $260m loss 
after a June 2015 explosion, and that the company did not likely meet its 
financial goals in 2016.

These struggles have not dimmed Musk’s ambitions, however: he hopes to take 
humans to Mars by 2024 and to launch 4,000 SpaceX satellites.
 