
A SpaceX rocket exploded on the launch pad at the air force station in Cape 
Canaveral, Florida, on Thursday morning, as it prepared to carry a 
communications satellite into space this weekend. The satellite was intended to 
be used byFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, as part 
of its effort to extend internet access in Africa.

Facebook’s founder and chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, said in a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/01/mark-zuckerberg-spacex-explosion-africa-internet>
 he was “deeply disappointed” by the news.

Facebook lures Africa with free internet - but what is the hidden cost?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/facebook-free-basics-internet-africa-mark-zuckerberg>
A little over a year ago, an unmanned SpaceX rocket carrying supplies to the 
International Space Stationexploded shortly after take-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/28/nasa-spacex-launch-international-space-station-wrong>
. Ina statement issued later on Thursday 
<https://twitter.com/SpcPlcyOnline/status/771458288470798336>, US space agency 
Nasa expressed its confidence in SpaceX as a commercial partner and said the 
new explosion was “a reminder that spaceflight is an incredible challenge”.

“It’s too early to know whether the incident will affect the schedule for 
upcoming Nasa-related SpaceX launches to the International Space Station,” the 
statement said. “If there areSpaceX <https://www.theguardian.com/science/spacex>
 mission delays, other cargo spacecraft will be able to meet the station’s 
needs, and supplies and research investigations are at good levels.”


The Nasa statement said the rocket and spacecraft for its next scheduled 
launch with SpaceX,Osiris-Rex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2013/may/17/nasa-osiris-rex-asteroids-video>
, were “healthy and secure” at a launch site a mile away from the site of the 
explosion. That mission, to retrieve samples from an asteroid, is due to launch 
on 8 September.

After Thursday’s blast a huge plume of smoke billowed 
<https://twitter.com/CNBC/status/771344471019687936> from the site. Reports 
claimed the explosionlasted several minutes 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/09/01/a-spacex-falcon-9-rocket-just-exploded-at-cape-canaveral/>
, destroying the vehicle and shaking buildings for several miles around. The 
sirens of emergency vehicles could be heard approaching the area.

Initial reports suggested there were no injuries and the private aerospace 
company’s unmanned Falcon 9 rocket exploded due to a problem with the launch 
pad, rather than with the rocket itself, during routine engine testing ahead of 
the planned lift-off on Saturday overnight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fspacex-explosion-launch-site-florida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb11585e25ebb21f725bba6c29e3acdc4a50dfdf%2F0_42_1967_1181%2F1967.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SpaceX%20rocket%20explodes%20on%20launch%20site%20in%20Florida%20during%20testing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fspacex-explosion-launch-site-florida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SpaceX%20rocket%20explodes%20on%20launch%20site%20in%20Florida%20during%20testing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fspacex-explosion-launch-site-florida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb11585e25ebb21f725bba6c29e3acdc4a50dfdf%2F0_42_1967_1181%2F1967.jpg>
 Smoke rises from a SpaceX launch site on Thursday in Cape Canaveral, Florida. 
Photograph: Marcia Dunn/AP 
Images quickly emerged on social media showing 
<https://twitter.com/TigernBear/status/771335016198639616> the site of the 
incident issuing thickclouds  
<https://twitter.com/USATODAY/status/771345161372721152>of dark smoke and lit 
up withflames 
<https://twitter.com/WESH/status/771339358532055040?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>. Smoke 
continued toswirl <http://live.reuters.com/Event/Reuters_Live_Video> into an 
overcast sky more than an hour after the reported explosion as witnesses in the 
area gave accounts of feeling a shock wave.

The SpaceX launch was scheduled to carry an Israeli communications satellite 
into orbit, with Facebook using some of the satellite’s capacity. It would have 
been Facebook’s first such launch, as part of Zuckerberg’s attempt to provide 
internet access to some 14 countries in sub-Saharan Africa that are currently 
poorly connected.

About 90 minutes after the explosion, with images and reports widespread on 
television and online but no official word on its cause, SpaceX issued a
statement <https://twitter.com/SpaceX/status/771357538738577408> via Twitter. 
Both the rocket and the satellite it was carrying had been destroyed, it said.

The statement read: “In preparation for today’s standard pre-launch static 
fire test, there was an anomaly on the pad resulting in the loss of the vehicle 
and its payload. Per standard procedure, the pad was clear and there were no 
injuries.”

Zuckerberg later confirmed in a Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10103074463098101?pnref=story> that the 
satellite had been wrecked. He announced last year that Facebookplanned 
<http://www.orlandosentinel.com/news/space/os-spacex-launch-satellite-20160829-story.html>
 to provide internet access via orbiting satellite to at least 14 sub-Saharan 
African countries. In his post on Thursday he said he was in Africa, although 
he did not give a specific location.

His post said: “As I’m here in Africa, I’m deeply disappointed to hear that 
SpaceX’s launch failure destroyed our satellite that would have provided 
connectivity to so many entrepreneurs and everyone else across the continent.”

Zuckerberg said the company had alternative ideas and added: “We remain 
committed to our mission of connecting everyone.”

The SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket was being used to launch the Amos-6 communications 
satellite for the Israeli company Spacecom. In October 2015, Facebook and the 
French satellite communications company Eutelsat announced a $95m agreement to 
lease broadband capacity on the satellite.


Elon Musk planning SpaceX mission to Mars by 2018
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/elon-musk-space-x-mars-mission-tesla>
According to 
<http://spacenews.com/facebook-eutelsat-to-pay-spacecom-95m-for-ka-band-lease/> 
the website Spacenews.com, at the time, Spacecom, Eutelsat and Facebook 
reported plans to secure insurance policies to cover risk linked to the 
satellite project.

SpaceX is the commonly used name for Space Exploration Technologies 
Corporation, a California-based private aerospace enterprise founded byElon Musk
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/elon-musk>, chief of Tesla Motors and 
former PayPal entrepreneur.

The company has succeeded in landing several spent rockets at Cape Canaveral 
andon a barge in the ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/06/spacex-lands-reusable-rocket-for-second-time>
, although some of the attempts at barge-landings have ended in failure and the 
explosion on the mission to the International Space Station last year created 
unwelcome headlines.

Nasa’s statement said: “We remain confident in our commercial partners and 
firmly stand behind the successful 21st-century launch complex that Nasa, other 
federal agencies and US commercial companies are building on Florida’sSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Coast.”
 