
The first time Nasa tried to launch a satellite into orbit, in December 1957, 
the rocket made it 4ft off the ground beforecrumpling 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zVeFkakURXM> into a blossom of smoke and fire. 
America’s ambitions to catch up to Russia’s success with Sputnik would have to 
wait.

Almost 60 years later, private spaceflight company SpaceX is feeling similarly 
explosive growing pains. From the same launch center at Cape Canaveral, 
Florida, a reusable Falcon 9 rocketexploded on the launch pad on Thursday 
morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/spacex-explosion-launch-site-florida>
 in a blast that could be felt miles away and that destroyed a satellite meant 
to expand internet access.

The company’s founder and CEO, tech billionaire Elon Musk, has said 
<https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/771394161756942336> that the rocket 
exploded “during propellant fill operation” and that the blast “originated 
around upper stage oxygen tank”.

Musk has stayed stoical about the company’s accidents, and SpaceX 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/spacex> itself only gave an engineer’s 
euphemism for the explosion in its first statement, describing the blast as “an 
anomaly on the pad”.

SpaceX mission could herald new era of reusable rockets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/05/spacex-mission-reusable-rockets-elon-musk>
The history of spaceflight is littered with explosions, accidents and 
disasters: SpaceX has had its share but has avoided tragedy or injury. Nasa has 
contracted the company to help take supplies to the InternationalSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station, and together the 
organizations hope to bring manned launches back to American launch pads in 
2017. SpaceX’s year of success and failure has cast that schedule into doubt.

The booms

SpaceX has had more success than failure in the 14 years since it was founded, 
when Musk set out with about 30 employees to revolutionize spaceflight with 
reusable rockets – the kind that can save small fortunes in fuel and technology 
with every landing.

In December 2010, SpaceX became the first private company to send a spacecraft 
into low-Earth orbit and back, and a year and a half later it becamethe first 
to dock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/may/25/spacex-dragon-capsule-space-exploration>
 at the International Space Station. That same year it first resupplied the 
station, and by 2014 it won a $2.6bn Nasa contract alongside Boeing to take US 
astronauts into space.

On 21 December 2015, the company managed its first landing of a reusable 
rocket – just under a month after a rival spaceflight company, headed by Amazon 
billionaire Jeff Bezos, achieved a similar landing with a smaller vehicle. Then 
on 8 April 2016, after four failures during the past year, the company landed a 
reusable rocket on a drone ship floating in the Atlantic ocean,the first ever 
landing at sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/08/spacex-rocket-test-elon-musk-international-space-station>
.

In the next eight months the company repeated the feat six times 
<http://www.space.com/33742-spacex-satellite-launch-rocket-landing.html> in 
all, four at sea and twice on land. Since 2012 it has had 18 successful payload 
deliveries.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fspacex-falcon-9-rocket-successfully-lands-on-ocean-platform-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SpaceX%20Falcon%209%20rocket%20successfully%20lands%20on%20ocean%20platform%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fspacex-falcon-9-rocket-successfully-lands-on-ocean-platform-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SpaceX%20Falcon%209%20rocket%20successfully%20lands%20on%20ocean%20platform%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fspacex-falcon-9-rocket-successfully-lands-on-ocean-platform-video&media=>
SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket successfully lands on ocean platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/apr/09/spacex-falcon-9-rocket-successfully-lands-on-ocean-platform-video>
The busts

Those accomplishments have not come without repeated failures, the most 
spectacular of which occurred during attempts to land their Falcon 9 rockets, 
named afterStar Wars’ Millennium Falcon 
<http://www.spacex.com/sites/spacex/files/spacex_nasa_crs-5_presskit.pdf>. 
After proving the rockets could lift supplies to astronauts in orbit, SpaceX 
began testing their abilities to land on a robotic drone ship out at sea – 
unmanned for safety, and mobile to meet the rocket, if a little unsteady. Musk 
has described the feat as “like trying to balance a rubber broomstick on your 
hand in the middle of a wind storm”.
Elon Musk (@elonmusk) 
Looks like Falcon landed fine, but excess lateral velocity caused it to tip 
over post landingpic.twitter.com/eJWzN6KSJa <http://t.co/eJWzN6KSJa>
 <https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/588082574183903232> April 14, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/588082574183903232> 
On 10 January 2015, the first landing attempt by a rocket “landed hard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/10/space-floating-barge-mission-spacex-falcon-9-rocket>
”, in Musk’s words, crashing onto the ship after it ran out of hydraulic fuel 
to fire engines that slowed its descent. On 14 April, another landing failed 
after the rocket’s landing legs struck the barge “too hard for survival 
<https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/588076749562318849>” – the rocket tipped 
over and careered off to the side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/14/spacex-launch-rocket-delay>.

On 28 June, the company’s string of failures continued, when a rocket 
disintegrated shortly after liftoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/28/nasa-spacex-launch-international-space-station-wrong>
 and destroyed its cargo of supplies meant for the ISS. The blast was blamed on 
a faulty strut, supposed to hold a tank of intensely pressurized helium, that 
Musk said appeared “to be incorrectly made but with no visible way of 
determining that from the outside”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fnasa-spacex-rocket-explodes-moments-after-launch-international-space-station-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435505294181%2FKP_327084_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nasa%20SpaceX%20rocket%20explodes%20moments%20after%20launch%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fnasa-spacex-rocket-explodes-moments-after-launch-international-space-station-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nasa%20SpaceX%20rocket%20explodes%20moments%20after%20launch%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fnasa-spacex-rocket-explodes-moments-after-launch-international-space-station-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435505294181%2FKP_327084_crop_640x360.jpg>
Nasa SpaceX rocket explodes moments after launch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2015/jun/28/nasa-spacex-rocket-explodes-moments-after-launch-international-space-station-video>
On 17 January 2016, Musk and his engineers were back to struggling with the 
barge. Fighting through rough weather, a Falcon 9 rocket landed at the right 
speed but one of its legs failed to latch on the platform. The rocketkeeled 
over and exploded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/17/spacex-rocket-liftoff-launch-hard-landing>
, with Muskcommenting <https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/688814634489413632>: 
“Definitely harder to land on a ship. Similar to an aircraft carrier vs land: 
much smaller target area, that’s also translating [and] rotating.”

In March they saw another failed landing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/05/elon-musk-spacex-failed-landing>
, but Musk was unfazed by the difficult conditions of attempted landings, 
tweeting: “Didn’t expect this one to work (v hot reentry), but next flight has 
a good chance.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fspacexs-falcon-9-rocket-lands-then-falls-over-and-explodes-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F18%2F1453094744792%2FKP_1443162_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SpaceX's%20Falcon%209%20rocket%20lands%2C%20then%20falls%20over%20and%20explodes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fspacexs-falcon-9-rocket-lands-then-falls-over-and-explodes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SpaceX%27s%20Falcon%209%20rocket%20lands%2C%20then%20falls%20over%20and%20explodes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fspacexs-falcon-9-rocket-lands-then-falls-over-and-explodes-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F18%2F1453094744792%2FKP_1443162_crop_640x360.jpg>
SpaceX’s Falcon 9 rocket lands, then falls over and explodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/jan/18/spacexs-falcon-9-rocket-lands-then-falls-over-and-explodes-video>
The future

Musk has handled SpaceX’s crashes stoically, reasoning that progress requires 
failures – science is messy. Nasa, for instance, has had contractorsmix up 
metric measurements <https://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/msp98/news/mco990930.html>, lost 
a lander somewhere on Mars 
<http://www.skyandtelescope.com/astronomy-news/mars-polar-lander-found-at-last/>
, and its Kepler spacecraftjerry-rigged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/11/nasa-re-establishes-solid-contact-with-kepler-spacecraft>
 into a planet hunter sailing on pressure from radiation off the sun. In recent 
years, Russia’s space agency haslost control of a cargo ship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/may/08/russias-failed-progress-spacecraft-plunges-into-the-pacific-ocean>
, and hadrepeated malfunctions 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/27/vladimir-putin-slams-repeated-russian-space-failures-after-delay/>
 andengine failures 
<http://www.parabolicarc.com/2015/05/16/years-failure-haunt-russian-space-program/>
.

Like Nasa, Musk remains ambitious. Earlier this year he announced that SpaceX 
intends to sendan unmanned mission to Mars by 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/elon-musk-space-x-mars-mission-tesla>
, to investigate the demands of a later crewed mission. The company has also 
won a contractto launch one of its used rockets 
<http://www.ses.com/4233325/news/2016/22407810> with a payload; Thursday’s 
launch involved a new rocket.


Nasa’s inspector general doused cold water on some of those aspirations in an 
audit released Thursday <https://oig.nasa.gov/audits/reports/FY16/IG-16-028.pdf>
. The mission to take astronauts into space from US launchpads “continues to 
face multiple challenges that will likely delay the first routine flight”, the 
office said in its report. The US will continue relying on foreign agencies, 
such as Russia’s Roscosmos, to launch astronauts “until late 2018 – more than 3 
years after NASA’s original 2015 goal”, the auditors added.
 