
Margaret Atwood’s most recent novel, The Heart Goes Last, began as an unusual 
digital experiment. Starting in March 2012, the website Byliner played host to 
the “Positron series”: a sequence of interconnected stories published gradually 
over the course of a year, which Atwood claimed was an attempt to revive a 
literary tradition of serialisation, popular from the halcyon days of Charles 
Dickens up through the 1950s.

First came the opening section, “I’m Starved for You”, originally a 
stand-alone story that sets up a dystopian premise promising to teach us a 
lesson: “When you surrender your civil liberties, you enter a funhouse of 
someone else’s making.” The world of the tale is the product of a devastating 
financial crash (think 2008, only bigger) in which “the whole card castle, the 
whole system fell to pieces, trillions of dollars wiped off the balance sheets 
like fog on a window.” No one’s sure who to blame, but formerly middle-class 
couples like protagonists Stan and Charmaine are left unemployed, homeless, and 
on the run from roving gangs of criminals. While Charmaine earns minimum wage 
at the bar PixelDust, ever on the verge of resorting to prostitution, her 
husband Stan sulks, grudgingly relying on his ex-con younger brother Con (yes, 
really) for financial help.

The Heart Goes Last by Margaret Atwood review – rewardingly strange
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/23/the-heart-goes-last-margaret-atwood-review-novel>
The solution? The Positron Project, a purportedly utopian community so 
obviously sinister it’s introduced in the form of a faux-1950s advertisement, 
complete with rhetorical questions (“Living in your car?” “Remember what your 
life used to be like?”) and a too-good-to-be-true product (“Help solve the 
nation’s problems of joblessness and crime while solving your own!”). 
Positron’s society combines the principle of vacation timeshares with the 
Stanford prison experiment. Every other month, resident couples lead 
middle-class lives, enjoy middle-class jobs, and live in middle-class houses in 
Positron’s private town, Consilience. In the off months, they stay in Positron 
Prison, performing unpaid labor and making room in Consilience for their 
Alternates—the couples who live their middle-class lives when they’re in prison.

Widespread demand for a continuation on the theme led Atwood to produce three 
succeeding parts, “Choke Collar,” “Erase Me,” and “The Heart Goes Last.” A 
scheduled fifth and final part, “Moppet Shop,” was never released in serial 
form. Atwood fans eager to read the conclusion of the Positron series were 
instead encouraged to buy The Heart Goes Last, which collects revised versions 
of the first four parts and provides a resolution. A lone question on the 
Goodreads page for “Moppet Shop” gives voice to paying subscribers “cheated” by 
the bait and switch; “I just want the last episode,” pleads the user. To which 
we might reply: Be careful what you wish for.

Escalating suddenly into a feverish cacophony of nonsensical plot twists the 
New Republic called “triumphantly camp,” the final chapters of The Heart Goes 
Last can hardly be the resolution fans were hoping for. Reviewerslike the New 
York Times’ Sarah Lyall 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/30/books/review-margaret-atwoods-the-heart-goes-last-conjures-a-kinky-dystopia.html?_r=0>
 have dismissed the novel’s unevenness on the grounds that it began as serial 
fiction; Atwood herself has spoken about the “psychological pressure” of serial 
writing, which “you can’t go back and change.” But one might instead question 
why Atwood, given the opportunity to reconcile some of the story’s choicer 
leaps and implausibilities in a novel version marketed as revised, didn’t “go 
back and change” more. Instead, Atwood allows the conventions of pulp fiction 
to dominate the novel’s second half, complete with a downhill slide into 
plot-driven story and a resolution that fulfills precisely those escapist power 
fantasies that the rest of the novel painstakingly denies.

All of this might come as a surprise for longtime fans of Atwood, who has 
staked a certain reputation on her disavowal of “science fiction.” Atwood’s 
relationship to the term itself is an old story among fans of the genre. In the 
distant past of 1985, Atwood was a science fiction icon, revered by fans for 
her novel The Handmaid’s Tale and the oppressive patriarchal religious dystopia 
it depicted. That reverence only grew with the 2003 publication of Oryx and 
Crake, the first in a trilogy of dystopian novels. But as Atwood once explained
in an interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/28/margaret-atwood-interview>: “I 
don’t like being an icon. It invites iconoclasm.”

Cue the shot heard round the genre — Atwood’s appalling claim on BBC Breakfast 
that science fiction is no more than “talking squids in outer space,” a 
betrayal viewed by fans as second only to the 1986 SNL skit in which William 
Shatner told a convention’s worth of Trekkies to “get a life!” Atwood’s 
attempts at damage control channeled the resulting outrage into a question of 
semantics — the difference between “science fiction”, which “has monsters and 
spaceships” and “speculative fiction”, which “could really happen”.

Perhaps Atwood was attempting to align herself with the “mundane SF” movement, 
a group of writers who vowed in their 2004 manifesto to produce a “no 
interstellar travel, no Martians” brand of science fiction. But her choice of 
term — “speculative fiction,” a charged phrase historically used by science 
fiction avant-gardists to elevate their plausible, “serious” science fiction 
above what they considered trashy space-opera pulps — only engendered further 
controversy.

Enter science fiction’s saviour, Ursula Le Guin, who in a 2009 review of 
Atwood’s The Year of the Flood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/29/margaret-atwood-year-of-flood> 
criticised Atwood’s “arbitrarily restrictive definition” and laid bare Atwood’s 
motivations for proposing it: “She doesn’t want the literary bigots to shove 
her into the literary ghetto.” This literary bigotry is more than just 
rhetoric; the very first line of the New York Times review of Oryx and Crake, 
for instance, proudly declares that “science fiction will never be Literature 
with a capital ‘L.’” While sympathizing with Atwood’s motivations, Le Guin 
refused to endorse Atwood’s proposed solution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fspeculative-or-science-fiction-as-margaret-atwood-shows-there-isnt-much-distinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fada57108358c0ecc75791826675f632a8cbdf0aa%2F486_222_2072_1243%2F2072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Speculative%20or%20science%20fiction%3F%20As%20Margaret%20Atwood%20shows%2C%20there%20isn't%20much%20distinction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fspeculative-or-science-fiction-as-margaret-atwood-shows-there-isnt-much-distinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Speculative%20or%20science%20fiction%3F%20As%20Margaret%20Atwood%20shows%2C%20there%20isn%27t%20much%20distinction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fspeculative-or-science-fiction-as-margaret-atwood-shows-there-isnt-much-distinction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fada57108358c0ecc75791826675f632a8cbdf0aa%2F486_222_2072_1243%2F2072.jpg>
 Ursula Le Guin: ‘[Atwood] doesn’t want the literary bigots to shove her into 
the literary ghetto.’ Photograph: Dan Tuffs/Getty Images 
In the eyes of science fiction fans, the still-raging Atwood–Le Guin debate 
carries life-or-death stakes for the genre. The widespread acceptance of the 
term “speculative fiction,” as Atwood has defined it, would spell the end for 
continuing efforts to legitimize science fiction as a genre. The resulting 
schism, presented as a defensive measure to protect works from the “literary 
bigots,” would plunder genre-transcendent texts like The Handmaid’s Tale to 
fill the snobbish stables of “speculative fiction” and leave “science fiction” 
to describe only much-derided 50s pulp novels.

With The Heart Goes Last, however, advocates of science fiction can put down 
their torches and bat’leths: the novel proves that speculative fiction can be 
every bit as pulpy as science fiction — even without the aid of “talking squids 
in outer space.” Whether it is entirely successful is another matter.



Despite its efforts to the contrary, The Heart Goes Last becomes an escapist 
power fantasy — a persistent trope in pulp fiction parodied frequently at the 
novel’s beginning. We’re introduced to Stan first and foremost as a sexually 
frustrated man, emasculated by his own unemployment and lack of sexual appeal. 
Stan fantasizes incessantly about having total sexual control over Charmaine — 
not “the sex that Charmaine enacts, like yoga, with careful breath control,” 
but “sex that can’t be helped. No no no, yes yes yes! That’s what he wants.” 
For most of the novel, Stan is tied to disinterested female partners whose 
dominance is incompatible with Stan’s neurotic desires.

Margaret Atwood on The Heart Goes Last – books podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2015/oct/02/margaret-atwood-heart-goes-last-podcast>
The final section of the novel, however, relies on a technological deus ex 
machina to stage a disturbing and implausible ending completely at odds with 
the novel’s insistence on depicting a world that denies everyone their 
fantasies. The novel’s conclusion resembles a 19th-century Dickensian 
denouement, or a kinky bastardisation of a certain Shakespeare play about 
mismatched lovers that appropriately appears in The Heart Goes Last in the form 
of an all-male burlesque show, A Midsummer Night’s Scream.

While it begins with a recognisably Atwoodian dystopian premise, The Heart 
Goes Last becomes mired in the territory of pulp fiction — precisely the type 
of work from which speculative fiction tries to differentiate itself — and 
concludes with events that undermine the narrative and thematic work done by 
the rest of the novel. The Heart Goes Last’s disintegration into pulp fiction 
might be dismissed as a fluke, celebrated as Atwood embracing the pulp 
tradition, or interpreted as Atwood’s send-up of that tradition. But as the 
latest volley in a debate between Atwood and Le Guin about the definitions of 
speculative fiction and science fiction, the novel’s concession to pulp 
conventions undermines Atwood’s larger claim that the genre of speculative 
fiction is the antithesis of those cheesy, teenage male escapist fantasies 
about talking squids in outer space that are pulp novels. For fans hoping to 
rehabilitate “science fiction” as a genre designation rather than abandon it, 
The Heart Goes Last kindles hope that Atwood’s “speculative fiction” may soon 
collapse under the weight of its own contradictions.

*****

Cecilia Mancuso is a PhD student in English at Harvard University. She works 
on popular fiction and genre fiction, with a particular interest in science 
fiction.
 