
It looked like the dream holiday. A week in a remote cottage on a wild 
Scottish island, just two and half miles long. A newly decorated house with no 
Wi-Fi, no phone signal and no electricity, just a wood-burning stove, gas lamps 
and views of wild moor, purple heather and sea across the bay. A welcome 
retreat from the hurry and bustle of the modern world. But who would come with 
me? I asked my 16-year-old son. “I… am… NOT… going with you to a Scottish 
island!” he shouted, before slamming the door and storming up to his room.

All other friends and family were busy. So I’d be on my own. A retreat, if you 
like. Can’t complain. In fact I am in love with this part of the world, the 
Inner Hebrides, and when younger I used to visit the Isle of Eigg, a wild and 
free place where you climb volcanic outcrops by day and drink crates of 
McEwan’s beer and smash crab claws at night.

The overnight sleeper from Euston is an absolute hoot. I dined on haggis and 
ale before retiring to my cosy bed somewhere slightly north of Watford 
Junction. At 7am I pulled open the blind to see red deer bounding across the 
mossy wastes of the Highlands, and a station sign: Upper Tyndrum. It is 
mind-blowingly beautiful. I breakfasted in the dining car, which has an 
appealing Eighties vibe, and at Fort William I stocked up on beer, bacon and 
bread before getting a lift with Al the taxi driver to the port.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1195c0e6c4de83a5f4059a439d10a3de40f4372%2F269_0_2204_2755%2F2204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Splendid%20isolation%3A%20alone%20in%20the%20Inner%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Splendid%20isolation%3A%20alone%20in%20the%20Inner%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1195c0e6c4de83a5f4059a439d10a3de40f4372%2F269_0_2204_2755%2F2204.jpg>
 Top tips: a white-tailed sea eagle in flight. Photograph: Colin Carter 
Photography/Getty Images 
An hour later we arrived at a tiny jetty where Paul, the island’s estate 
manager, a giant of a man, was waiting. He buzzed me across the bay in a tiny 
boat called Harmony to the island (a five-minute journey) where we climbed on 
to a quad bike and Paul drove me the mile and a half down a bumpy track – past 
the village hall, a couple of polytunnels, a large manmade lake covered in 
water lilies and along the coast. It rained.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5773574071b211c08a1121fa1cedc5c16a2d3d6c%2F312_409_645_387%2F645.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Splendid%20isolation%3A%20alone%20in%20the%20Inner%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Splendid%20isolation%3A%20alone%20in%20the%20Inner%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5773574071b211c08a1121fa1cedc5c16a2d3d6c%2F312_409_645_387%2F645.jpg>
 The Old Schoolhouse: ‘I kept the wood-burning stove alight during my whole 
stay.’ 
The Old Schoolhouse is gorgeous. Recently renovated, it is all space, light 
and white wooden floors, ceilings and walls, and furniture from Loaf in London. 
There is a big wood-burning stove which, I am happy to report, I kept alight 
during my whole stay. Eilean Shona is owned by Vanessa Branson, sister of 
Richard, and her husband; they bought it 20 years ago. It has seven holiday 
cottages, and there are four staff, two of whom live on the island. A couple 
from Tring moved here two years ago, bringing the full-time population to four. 
It is not wild like Eigg: it is very quiet, and there are no cars.

Somewhat daunted by the prospect of a week of solitude, I’d brought with me the
Discourses of Epictetus, the classic Roman Stoical work, whose central message 
is: stop moaning. About loneliness he wrote: “Only the weak-spirited would 
complain. Think of the peace and freedom you have while alone.” That didn’t 
stop me from shouting to myself, “What am I going to do?” on the first evening.

Since its main claim to fame is that JM Barrie came here to write the 
screenplay ofPeter Pan in the twenties, I decided it was a good place to do 
some writing. And, actually, I was not completely cut off. The village hall has 
a good Wi-Fi connection, as well as ping pong and darts, and it became my 
office. Each day went roughly like this: get up at eight and make bacon and 
eggs. Walk to the village hall, half an hour away from the house, and work for 
three hours on the computer. Walk back home for lunch. Read on the sofa and 
have a nap. Get up and have a cup of tea. Go for a long walk. Return at eight 
for some real ale and stew. Write diary. And read Epictetus. Light the gas 
lamps. Peace. Freedom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3625f54ba919d7dd3da0cf5a302232477afe6d15%2F0_71_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Splendid%20isolation%3A%20alone%20in%20the%20Inner%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Splendid%20isolation%3A%20alone%20in%20the%20Inner%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3625f54ba919d7dd3da0cf5a302232477afe6d15%2F0_71_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 The village hall: with a good Wi-Fi connection, so it wasn’t really complete 
solitude. Photograph: James Bedford 
On other days I walked to the highest point on the island, and gazed out to 
Eigg. Once, I decided to walk across the middle of the island: after all, 
Eilean Shona is home to sea eagles, otters, red deer, pine martens and the
red-breasted merganser 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/r/redbreastedmerganser/>
. Should take about an hour, looking at the map. But things went wrong. Paths 
were of the sort that disappeared or turned into streams. Stream or path? I 
could never tell. The moss was so waterlogged it was like walking through a 
field of soaking sponges. I would find a little bay only to have to walk back 
again as there was no way of climbing round the rocks. I saw no birds of note.

I started to worry. What if I sprained an ankle? How would they find me? 
Probably I would have to drag myself to the nearest bit of coast, so I could be 
seen, and Paul would have to get Harmony out and come buzzing round the coast 
in search of the idiot who sprained his ankle in a stream. I clambered up some 
rocks towards some pine trees in the distance. I entered the forest and 
scrambled down a stream, scratching myself on pine branches. Finally I found a 
path and wept with joy when it emerged at an old, abandoned tennis court. I was 
back at the port.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf91ff36c6bb82a1b44b804d64e119df0c2930a1%2F0_205_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Splendid%20isolation%3A%20alone%20in%20the%20Inner%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Splendid%20isolation%3A%20alone%20in%20the%20Inner%20Hebrides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fsplendid-isolation-alone-on-a-hebridean-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf91ff36c6bb82a1b44b804d64e119df0c2930a1%2F0_205_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Sand and sea: a beach on Eilean Shona. 
On the last day, Paul took me for a spin in the bay in his boat. We saw dozens 
of very appealing looking seals basking in the sun, and took a quick look at 
the shiny, white sand of the beach at the north end of the island, recently the 
site of a mini-rave put on by the owner’s son. I can’t say I experienced that 
ecstatic kind of fun up here, on my own. But thanks to my beer and my books, I 
didn’t go completely mad. Next time I’m taking the children. And the dog.

One week’s rental of the Old Schoolhouse (sleeps 4) costs £1,250 including 
return transfers to the mainland (eileanshona.com 
<http://eileanshona.com/the-cottages/the-old-schoolhouse>). A sleeper seat on 
the Caledonian Sleepers Highland Route starts at £40, and a standard berth 
costs from £85 (sleeper.scot <https://www.sleeper.scot/>; 0330 060 0500)
 