
A spokesman for the Trump transition team has claimed that Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> “never advocated” for a 
registry tracking individuals based on their religion, despite video evidence 
showing Trump doing exactly that.

Jason Miller, the communications director for the transition team, released a 
statement on Thursday in response to reports that theincoming administration 
has been considering a register for Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/muslim-americans-donald-trump-hate-crimes-surveillance>
 arriving in the US:

President-elect Trump has never advocated for any registry or system that 
tracks individuals based on their religion, and to imply otherwise is 
completely false.


The national registry of foreign visitors from countries with high terrorism 
activity that was in place during the Bush and Obama administrations gave 
intelligence and law enforcement communities additional tools to keep our 
country safe, but the president-elect plans on releasing his own vetting 
policies after he is sworn in.

Unfortunately for Miller, his statement is directly contradicted by this video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/20/donald-trump-track-muslim-americans-video>
 of Trump at a campaign event in Newton, Iowa, in November 2015.

Muslims in Trump's America: realities of Islamophobic presidency begin to sink 
in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/muslim-americans-donald-trump-hate-crimes-surveillance>
In the video, asked by a reporter for NBC News if he would implement a 
database of Muslims, Trump responded: “I would certainly implement that. 
Absolutely.”

Asked if Muslims would be legally obligated to sign in to the database, Trump 
responded: “They have to be.” He also said: “There should be a lot of systems, 
beyond databases, we should have a lot of systems.”

The clip was widely reported at the time and drew condemnation from the 
Council on Islamic-American Relations and Trump’s political opponents, 
including Jeb Bush andHillary Clinton 
<https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/667703375035789312?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
.


Trump was then asked by NBC News 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump-says-he-would-certainly-implement-muslim-database-n466716>
 what the difference was between a Muslim registry and the registration of Jews 
by Nazis in Germany. “You tell me,” he responded. “You tell me.”

Asked again, he responded, “Why don’t you tell me.” Pressed by the reporter, 
he responded again, “You tell me,” before moving on to sign autographs for 
supporters.

It is unclear whether he was being sarcastic or genuinely did not have an 
answer to the question.

Representatives for Trump did not immediately respond to a request for 
clarification.

Kris Kobach, the Kansas secretary of state and an anti-immigration hardliner 
advising Trump’s transition team,said 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/reported-trump-immigration-advisor-says-hes-drafting-plan-for-muslim-registry_us_582c59bde4b01d8a014b6328>
 earlier this week that the president-elect’s policy advisers were considering 
instating a Muslim immigrant registry.

Michael Keegan, president of the pressure group People for the American Way, 
said: “The internment of Japanese Americans during the second world war is an 
ugly stain on our nation’s history. Republicans at every level should rush to 
condemn any hint that we’d repeat that mistake by targeting Muslims or any 
other minority group. To be clear: Donald Trump’s campaign promise to create a 
registry of Muslims is unconstitutional and un-American.”
 