
The wisdom of crowds and the power of open sourcing may be the hallmarks of 
the millennium. Think Wikipedia, Linux, and predictive Google searches. Think 
Anonymous hacking the Vatican. There's no limit to what strangers working 
together can do, if only they are many and the reward is handsome.

So here's one for you, suds-loving denizens of New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City, on the eve of St Patrick's 
Day: which bar within the confines of this fair town can be counted on to pour 
a truly transcendent Guinness? A consistently superb stout? A pint of mud to 
write home about? One Guinness master brewer Fergal Murray might approve of:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1DAIK2I8y8Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1DAIK2I8y8Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1DAIK2I8y8Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
If you're the type of self-serious drinker for whom the question prompts an 
offended round of, "There's no such thing as a proper pint of Guinness 
stateside; the only good one is in Dublin" – congratulations! Science has 
literally proved you right. Last year the Journal of Food Science published 
work by four lab-coated blokes who set out to study "the much-pronounced but 
poorly supported theory that 'Guinness does not travel well.'" Their 
conclusion: "The enjoyment of Guinness consumed in Ireland was rated higher (74 
mm VAS) than outside Ireland (57 mm; P < 0.001)." (VAS=Visual Analogue Scale, 
just click through 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2010.01986.x/abstract>.)

Here are a few perennial standouts in the March competition for the Gotham 
Guinness crown to get you started. Let us know what you think of these – and 
tell us which pubs are your neighborhood faves:

• The Ginger Man <http://nymag.com/listings/bar/ginger_man/>, 36th St between 
Madison and Fifth. You can find dozens of taps, scores of bottles and worlds of 
fun in a room that takes its name from the novel too sexy to publish in the USA 
65 short years ago.

• Tracks Raw Bar and Grill 
<http://nymag.com/listings/bar/tracks-raw-bar-grill/> in Penn Station. It's 
underground, it draws a commuter clientele and if there's a rainbow you'll miss 
it. But the pint of Guinness here is widely reputed to be one of the finest on 
offer in New York State.

• Paddy Reilly's <http://nymag.com/listings/bar/paddy_reillys_music_bar/>, 2nd 
Ave. at 29th St. A Kips Bay classic. The place to go for Guinness in New York 
for a long generation. And supposedly the first and only all-Guinness draft bar 
in the world, New York magazine points out.
 