
When John Doar died in 2014, Barack Obama, who’d already awarded 
<https://www.justice.gov/opa/blog/champion-civil-rights-john-doar-awarded-medal-freedom>
 him the Presidential Medal of Freedom, called him “one of America’s bravest 
lawyers”. Without his courage and perseverance, the president said, “Michelle 
and I might not be where we are today”.

The Standing Rock protests are a symbolic moment | Neil Young and Daryl Hannah
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/standing-rock-protests-neil-young>
Doar was the federal lawyer sent south by the Kennedy and Johnson justice 
departments to keep an eye on the explosive centers of the civil rights 
movement. Those White Houses didn’t do enough – but at least they kept watch on 
things. Doarescorted 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/12/us/john-doar-federal-lawyer-in-battle-against-segregation-dies-at-92.html>
 James Meredith to classes at the University of Mississippi, and helped calm 
crowds at the murder of Medgar Evers; he rescued activists from mobs during the 
Freedom Rides. A figure of history, in other words.

But history is just news from a while ago. Right now, we’re seeing a scene as 
explosive as the Freedom Rides or the bus boycotts play out in real time on the 
high plains of the Dakotas. And it’s a scene that desperately needs some 
modern-day John Doars to keep it from getting any worse.

Representatives of more 200 Indian nations have gathered at the Standing Rock 
Sioux reservation in an effort to prevent construction of an oil pipeline that 
threatens the tribe’s water supply, not to mention the planet’s climate. It’s a 
remarkable encampment, perhaps the greatest show of indigenous unity in the 
continent’s history. If Trump Tower represents all that’s dark and greedy in 
America right now, Standing Rock is by contrast the moral center of the nation.

But the peaceful protests have been met with repression that closely resembles 
the work of Bull Connor, as the pipeline company’s hired guards began byusing 
dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/north-dakota-pipeline-protest-guard-dogs-charges>
, and the local sheriff escalated from pepper spray tousing water guns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/dakota-access-pipeline-water-cannon-police-standing-rock-protest>
 in freezing weather, “sonic cannons” and rubber bullets.

Clearly the authorities are attempting, a la Birmingham or Selma, to goad 
nonviolent protesters into some kind of reaction that will justify more 
repression. They’ve used every trick in the book, including arresting reporters 
and shutting down camera drones to make sure they’re operating in the dark.

So far the Native Americans and their allies have held back despite the most 
intense provocation – for instance, the pipeline companybulldozed sacred sites 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2016/09/06/dakota-access-pipeline-sacred-sites-federal-judge>
 and ancient graves the day after the tribe handed a list of their locations to 
a federal court. Now the Army Corps of Engineers hasannounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/26/us-army-orders-eviction-of-dakota-protesters-camp-tribe-says>
 that they’re revoking the permit under which everyone is camped at the 
confluence of the Cannonball and Missouri rivers as of 5 December.

So far the Obama administration has announced 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-14/obama-administration-extends-dakota-access-oil-pipeline-review>
 at least a short delay before granting the final pipeline permits. But that 
delay could expire at any moment, adding to the tension in the camp. Clearly 
the administration needs to do much more: the entire pipeline, which underwent 
an “antiquated 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/the-super-twisted-history-of-the-dakota-access-pipeline_us_57d9daeae4b08cb14093c741>
” approval process, needs a full environmental review – by a body other thanthe 
project’s own developer 
<https://insideclimatenews.org/news/30082016/dakota-access-pipeline-standing-rock-sioux-army-corps-engineers-approval-environment>
.

Yes, Donald Trump will likely overturn the delay. But Trump’s not president 
yet; this tragedy is playing out in the Obama years.

Along with other actions, the federal government needs to grant the Sioux 
tribal governmentrequest 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Justice/2016/1024/Standing-Rock-protests-escalate-as-tribe-calls-for-DOJ-to-investigate>
 to send justice department observers — contemporary John Doars – to the 
Standing Rock reservation to ensure that the local authorities don’t keep 
escalating the situation. They should do it because it’s right, and also 
because it’s a historic moment.
 