
In a now famous tweet revealing, yet again, his tenuous grasp on the US 
constitution, Donald Trump suggested that anyone daring to burn a US flag 
should be stripped of their citizenship. Never mind that the US supreme court 
ruled on that very act in 1989, deeming it protected free expression under the 
first amendment (see Dread Scott, below); retro-fitting Old Glory as a symbolic 
vehicle for the full breadth of interpretation of American identity has been a 
strategy of artists and activists alike for decades.

What follows are some of the best known and most relevant displays for this 
badly strained moment for the American psyche.

Dread Scott, What Is the Proper Way to Display a US Flag? 
<http://www.dreadscott.net/works/what-is-the-proper-way-to-display-a-us-flag/>, 
1988
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fartists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27673bb1fdd3bfcf234433e55de1246d9025ceba%2F0_91_3082_1849%2F3082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stars%20and%20stripes%3F%20Whatever%3A%20six%20times%20artists%20subverted%20the%20American%20flag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fartists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stars%20and%20stripes%3F%20Whatever%3A%20six%20times%20artists%20subverted%20the%20American%20flag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fartists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27673bb1fdd3bfcf234433e55de1246d9025ceba%2F0_91_3082_1849%2F3082.jpg>
 Photographers focus their cameras on the Dread Scott exhibit in March 1989. 
Photograph: Mark Elias/AP 
When Scott showed this piece at the Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Institute of Chicago in 1989, it 
became a predictable flashpoint for conservative scorn. Its timing was 
impeccable: Congress, then in the grip of a Republican presidency and majority, 
had just passed ambiguous-seeming legislation protecting the flag, and Senator 
Bob Dole invoked it as a way to remove Scott’s work from public view. 
(President George HW Bush, for his part, called it “disgraceful”.)

The law led to Scott, along with three other protesters, burning the flag on 
the steps of Congress that same year, followed by a landmark in freedom of 
expression: the supreme court ruled that the first amendment protected the 
right of anyone to reinterpret the flag as they chose.


So what was all the fuss about? Scott, an African American then in his early 
20s, installed an array of photos culled from media – Korean students burning 
US flags; flag-draped coffins of American soldiers – with a suggestion book, of 
sorts, asking his titular question. While offering their views, the audience 
would have to use the flag, laid on the floor, as a kind of doormat. At the 
tail end of the jingoistic Reagan years, Scott’s simple, if provocative, 
question touched a raw nerve in the American psyche – one that President-elect 
Trump seems determined to tear open again.

David Hammons, African American Flag 
<https://www.moma.org/collection/works/81317>, 1990

Made partly to mark the election of David Dinkins, New York City’s first – and 
only – black mayor, in 1990, Hammons’ reimagination of Old Glory can be seen as 
cheeky celebration of an undeniable moment of American progress. Its red, black 
and green stand for the blood and skin of African Americans, and a nod to the 
verdant roots of black civilization in Africa.

Folded into Hammons’ career-spanning interest in civil rights and black power 
movements, you can draw a straight line from then to an increasingly unstable 
now: Black Lives Matter has prompted the president-elect to muse openly about 
investigating the movement as a domestic terror organization, and shifts 
Hammons’ guardedly hopeful work into a symbol of deepening division – of two 
Americas at the very least, and probably more.


Barbara Kruger, Who is bought and sold? Who is beyond the law? Who is free to 
choose? Who follows orders? Who salutes longest? Who prays loudest? Who dies 
first? Who laughs last? 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=Barbara+Kruger,+flag&biw=1377&bih=623&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjs3aXGvdPQAhXGyVQKHeWPB0IQ_AUICCgB>
, 1991

Kruger, whose wryly blunt text-based work pioneered media appropriation in the 
70s and 80s – it borrowed, while gleefully satirizing, the language of popular 
advertising – has always been a firebrand of politically engaged art-making, 
most often with an acid, feminism-inclined wit.

This work takes a foundational symbol of jingoistic Americana and deeply 
complicates it with questions of power and powerlessness in a polarized nation. 
Coming out of the Reagan/Bush years, where many believed power given to a cadre 
of elites was gleefully abused with the blessing of a willfully ignorant 
public, the questions were apt; as President-elect Trump assembles his cabinet 
along similar lines, Kruger’s exploration could hardly be more relevant.

Faith Ringgold, Black Light Series #10: Flag For the Moon: Die Nigger 
<http://www.faithringgold.com/ringgold/d84.htm>, 1969

Made after many fractious years of the civil rights movement, Ringgold’s piece 
leaves little to the imagination. “It would be impossible for me to picture the 
American flag just as a flag, as if that is the whole story,” she said at the 
time. “I need to communicate my relationship with this flag based on my 
experience as a black woman in America.”

The word “DIE” is clear enough behind the stars, but turn the image to the 
vertical to clarify: the stripes, emblems of the country’s original 13 
colonies, spell out “NIGGER” in blocky type.

After years of water cannons, church burnings, unprosecuted murders and 
widespread, often unchecked violence against black people, race relations in 
America were as raw as they had ever been. Ringgold has revisited the flag as a 
symbol of oppression; in her 1997 workThe Flag Is Bleeding 
<http://www.faithringgold.com/ringgold/d27.htm>, she recreated the flag with 
traditional African American quiltwork, sewing an image of a bloodied mother 
and children into the folksy motif.

Jasper Johns, various (starting in 1954) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fartists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e889f83116d15a6671c460188dadeb9412405a0%2F0_199_5430_3257%2F5430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stars%20and%20stripes%3F%20Whatever%3A%20six%20times%20artists%20subverted%20the%20American%20flag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fartists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stars%20and%20stripes%3F%20Whatever%3A%20six%20times%20artists%20subverted%20the%20American%20flag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fartists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e889f83116d15a6671c460188dadeb9412405a0%2F0_199_5430_3257%2F5430.jpg>
 ‘Johns himself never suggested specific intentions for his flag paintings.’ 
Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
Johns, a painter whose work was foundational in the evolution of 
conceptualism, painted his first flag in 1954 while he was a 24-year-old army 
veteran (he was discharged two years earlier). It’s faithful, but notable for 
its obvious materiality, the crisp lines of the fabric rendered rough and 
homespun by the artist’s hand. Johns himself never suggested specific 
intentions for his flag paintings, beyond the evolving conceptual priority on 
remaking everyday objects in unfamiliar ways.

That said, it has often been suggested that the artist’s return to symbol at 
important junctures in American political life (the Joseph McCarthy-led inquiry 
into “anti-American”, or communist, activity; the Vietnam war) reflect a 
nation’s foundational ideal beaten down by wrongheaded political action. 
Looking at another flag, made in 1955, it’s not hard to read that much: it’s 
rough and textural, and a grimy white.


Robert Longo, Untitled (the Pequod), 2014
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fartists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F190afda5275edf743f0581565b31bef62a5040a0%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stars%20and%20stripes%3F%20Whatever%3A%20six%20times%20artists%20subverted%20the%20American%20flag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fartists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stars%20and%20stripes%3F%20Whatever%3A%20six%20times%20artists%20subverted%20the%20American%20flag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fartists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F190afda5275edf743f0581565b31bef62a5040a0%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Artist Robert Longo speaks in front of his artwork. Photograph: Brian 
Ach/Getty Images for New York Magazine 
Longo rose to prominence during the “pictures generation” of the 1980s with a 
series of photographs called Men in the Cities, which showed men (and women) 
snappily clad in business attire and tangled in violent-looking contortions, as 
though having just been shot.

Longo’s engagement with the darkness that lies just beneath the slick surface 
of American idealism projects right up to the present day: a 2014 show at New 
York’s Metro Pictures coupled Longo’s hand-drawn black and white facsimiles of 
abstract expressionist masterpieces with an imposing sculptural treatment of 
the American flag: an enormous, rough presence in glistening black, the piece 
cantilevered awkwardly in the gallery space, listing badly, as though it were a 
ship going down.

It makes for an elegantly powerful read: a cultural totem for the so-called 
“American century”, Longo’s treatment of those masters deflates ambitions of 
ever achieving such heights again, while the flag work – called Untitled (The 
Pequod), after Captain Ahab’s mercilessly violent, famously doomed whaling ship 
in Moby-Dick – evokes Jasper Johns, minus the ambiguity.

Longo suggests an America going in one direction: down. 
 