
The original Star Wars (let's not bother with this Episode IV: A New Hope 
subheading nonsense) lays its cards on the table with its opening shot: a 
gigantic, evil-looking spaceship chasing down a far smaller craft. Like the 
rest of the movie, you could watch it with the sound off and completely follow 
what was going on. It's the purity of the story that has made this film endure, 
the classic themes handed down through the ages. It may be dressed up with 
robots, spaceships and trash compactors, but it's the old-as-time hero journey â€“
George Lucas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas> has said he 
consciously modelled his screenplay on Joseph Campbell's study of comparative 
mythology The Hero With a Thousand Faces.

In the cynical 70s, the notion of making a movie that mixed Kurosawa and Flash 
Gordon must have sounded as ludicrous as it does today. The film industry 
wasn't even ready for such an ambitious technical feat (at such a modest 
budget) asStar Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>, so Lucas 
changed it by bringing in untested youngsters from experimental and indie 
movies, or from fields like industrial design. Lucas had a talent for mixing 
disparate influences and making them fit perfectly. He shepherded together 
acting stalwarts like Alec Guinness and Peter Cushing, experimental film-makers 
like Adam Beckett (who supervised the effects), and military uniform historian 
John Mollo; it would otherwise be inconceivable that these people would have 
all worked on the same project.

Much has been made of Lucas's repeated direction to his cast ("Faster and more 
intense") or that the dialogue was easier to type than say. Guinness, Cushing 
and James Earl Jones give it all the gravitas it needs, with the younger 
members fitting their roles perfectly: Mark Hamill's wide-eyed earnestness, 
Carrie Fisher's dignity and, perhaps best of all, Harrison Ford looking so 
mortified and embarrassed to be there. For audiences it resulted in a film 
unlike any before or since.
 