 Graphic: Finbarr Sheehy  See the full visual 
Orion is now in prime position in everyone’s evening sky. Lying across the 
celestial equator, with his main stars slotting neatly between 10° N and 10° S 
of the celestial equator, the Hunter’s figure is visible from all parts of the 
Earth bar the central regions of the Arctic and Antarctic. I accept, of course, 
that most of the latter currently enjoys 24-hour daylight and is hardly the 
place to go for visual star-watching in January.

Last month, our chart displayed Orion’s stellar neighbours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/11/moon-hides-aldebaran-as-geminids-fly-starwatch>
 as they filled Britain’s S sky soon after midnight. That chart is just as 
applicable at 22:00 GMT tonight and by 21:00 at the month’s end. This time, 
though, our focus is on Orion itself.

Very few constellations resemble the figure or object they represent – 
Triangulum the Triangle and Crux the Southern Cross are exceptions that spring 
to mind. Another is Orion, with a belt of three stars at his waist, prominent 
stars to mark his shoulders and knees and a knot of stars for a head. He even 
carries a shield, the arc of stars to his NW (upper-right) and is brandishing a 
club of faint stars above his head.

Related: Starwatch: The Orion Nebula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/feb/10/starwatch-orion-nebula-space> 

As I mentioned last time, though, his most fascinating feature, the hazy gas 
and dust of theOrion Nebula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/feb/10/starwatch-orion-nebula-space>, 
lies in the sword that hangs below (at least, for us N hemisphere observers) 
the middle star of his belt.

Six of Orion’s seven main stars are young blue-hot giant or supergiant stars, 
including the brightest,Rigel <http://www.space.com/22872-rigel.html>. The 
exception and second brightest,Betelgeuse 
<http://www.space.com/31693-dying-star-betelgeuse-puzzles-astronomers.html>, is 
a bloated and relative cool red supergiant, large enough to engulf the entire 
orbit of the Earth if it were to replace the Sun. It pulsates slowly and 
semi-regularly in size and brightness and may die as a supernova within the 
next million years.

Another fainter star worth checking is Cursa 
<https://www.universeguide.com/star/cursa>, near Rigel but next door in 
Eridanus the River. Perhaps because of an unusually violent flare, this 
apparently brightened to surpass Rigel for a brief 2-hour spell back in 1985.

Orion will grace our evening sky for weeks to come, edging relentlessly 
westward so that it stands due S at nightfall by mid-March.

A brief look at the planetary year ahead has Mars keeping company with the 
brilliant Venus in our W evening sky untilVenus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/venus> dives around the Sun’s near side on 
25 March and becomes a morning star. We lose Mars in May and it, too becomes a 
morning object from August.

Jupiter <https://www.theguardian.com/science/jupiter> is resplendent above 
Spica in Virgo in the S before dawn and close to the Moon on the 19th. It is 
visible all night at opposition on 7 April and slips into the Sun’s glare by 
September. Saturn, low in our SE morning twilight at present, reaches 
opposition in S Ophiuchus on 15 June and remains in view until November with 
the N face of its rings wide open for telescopic study. Mercury, below and left 
of Saturn at present, has its best evening visibility in March-April and before 
dawn again in September.

For many, though, the year’s astro-highlight will be the total solar eclipse 
<https://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/SEgoogle/SEgoogle2001/SE2017Aug21Tgoogle.html> 
visible from coast to coast across the USA on 21 August.
 