
It is widely held that people are meaner on the internet than in person. Now 
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> is attempting to 
teach its users how to play nice.

Its newly updated safety centre, including its “bullying prevention hub” 
<https://www.facebook.com/safety> are central to its strategy to improve the 
quality of discourse on the platform – for the sake of its future as much as 
for its users’ experience.

“If people don’t have a positive experience, they’re not going to keep using 
Facebook, so safety is actually integral to everything we do,” says Mia 
Garlick, director of policy and communications for the platform in the 
Australia-Pacific region.

Asked if she has statistics that show whether disillusioned users are closing 
their accounts, Garlick says no – somewhat surprisingly, given the volume of 
data that Facebook collects. It certainly records growth: in its third quarter 
report for 2016, Facebook had 1.79 billion monthly active users, an increase of 
16% year-on-year. There are now 15 million Australians active on Facebook, 
62.5% of the total population.

At that size, it’s an unwieldy community, encompassing a wide range of 
investment: for example, it has about 600,000 fewer daily active users than 
those who log in monthly. Facebook’s hope is that its new resources will equip 
them with the knowledge and resources they need to be a somewhat self-policing 
community.

Facebook revenge pornography trial 'could open floodgates'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/09/facebook-revenge-pornography-case-could-open-floodgates>
Developed in tandem with the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence in 2013, 
the bullying prevention Hub isa website <https://www.facebook.com/safety/>, 
linked to but separate from Facebook’s homepage. Newly updated to put greater 
focus on video, it delivers support for teenagers, parents and educators on how 
to prevent and respond to online abuse.

Much of the advice seems obvious. The hub advises teenagers to remember “that 
bullying is never your fault, and it can happen to anyone”. If your child is 
being bullied, “try to stay calm”. And if you are unsure, you can download a 
document that explains “What is bullying?”

The separate safety centre is geared towards explaining Facebook-specific 
tools, resources and policies, as well as advice as to how to apply them: 
“Before you share, ask yourself: could somebody use this to hurt me?”

Garlick says there is a generation gap that Facebook must help its users 
bridge. Parents, in particular, need to be confident about using the platform 
to educate their children about the risks.


“Young people are very sophisticated about how they use technology, but 
sometimes they haven’t actually gone through all of the thought processes that 
they should.”

But the usefulness of the resources depend on people knowing they exist and 
how to find them, which Garlick says is a “challenge”. She says instructional 
videos are posted toFacebook’s regional branded pages 
<https://www.facebook.com/FacebookAU/?brand_redir=20531316728>, and it has 
“reached out” to educational partners in the hope that they will share it 
within their networks.

If Facebook wanted all 1.8 billion monthly users to be aware of the hub, it 
could simply push it out to them top of their news feeds – where the network on 
occasion posts messages as anodyne as the hope that usershave a “fun and happy” 
summer <https://twitter.com/jrhennessy/status/804039943949406208>. 

And it does – occasionally.

“The thing to keep in mind is that the vast majority of conversations and 
interactions on our platform are really, really positive,” Garlick says. She 
says Facebook’s tools and resources are about empowering users to look after 
themselves, and to encourage them to exercise control over their interactions 
on the platform.

One relatively recent addition is the security checkup 
<https://www.facebook.com/help/799880743466869>, which explains who can see 
your posts and how to restrict their access, step by step. It’s straightforward 
for irregular Facebook users to grasp but in-depth enough to bring value to the 
confident ones.

Garlick says 4,000 privacy checkups are carried out on the site each day. Even 
she benefited from the tool, using it to do “a bit of spring cleaning” of the 
apps she had used since 2007.

Self-sufficiency is a cornerstone of Facebook’s reporting process 
<https://www.facebook.com/help/181495968648557>, which asks that users flag 
objectionable material for review against its community standards – still the 
best tool the platform has for ruling what is and is not acceptable.

Automation is used to prevent malware and crack down on fake accounts, and 
some software is used for child exploitation images and,soon, extremist content 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/05/facebook-twitter-google-microsoft-terrorist-extremist-content>
. But Garlick says calls about individual posts that “go through the flow” are 
made on a case-by-case basis, by human moderators.


“It’s very hard to understand nuance if you’re a machine.”

Facebook censors Le Monde's mammogram screening photo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/12/facebook-censors-le-monde-mammogram-screening-photo-breast-anti-nipple-policy>
Managing those 1.8 billion users, three-quarters from outside the US, is not 
easy for a human. The community standards are deliberately broad, but there are 
nonetheless some lines in the sand that users keep coming up against. Nipples – 
sometimes sexual, often not – are one of the recurring sticking points.

“Don’t even get me started,” says Garlick, somewhat ruefully. “Some of the 
conversations I have around nipples ... ”

In July Facebook removed a video posted by 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/facebook-removes-abc-four-corners-footage-of-child-detainee-abuse-20160726-gqe0bz.html?logout=true>
 the Australian public broadcaster, the ABC, that showed abuse in juvenile 
detention facilities, because it included child nudity. The ABC posted a new 
version with blurring.

There is a “pretty tough line” drawn around children in particular, Garlick 
says. “We get the majority of reports right.”

Allowing users control over their Facebook presence through the news tools 
helps them to “create and curate a positive experience”, she says.

It also helps foster a sense of ownership, maybe even of community. This seems 
to be top of mind for the platform. It hashas started asking 
<https://twitter.com/mlle_elle/status/807080499277533184?lang=en> users: “How 
much does this post help you feel like you are part of a larger community on 
Facebook?” The possible answers range from “Not at all” to “Completely”.

But an integral part of community is support. If people feel equipped to have 
positive experiences on Facebook, maybe they will be more inclined to look out 
for it.

“You take care of your house,” Garlick says. “If somebody graffitied your 
front yard, you’d clean it up. It’s the same if people are saying stuff in your 
space on Facebook.”
 