
If you think the controversial Mast Brothers chocolate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/20/mast-brothers-chocolate-bars-scandal>
 is pricey at £19 for a 200g bar, then you haven’t come acrossTo’ak chocolate 
<https://toakchocolate.com/>. Touted as the world’s most expensive chocolate, 
one 50g bar of To’ak comes packaged in an elm wood box, in which you’ll find a 
pair of wooden tongs – so that you can taste the delicacy without tainting it 
with oil from your fingers – and a 116-page booklet explaining the origin and 
pedigree of the beans. It costs $260 and is claimed to be a luxury on a par 
with a fine wine or whisky – an experience to be savoured and shared. If that’s 
not exclusive enough, there’s the Vintage 2014 range (only 100 bars are 
produced) for $315 or $345.

To’ak, which roughly translates as terroir in ancient dialects of Ecuador, 
comes from Finca Sarita, a remote farm in Ecuador where you can also experience 
the flavours of the rainforest – by staying there for just US$15 a night, 
including breakfast, dinner and, if you’re lucky, a bite of the exclusive 
chocolate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fchocolate-ecuador-farm-stay-worlds-most-expensive-chocolate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9845184024ca2ae7784bd360cf2868e2e72658c%2F0_0_1577_946%2F1577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stay%20on%20the%20Ecuador%20farm%20that%20produces%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20expensive%20chocolate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fchocolate-ecuador-farm-stay-worlds-most-expensive-chocolate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stay%20on%20the%20Ecuador%20farm%20that%20produces%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20expensive%20chocolate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fchocolate-ecuador-farm-stay-worlds-most-expensive-chocolate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9845184024ca2ae7784bd360cf2868e2e72658c%2F0_0_1577_946%2F1577.jpg>
 Ta’ok chocolate comes with a pair of tongs, to avoid tainting the taste with 
oil from the fingers 
The cacao tree is just one of dozens of species growing on the organic 
permaculture farm where Servio Pachard Vera lives with his four children, just 
a short drive outside the city of Calceta in Manabí province, around 50km from 
the Pacific coast. When my partner and I visited, Pachard Vera was proud to 
show off the vines, shrubs and trees that have produced useful fruits and 
medicine for his family for generations. Towering breadfruit and jackfruit 
trees stand near the front of the property, and tamarind, mango and cinnamon 
trees grow nearby. Almost everything he and his family eat, except for flour 
and salt, is grown on the farm. “To us, permaculture is a new word,” he said, 
“but our people have done it all their lives.”

Last year, Pachard Vera became the production manager for To’ak chocolate 
<https://toakchocolate.com/making/on-the-farm/>, which was set up by American 
conservationist Jerry Toth and Austrian designer Carl Schweizer. Pachard Vera 
doesn’t actually grow the cacao for To’ak at Finca Sarita, it comes from a 
nearby mountain slope where native heirloom Arriba cacao still grows, rare in a 
country where most species are now hybridised. After the workers harvest the 
cacao beans they bring them to Pachard Vera’s farm for processing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fchocolate-ecuador-farm-stay-worlds-most-expensive-chocolate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b1a96640fb24b000f6ba0a3eba940c3e344f27a%2F0_22_1914_1148%2F1914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stay%20on%20the%20Ecuador%20farm%20that%20produces%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20expensive%20chocolate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fchocolate-ecuador-farm-stay-worlds-most-expensive-chocolate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stay%20on%20the%20Ecuador%20farm%20that%20produces%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20expensive%20chocolate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fchocolate-ecuador-farm-stay-worlds-most-expensive-chocolate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b1a96640fb24b000f6ba0a3eba940c3e344f27a%2F0_22_1914_1148%2F1914.jpg>
 The cacao that goes into Ta’ok chocolate. 
He ferments the cacao for five to seven days, then spreads it out on mesh 
racks under a clear plastic roof to dry for about another week. From there, the 
beans go to a separate roasting area off-site, and eventually end up in 
ultra-high-end shops in Europe and the US. Pachard Vera laughs at the cost of 
the finished product, but is grateful for the extra income he earns compared to 
selling cacao on the local market.

In the meantime, his life follows the same rhythms and patterns of his 
ancestors. His great-grandfather arrived on the land over a century ago, 
looking for rubber trees. He stuck around and started planting cacao and fruit 
trees, and his family continued the practice in the traditional manner, free 
from chemicals. “It’s a clean production,” said Pachard Vera. “Everything is 
symbiotic, in equilibrium, in peace and harmony.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fchocolate-ecuador-farm-stay-worlds-most-expensive-chocolate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaeb1e29e00ededd092a98550c76a7b62a62b9e5%2F0_0_1152_691%2F1152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stay%20on%20the%20Ecuador%20farm%20that%20produces%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20expensive%20chocolate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fchocolate-ecuador-farm-stay-worlds-most-expensive-chocolate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stay%20on%20the%20Ecuador%20farm%20that%20produces%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20expensive%20chocolate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fchocolate-ecuador-farm-stay-worlds-most-expensive-chocolate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaeb1e29e00ededd092a98550c76a7b62a62b9e5%2F0_0_1152_691%2F1152.jpg>
 Servio Pachard Vera tasting a fresh cacao pod on his finca Sarita. Photograph: 
Ada Kase 
He took us on a tour of the property, munching on fruit as he went. We walked 
by a flowering coffee bush, with a few berries nearly ready to harvest, then he 
reached up to snag a yellow starfruit off a tree, which was juicy and bursting 
with flavour. We passed various types of palms, lime trees, sugar cane, and 
beautiful red heliconia flowers that bear a resemblance to ginger. A space near 
the back of the farm is reserved for dragon fruit, passion fruit, bananas and 
plantains. The area is attractive to wildlife as well. A small brown owl 
perched in the branches of an orange tree, waiting for the cover of night. A 
sloth hung in a 120-year-old mango tree.

At night, we climbed up narrow ladders to a treehouse perched five metres 
above the ground among the branches and leaves of the forest and near the 
sloth, as well as a river bordering the property. We fell asleep to the sounds 
of flowing water, late-night bird calls and armadillos rustling about on the 
forest floor below – a world away from the reggaeton music and car alarms we’d 
grown accustomed to in Ecuadorian cities.

Sometimes, Pachard Vera told us, guests see iguanas and nutrias (large aquatic 
rodents) searching for food in the early morning in and around the river, but 
we weren’t lucky enough to spot any.

For breakfast, Pachard Vera treated us to breadfruit, mangos, oranges and 
plantains, supplemented with homemade bread and coffee, along with a giant bowl 
of thick, rich chocolate sauce made from his own cacao. And if that wasn’t 
enough, he happened to have a sample of the To’ak itself that he let us try: I 
found it subtle and refined, earthy without being bitter.

Personally, however, I couldn’t fathom why anyone would shell out $345 on it, 
but it was certainly a delicious piece of chocolate. Just one of the many 
pleasures to be found at Finca Sarita.

• Email Servio Pachard Vera, serviodecalceta at yahoo.es or call +593 9 6802 
1185. No website
 