
A senior police officer is warning people who use dating apps to take extra 
security precautions as concerns grow over the scale of violence and sexual 
assaults linked to their use.

Stephen Port's freedom to kill raises difficult questions for the Met
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/stephen-ports-freedom-kill-difficult-questions-met-police>
The conviction of Stephen Port for the serial killings of young men he met via 
a variety of dating apps, including Grindr and Gaydar, comes after the case of
Stefano Brizzi, who killed a police officer, Gordon Semple, whom he met via the 
Grindr app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/14/sadomasochist-found-guilty-of-murdering-london-police-officer>
.

The use of dating apps by perpetrators of sexual violence is one of the 
NationalCrime <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Agency’s emerging 
threats to the general public. Recent figures showed the number of allegations 
of rapes linked to dating websites have risen sixfold in the last five years.

The NCA said in its most recent figures that 184 people had reported being 
raped by someone they had met via a dating app or website in 2014 – up from 33 
in 2009. Twice as many people now report being raped by someone they met online 
as are attacked by a bogus taxi driver – a danger once seen as so great it 
attracted a huge public awareness campaign.

The Norfolk chief constable, Simon Bailey, national police lead on violence 
and public protection, said there was a direct connection between the use of 
dating apps and a rise in crime.

“The rising popularity of online dating apps and websites has contributed to 
an increase in the number of recorded crimes,” said Bailey. “We strongly 
encourage users to report offences and seek support if they become a victim of 
any type of crime.

“I would urge those who use online dating apps to be as security-conscious as 
possible and not to share personal data with anyone until they are sure about 
those they are communicating with.”

Port was a prolific user of gay dating apps including Grindr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grindr>, Gaydar, FitLads, SlaveBoys, 
Hornet and Badoo. His case highlights how individuals with violent intentions 
can exploit the apps to gain the trust of victims. Port used a false name and a 
fake profile picture in some of his personal information to gain the trust of 
the men who were to meet him.

He used the names “shyguy”, “top fun Joe”, “Basketballguy” and a variety of 
others and cited his preference for “under 30” and slim men. In one profile, he 
claimed to be an Oxford graduate. In another, a special needs teacher.

“I am a shy, polite guy. Enjoy keeping in shape, love to have a good time. I 
am romantic, caring and would take good care of my partner. I am successful, 
educated and determined,” he wrote. “I’m looking for fun/date/bf who is between 
18-24, slim, smooth twink type, not too camp tho .... who has plenty of energy 
and enjoys a good time.”

Bailey said the greatest danger was often at the first face-to-face meeting. 
He urged men and women who use dating apps to take security precautions when 
they met their “date” for the first time.

“If you are planning on meeting someone for the first time, take precautions 
and meet in a public place,” he said. “Individuals should stop all 
communication with anyone who attempts to pressurise them into something they 
are not comfortable with. If this happens you should contact the dating app 
provider immediately to discuss your concerns and always report any criminal 
activity to the police.”

The vulnerability of victims who meet people with violent intent via dating 
apps was starkly illustrated by the Port case. Having enticed his victim with a 
fake profile, Port would use his first meeting with the men to slip GHB into 
their drink, or in some cases, he would tell them it was lubricant. Within 15 
minutes, they would be unconscious.

GHB, an anaesthetic, is popular on the dance and club scene, and is available 
in liquid form [liquid ecstasy] or powdered form.

In low doses, it is reported to produce euphoria, to lower social inhibition 
and increase libido. At higher doses, euphoria gives way to sedation. Still 
larger doses can induce coma. In some cases death can arise as a result of 
respiratory depression or inhalation of vomit. It is particularly dangerous 
when taken in conjunction with other sedatives, such as alcohol, or sleeping 
pills.

Port worked as a male escort – and was well aware of the power a stranger with 
violent intentions could hold over an unwitting victim.

When giving evidence he was asked about his safety rules as an escort. He 
replied: “I would never accept a drink or anything to eat off a client. And I 
always took my own lube, condoms and poppers.” It was just such vulnerability 
he exploited in the victims he targeted.
 