
Donald Trump has named Reince Priebus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/reince-priebus> as his White House chief 
of staff, rewarding a loyalist to his party and its long-serving chairman by 
making him his top aide in the Oval Office. But he also named Steve Bannon, the 
head of his campaign and of the far-right website Breitbart, as his “chief 
strategist and senior counselor”.

The statement announcing Trump’s decision named Bannon first, despite the 
vague title of his role. It said he and Priebus would work as “equal partners”.

“Steve and Reince are highly qualified leaders who worked well together on our 
campaign and led us to a historic victory,” Trump said. “Now I will have them 
both with me in the White House as we work to make America great again.”

Bannon mentioned his “very successful partnership” with Priebus, who said in 
his own statement that the Trump White House would “work to create an economy 
that works for everyone, secure our borders, repeal and replace Obamacare and 
destroy radical Islamic terrorism”.

Who are Trump appointees Reince Priebus and Stephen Bannon?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/who-are-trump-appointees-reince-priebus-and-stephen-bannon>
Priebus spent months trying to bring Republican leaders to terms with their 
party’s nominee, who oftenrailed against them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/donald-trump-republican-party-disloyal-election-2016>
 and drove several senior senators away with his mockery ofdisabled people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/08/susan-collins-donald-trump-washington-post-op-ed-republican>
 andprisoners of war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/18/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-iowa-republicans>
, andboasts of groping women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-list-of-republicans-reject-support-endorsement>
.

A fixture in Washington and Wisconsin politics since the mid-2000s, Priebus 
led the “autopsy report” after Republicans failed to win the 2012 election, 
recommending efforts to win over Hispanic voters and women.


Throughout Trump’s chaotic and divisive campaign, he served as his diplomat to 
senior Republicans and donors, and as manager of the party resources to elect 
candidates around the country.

The White House chief of staff is considered one of the most powerful 
positions in Washington, charged with helping the president in almost every 
task and operating the complicated machinery of government.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Bannon stands on the far right of the party, far from Priebus’s dedication to 
fiscal issues over social ones. A former Goldman Sachs executive and early 
investor in the sitcom Seinfeld, Bannon has in recent years headed Breitbart 
News, which has been accused by the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) ofantisemitism 
<https://twitter.com/adl_national/status/732297098759131136>, and whose stories 
regularly traffic 
<http://mediamatters.org/blog/2016/08/17/breitbart-news-worst-headlines/212467> 
in racist and sexist stereotypes and conspiracy theories.

The ADL’s chief executive, Jonathan Greenblatt, welcomed Priebus’s appointment 
but said of Bannon’s: “It is a sad day when a man who presided over the premier 
website of the ‘alt-right’ – a loose-knit group of white nationalists and 
unabashed antisemites and racists – is slated to be a senior staff member in 
the ‘people’s house’.”

John Weaver, a Republican strategist who worked for Ohio governor John 
Kasich’s presidential campaign, tweeted: “The racist, fascist extreme right is 
represented footsteps from the Oval Office. Be very vigilant, America.”

Priebus on Monday defended Bannon, saying the two made an effective pair as 
they steered Trump past Democrat Hillary Clinton and toward the presidency. He 
sought to distance Bannon from the incendiary headlines on his website, saying 
they were written by unspecified others.

“Together, we’ve been able to manage a lot of the decision making in regard to 
the campaign,” Priebus told NBC’s Today. “It’s worked very, very well.”

In 2007, Bannon’s ex-wife accused him of making antisemitic remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/27/trump-campaign-ceo-stephen-bannon-denies-antisemitic-remarks>
, which he denied. In 1996 he wascharged with domestic violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-domestic-violence-trump-campaign-ceo>
 in acase <http://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000156-c3f8-dd14-abfe-fbfbbe310001> 
that was eventually dismissed.

In August, the Guardian found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-registered-vote-donald-trump>
 that he was registered to vote in Florida, a key swing state, at an empty 
house where he did not live, in an apparent breach of election laws. Bannon 
subsequentlychanged his registration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-voter-registration-home-breitbart-writer>
.

Bannon has repeatedly criticized Republicans 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/300445-exclusive-trump-campaign-ceo-wanted-to-destroy-ryan>
, including the House speaker, Paul Ryan, for not moving far enough to the 
right.

Neither of the appointees has served in elected office, although Priebus, 44, 
has worked in government since 2004 and as Republican National Committee 
chairman since 2011.


Donald Trump backs same-sex marriage but not abortion under supreme court 
threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/trump-supreme-court-abortion-same-sex-marriage>
Bannon has shied from the stage since taking over Trump’s campaign this 
summer, replacing former lobbyist Paul Manafort, who left after reports of his 
past ties to pro-Kremlin Ukrainian politicians.

Priebus continued to defend Trump throughout his many controversies this 
summer, and the businessman praised him during his victory speech on Tuesday.

“I never had a bad second with him,” Trump said. “He’s an unbelievable star.”

Meanwhile, in his first broadcast interview as president-elect, which aired on 
Sunday evening,Trump told CBS’s 60 Minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-deportation-immigration-criminals>
 that he planned to deport as many as 3 million people once he acceded to the 
Oval Office, and that fencing would form part of his promised wall onthe border 
with Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/mexico-border-nogales-president-trump-joke>
.

“What we are going to do is get the people that are criminal and have criminal 
records, gang members, drug dealers, where a lot of these people, probably 2 
million, it could be even 3 million, we are getting them out of our country or 
we are going to incarcerate,” he said. “But we’re getting them out of our 
country, they’re here illegally.”

On the campaign trail, Trump said he would deport all undocumented migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/21/donald-trump-deportation-immigration-plan-meeting-latino-leaders>
 living in the US, estimated to be about 11 million people.

In the same interview, Trump sent conflicting messages about his hopes for the 
supreme court, saying he would appoint justices who wouldsend abortion rights 
“back to the states” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/trump-supreme-court-abortion-same-sex-marriage>
, but not those who sought to repeal marriage equality “because it was already 
settled”.


The supreme court has had eight members since the death of the conservative 
justice Antonin Scalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/14/antonin-scalia-man-of-his-word-who-shaped-america-in-life-and-in-death>
 in February. Senate Republicans have refused to consider Obama’s nominee for 
the seat, Merrick Garland.

Trump also suggested he might retain parts of Barack Obama’s healthcare reforms
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-appears-to-soften-stance-on-range-of-pledges>
.

 