
Australian captain Steve Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steve-smith> 
is not pleased with a busy summer schedule which will force him to miss the 
upcoming Twenty20 series against Sri Lanka.

The three-match T20 series, beginning in Melbourne on February 17 and 
finishing in Adelaide on February 22, is set to clash with the Test squad’s 
tour of India starting in Pune on February 23.

It’s likely the Test side will assemble on the subcontinent in early February, 
wanting a better chance to adjust to local conditions as they seek to gain 
revenge for a shambolic 4-0 series loss to India in 2013.

Australia have the better of Pakistan on rain-drenched first day in Melbourne 
| Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/australia-have-the-better-of-pakistan-on-rain-drenched-first-day-in-melbourne>
Smith has confirmed he will miss the T20 series, and the likes of David Warner 
and Mitchell Starc are also likely to be unavailable.

“I don’t think it’s ideal,” Smith told ABC Grandstand.

“I think the Australian public would love to see the best Australian team on 
the park for every game. It’s difficult to do that with the schedule and how 
much we play.”

Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia high-performance 
manager Pat Howard has previously said Australia should embrace the prospect of 
two teams being in action almost simultaneously.

“We’ve done better and performed better when players have really lavished the 
opportunity, versus it being tacked on at the end of a long season,” he said in 
October.

“So there is a way to have a think about this differently to give us a better 
chance of winning.”

With players now competing regularly in three formats of the game, managing 
their workloads has become increasingly tricky.

Australia chose to rest Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc for their one-day 
international tour of South Africa in October and ended up losing the series 
5-0.

“Had they been there, things could have been slightly different,” Smith said.

“We look now and see how well they’re bowling, and (considering) how much 
cricket they’ve had to play over the summer, it was probably the right decision 
to have rested them and made sure they were fit for the summer.”

Smith says he isn’t fussed who leads the T20 team in his absence, so long as 
they get the best out of the players at their disposal.

He has turned his attention to the 2018 World T20 after Australia were 
eliminated in the group stages by India in this year’s tournament.

“In T20 cricket, we play games on and off, here and there,” he said.

“For me, the most important thing is that we win major tournaments in that 
format of the game, and that’s the World Cup.”



 