
Donald Trump’s campaign chief has moved his voter registration to the home of 
one his website’s writers, after the Guardiandisclosed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-registered-vote-donald-trump>
 that he was previously registered at an empty house in Florida where he did 
not live.

Stephen Bannon is now registered to vote at the Florida house of Andy Badolato 
<http://www.breitbart.com/author/andy-badolato/>, who reports for Breitbart 
News and has worked with Bannon in the past on the production of political 
films.

According to public records, Badolato, 52, and two of his adult sons are also 
registered to vote at the property, which he co-owns with his ex-wife.

Trump campaign chief Steve Bannon is registered voter at vacant Florida home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-registered-vote-donald-trump>
A spokeswoman for Bannon, a spokesman for Trump, and Badolato did not respond 
to emailed questions about whether Bannon lives at the single-family house, 
which is listed as his residence on his new voter registration record in 
Sarasota County.

Alexandra Preate, a spokeswoman for Bannon, said earlier in an email that “Mr 
Bannon moved to a different residence in Florida”, repeating a statement about 
the issue that was previously released by Trump campaign spokesman Jason Miller.

The Sarasota County supervisor of elections advises new registrants that they 
must use the address of their legal residence, andnotes prominently that 
applying with untrue information 
<http://www.sarasotavotes.com/content.aspx?id=16> can result in a felony charge 
punishable by five years in prison or a fine of up to $5,000.

Bannon, the recently hired chief executive of Trump’s presidential campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/17/donald-trump-stephen-bannon-breitbart-news-kellyanne-conway>
, made the amendment to his registration after being contacted by the Guardian 
for areport published on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-florida-registered-vote-donald-trump>
 morning about his previous voting registration arrangements.

The 62-year-old executive chairman of Breitbart News was from 2014 until this 
week registered to vote at two rented houses in Miami where his ex-wife lived. 
The second house has been vacant for months, according to neighbors, and is due 
to be demolished. Bannon, who owns property in California, works predominantly 
in Washington and New York.

Bannon, his ex-wife Diane Clohesy and the Trump campaign have not disputed 
that Bannon did not live in the Miami houses with Clohesy when given eight 
separate opportunities to do so before and after publication.

Badolato states on his website <http://www.andybadolato.com/> that he is an 
“entrepreneur, senior level executive, venture capitalist and seed stage 
investor” and claims to have founded companies that reached a total of $26bn in 
market capitalization. According to federal court records, he has filed for 
bankruptcy four times since 2008.

He is also an “editorial journalist and blog contributor” at Breitbart News 
and formerly worked as an associate producer on some of Bannon’s films such as 
The Undefeated, a documentary about the 2008 Republican vice-presidential 
nominee Sarah Palin.
 