
They have a better class of book thief in Toronto. Whereas in the UK, Potters 
Harry and Beatrix, as well as travel guides, top the list of titles most likely 
to be stolen from bookshops, thieves working the aisles in the Canadian city 
are targeting Haruki Murakami’s work.

One bookseller said he was C$800 (£500) lighter after a shoplifting spree that 
cleared an entire shelf of the Japanese author’s work from his shop. “They took 
my Norwegian Woods, my Sputniks, all of them,” lamented Gary Kirk of the A Good 
Read Bookshop, telling broadcaster CBC Toronto that hedoubted the thief had 
ever cracked open a Murakami 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/haruki-murakami-toronto-theft-used-books-used-book-store-1.3923235>
.

In the UK, though the Booksellers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksellers> Association keeps no records 
about “shrinkage” – as it quaintly refers to shoplifting – it appears 
shoplifters (shrinkers?) browsing its members’ shelves have less highbrow 
tastes. Philip Downer, former head of Borders UK and managing director of 
Calliope Gifts told the Guardian that thieves targeted “big brands – Harry 
Potter, Peppa Pig – where the thief can take a pile of the same title with an 
easy guarantee of being able to shift the goods.”

10 independent bookshops you should visit worldwide: our readers recommend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/jun/19/the-10-best-independent-bookshops-in-the-world-readers-recommend>
Like all the best capitalists, thieves operate on demand-led principles. If 
they can’t shift it, they won’t nick it. So rather than Murakami, the books 
you’ll be offered by a bloke down the pub won’t be Paul Beatty’s Booker-winning 
The Sellout, but Joe Wicks’s Body Coach as well as the boy wizard and his mates.

That said, Wicks’s musclebound tomes may be too much for bookish kleptomaniacs 
because, to misuse a cliche, when it comes to stealing, size matters. According 
to Tony Higginson of Formby Books, this is why Beatrix Potter proved popular 
with light-fingered customers in his shop. “The books are small and nice and 
easy to re-sell,” he said.

But am I alone in feeling a bit embarrassed that our thieves can’t raise the 
bar a bit? Must they make us look so dumb compared with our Canadian cousins?

It isn’t as if our taste in knockoff books has always been books with a 
reading age of 12 and lots of pictures. As with our bestsellers, our stolen 
books have dumbed down.

Go back 40 years and any self-respecting book thief in London could be found 
at Soho’s Coach and Horses knocking back booze with Peter Cook, Lucien Freud 
and Tom Baker, according toJeffrey Bernard’s memoirs 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-jeffrey-bernard-1237687.html>
. Their taste in quality art books and highbrow literary works makes them look 
like“gentleman thief” Raffles 
<https://strandmag.com/the-magazine/articles/raffles-the-gentleman-thief/> 
compared to modern-day thieves.

According to former “gentleman bookseller” Steerforth, whole shelves of 
Nabokov used todisappear from his Richmond shop 
<http://thedabbler.co.uk/2015/03/the-book-theives-of-london/>. One thief, the 
notorious curmudgeon Roy Faith, who specialised in high-end art books, ensured 
so much business for store detectives that one firm sent a rep to his funeral. 
Another wore a specially adapted raincoat to lift copies of the Times Atlas – 
£75 a pop – two at a time.

It all seemed to go wrong at the turn of the century. Scroll forward to 2004, 
and the 35,000 books stolen to order every year for Ronald Jordan to sell on 
market stalls look far less impressive in quality than quantity.

Targeting almost exclusively Rough Guides and Lonely Planet guidebooks, Jordan 
was a modern-day Moriarty, managing a gang of shoplifters who provided enough 
books each year to furnish a small bookshop. Jordan wasjailed in 2004 for 30 
months for handling stolen goods 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/london/4314663.stm>.

But maybe Toronto thieves won’t make us look so dumb for long: CBC reported 
that shoplifters follow the trends in publishing as closely as booksellers. “It 
used to be all the Beats,” Derek McCormack of Type Books told the broadcaster. 
“Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg. Then it became Nabokov by far – you couldn’t 
keep Lolita on the shelf.” Give it a week before they drop Murakami for some 
Peppa Pig instead.
 