
Hillary Clinton has not won the presidential election. Granted, the polls look 
good. The New York Times gives her a92% chance 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/upshot/presidential-polls-forecast.html?_r=0>
 at taking the White House as of Thursday morning, and more Republican elites 
are defecting from their party’s nominee each day. Data hub FiveThirtyEight’s 
numbers are a little more modest, putting Trump’s odds of victory just north of 
15%. Evan McMullin – the once-laughable conservative independent candidate –
could even win 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/polls-may-be-underestimating-evan-mcmullins-chances-in-utah/>
 his home state of Utah, fueled by Republican recoiling.

No, Hillary, young voters aren't naive. The system doesn't work for them | 
Alexander Zaitchik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/04/bernie-sanders-supporters-young-voters-hillary-clinton>
But not every picture is so rosy. A recent Reuters/Ipsos poll 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/10/22/trump-gains-on-clinton-poll-shows-rigged-message-resonates.html>
 saw Clinton with just a 4-point lead nationwide, with Trump undershooting his 
campaign high by just one point. That a full 15% of votersremain undecided 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/election-update-where-are-the-undecided-voters/>
 leaves a huge potential for the election to swing at the last minute. 
Worryingly, the candidates remain neck in neck in several swing states.

By all accounts, Trump (to speak generously) has a slim hope of walking away 
with a win come 8 November. But that there is still any chance he could become 
commander in chief, America’s ambassador to the world and a central player in 
literally any decision about the future of the United States should inspire not 
just concern, but a trip to knock on doors in your nearest swing state.

Mind, this isn’t a call to silence dissent about Clinton, let alone to start 
phone banking for her campaign. But those savvy enough to hold principled and 
well-founded critiques of her role in the Honduran coup and ending “welfare as 
we know it”, for instance, can also recognize the stakes of voting for anyone 
besides her in a swing state.

There are more than a few good reasons to help make sure Clinton wins that 
have almost nothing to do with her. Anything but victory by a sizable margin 
will feed Trump’s omens about election “rigging”, potentially tying up the news 
cycle for several months in some horrific recount debacle like the one in 2000. 
A narrow defeat is also likely to embolden Trump’s most irascible supporters, 
many of whom happen to be armed.

Assuming the election is over could further hit down-ballot candidates by 
driving down voter turnout at a time when Democrats have a real potential to 
flip the Senate and render Bernie Sanders chairman of the budget committee. (By 
fear-mongering about that possibility, Paul Ryan inadvertently helped Sanders 
raise$2.4m <https://berniesanders.com/thankspaul/> to aid in down-ticket races.)

So whether you want to avert open revolt, take back Congress or just be done 
with this hellscape marathon of an election cycle, assuming Clinton has already 
coasted to victory is a dangerous move.

Perhaps the best reason to double down on electing Clinton, though, is to aid 
the movements that will be a thorn in her side. Especially after reading the 
transcripts of her speeches to Goldman Sachs and other major banks, few 
progressive activists have illusions as to where Clinton’s priorities – and 
donor pools – lie.

Veterans of Occupy Wall Street, the movement for black lives and the climate 
fight know that major egalitarian change in the United States has never come 
straight from the Oval Office. From the New Deal to women’s suffrage to beating 
back Jim Crow, nearly every transformative shift in American politics has been 
the result of militant and confrontational social movements pushing Democratic 
presidents into a corner.

Where Republican administrations spark defensive fights – against ill-advised 
wars (Bush II) and neoliberal crusades (Reagan) – Democratic ones allow 
activists to play up the contradictions between a party that claims progressive 
values and the hawkish, corporate one that actually exists.

As Sanders’s unlikely primary success showed, the Democrats’ establishment 
base is quite literally dying off, being replaced year after year by voters 
from the youngest and most progressive generation in American history. It’s the 
same generation that has headed up the most dynamic social movements of the 
last five years, and it stands to change the musty face of this country’s 
political system for the better, working within and outside of elected office.

As longtime organizer Nelini Stamp put it 
<https://medium.com/@NelStamp/presedential-elections-are-not-radical-litmus-tests-and-why-im-voting-for-my-opponent-a55a7259d35d#.6ab195ex3>
, “I am voting for who I want my opponent to be post November 9th and that 
person is Hillary Clinton.” In other words, nothing ends on election day. But 
making sure she wins will allow movements – the messy, disruptive politics that 
actually change things – a chance to thrive.
 