
He was the Parisian who ripped up his home city; one of the most famous and 
controversial urban planners in history. Even now, 125 years after the death of 
Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann,France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>
 remains divided over whether the man who transformed Paris into the City of 
Light was truly a master planner – or an imperialist megalomaniac.

Internationally, Haussmann is celebrated for much that is loved about the 
French capital; notably those wide avenues flanked with imposing buildings of 
neatly dressedashlar <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashlar> and intricate 
wrought iron balconies.

To his republican compatriots, however, Haussmann was an arrogant, autocratic 
vandal who ripped the historic heart out ofParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>, driving his boulevards through the 
city’s slums to help the French army crush popular uprisings.

Historian and Haussmann expert Patrice de Moncan 
<http://www.les-editions-du-mecene.fr/fr/quelques-uns-de-nos-livres> is 
exasperated by the century’s worth of criticism that has been levelled at this 
hugely influential figure. “Sometimes I don’t know where to start; it’s 
bullshit from beginning to end,” De Moncan says. “But it’s a view many people 
still hold in France.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f79ffe3bb3bd03f09220538a687298849cbb63b%2F0_80_3917_4896%2F3917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f79ffe3bb3bd03f09220538a687298849cbb63b%2F0_80_3917_4896%2F3917.jpg>
 Baron Haussmann. Illustration: Alamy 
“Haussmann has been portrayed as this almost sinister figure, only out to 
enrich himself and with his fingers in the till. His critics accused him of 
filling Paris with cobbled streets, bland buildings with stone facades, and 
wide, dead straight avenues so the army could repress the masses.”

De Moncan, who is writing a new biography of Haussmann, smarts with the 
injustice of what he sees as the ongoing maligning of his hero. “Some said he 
was austere, but from what I have discovered he liked a good party and threw 
great ones. Others accused him of chasing the girls – it’s true he had a 
mistress [the opera star Francine Cellier] with whom he had a child, but unlike 
others at that time, he accepted, recognised and educated the girl.”

In 1848, Haussmann was an ambitious civil servant determinedly climbing the 
ranks when Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte – nephew and heir ofNapoléon I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/from-the-archive-blog/2015/oct/23/napoleon-bonaparte-st-helena-exile-1815>
 – returned to Paris after 12 years’ exile in London to become president of the 
French Second Republic.

Bonaparte, later elected Emperor Napoléon III, hated what he saw. In his 
absence, the population of Paris had exploded from 759,000 in 1831 to more than 
a million in 1846 – despite regular outbreaks of cholera and typhoid that 
killed tens of thousands.

The French capital was overcrowded, dingy, dirty and riddled with disease. 
Why, Bonaparte pondered, was it not more like London, with its grand parks and 
gardens, its tree-lined avenues andmodern sewage system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/22/water-thames-victorian-london-150-years-sewer-system>
? Paris, he declared, needed light, air, clean water and good sanitation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde90059cc298610fce939ce2094e109ff7e38134%2F0_93_4026_2418%2F4026.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde90059cc298610fce939ce2094e109ff7e38134%2F0_93_4026_2418%2F4026.jpg>
 A drawing of the rebuilding of Paris under Haussmann’s command, from around 
1860. Illustration: Alamy 
Haussmann was an imposing figure both physically – at 6ft 3in – and 
intellectually. Born into a bourgeois military family with strong Lutheran 
ties, he had been a brilliant student at elite Paris colleges, and personified 
theProtestant work ethic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/11/pain-gain-work-ethic-burkeman>
. Portraits show a tall, solid, often studious figure with a not unkind face, 
often sporting a chin-strap beard and, in later years, thinning hair.

France’s interior minister, Victor de Persigny, believed Haussmann to be the 
ideal candidate for the job of Prefect of the Seine and overseer of Napoléon 
III’s plan to transform the city. “He is one of the most extraordinary men of 
our time; big, strong, vigorous, energetic and at the same time clever and 
devious,” wrote De Persigny to the emperor. “He told me all of his 
accomplishments during his administrative career, leaving out nothing: he could 
have talked for six hours without a break, since it was his favourite subject, 
himself.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4f04c271df2a381a89fb409e54bf832f975060b%2F0_158_2191_2732%2F2191.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4f04c271df2a381a89fb409e54bf832f975060b%2F0_158_2191_2732%2F2191.jpg>
 Emperor Napoléon III. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
Haussmann got the job. A week after his appointment in the summer of 1853, he 
was summoned to the emperor’s official residence at the Palais des Tuileries, 
where Napoléon III produced his plan for Paris. It showed a map of the city 
with three straight, dark lines drawn over it: one running north-to-south and 
two east-to-west either side of the Seine, all cutting through some of the most 
densely populated but historic areas of central Paris.

“This is what I want,” Napoléon III told Haussmann. It was the start of the 
most extensive public works programme 
<http://www.arthistoryarchive.com/arthistory/architecture/Haussmanns-Architectural-Paris.html>
 ever voluntarily carried out in a European city, turning Paris into a vast 
building site for more than 17 years.

Haussmann cut a swathe through the cramped and chaotic labyrinth of slum 
streets in the city centre, knocked down 12,000 buildings, cleared space for 
the Palais Garnier, home of the Opéra National de Paris, and Les Halles 
marketplace, and linked the new train terminals with his long, wide and 
straight avenues.

Less well known is Haussmann’s commissioning of an outstanding collection of 
street furniture – lampposts, newspaper kiosks, railings – and the decorative 
bandstands in the 27 parks and squares he created.


Below ground, Haussmann oversaw the installation of les egouts, the city’s 
complex sewage network. He also commissioned reservoirs and aquaducts to bring 
clean drinking water to the city.

On his orders, gas lamps were installed along the widened cobbled streets; now 
when the elegantflâneurs <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fl%C3%A2neur> who 
strolled the 137km of new boulevards retired for the night, the revellers and
prostitutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/sep/19/prostitution-19th-century-paris-musee-dorsay-in-pictures>
 who emerged from the bars and the shadows could walk safely. The new streets 
came with trees and broad pavements along which café terraces sprang up, soon 
to be filled with artists and artisans enjoying “absinthe hour”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb682b210eb4c611dedcc0a16c3d475e7ed91ca9e%2F0_22_2048_1341%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb682b210eb4c611dedcc0a16c3d475e7ed91ca9e%2F0_22_2048_1341%2F2048.jpg>
 The Palais Garnier was built on the orders of Napoléon III as part of 
Haussmann’s grand reconstruction project. Photograph: Alfred/EPA 
In his Dictionary of the Second Empire, Josephy Valynseele wrote of Haussmann: 
“During his career he showed a maniacal ambition, an impudent opportunism and 
was, whatever he did, a genius of showmanship.”

But republican opponents criticised the brutality of the work. They saw his 
avenues as imperialist tools to neuter fermenting civil unrest in working-class 
areas, allowing troops to be rapidly deployed to quell revolt. Haussmann was 
also accused of social engineering by destroying the economically mixed areas 
where rich and poor rubbed shoulders, instead creating distinct wealthy and 
“popular”arrondissements.

Critics also accused him of destroying the city’s medieval treasures, citing 
the enduring charm of the narrow winding streets of the Marais: the city’s 
oldest district and one which escaped Haussmann’s razing.

There was additional outrage at the staggering 2.5bn franc bill for the work – 
around €75bn today. By 1869 the attacks had become deafening, and Haussmann was 
forced to vigorously defend himself before MPs and city officials. In the hope 
of salvaging his own flagging popularity, Napoléon III asked Hassmann to 
resign. He refused.

“Haussmann had a great belief in public service and had spent his whole career 
in the service of the king and then the emperor,” De Moncan says. “He believed 
if he resigned it would be assumed he had done wrong, when in fact he was very 
proud of what he had done. Napoléon III offered him all manner of inducements 
but he still refused, so the emperor sacked him.

“The Second Empire and Napoléon III were despised by republicans, and 
Haussmann was the victim of this political backlash.Victor Hugo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/26/hugo-manet-paris-poor-privilege> 
hated him, and because everyone in France regarded what Hugo wrote as the word 
of God, they hated Haussmann too. Hugo, the man who wroteLes Miserables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/12/saturdayreviewsfeatres.guardianreview>
 about how desperate conditions were in Paris, accused Haussmann of destroying 
the city’s medieval charm!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bade45bfe6dbdd0a7f1ff118c3d6d6921c78d1e%2F0_106_2496_1499%2F2496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2312%3A%20Haussmann%20rips%20up%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20divides%20France%20to%20this%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstory-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bade45bfe6dbdd0a7f1ff118c3d6d6921c78d1e%2F0_106_2496_1499%2F2496.jpg>
 An overview of Paris, centring on the Étoile area that Haussmann redesigned. 
Photograph: DigitalGlobe/Rex 
De Moncan observes this was the same “charm” that had brought epidemics to 
Paris; the charm that “had 20 people living in one room with no light and no 
toilets, just a common courtyard into which they did their business. People 
like Hugo forgot how truly miserable Paris had been for ordinary Parisians.”

Out of a job and persona non grata in Paris, Haussmann spent six months in 
Italy to lift his spirits. He returned and was given a management post with the 
military – which lasted less than a week before Napoléon III was defeated.

Haussmann lived out his final days in rented accommodation on a paltry 
6,000-franc pension, the equivalent of €20,000 a year today, paying regular 
visits to his three beloved daughters. In his memoirs, he seems stoic rather 
than bitter about his fall from grace:

“In the eyes of the Parisians, who like routine in things but are changeable 
when it comes to people, I committed two great wrongs. Over the course of 17 
years I disturbed their daily routines by turning Paris upside down; and they 
had to look at the same face of the prefect in the Hôtel de Ville. These were 
two unforgivable complaints.”

Some of Haussmann’s harshest critics, including the politician and philosopher 
Jules Simon <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Jules-Francois-Simon>, later 
changed their view of him: “He tried to make Paris a magnificent city and he 
succeeded completely,” Simon wrote in 1882. “He introduced into his beautiful 
capital trees and flowers, and populated it with statues.”

Story of cities #13: Barcelona's unloved planner invents science of 
'urbanisation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/01/story-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation>
Today, Haussmann is remembered by the grand boulevard that bears his name, on 
which the Palais Garnier sits, anda statue 
<http://statue-de-paris.sculpturederue.fr/page489.htm> on its corner with Rue 
de Laborde in the 8th Arrondissement. But according to De Moncan, Haussmann’s 
vital contribution to modern Paris is still not fully appreciated.

“Haussmann was never forgiven or recognised in his lifetime in France, and 
still isn’t. If I give a conference here, people groan when I talk about him. 
Right up until the 1980s, his buildings were dismissed as rubbish and as many 
as possible were destroyed, so that all those unlovely 1970s glass and concrete 
structures could go up.

“But what he did was phenomenal; he was the world’s first modern urban 
developer. Everyone who came to Paris for the universal exhibitions, including 
Queen Victoria, was astonished by the transformation of the city. In 1867, 
there was a meeting of European architects in Germany at which Haussmann was 
hailed as a pure genius; a brilliant modern urban developer. Yet all that was 
said about him back home was that he was a crook.”

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 