
America’s technology industry has enjoyed a close relationship with President 
Obama’s administration since he was elected in 2008 – a fact that will not be 
lost on president-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, who pitched his own ideas 
about technology policy while campaigning.


The technology sector is responsible for 6% of the nation’s economy and nearly 
$1tn in GDP for 2014 alone, according to the trade body the Internet 
Association. Trump needs to engage – but what policies is he likely to 
formulate?

Sessions, Flynn and Pompeo: who are the potential Trump cabinet picks?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/sessions-flynn-and-pompeo-who-are-the-potential-trump-cabinet-picks->
Eric Schmidt <http://fortune.com/2016/11/10/google-eric-schmidt-peter-thiel/>, 
executive chairman of Google’s parent company Alphabet, said last week that the 
industry is in for a big change. “[Republicans] have a traditional set of 
doctrinal issues which are now being challenged by the new president and I 
don’t think we know [how that will play out]. The top five most valued 
companies in America today are Apple, Google, Amazon, Facebook and Microsoft. 
If the ‘all-R’ team is very focused on big business, there’s five big 
businesses right there.”

Trump’s technology team?

The first big indicator of his position on technology came from the 
appointment of PayPal billionairePeter Thiel to his transition team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/11/peter-thiel-joins-donald-trump-transition-team>
. In Democrat-heavy California and Silicon Valley, Thiel was an anomaly in his 
support for Trump, even ploughing another $1.25m to the campaign shortly after 
Trump boasted aboutsexually assaulting women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
.

Trump’s likely appointment of Jeffrey Eisenach as head of the regulator the 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is another clear indicator. Eisenach, 
who served on transition teams for both Ronald Reagan in 1980 and George W Bush 
in 2000, is a vocal proponent of scaling back the powers of the FCC. He is also 
expected to push for reversal of the hard-fought 2015 net neutrality rules, 
which stops internet providers prioritizing more profitable or preferred 
services.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F575ab37974a656cf18dc3e1313f77897e4d14e1e%2F0_115_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strong-arm%20Apple%20and%20tax%20China%20bigly%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Trump's%20possible%20tech%20policies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strong-arm%20Apple%20and%20tax%20China%20bigly%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Trump%27s%20possible%20tech%20policies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F575ab37974a656cf18dc3e1313f77897e4d14e1e%2F0_115_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Entrepreneur Peter Thiel, now on Trump’s transition team, leaves a meeting at 
Trump Tower. Photograph: Eduardo Munoz/Reuters 
Apple and big tech (but mostly Apple)

The Cupertino-based company is a favourite target of Trump. In February 2016 
he argued that the companyshould be forced to help the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/19/donald-trump-apple-boycott-fbi-san-bernardino>
 hack into an iPhone used by the San Bernardino killer.

“First of all, Apple ought to give the security number [pin number] for that 
phone, OK?,” he said at a rally in South Carolina on 19 February. “What I think 
you ought to do is boycott Apple until such time as they give the security 
number. How do you like it? I just thought of that. BoycottApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>.”

Trump also picked out Apple as an example of an American company that had 
moved its manufacturing overseas. “We’re going to get Apple to build their damn 
computers and things in this country instead of in other countries,” he said in 
Virginia on 18 January.

Trump did not acknowledge that building Apple’s computers, tablets and 
smartphones in the US may actually increase the cost of the end-products. An 
analysisby the MIT Technology Review 
<https://www.technologyreview.com/s/601491/the-all-american-iphone/> estimated 
that the price of an iPhone 6S Plus would rise by between $30 to $100 per unit, 
depending how much of the manufacturing Apple was required to do in the US. 
Much of the extra cost would come from having to ship components into the 
country, rather than a difference in labor costs.

It was Google that came under fire when he spoke in Wisconsin on 28 September, 
for supposedly “suppressing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/28/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-news-election-live?page=with%3Ablock-57ec312be4b07eb0f44b8311>
” bad news about opponent Hillary Clinton. “A new post-debate poll that just 
came out, the Google poll, has us leading Hillary Clinton by two points 
nationwide – and that’s despite the fact that Google search engine was 
suppressing the bad news about Hillary Clinton,” he said. The claim was based 
on a viral video that claimed to show how Google’s search tool did not 
autocomplete the term “Hillary body count 
<http://www.infowars.com/google-hides-clinton-body-count-search-suggestions/>”, 
but which was later debunked.

China

While Hillary Clinton was the main villain in the Trump campaign narrative, 
China came a close second, with Trump often questioning the US relationship 
with its second biggest trading partner. China is the manufacturing engine that 
drives the technology and consumer electronics sectors, with “advanced 
technology products” accounting for $103bn of all US imports fromChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in 2016 so far.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dc35298f57358ed859be745950e2f68c8ca9a2b%2F0_68_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strong-arm%20Apple%20and%20tax%20China%20bigly%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Trump's%20possible%20tech%20policies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strong-arm%20Apple%20and%20tax%20China%20bigly%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Trump%27s%20possible%20tech%20policies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dc35298f57358ed859be745950e2f68c8ca9a2b%2F0_68_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Donald Trump on Apple: ‘We’re going to get them to build their damn computers 
and things in this country.’ Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
“If China does not stop its illegal activities, including its theft of 
American trade secrets, I will use every lawful presidential power to remedy 
trade disputes, including the application of tariffs,” he told a crowd in 
Pennsylvania on 28 June. “President Reagan deployed similar trade measures when 
motorcycle and semiconductor imports threatened US industry. His tariff on 
Japanese motorcycles was 45% and his tariff to shield America’s semiconductor 
industry was 100%.”

President Obama’s administration attempted trade tariffs on China 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-tariffs-trade-analysis-20160724-snap-story.html>
, in 2009 applying 25-35% on tire imports. The initiative eventually failed 
because other low-cost trading partners filled the gap. China has alreadywarned 
that it would respond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/china-threatens-to-cut-sales-of-iphones-and-us-cars-if-naive-trump-pursues-trade-war?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
 aggressively to any attempt at levy high tariffs on Chinese goods coming into 
the US.

China threatens to cut sales of iPhones and US cars if 'naive' Trump pursues 
trade war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/china-threatens-to-cut-sales-of-iphones-and-us-cars-if-naive-trump-pursues-trade-war>
Some insiders think that tariffs may have positive effects, if Trump’s 
administration was able to enforce them. Robert Atkinson, founder and president 
of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation think tank, says the US 
is suffering from huge Chinese government subsidies to its domestic technology 
companies.

Chinese government subsidies 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/china-moves-to-contend-in-chip-making-1458851538> 
of up to $160bn are helping Chinese companies build up their semiconductor 
industry bybuying up American and European semiconductor 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/18/business/dealbook/china-fairchild-semiconductor-bid-rejected.html>
 companies at huge premiums to market prices. “[China] has ramped up its 
efforts to do indigenous innovation with a set of policies and practices that 
are hurting US firms and US jobs. It has continued unabated and grown,” said 
Atkinson, who also co-chairs a White House policy group on China.

Immigration

Technology companies have been lobbying for decades to increase the number of 
H1B visas, which allow skilled workers to work temporarily in the US, but have 
been met with stiff opposition. The Forward.us coalition, which includes 
Facebook’s CEO Mark Zuckerberg and Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, wanted to 
make the 2016 election a “referendum on immigration reform”, explaining how 
they battle for a small number of global technology specialists. With Trump, 
that mission seems likely to get harder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcc1239197e0379e8ffc98288878a24ec4dc3db8%2F679_440_2562_3203%2F2562.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strong-arm%20Apple%20and%20tax%20China%20bigly%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Trump's%20possible%20tech%20policies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strong-arm%20Apple%20and%20tax%20China%20bigly%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Trump%27s%20possible%20tech%20policies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcc1239197e0379e8ffc98288878a24ec4dc3db8%2F679_440_2562_3203%2F2562.jpg>
 Eric Schmidt, executive chairman of Alphabet, has said the industry is in for 
a big change. Photograph: Christopher Lane/Christopher Lane (commissioned) 
“The H-1B program is neither high-skilled nor immigration: these are temporary 
foreign workers, imported from abroad, for the explicit purpose of substituting 
for American workers at lower pay,” Trump said in a statement on3 March 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/donald-j.-trump-position-on-visas>
. “I remain totally committed to eliminating rampant, widespread H-1B abuse and 
ending outrageous practices ... I will end forever the use of the H-1B as a 
cheap labor program, and institute an absolute requirement to hire American 
workers first for every visa and immigration program. No exceptions.”

Schmidt expressed hope that Trump might be convinced by technology companies 
once he takes office. “What do each and every one of those companies need? 
High-value, high-quality, high levels of education immigration. Every one of 
them is powered completely by those policies, which have been stuck for 20 
years,” he said. “We bring these incredibly intelligent people into our 
country, we have the best educational system by far at the college and graduate 
school level, we kick them out after we give them these incredibly expensive 
degrees – which we help subsidize – and then they go an create competitors to 
our companies.”

Corporate tax reform

Apple is dealing with a complex problem in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/21/apple-tax-battle-ireland-state-aid-laws>
, where the European Commission is seeking “recovery of illegal state aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
” for alleged unpaid taxes of up to €13bn, plus interest. It is standard for 
global businesses to exploit loopholes that allow them to register profits in 
countries with lower corporate tax rates, though that means the profits (and 
taxes that go with them) don’t come back to the US. The US government has 
already said it would like that tax revenue back, and Donald Trump says he has 
ways of making it happen.

“Under my contract, if a company wants to fire their workers, move to Mexico 
or other countries, and ship their products back into the US, we will put a 35% 
tariff on those products,” he said in Ohio on 27 October. “As part of our plan 
to bring back American jobs, we will lower taxes on our businesses from35% down 
to 15% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/trumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines>
.”

Trump is more likely to cut corporate tax to between 20 to 25%, Atkinson says. 

Terrorism

The radicalisation of people online, and its relationship to terrorist 
attacks, became a campaign issue for Trump.

Silicon Valley investors call for California to secede from the US after Trump 
win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/09/trump-win-california-secede-calexit-silicon-valley>
“We’re losing a lot of people because of the internet and we have to do 
something. We have to go see Bill Gates and a lot of different people that 
really understand what’s happening. We have to talk to them. Maybe in certain 
areas closing that internet up in some way,” Trump said on 7 December in South 
Carolina. “Somebody will say – oh, freedom of speech, freedom of speech. These 
are foolish people. We have a lot of foolish people. We’ve got to do something 
with the internet because they are recruiting by the thousands.”

Microsoft’s chief legal officer Brad Smith re-asserted the need for government 
and the tech sector to collaborate, balancing privacy with public safety.

“We’ve not only advocated for clearer and more modern US laws, but have filed 
lawsuits four times in the past three years against the current administration, 
standing up for what we believe are the vital rights of people both here and 
abroad,” he wrote after the election. “As we’ve won the cases we’ve brought, 
we’ve been reminded of one of this country’s greatest strengths, its strong 
Constitution, independent judiciary, and the overarching rule of law.”

Data privacy and surveillance

Trump brought up cybersecurity many times, often referring to it as “cyber”, 
very much emphasizing his priority of increasing the security of government 
systems.

“To enhance the defense of the other agencies of government, including our law 
enforcement agencies, we will put together a team of the best military, 
civilian and private sector cybersecurity experts to comprehensively review all 
of our cybersecurity systems and technology,” he promised on 3 October, 
speaking to veterans in Virginia. “This will include the various methods of 
internal monitoring, attack and penetration, investigation of suspected hackers 
or rogue employees, and identity protection for government employees.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc11e532da1ffe144863064e216ce631a316b6e68%2F0_0_5492_3296%2F5492.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strong-arm%20Apple%20and%20tax%20China%20bigly%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Trump's%20possible%20tech%20policies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strong-arm%20Apple%20and%20tax%20China%20bigly%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20Trump%27s%20possible%20tech%20policies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc11e532da1ffe144863064e216ce631a316b6e68%2F0_0_5492_3296%2F5492.jpg>
 Trump has spoken often of cybersecurity, particularly increasing the security 
of government systems. Photograph: Cultura/REX/Shutterstock 
Civil rights organisations have been quick to seize on the potential impact of 
Trump’s policies on personal privacy. Neema Guliani, legislative counsel with 
the American Civil Liberties Union, said Trump should “categorically reject 
proposals to mandate encryption backdoors and supports reforming surveillance 
programs that have violated the rights of millions of Americans”.

That, however, is unlikely.

Given that so many in the technology industry either publicly or privately 
backed Trump’s rival Hillary Clinton in the election, there is some concern 
that Trump might try to “punish”Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley>.

“He has a lot of people criticizing him and if he spent his whole time getting 
back at people, he wouldn’t get anything done,” said Atkinson. “Trump is going 
to need the tech sector. You can’t make America great again if you don’t have a 
great tech industry.”
 