
At the start, Tiananmen Square had the atmosphere of a festival. Most people 
couldn't see the hunger strikers – they saw the crowds marching with banners 
and music being played. Lots of things were surprising about the events in 
Tiananamen Square, even the demonstration itself. It's pretty rare in Chinese 
history for people to get together at the centre of a government square and 
defy the leadership.

I had arrived in Beijing in the last week of May 1989, working for Magnum on 
assignment for Time magazine. I got myself a bicycle to get around the city and 
was staying just off the square. It was relatively easy to work as a 
photographer back then, by today's standards. The political class weren't as 
sophisticated at handling the press, or realising the power that they had.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fphotography-blog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fstuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F1%2F1401637839344%2Fe0fa162c-7f75-441e-a867-fb2a62786f28-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stuart%20Franklin%3A%20how%20I%20photographed%20Tiananmen%20Square%20and%20'tank%20man'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fphotography-blog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fstuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stuart%20Franklin%3A%20how%20I%20photographed%20Tiananmen%20Square%20and%20%27tank%20man%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fphotography-blog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fstuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F1%2F1401637839344%2Fe0fa162c-7f75-441e-a867-fb2a62786f28-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Goddess of Democracy statue, 30 May 1989. Photograph: Stuart Franklin/Magnum 
Photos 
On 30 May, Chinese art students wheeled a huge statue out into the square that 
resembled the Statue of Liberty. It became a symbol of democracy and was 
described in New York, and by the press, as the "Goddess of Democracy". The 
Chinese were protesting for freedom of speech, freedom of the press and an end 
to corruption but they didn't know the rhetorical force of this figure, and how 
she would be used and seen as a powerful image all over the world.

After the statue was brought in, and once protesters had been camped out for 
weeks, the government realised they needed to act. Two days before the 
crackdown, the army arrived in bulk and the atmosphere changed radically. 
Within a few hours, truckloads of troops arrived from all different directions. 
At the time, no one really knew what was going on. In fact, there were even 
rumours of civil war acrossChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>. 


I witnessed the troops moving into the square and clearing out the protesters 
on the night of 4 June. I left in the early hours of 5 June with Newsweek 
photographer Charlie Cole and we headed back to our hotel. After that point, we 
were totally confined. The military occupied the lobby and journalists were 
searched and stopped from working. I was on a balcony with a group of other 
photographers and journalists when we saw the man jump in front of the tank on 
5 June. That image has now become so iconic – but what drove its impact was the 
fact that people had seen the man moving in front of the tanks on TV, as well 
as footage of the violent crackdown the night before. The still photographs 
that a few of us took of that 'tank man' scene seemed unremarkable to me, only 
because I was so far away on that balcony.

The majority of journalists were not there to witness the scene; lots had 
moved to another hotel and missed the 'tank man' moment. Most of them started 
at the Beijing Hotel, but the food wasn't great. Another place nearer the 
airport did hamburgers, so they had decamped and got stuck outside the city by 
blockades at the point of the crackdown.

As I was photographing the tank, I had very clear memories of the Prague 
spring of 1968, when citizens faced off with Russian tanks. The atmosphere soon 
became chaotic in the hotel, as people were worried about getting their stories 
out in the unfolding tragedy. Authorities inside the hotel confiscated footage, 
but I packed my film into a box of tea and gave it to a French student who was 
heading back to Paris. She got it to Magnum. It was really common then to stow 
our films with passengers travelling back on planes, because it was quicker 
than air freighting and less admin. You'd often sit in airports looking for 
people who would take your film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fphotography-blog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fstuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F1%2F1401638134864%2F3ede471a-4c2e-4a4f-85ed-941185f142f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stuart%20Franklin%3A%20how%20I%20photographed%20Tiananmen%20Square%20and%20'tank%20man'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fphotography-blog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fstuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stuart%20Franklin%3A%20how%20I%20photographed%20Tiananmen%20Square%20and%20%27tank%20man%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fphotography-blog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fstuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F1%2F1401638134864%2F3ede471a-4c2e-4a4f-85ed-941185f142f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Posters on lampposts showing images of victims of the massacre. Photograph: 
Stuart Franklin/Magnum Photos 
In the days that followed, it became clear that not many Chinese people had 
seen any footage or images of what had happened during the crackdown. Looking 
back at the set of pictures I took, this image of people gazing at a lamppost 
stands out. A picture had been pinned up of someone that had been killed. 
Throughout central Beijing, lampposts acted as the media for the Chinese 
public, because the press was so heavily controlled. Nobody really knew what 
had happened, so these lampposts became the Twitter of their day – it's really 
bizarre to see that now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fphotography-blog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fstuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F3%2F1401789565701%2Fab1457dd-94d5-431c-a993-28c5a6cab216-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stuart%20Franklin%3A%20how%20I%20photographed%20Tiananmen%20Square%20and%20'tank%20man'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fphotography-blog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fstuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stuart%20Franklin%3A%20how%20I%20photographed%20Tiananmen%20Square%20and%20%27tank%20man%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fphotography-blog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fstuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F3%2F1401789565701%2Fab1457dd-94d5-431c-a993-28c5a6cab216-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A student on hunger strike gestures in Tiananmen Square, 1989. Photograph: 
Stuart Franklin/Magnum Photos 
When I returned home, a lot of people were talking about the tank image – but 
the Sunday Times magazine ran with this picture of a guy with his arms raised 
in the air as their cover shot. Many other publications ran it as a more 
powerful, human image of what the demonstration and uprising meant for the 
Chinese people.

As a photographer, the objective is to crystallise the emotion of an event and 
communicate that as effectively as possible. My pictures follow the different 
efforts I made to come to terms with the events as they were unfolding, to tell 
the story even as it was changing.




 