
Newcastle, County Down

Since its £14m seafront revamp, Newcastle has become one of Northern Ireland’s 
most sought-after coastal resorts. Set amid rugged mountainous countryside that 
rolls down to beautiful windswept beaches, the town is popular with hikers and 
beach-lovers alike. It sets its cap firmly at active types, with 
mountaineering, canoeing and hiking all available. Newcastle’s restaurant scene 
is thriving, and makes the most of a rich selection of fresh produce.


Do Reward an early morning hike with a lazy afternoon at the UK’s only seaweed 
bath house –Soak Seaweed Baths <http://www.soakseaweedbaths.co.uk/> on the 
South Promenade (from £25). Seaweed bathing is said to reduce stress, relieve 
skin conditions, and treat muscle aches and joint stiffness.

Eat For cool and casual New York-style dining, head to Great Jones Craft & 
Kitchen <http://www.greatjones.co.uk/> (73 Main Street). Equally fashionable 
Brunel’s <http://www.brunelsrestaurant.co.uk/> (11 Bryansford Road, 
brunelsrestaurant.co.uk <http://www.brunelsrestaurant.co.uk/>) puts on frequent 
taster nights that are so popular it sometimes offers a special meal-inclusive 
bus service to and from Belfast. Newcastle’s culinary scene is a prime example 
of well-travelled chefs returning home with the tastes and aesthetics of the 
big city.

Stay There’s a host of luxury hotels around Newcastle, including the upmarket 
Slieve Donard Resort and Spa 
<http://www.hastingshotels.com/slieve-donard-resort-and-spa/> (from £145 B&B, 
but for some Grand Designs-worthy alternatives, it’s worth checkingAirbnb 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/1321326?s=VzInga5Y>: you could end up in a gem. 

Bournemouth, Dorset
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fseaside-resort-revival-bournemouth-torquay-barry-newcastle-county-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0fb56ec45e3000bb2511740a9de56179e0e1972%2F0_32_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Style%20revival%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20booming%20seaside%20towns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fseaside-resort-revival-bournemouth-torquay-barry-newcastle-county-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Style%20revival%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20booming%20seaside%20towns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fseaside-resort-revival-bournemouth-torquay-barry-newcastle-county-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0fb56ec45e3000bb2511740a9de56179e0e1972%2F0_32_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
From retirement hub to Silicon Valley-on-Sea, Bournemouth, now home to the 
fastest-growing and densest concentration of digital companies in Britain, has 
seen quite a transformation over recent years. Its football team’s 2015 
promotion to the Premier League has also been helpful for encouraging day 
trippers. Seven miles of award-winning beaches await visitors, as well as a 
host of water sports and thriving entertainment venues including the Pavilion 
Theatre and International Centre concert venue.

Do Opened in 2014, Pierzip <http://www.rockreef.co.uk/pier/> is the world’s 
first pier-to-shore zipwire, running from a launch tower in the water to the 
beach (from £15pp).

Eat Ojo Rojo <http://www.ojo-rojo.co.uk/> (106 Commercial Road) serves 
Mexican-inspired street food and a wide selection of Mezcals in a unusual 
setting decorated with murals and artwork by local artists and designers. 
Afterwards, stop off at the buzzy60 Million Postcards 
<https://www.sixtymillionpostcards.com/> (19-21 Exeter Road) – the bar does 
craft cocktails for £5 and is participating in the UK Keg Craft Showcase until 
26 June.

Stay The Green House <http://www.thegreenhousehotel.co.uk/> (doubles from £108 
B&B) is an elegantly restored Grade II-listed Victorian villa in the heart of 
Bournemouth, with 32 bedrooms and an eco-friendly restaurant, Arbor.

Torquay, Devon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fseaside-resort-revival-bournemouth-torquay-barry-newcastle-county-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd349000feb50435bb497960697bb4787c7ee1519%2F0_0_7224_4334%2F7224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Style%20revival%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20booming%20seaside%20towns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fseaside-resort-revival-bournemouth-torquay-barry-newcastle-county-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Style%20revival%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20booming%20seaside%20towns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fseaside-resort-revival-bournemouth-torquay-barry-newcastle-county-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd349000feb50435bb497960697bb4787c7ee1519%2F0_0_7224_4334%2F7224.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
The town that inspired Fawlty Towers has traded its dusty slapstick image for 
Michelin-starred restaurants and swanky yachts. Capital of the English Riviera, 
Torquay is steeped in history and a gateway for walks in the Devon countryside. 
The biennial International Agatha Christie Festival runs for 10 days in 
September 2017, but the town celebrates its most famous daughter every year on 
her birthday (15 September).

Do Torbay is one of Britain’s foremost competitive sailing destinations, and 
Corinthian Sailing Club in nearby Babbacombe has won RYA awards for its 
training centre, which is ideal for novices.

Eat Priding itself on its sustainability and overlooking the inner harbour, 
Rockfish <http://www.therockfish.co.uk/> (20 Victoria Parade, ) offers 
alternatives to a classic fish and chip supper (which it also serves). Choose 
fromfritto misto, seafood tacos or dressed South Devon crab. For that Michelin 
star, head toThe Elephant <http://www.elephantrestaurant.co.uk/> on Beacon Hill.

Stay Above Babbacombe beach, The Cary Arms <http://www.caryarms.co.uk/> 
(doubles from £195 B&B) combines contemporary seaside chic with classic 
touches. Rooms are light and stylish and the restaurant serves local meat and 
line-caught seafood.

Barry, Glamorgan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fseaside-resort-revival-bournemouth-torquay-barry-newcastle-county-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd3c712c26c384b1670e17abb29ef53f73c1fc46%2F0_129_3863_2317%2F3863.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Style%20revival%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20booming%20seaside%20towns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fseaside-resort-revival-bournemouth-torquay-barry-newcastle-county-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Style%20revival%3A%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20booming%20seaside%20towns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fseaside-resort-revival-bournemouth-torquay-barry-newcastle-county-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd3c712c26c384b1670e17abb29ef53f73c1fc46%2F0_129_3863_2317%2F3863.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Synonymous with BBC sitcom Gavin and Stacey, Barry is home to some promising 
new developments. Along with its attractive open spaces and the vintage seaside 
thrills of Barry Island, the town has seen a multimillion pound redevelopment 
of its iconicPleasure Park 
<http://www.barryislandpleasurepark.co.uk/find-us.html>, with its waltzers, 
dodgems and family rides (which is still ongoing) as well as, on the 
“mainland”, the stylish regeneration of its Grade II-listed Pumphouse. The 
1800s building houses apartments, a gym, a coffee house, and the new Hangfire 
<https://www.hangfiresouthernkitchen.com> US barbecue restaurant (see below). 

Do Work up an appetite for the town’s many dinner options with a walk through 
Porthkerry Country Park, west of Barry. Its inviting meadows lead to 
Instagram-worthy cliff views and pebble beaches.

Eat Newly opened Hangfire Southern Kitchen 
<https://www.hangfiresouthernkitchen.com> (which had more than 1,300 bookings 
in its first 24 hours) serves award-winning barbecued meats influenced by the 
southern US. TheGallery <http://www.the-gallery-restaurant.co.uk/> restaurant 
(2 Broad Street) has been crowned sustainable restaurant of the year three 
years running. Its fresh and inventive menu changes each month; its beers are 
all Welsh, and its wines organic or biodynamic.

Stay North of town, Sutton Mawr Farm <https://www.facebook.com/suttonmawrfarm/>
 (doubles from £89 B&B, on Facebook) is a scenic French-style farmhouse with 
views over the Glamorgan countryside. Elegantly furnished en suite rooms have 
private entrances and are perfect for walkers and cyclists.



 