
Two Sudanese men have been arrested in Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> after posting their support for 
protests in their home country on Facebook, amid signs that ties between the 
two states are growing stronger following years of tension.

The men, Qasim Mohamed Sid-Ahmed and Al-Waleed Imam Hassan Taha, were 
allegedly detained while leaving work in Riyadh on 21 December. Their families 
were told they were being held for a secret investigation but did not explain 
to them the reason for their arrests.

Sudan's social media campaign of civil dissent boosts hopes of change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/11/sudan-social-media-drive-for-civil-dissent-boosts-hopes-of-change>
Sid-Ahmed and Taha were both active online, expressing support for a campaign 
of stay-at-home strikes,known as the Civil Disobedience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/11/sudan-social-media-drive-for-civil-dissent-boosts-hopes-of-change>
, to protest against austerity measures and soaring medicine prices. The 
protests, which have left Khartoum’s streets deserted for days at a time, was 
devised by activists to avoid the bloodshed that occurred duringanti-austerity 
protests in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/30/sudan-protesters-president-omar-al-bashir>
.

Sid-Ahmed’s and Taha’s families believe that the Sudanese government pushed 
for the two men’s arrests in Saudi Arabia.

“He’s lived here for 18 years and has never broken any laws,” Sid-Ahmed’s 
wife, Ebitisam, who is a doctor and works at the ministry of health, told the 
Guardian. “I’m extremely scared they will extradite him toSudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>.”

The prospect of extradition is a bleak one: Sid-Ahmed and Taha will likely 
face severe punishment – and possibly torture – if they return.

“This is what we’re scared of the most,” Taha’s wife, Nahid, said in an 
interview via phone with the Guardian. “They are known for torturing people. 
Some people have died in torture.”

The Saudi embassy in Washington had not responded to a request for comment at 
the time of publishing.

Why has Sudan ditched Iran in favour of Saudi Arabia?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/12/sudan-siding-with-saudi-arabia-long-term-ally-iran>
These arrests reflect the warming of relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/12/sudan-siding-with-saudi-arabia-long-term-ally-iran>
 between the dictator Omar al-Bashir’s government in Sudan and the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia. Relations had been fraught for some time due to Bashir’s close 
ties to Iran but as sanctions began to pinch Sudan, the country has attempted 
pivot closer to the Gulf states.

Sudan signed up to join in the Saudi-led airstrike campaign in Yemen in 2015 
and wasone of only three states 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/sudan-saudi-diplomacy-idUSL8N14V2WV20160112> to 
sever ties with Iran when the Saudi embassy in Tehran was torched in 
retaliation for the execution of prominent Shia cleric.

Elsadig Elsheikh, director of the Global Justice Program at the Haas Institute 
at UC Berkeley, said the Sudanese government was hoping the Saudis would lobby 
the US government to ease sanctions.

“The Sudanese regime hoped that rebuilding the relationship with Saudi Arabia 
would help the regime,” he said, by wielding their influence in Washington DC 
and lifting the “unofficial blockage” of millions of US dollars in remittances 
from Sudanese expatriates working in Saudi Arabia.

These arrests are also not the first of their kind in Saudi Arabia. A Sudanese 
journalist, Waleed al-Hussein al-Dood,was arrested in Saudi Arabia 
<https://cpj.org/2015/09/sudanese-journalist-arrested-in-saudi-arabia-faces.php>
 in 2015 and held for almost a year without charges. He ran the independent 
news website al-Rakoba, which is critical of the Sudanese government.

“Certainly the improvement in relations between the two governments doesn’t 
bode well for any Sudanese opposition folks living in Saudi Arabia,” said Adam 
Coogle, a Saudi Arabia researcher for Human Rights Watch.


Sid-Ahmed’s and Taha’s families and friends have established a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/u-s-department-of-state-free-qasim-sid-ahmed-and-waleed-taha?recruiter=661407443&utm_source=share_petition&utm_medium=whatsapp>
 andwebsite <http://freeqasimandwaleed.com/> to help push for their release.


Their families are struggling without them as both men have children with 
severe illnesses. Sid-Ahmed’s daughter was in hospital with renal disease while 
he was arrested and Taha’s youngest son has Down’s syndrome.Due to guardianship 
laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/saudi-arabia-protest-petition-end-guardianship-law-women>
 in the country, it is difficult for the women to move around and get the 
necessary medicines for their children without their husbands.

“I’m scared for my safety,” Nahid said. “I don’t know if my children will come 
home if they go out.”
 