
The summer holidays will soon be here – and this year, following the collapse 
of the pound, family trips abroad promise to be even more expensive than usual.

So what options are available to working parents desperate to keep their costs 
down – and their kids entertained – in the weeks ahead? We went on the hunt to 
find cheap, free and affordable UK holiday schemes for schoolchildren, which at 
the time of writing still had places left for this summer. Here’s our pick of 
the best:



Kings Camps <http://www.kingscamps.org>

Day camps for children designed to get them active by encouraging them to try 
a wide variety of different sports at 50 venues across the UK (though there are 
none in London, and not all that many in southern England). Dedicated cricket 
and football clubs are available.

Age range: 4-6, 7-11 and 12-17.

Cost: Typically, for a five-day camp, £173 (8.15am to 5.45pm) or £153 (9.30am 
to 4pm).

Discounts: Offered on a case-by-case basis. Typically 75% to £90% off if your 
household income is £10,000 or less, ranging from 25% to 50% off if it is 
between £10,000 and £25,000. Recently bereaved children may be offered free 
places regardless of income, and children whose parents or siblings receive 
intensive medical care can get subsidies. Large families may also qualify for 
help.Childcare <https://www.theguardian.com/money/childcare> vouchers are 
accepted and all parents receive a 10% discount for bookings of four weeks.



YHA England & Wales <https://summercamps.yha.org.uk/2016-summer-camps/>

All-inclusive outdoor adventure camps at seven YHA locations in England, 
ranging from Lewes in East Sussex to Ravenstor, in the heart of the Peak 
District. The cost includes all meals, five nights’ accommodation and four days 
of adrenalin-fuelled activities such as quadbiking, archery, zip wires, 
climbing, raft building and canoeing with qualified instructors.

Age range: 10-16, 12-16 and 16-18.

Cost: Around £380.

Discounts: 75% off for 10- to 16-year-olds in receipt of free school meals. 
15% off for YHA members – membership costs just £5.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fsummer-camps-for-kids-budget-free-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87200be441f60d00ef31adab97c3540a120dccab%2F0_55_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Summer%20camps%20for%20kids%20%E2%80%93%20budget%20and%20free%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fsummer-camps-for-kids-budget-free-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Summer%20camps%20for%20kids%20%E2%80%93%20budget%20and%20free%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fsummer-camps-for-kids-budget-free-ideas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87200be441f60d00ef31adab97c3540a120dccab%2F0_55_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 High ropes at a YHA summer camp 


YMCA <http://www.ymca.org.uk>

Many local YMCAs accept childcare vouchers and offer affordable day camps 
where children can enjoy sports and craft activities during the summer holidays.

Age range: Depends on the club, but schemes for four- to 16-year-olds are 
common.

Cost: Varies, but the cheapest we could find, on the Isle of Wight, charges 
just £15 a day and runs from 8am to 6pm. Activities include games, outside 
play, beach visits, arts and crafts, and cooking.

Discounts: May be offered to members or on a case-by-case basis. 
Nottinghamshire YMCA, for example, is willing to offer substantial subsidies 
for children who receive free school meals.



National Citizen Service <http://www.ncsyes.co.uk>

A new government-backed programme for teenagers which takes place outside of 
term time in the spring, summer and autumn holidays.

Week one involves four nights and five days at an outdoor activity centre, 
doing team-building exercises that typically include hiking, kayaking and rock 
climbing. In week two, while staying at university-style accommodation, 
participants take part in workshops and hear from business leaders, MPs and 
charities about challenges facing their local communities. They then work 
together on a project, typically spread over a couple of weeks, that will 
contribute to their local community.

Age range: 15-17

Cost: No more than £50 in total.

Discounts: Bursaries and free places are available on a case-by-case basis.



Forest Schools <http://www.forestschools.com/find-your-local-forest-school/>

Schemes all over Britain where children learn social, personal and outdoor 
skills in forests and woodlands.

Age range: Varies locally, but schemes for four- to 12-year-olds and 11- to 
18-year-olds are common.

Cost: Some can charge as much as £60 per day in the summer holidays, but 
others are much cheaper. The Get Out More holiday forest school in Acomb Wood, 
York, for example, charges £60 for three days in mid-August, and is for five- 
to 11-year-olds.

Discounts: Offered on a case-by-case basis, but free places are often 
available to children who receive free school meals or come from low-income 
households. For example, Little Forest Folk in London offers free day camp 
places to children aged three to seven from deprived backgrounds and living in 
Chiswick or Wimbledon during the holidays (and younger children all year 
round). Other camps are funded by local councils and offer free places to local 
children. For instance, the two-day Woodland Playscheme at Dewsbury Country 
Park (between Ravensthorpe, Dewsbury Moor and Heckmondwike) later this month is 
free for children aged eight to 12 who live in the Kirklees area of West 
Yorkshire.

Books and bookability

• Encourage your child to take part in this year’s Summer Reading Challenge 
<http://summerreadingchallenge.org.uk>, which encourages children aged four to 
11 to read six books during the long summer holiday. Head to your local library 
to enrol.

• Request a free activity booklet and stickers online from the Canal & River 
Trust <https://canalrivertrust.org.uk>, or download a free activity guide for 
your local canal fromcanalrivertrust.org.uk <https://canalrivertrust.org.uk>

• Take advantage of free theatre tickets courtesy of Kids Week. From 1 to 31 
August, children under 16 can see a wide range of shows in London for free when 
accompanied by a full-paying adult. Two additional children can go at half 
price. Details of participating shows are on thekidsweek.co.uk 
<http://www.kidsweek.co.uk> website.

• Find a free local festival and carnival near you via 
moneysavingexpert.com/deals/free-uk-festivals 
<http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/deals/free-uk-festivals>. Alternatively, 
search onlist.co.uk <https://www.list.co.uk> and free-events.co.uk 
<http://free-events.co.uk> for free events for children near you. Visit England 
<https://www.visitengland.com>, Visit Scotland <https://www.visitscotland.com>, 
Visit Wales <http://www.visitwales.com> and Discover Northern Ireland 
<http://www.discovernorthernireland.com> also list a wide range of inexpensive 
summer events as well as free things to do locally.

• Sign up to become an audience member of your child’s favourite TV show. 
Tickets are generally free, but some may state a minimum age.
 