
It’s 5am on Weymouth’s Esplanade. It is dark and an ominous wind has picked up 
overnight. Empty cans and old chip papers blow across the front, all dusted 
with fine white sand from the resort’s beautiful beach. There’s a young woman 
limping in front of me. She is in a terrible state. Her torn party dress hangs 
from her shoulders and she’s lost a stiletto so she’s lurching from side to 
side. I am walking quietly behind her and stone-cold sober, but it occurs to me 
that in about 12 hours I’ll be in a similar state. Not because I’ll be drunk 
and wearing a wrecked dress, but because I’ll be on the final lap of my first 
long-distance triathlon.

My landlady had told me the town would be “dead as the grave” as there were so 
many athletes staying in the endless b&bs. But she was wrong. Weymouth had 
partied late. I know because as I’d lain in my single bed staring at the 
ceiling, the thundering bass from the club across the lane had kept me awake 
for hours. Or maybe that had just been my heart hammering in my chest? I was so 
nervous I didn’t have butterflies but a colony of hyperactive bats… An ironman 
triathlon! What on earth was I thinking?

The event consists of a 2.4-mile swim followed by a 112-mile bike ride topped 
off with a full 26.2-mile marathon. The three disciplines are always in this 
order and, not without exaggeration, it’s recognised as one of the toughest 
(and stupidest) one-day sporting events you can do. The original took place on 
Kona in Hawaii in 1978. The story goes that a naval commander decided to settle 
a bragging contest about which athletes were fittest – runners, swimmers or 
cyclists – by combining all three into a single ultra triathlon. That explains 
why the distances are so peculiar. They were created to fit the particular 
contours of the island. It was the commander who also decided to call the 
winner the “Iron Man”. Fifteen men (no women) took part – 12 finished. The 
following year 50 athletes (including some women) pitched up. The “Ironman” was 
born.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977274703%2F4467dbf8-3347-4399-af16-ae1a588f6a67-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977274703%2F4467dbf8-3347-4399-af16-ae1a588f6a67-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fun by the sea: Weymouth’s beautiful beach and Georgian front – the promenade 
later became the site of the run stage of the ironman. Photograph: John 
Harper/Getty Images 
Only a few branded events are actually “Ironman” races. This one, Challenge 
Weymouth <http://www.challengetriuk.com/>, is therefore called an 
“iron-distance” triathlon. It’s also not in Hawaii. But the distances are the 
same, the beach is just as sandy and we have a quaint Georgian promenade…

It was far too early for my landlady to cook me a full English, so I sat on 
the end of my bed and solemnly ate two egg-mayo sandwiches, washed down with 
tea and powdered milk. A true breakfast of champions. After faffing about with 
my various bags of kit, I checked out of the b&b and plodded past the drunk 
woman on the Esplanade and on up the bay to the start. Most of my fellow 605 
ironmen and ironwomen had begun to gather and the dreadful nerves I’d been 
feeling gave way to something else: excitement. It sounds odd, considering the 
pain that awaited us, but we were all here because we wanted to be. This is 
what we’d chosen to do with our Sunday. We’d trained hard, too, so in many ways 
there was a sense of relief that finally we were getting this thing done.

But there was a problem. Down on the wind-lashed beach the organisers said 
there were safety issues – code for enormous waves and a nasty current. The sea 
had rearranged the buoys overnight – in fact some had been blown away. So it 
was goggles on, goggles off. Hats on, hats off. We fretted and paced. Finally 
everything was sorted and a klaxon set us off, bounding down the beach into the 
surf. The sight of so many rubber-clad people whooping and cheering as they ran 
into towering waves in dawn’s half-light was weird, wonderful and probably of 
concern to social services. It was like a mass dip organised by the local gimp 
society.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977535301%2F43c16485-d207-4335-9f14-840e37435389-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977535301%2F43c16485-d207-4335-9f14-840e37435389-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Athletes had to brave rough seas in the swim stage. Photograph: David 
Pearce/Different Perspective 
We were swept off our feet and bundled over by the waves, but the sea was 
surprisingly warm, and once past the breakers it was a beautiful blue-green. 
Heads down, we ploughed out to the yellow buoy in the distance. Rounding it I 
stopped and looked back at the shore, the long crescent of Weymouth bay backed 
by the Georgian front was quite a sight. A man pulled up next to me and, 
treading water a mile out to sea at 7am, we admired the view together, yellow 
swim caps dotted all about us. Strange, but memorable…

The current was strong, so rather than emerging where we’d entered most of us 
were washed hundreds of yards down the beach. One woman was led off in tears, 
her face red from being slammed on to the beach by the waves. By the end of the 
day, of the 605 who originally signed up more than 100 would not reach the 
finish.

Shoulders aching and lips swollen from the salt, I dragged myself from the 
clutches of the sea and headed for the race’s first set-change. Transition is 
something the pros take very seriously. A quick change will save you minutes. 
But my mantra for the day was: “Keep it slow and steady.” Besides, if I was 
about to ride 112 miles, I wanted to make sure my socks were on straight, my 
top was zipped and my bottom was well greased.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977680251%2F06fdf843-7f6c-4ba8-8231-c3eff326d4a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977680251%2F06fdf843-7f6c-4ba8-8231-c3eff326d4a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Riding hard: competitors on the 112-mile stage around the Dorset countryside. 
Photograph: David Pearce/Different Perspective 
Around me panicked men hopped about, hog-tied by clinging wetsuits – like so 
many lovers caught with their trousers down. It was hard not to laugh at the 
sheer oddness of it all.

Setting out on a 112-mile ride is daunting at the best of times. But after 
you’ve already done a long swim… well, that’s just crazy. I spent a lot of time 
that day thinking people were nuts, then remembering I was one of them. It 
didn’t help that my bike cost at least a grand less than everyone else’s. The 
top athletes pump round on extreme aero machines, arms stretched out in front 
in supplication. It means they look at little more than the tarmac sweeping 
beneath their tyres. That’s a shame for them because the ride was a beauty. 
Rolling rather than hilly, it took in a great swathe of Dorset’s lovely 
countryside. We passed through endless villages called Piddle This or Puddle 
That. Dorset’s early settlers must have had serious incontinence issues.

The only mechanical issue was to my back rather than my bike. It started to 
cramp, so I pulled over and stretched on a grassy bank. A fellow competitor 
stopped in panic, then laughed with relief. “All I could see was your bike 
lying by the road,” he said, “and two legs waving in the air…”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977802197%2F7a0de7b3-4bf5-4ea0-b4b5-ce762e861a0b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977802197%2F7a0de7b3-4bf5-4ea0-b4b5-ce762e861a0b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Run, run, run: the final leg of the race – 26.2 miles along the seafront. 
Photograph: David Pearce/Different Perspective 
Back on the bike and the ride went on, and on. Back pain, neck pain, hand 
pain, bum pain. Sit on a tiny saddle for six hours and everything hurts or goes 
numb.

Finally it’s back to transition. Bike kit off/run kit on. Start a marathon 
with fresh legs and you feel trepidation. Start one with knackered legs and you 
feel… actually you feel OK. Two-thirds of the race is behind you. You are on 
the home straight. The first mile of running was dreadful. Imagine a cadaver 
attempting to shake off rigor mortis. We were a bunch of stumbling robot 
runners… But the stiffness wore off and our legs came back to life.

The run was four 10km laps of Weymouth. Clapped on by my family, friends and 
volunteers, the miles ticked past quicker than I dared hope. Locals cheered in 
Dorset accents: “Good job, mate! Good job, Martin!”
 Home straight: Martin Love arrives at the finish line after a long day. 
It was a glorious sunny Sunday and Weymouth was all ice cream, donkey rides, 
deck chairs, candy floss, a crooner on the bandstand…

I jogged on, fuelled with flapjacks and flat cola. Each time I passed a woman 
on a bench she held up her little dog and shouted: “Beagle power!” I saw two 
sons pace their dad; a young family chase their mother and shout: “Go, Mummy, 
go! We areso proud of you!” I welled up then. I didn’t have long to go.

And then the finish came in a rush – 11 hours and 32 minutes after I started. 
Medal on, smiles on, hugs all round. A booming voice came over the loudspeaker: 
“And well done to Martin! Welcome to the Challenge family!” I stood rooted to 
the spot, not moving for the first time all day, savouring every moment.

Then – and this sounds a little odd – I looked down at my heaving body as if 
it wasn’t really mine, and said to it in a rich Dorset accent: “Good job, mate! 
Good job, Martin!”

The next Challenge Weymouth is on 13 September 2015, which will also host the 
European Long-Distance Triathlon Championships (challengeweymouth.com 
<http://www.challengetriuk.com/>). For information on visiting Weymouth, go to 
visit-weymouth.org.uk <http://visit-weymouth.org.uk/>

Wiggle Dragon Ride goes on Tour in 2015
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977929712%2F077e9f06-70be-4ade-b7e7-de08087c5400-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sun%2C%20sea%20and%20sweat%3A%20Weymouth%20hosts%20its%20first%20%E2%80%98ironman%E2%80%99%20triathlon%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fsun-sea-sweat-weymouth-triathlon-ironman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413977929712%2F077e9f06-70be-4ade-b7e7-de08087c5400-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Breathing fire: a rider competes in last year’s Dragon Ride. 
The prestigious Wiggle Dragon Ride 
<http://humanrace.co.uk/events/cycling/dragon-ride> has opened for entries. 
It’s earned a reputation as one of the most outstanding sportives the UK has to 
offer and next year the Wiggle Dragon Ride will be preceded by an additional 
two days of road cycling for the very first time, to create the Dragon Tour 
supported by Stephen Roche. The event will form part of a new look Human Race 
Sportive Series, which also features the London Cycle Sportive, Chiltern 100 
and Wiggle Etape Cymru as well as the newly added Lionheart Cyclosportive. The 
new Dragon Ride Tour will include three days of spectacular cycling through the 
stunning Welsh landscape from Friday 5 to Sunday 7 June 2015. Riders will 
experience well-stocked feed stations, marshals, timed climbs and fully signed 
routes throughout the three days, as well as some of the most spectacular 
riding in Britain. Accommodation for the group has been secured at both the 
Marriott Hotel Swansea and the Grand Hotel Swansea, or participants can choose 
to book their own room elsewhere for the night. To top it all off, the 
after-dinner speaker on the Saturday will be former Tour De France Champion 
Stephen Roche, who will be sharing his knowledge and experience which helped 
him claim the Triple-Crown in 1987. For more information, head to
www.humanrace.co.uk/cycling <http://humanrace.co.uk/events/cycling>.

Email Martin at martin.love@observer.co.uk <mailto:martin.love@observer.co.uk> 
or follow him on Twitter@MartinLove166 <https://twitter.com/martinlove166>
 