
In vertebrate paleontology, complete bones are a luxury. More often than not, 
what ends up in front of paleontologists, are bits and pieces. The shaft of a 
long bone, a chunk of bone of something bigger, or a bone crushed under the 
weight of earth and time but held together by its rocky matrix. Those specimens 
are difficult, if not impossible, to identify, and many disheartening hours can 
be spent cataloging tiny bits of fossilized bone as nothing more than “bone 
indet.”

However, paleontologists are trained to notice the smallest details, and every 
now and then, a certain bony bump or a barely discernible curvature of the bone 
surface catches your eye and makes you spin your mental bone Rolodex 
frantically thinking where you have seen that particular feature before.

I imagine the same thing happened to Russian paleontologist Nikita Zelenkov 
while he was sorting bone material from the Early Miocene Tagay fossil locality 
in eastern Siberia. A tiny fragment of bird bone, measuring about 5 mm, could 
easily have gone unnoticed and ended up in the pile of indets. But something 
about this bone fragment stood out. And lo and behold, the first Siberian 
parrot was a fact (Zelenkov, 2016).

The bone fragment is part of a tarsometatarsus 
<https://fossilpenguins.wordpress.com/2011/06/06/tour-of-the-penguin-skeleton-ii-the-tarsometatarsus/>
, a bone in the lower leg of birds and certain reptiles that is formed by the 
fusion of the tarsal (ankle) and metatarsal (foot) bones. The tarsometatarsus 
varies quite dramatically in shape and size across birds, and as such it is a 
useful element to distinguish between different groups of birds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsunny-steppes-a-tiny-parrot-fossil-suggests-siberia-was-once-subtropical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffca20118a72fbfd908be23314466d2e2a3a0ab5f%2F0_0_2666_4916%2F2666.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sunny%20steppes%3F%20A%20tiny%20parrot%20fossil%20suggests%20Siberia%20was%20once%20subtropical&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsunny-steppes-a-tiny-parrot-fossil-suggests-siberia-was-once-subtropical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sunny%20steppes%3F%20A%20tiny%20parrot%20fossil%20suggests%20Siberia%20was%20once%20subtropical&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsunny-steppes-a-tiny-parrot-fossil-suggests-siberia-was-once-subtropical%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffca20118a72fbfd908be23314466d2e2a3a0ab5f%2F0_0_2666_4916%2F2666.jpg>
 Variation in shape and size in bird tarsometatarsi. From left to right: 
eclectus parrot, osprey, chicken, and heron. Specimens are part of the 
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History Synoptic Bird Skeleton 
collection. Photograph: Hanneke Meijer for the Guardian 
In parrots, the tarsometatarsus has a distinct shape resulting from the 
particular arrangement of parrot toes. Aszygodactyl 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dactyly#Zygodactyly> birds, toes number 2 and 3 
are facing forward, while toes 1 and 4 are facing backwards. A handy 
arrangement that allows you to hang upside down from tree branches to reach 
that tasty piece of fruit. As the tarsometatarsus articulates with all the 
toes, the lower end of the tarsometatarsus has a broad shape that allows the 
toe bones to move along a wide arc and ensures maximum flexibility. This 
particular shape of the tarsometatarsus is also seen in other birds that have 
flexible and strong feet, such as woodpeckers and owls, but not to the same 
degree as in parrots. It is precisely this distinctive, broad part of the bone 
that is preserved in the Siberian fragment (although the joints that articulate 
with the toes are broken off). Therefore, even an incomplete parrot 
tarsometatarsus can still be distinct enough to tell you it’s a parrot.

But although the bone is convincingly parrot-like in shape, its fragmentary 
nature makes it hard to pinpoint what species of parrot it belonged to. Its 
shape differs from that of the most basal parrot groups, such as the New 
Zealand kakapo and the Australasian cockatoos, and looks more like modern-type 
parrots (ie. crowngroup parrots) that include the lovebirds and parakeets. 
Parrots likely originated in the Late Cretaceous in Gondwanaland, but the 
diversification of modern-type parrots did not start until well after the 
extinction of the dinosaurs (Schweizer et al., 2011).Fossils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/fossils> of modern-type parrots are known 
from a number of Oligocene and Miocene sites in France and Germany (for 
instance, see Mayr, 2010). The Siberian specimen shares certain aspects of its 
morphology as well as its size with some of these European species, but given 
its fragmentary status, Zelenkov rightfully holds off on assigning the specimen 
to a definite species.

Siberia doesn’t exactly conjure up images of lush tropical ecosystems today, 
but the Tagay fossil locality dates to the Middle Miocene Climatic Optimum, a 
period 17-15 million years ago that saw temperatures as much as 4-8C warmer 
than today. Abundant fossils of pond turtles, skinks and other ectothermic 
vertebrates indicate that Middle Miocene Tagay was less chilly than it is today 
(Daxner-Hock et al., 2013). The several species of small mammals found at 
Tagay, such as dormice, talpids and hedgehogs, show close affinities to 
European taxa. The fossil avifauna includes a number of aquatic and 
semi-aquatic species (Zelenkov & Martynovich 2012), and together with the new 
parrot specimen, these results support the interpretation that a largely 
homogeneous vertebrate fauna may have existed across large swaths of Eurasia 
during the Middle Miocene.

The Siberian parrot specimen also raises some interesting questions regarding 
parrot biogeography. The oldest parrots in Africa date to the early Miocene 
(Mourer-Chauviré, 2008), which led some authors to argue that parrots colonised 
Africa via long-distance dispersal from Australasia across the Indian Ocean, a 
long way for birds that are mostly non-migratory. Similarly, long-distance 
dispersal across the Indian Ocean was also argued to have played a key role in 
the colonisation of Africa by songbirds. However, a recent studyre-dating early 
songbird diversification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/19/geology-understand-evolution-spread-songbirds>
(Moyle et al., 2016) showed that the emergence of island chains between 
Australasia and Eurasia may have provided a much more likely dispersal pathway 
for songbirds. The presence of a parrot as far north as Siberia in the Middle 
Miocene may indicate that a similar route existed for parrots as well.

Why you can thank geology for your morning songbird chorus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/19/geology-understand-evolution-spread-songbirds>
Furthermore, if parrots were present as in Siberia, would they have crossed 
across Beringia into the Americas? The oldest parrot from the Americas comes 
from the Miocene of Nebraska (Wetmore, 1926), around a time when the land 
connection between North and South America was not in place yet. Could it have 
come from subtropical Siberia instead? A new species of diving duck from the 
Miocene of Nevada (Stidham & Zelenkov, 2016), belonging to a genus formerly 
known only from Mongolia, indicates that avian dispersals from Eurasia to North 
America may have occurred more often. As these events predate later, and more 
well-known, faunal exchanges between Eurasia and North America, it goes to show 
that the impact of Northern Asia on North America may have been older than 
previously thought.

References

Daxner- Höck, G. et al., 2013. New Data on Miocene Biostratigraphy and 
Paleoclimatology of Olkhon Island (Lake Baikal, Siberia). In: Fossil Mammals of 
Asia: Neogene Biostratigraphy and Chronology, Fortelius, M. et al., 2013,pp. 
508-519. <http://www.wahre-staerke.com/~madelaine/Daxner.pdf>

Mayr, G. 2010 Mousebirds (Coliiformes), parrots (Psittaciformes), and other 
small birds from the Late Oligocene/Early Miocene of the Mainz Basin, Germany. 
Neues Jahrbuch fur Geologie und Paläeontologie Abh.258:129–144 
<https://www.schweizerbart.de/papers/njgpa/detail/258/75392/Mousebirds_Coliiformes_parrots_Psittaciformes_and_other_small_birds_from_the_late_Oligocene_early_Miocene_of_the_Mainz_Basin_Germany?l=FR>
.

Mourer-Chauviré, C. 2008. Birds <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/birds>
 (Aves) from the Early Miocene of the Northern Sperrgebiet, Namibia. Memoir of 
the Geological Survey of Namibia 20(20):147-167.

Moyle, RG, et al., 2016. Tectonic collision and uplift of Wallacea triggered 
the global songbird radiation. Nature Communicationsdoi: 10.1038/ncomms12709 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms12709>

Wetmore, A. 1926. Descriptions of additional fossil birds from the Miocene of 
Nebraska. American Museum Novitates 211:1-5. 
<http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/bitstream/handle/2246/3188/N0211.pdf;jsessionid=1245283191DB56AA77672245CCEA699D?sequence=1>

Schweizer, M., et al., 2011. Macroevolutionary patterns in the diversification 
of parrots: Effects of climate change, geological events and key innovations. 
Journal of Biogeography38:2176-2194 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2699.2011.02555.x/abstract>. 

Stidham, TA & Zelenkov NV, 2016. North American–Asian aquatic bird dispersal 
in the Miocene: evidence from a new species of diving duck (Anseriformes: 
Anatidae) from North America (Nevada) with affinities to Mongolian taxa. 
Alcheringa41:1-9 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03115518.2016.1224439>.

Zelenkov N.V., Martynovich N.V. 2012. The oldest avian fauna from Baikal. 
Bajkal. Zool. Zhurn. No. 3(11):12-17.[in Russian with English summary] 
<http://zmmu.msu.ru/menzbir/publ/baikal%2011.pdf>

Zelenkov, N.V. 2016. The first fossil parrot (Aves, Psittaciformes) from 
Siberia and its implications for the historical biogeography of Psittaciformes. 
Biology Letters12:20160717 
<http://rsbl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/12/10/20160717>
 