
For me, it’s marshmallows. The moment I catch the scent of powdered sugar I 
remember lying with my head in my grandmother’s lap as a child. For Benjamin 
Loyauté, it’s apple-flavoured sticks from Rouen that exert the Proustian pull, 
transporting him back to his Normandy childhood and squabbles with his twin 
sister over the sugary treats.

Sweets may be universal, but the nostalgia they hold is intense and intimate, 
which is why – says Loyauté – they are the perfect vehicle for his long-term 
project to highlight the “immaterial heritage” ofSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. With a man-bun and a curator’s love 
of critical theory, the Brussels based artist and designer makes an unexpected 
confectioner. Yet when we meet in the foyer of his London hotel, on the table 
in front of us are little packets of pink candies created to his exacting 
specifications.

At first glance they could be the cheap sweets sold by Syrian street vendors, 
except that each is shaped to resemble an “eye idol” – those ancient Syrian 
figurines whose use and meaning archaeologists are still debating. Loyauté 
describes his sweets as “transmitter objects” – everyday things with “a real 
value and symbolic value linked to emotion, history, heritage”. In other words, 
as it says on one of his text paintings: “candy keeps the past alive.”

“One woman said she never ate these candies because they are sold on dusty 
trolleys – they are not for rich people,” he explains. “It was only when they 
started disappearing from the streets thanks to the war, that she realised: ‘I 
miss them’.”

I can’t wait any longer and break off our chat to open the simple plastic 
packet and pop one in my mouth. The soft texture yields an intense burst of 
sugar and rose. For an artwork, they are pretty delicious. And at this month’s 
LondonDesign <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/design> Biennale, 
visitors will get their own chance to scoff. Loyauté’s exhibit includes “a 
practical sculpture”, otherwise known as a vending machine. For £5, it will 
dispense a packet of the sweets and design buffs will be invited “to do their 
bit”.

The money put into the machine will directly transfer to the Mosaic initiative 
<https://mosaicinitiative.org.uk/>, a small London-based charity which 
distributes aid, both within Syria and to educational projects for Syrian 
refugees elsewhere. If Loyauté has his way, it will be only the first step in a 
Willy Wonka-ish ambition to bring people together through sweets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe809deb7ef1ed237681207524d786bc603c1bfa0%2F0_0_8389_6711%2F8389.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe809deb7ef1ed237681207524d786bc603c1bfa0%2F0_0_8389_6711%2F8389.jpg>
 Candy keeps the past alive ... The Astounding Eyes of Syria installation. 
Photograph: Dylan Perrenoud/Benjamin Loyauté Studio 
He calls his candies Louloupti – merging a common Arabic pet name for children 
with the affectionate suffix “pti” to reflect the Syrian quirk of calling 
sweets names like “cuties”. Loyauté is thinking big: aiming to work with a 
company like Kraft to mass produce these sweets and use the money raised to 
protect Syrian heritage. “Haribo sells one billion strawberry sweets a year. I 
am a dreamer, but if I sell 100,000 in two years that’s something tangible,” he 
says.

These Louloupti sweets are an ambassador for a way of living ... in Syria 
people want to share
Benjamin Loyauté 
At the heart of the London exhibition is his film, The Astounding Eyes of 
Syria, shot in the Bequaa Valley refugee camp, which lies in the “red zone” of 
Lebanon’s border with Syria. Loyauté travelled to the camp last winter with 
Syrian and Lebanese friends, rather than an NGO, so he could quietly meet 
families. The result is a heartbreaking 20 minutes of Syrians talking about the 
sweets they miss. Focusing on this tiny, delicious detail of their former lives 
highlights how much the war has swept away: a living culture, close-knit 
communities, simple pleasures.

Loyauté says the families – some of whom he remains close to – enjoyed the 
chance to discuss happy memories. “There are always westerners who want to film 
the dust and the horror. They were thankful to shine a smile inside the horror, 
because that does exist,” he insists. “We can destroy buildings and kill 
humans, but we can’t erase the living heritage; the memory of things, the 
culture, the civilisation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd3bd024d90681148a9f14a9f743db094ed5149b%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd3bd024d90681148a9f14a9f743db094ed5149b%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 ‘A smile inside the horror’ … a still from The Astounding Eyes of Syria. 
Photograph: Benjamin Loyauté Studio 
One father, Hanadi Abbas, talks of the penny sweets he used to buy to give to 
guests or relatives. Today a bag costs £10 to £20. A woman shows the camera a 
plastic box of baking moulds she saved during her flight to the camp. Bringing 
out a biscuit cutter, she remembers baking her husband heart-shaped biscuits. 
“He asked, ‘Why so many tiny hearts?’ I said, ‘Because I love you.’” A mother 
of three, Hani Koubaisi remembers how, on feast days, she would invite 
neighbours to her house for homemade pastries. If she had fallen out with one 
of them, it was a chance “to make peace”. Now, she says sadly, “It’s all been 
lost and we will never get it back.”

Interspersed with their stories are fictional scenes: a sweet seller in an 
empty shop; one of the traditional ice-cream makers Damascus is famous for, 
making rhythmical music as he pounds the dessert. They bring the sights and 
sounds of Syria to life. For Loyauté, sweets also represent the generosity of 
Syrians, a theme he returns to repeatedly. “Louloupti is an ambassador for a 
way of living in Syria – sharing sweets in the street. In Syria people want to 
share.” Even in the camp, he says, he noticed this reflex. When he went to a 
small shop to buy sweets to take to the families he was visiting, the 
shopkeeper “had nothing and was very poor … but he didn’t want to take my 
money.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda741e53889ad255da6f182ba2662d41f3de89e4%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda741e53889ad255da6f182ba2662d41f3de89e4%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Candy colours ... a Syrian sweet shop Photograph: Lens Young Dimashqi 
It’s not hard to see how passionate Loyauté is about Syria. He first travelled 
to the country in his early 20s, the first time he had been outside Europe. 
Today he considers himself a global citizen, he says, but he grew up in a 
“little village with farmers” and was not ready for the impact of seeing 
archeological wonders such as Palmyra, or the old Byzantine Church of Saint 
Simeon Stylites.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba80aa6e23d30fddec8f72bc2da13ed698ffa51d%2F0_0_2934_2356%2F2934.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba80aa6e23d30fddec8f72bc2da13ed698ffa51d%2F0_0_2934_2356%2F2934.jpg>
 A postcard from Syria – part of Loyauté’s project. Photograph: Benjamin 
Loyauté Studio 
“I was like a sponge. When you see in your school book the Krak des chevaliers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krak_des_Chevaliers> and then you see it in real 
life …” He breaks off in awe at the thought. Among the ruins of Palmyra, he 
says, he had Stendhal syndrome, a physical reaction to the wonder it inspired. 
“The psychologist said it was too much beauty and information. This country 
took a part of my brain.”

He returned often, visiting Damascus on holiday, learning Arabic and widening 
his circle of Syrian friends. It felt like home, and he always thought that one 
day he would move there. Now the country is being destroyed, he wants to repay 
a debt. “I wanted to give back to Syria what Syria has given to me,” he says 
simply.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5bdf8df7abca8338f8c13bc6475aecfd4b3440e%2F0_266_3004_1803%2F3004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweet%20artist%3A%20the%20Willy%20Wonka%20of%20lost%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Finterview-benjamin-loyaute-astounding-eyes-of-syria-london-design-biennial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5bdf8df7abca8338f8c13bc6475aecfd4b3440e%2F0_266_3004_1803%2F3004.jpg>
 A postcard to Loyauté from a Syrian in Switzerland. Photograph: Benjamin 
Loyauté Studio 
Loyauté invited his Syrian friends – and friends of friends, within or outside 
the country – to write him postcards about the sweets they remembered. His 
request yielded hundreds of replies, now collected in a beautiful book that 
accompanies the project, including one that sums up his work. “Sweets remind me 
of my friend Amira … I haven’t seen Amira for a long time, nor her family, nor 
her house. The war has stolen all these wonderful moments, but it all still 
lives on in our memories.”

 * The Astounding Eyes Of Syria 
<http://www.londondesignbiennale.com/participants> is at London Design 
Bienniale until 27 September.  