
For the second BBL match in a row Sydney Thunder’s star import, Andre Russell 
has failed to deliver and the West Indies star appears out of touch and below 
peak physical condition. Russell’s now-outlawed black bat isn’t the only 
talking point after his laboured start to BBL06 that has seen the Thunder 
suffer heavy losses in the first two games of their BBL title defence.

The 28-year-old took two wickets but was expensive (2-42) in the 48-run loss 
to the Melbourne Renegades and failed with the bat, making two runs from seven 
balls. That followed a brief knock of nine and figures of 1-29 in the 
season-opening nine-wicket loss to the Sydney Sixers.

Aboriginal cricket pioneer Faith Thomas: 'I'm still the fastest woman bowler 
ever'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/aboriginal-cricket-pioneer-faith-thomas-im-still-the-fastest-woman-bowler-ever>
“It’s early on, I’m really not concerned,” Thunder coach Paddy Upton said of 
the out-of-form allrounder. “A guy with his ability in all three departments 
... when he does click he’s really going to hurt people. The reality is with 
the amount of T20 cricket that he plays around the world, everybody will expect 
him to arrive from game one and click and fire for the whole tournament.”

“But the reality is that doesn’t happen. As long as he’s settling, he’s 
finding his rhythm and he’s finding his role within our unit ... I’m very 
comfortable that over the course of eight games he’s going to deliver, he’s 
going to come good. So I’m not concerned. Yes, he hasn’t arrived and set the 
world on fire, but it seldom happens that way.”

After losing two early wickets in their run chase against the Renegades, the 
Thunder never looked like challenging the home team. But Upton urged patience 
as his side, currently without injured skipper Shane Watson, builds into the 
season. “It’s never nice to lose but it’s been important for us to be clear on 
what our campaign is going to look like,” he said.

“How we learn, how we grow and how we build the kind of cricket we want to 
play. If we stay on the right path and do the right things hopefully we’ll 
start clicking.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fsydney-thunder-back-out-of-form-big-bash-league-star-andre-russell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8418630fc87018d53c80f9f570690032657e4821%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20Thunder%20back%20out-of-form%20Big%20Bash%20League%20star%20Andre%20Russell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fsydney-thunder-back-out-of-form-big-bash-league-star-andre-russell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20Thunder%20back%20out-of-form%20Big%20Bash%20League%20star%20Andre%20Russell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fsydney-thunder-back-out-of-form-big-bash-league-star-andre-russell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8418630fc87018d53c80f9f570690032657e4821%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Renegades opener Aaron Finch acknowledges the crowd after posting a 
half-century in Thursday’s clash against Sydney Thunder. Photograph: Michael 
Dodge/Getty Images 
If Australia’s ODI selectors needed reassurance embattled opener Aaron Finch 
isn’t far off making some runs he gave it to them with a man-of-the-match 
performance in the Renegades’ big win. Finch found his groove with a 
swashbuckling half-century as the Renegades cruised to a 48-run win.

The 30-year-old, who admitted his place in the Australian limited-overs side 
was under pressure after a lean run, belted 63 runs off 37 balls, his knock 
including three fours and four sixes. Finch smashed successive sixes off the 
first two balls of Fawad Ahmed’s third over but was caught on the rope as he 
tried for three in a row. But by then, he’d successfully set the tone for the 
Renegades, and possibly eased selectors’ concerns over his lack of production 
in recent series against South Africa and New Zealand.

“It’s tough to say ... no doubt my spot is under pressure,” Finch replied when 
asked if the innings could be a turning point. “I haven’t scored as many runs 
as I would like lately - but I’m still hopeful of retaining my spot and playing 
well. I was striking them nicely.”

The win snapped a run of five successive losses by the Renegades at Etihad 
Stadium and kept the Thunder winless after the first two games of their BBL 
title defence. South Australian Callum Ferguson was next top scorer for the 
Renegades with 38 from 32 balls, with Dwayne Bravo putting in a cameo of 24 
runs from 16 balls.

Evergreen spinner Brad Hogg was given a hero’s welcome by the 23,015-strong 
crowd when he came on for his first spell since crossing from the Perth 
Scorchers. He claimed his first wicket for the Renegades in his third over when 
Ryan Gibson, who top scored with 39 off 37, skied a return catch off a cheeky 
bouncer.

Hogg finished with 2-22 from four overs, with fellow Renegades debutant Sunil 
Narine snaring 2-32 and Bravo claiming 2-28 in an attack missing injured 
seamers James Pattinson and Peter Siddle.
 