
As the old saying goes, “Laughter is the best medicine. Unless you have 
syphilis in which case penicillin is the best choice”. The disease, caused by 
the bacteriumTreponema Pallidum and passed on through unprotected oral, vaginal 
and anal sex, has affected the famous through the ages (Al Capone and, 
reportedly,Hitler <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/2842819.stm>, to name just 
two).

But syphilis is in no way confined to big names, nor is it a sexually 
transmitted infection (STI) of the past. The 2016Public Health England (PHE) 
syphilis report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/546287/london_syphilis_report.pdf>
 has shown that infection rates are on the up, with disproportionate rates in 
London. In 2015, the capital accounted for 56% of all cases in England, with a 
22% increase in diagnoses in the year 2014-15. Since 2010 the number of cases 
of syphilis in Londoners has increased by 163%, with a 22% increase in the year 
from 2014 to 2015. The borough of Lambeth has the highest rates, closely 
followed by the City of London and Southwark.

Men who have sex with men (MSM) represented 90% of all syphilis cases in 2015, 
with a 232% increase in diagnosis over the last five years, said the report. 
More than half of the MSM diagnosed with syphilis in 2015 were also infected 
with HIV, and over half additionally tested positive for a separate STI. Rates 
in heterosexuals remain stable but are higher than ideal.

Government cuts are brewing a sexual health crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/jun/27/government-cuts-are-brewing-a-sexual-health-crisis>
It’s 2016. Safe sex campaigns and targeted prevention efforts are in place. 
Sexual health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/sexual-health> care is free 
and accessible to both high and low risk groups. So what is going on?

The basic science can’t be sugar coated. More condomless sex leads to higher 
rates of syphilis, (and gonorrhoea, chlamydia, HIV … the list goes on). 
Untreated syphilis means the disease continues to be passed on and leads to 
potentially horrifying long-term medical complications. Action is needed now to 
address the reasons behind these patterns, particularly in MSM, the group most 
affected.

In MSM, higher numbers of partners is a key reason behind the heavily inflated 
rates, compounded by the use of apps such as Grindr, venue based and group sex. 
Thereported increased use of Chemsex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/apr/08/chemsex-gay-men-drugs-health-risk-hiv-aids>
 (recreational drugs used during sex) is also of concern, lowering sexual 
inhibitions and making the likelihood of using a condom less likely.

Another worrying phenomenon is “sero-sorting” – when men choose partners who 
have the same HIV status, in theory negating the need to use a condom. However, 
this puts both partners at high risk of contracting a plethora of STIs.

So what to do? A wag of the finger and a warning to wear condoms is 
insufficient. While individuals do need to take responsibility for their 
personal health, adequate support and infrastructure is essential to achieve 
better sexual health in the UK and turn around these rising figures.

Progress begins with knowledge, which in turn begins with education. Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> education in schools remains an 
optional curriculum, with countless young people, particularly teen MSMs, 
missing out on vital advice needed to keep them healthy.

Sex education in the UK is letting our teenagers down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/mar/24/sex-education-uk-teenagers-pregnancy-sexually-transmitted-infections>
Sexual health clinics manage the majority of syphilis testing and treatment 
and so attention must be paid to themassive budget cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/jun/27/government-cuts-are-brewing-a-sexual-health-crisis>
 being faced by sexual health and MSM support services. MSM are advised to have 
regular STI checks (which includes a syphilis test), use condoms and seek 
support if they are struggling to maintain their personal health. Only robust, 
accessible and adequately funded services will be able to maintain this level 
of care. Responsibility is now on the government to ensure the needs of some of 
its most vulnerable populations are being met.

Further study is needed to look at the complex background to increasing rates 
of STIs in high risk groups. But while syphilis has been a feature of centuries 
past, there’s no doubt that its story now should be confined to the history 
books.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 