
8.25am: (all times BST) Welcome to Middle East Live. The UN secretary general, 
Ban Ki-moon, has accused Syria of not complying with the ceasefire and the 
former Met police officer advisingBahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> has warned that the authorities 
can't guarantee safety at Sunday's grand prix.

Here's a roundup of the main developments:

Syria

• The UN secretary general says Syria has failed to comply with its obligation 
under a peace plan to pull troops and heavy weapons out of urban areas. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/19/syria-peace-plan-ban-ki-moon> In 
a letter to the security council, Ban Ki-moon called for an observer mission to 
be expanded to 300 members.

• Ban's letter confirmed that shots were fired to disperse crowd in the 
Damascus suburb of Arbeen while UN monitors were visiting the area, 
<https://twitter.com/#!/BBCBarbaraPlett/statuses/192847903323193345> according 
to the BBC's Barbara Plett.

As this blog reported yesterday video showed protesters fleeing the area after 
the shots were heard <http://youtu.be/1aFZHM8kOZo>.

• The French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, has again called for the 
establishment of humanitarian corridors to help the Syrian opposition. 
<http://www.trust.org/alertnet/news/france-urges-humanitarian-corridor-in-syria/>
 "Bashar al-Assad is lying ... He wants to wipe Homs off the map just like 
Gaddafi wanted to destroy Benghazi," Sarkozy said ahead of a meeting in Paris 
of foreign ministers to discuss Syria.

• Bashar al-Assad and his wife, Asma have been shown on Syrian state TV 
packing food aid, in an apparent effort to repair the image of a first couple 
derided for ordering luxury goods on the internet while their country burns. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/19/syria-presidential-couple-tv>At 
a stadium in Damascus they joined hundreds of volunteers boxing cartons of 
flour, sugar, cooking oil and pasta for victims of the fighting in Homs.

Bahrain

• About 200 protesters confronted police for more than an hour before being 
scattered by stun grenades in the main shopping area of the capital Manama, 
Paul Weaver reports. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/18/f1-bernie-ecclestone-bahrain-peaceful>
 They chanted "down with the government" and "we want freedom" as they waved 
posters supporting the hunger striker and human rights activist Abdulhadi 
al-Khawaja. Activists in the country are pushing to get their voices heard 
ahead of Sunday's grand prix. Three "days of rage" have been called, to begin 
after prayers on Friday.

• The government of Bahrain cannot guarantee the safety of Formula One teams 
and spectators at the Bahrain Grand Prix as violence escalates in the Gulf 
kingdom, according to the British former police officer who is working on 
security at the track. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/18/bahrain-formula-one-yates-safety>
 John Yates, the former assistant commissioner of the Metropolitan police who 
is employed by the Bahrain government to advise on police reform, told the 
Guardian: "People say can we guarantee security. Of course we can't guarantee 
security. I'd be a fool to sit here and say that. Is it possible there might be 
an incursion on the track? Of course there is. It's an open event. Can you stop 
some idiot running onto the track? There have been other incidents of track 
incursions." Yates also said police would retaliate with live rounds if 
necessary.

• A group of MPs have launched a cross-party campaign calling for a halt to 
this weekend's grand prix because of government crackdowns in the Gulf state. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/apr/18/mp-campaign-bahrain-grand-prix> 
The Labour MP Jeremy Corbyn has won support for an early day motion from the 
Tory Peter Bottomley and the Liberal Democrat Bob Russell. It said: "This House 
is astonished that the Bahrain Formula One race is going ahead despite huge 
concerns over abuse of human rights expressed by Amnesty International and 
others."

• Cherif Bassiouni, the chairman of the Bahrain Independent Commission of 
Inquiry into human rights, insisted that the Kingdom was "genuine" in its 
intention to tackle abuses, but needed to do more. <http://youtu.be/QeFdBePOZtE>

In an interview with Foreign Policy magazine he said Bahrain society had to 
change so that all the power was no longer in the hands of the Sunni minority. 
"That can't be, things have to change," he said.

Egypt

• Khairat al-Shater, the Muslim Brotherhood financier who has been barred from 
standing as president, told the BBC that progress towards democracy is in 
danger. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-17761955> Shater said he 
feared the possibility of a rigged election and signalled that Brotherhood 
would increase its pressure, both inside and outside parliament, to ensure that 
the transition to democracy goes ahead.

Libya

• The National Transitional Council continued to insist that Saif al-Islam 
Gaddafi will be tried in Libya during a visit to Tripoli the international 
criminal court chief prosecutor, the Libya Herald reports. 
<http://www.libyaherald.com/moreno-ocampo-says-icc-has-not-requested-extradition-of-senussi/>
 NTC chairman Abdul Jalil said talks with Luis Moreno-Ocampo had focused purely 
on the trial proceedings of Gaddafi in Libya. He added that the Moreno-Ocampo 
had come to Tripoli to check the procedures put in place for Saif's trial in 
Libya.

8.50am: Bahrain: Human rights activists are about to start a press conference 
tohighlight police brutality during yesterday's demonstrations 
<https://twitter.com/#!/AlWefaqEN/statuses/192730060741025793>.

Activist Ala'a Shehabi tweeted reports of injuries so far:

Overnight reports of 23 injuries from shotgun pellets (alltreated @ home 4 
fear of arrest @ hospital).Violent house raids+10 arrests#F1 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523F1>

— Dr Ala'a Shehabi (@alaashehabi) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/alaashehabi/status/192859089544544257>

Bahrain's ministry of the interior accused protesters of rioting and vandalism 
<http://www.policemc.gov.bh/en/news_details.aspx?type=1&articleId=12533> and 
threatened more firm action in future. In a statement it said:

Chief of public security, Major-General Tariq Al Hassan, said that as part of 
the police duty to maintain security and stability in Bahrain and enforce the 
law, a number of rioters and vandals had been arrested for taking part in 
illegal rallies and gatherings, hindering public and private interests by 
blocking roads and endangering people's lives by attacking them as well as 
policemen with Molotov cocktails, iron rods and stones ...

The chief of public security said that such acts of vandalism did not come 
under the definition of freedom of expression protected by the law. Instead, 
they are considered acts causing chaos which are against civilised behaviour 
and endanger civil peace. He affirmed that maintaining security and peace among 
the public and ensuring their safety as well as the safety of public and 
private property were the top priorities for security men and any violation was 
tackled by police with zero tolerance. Any activities which violate the law are 
tackled firmly according to legal regulations and the authority of police, he 
said.

Later today the trial of 20 medics targeted by the government after they 
treated injured protesters is due to resume. The campaign groupHuman Rights 
First said 
<http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/2012/04/18/bahrain-crackdown-intensifies-in-run-up-to-f1/>
:


The medics were detained, tortured and sentenced to prison terms of between 
five and 15 years after an unfair trial in a military court. The government 
continues to press its case against them and many others it perceives to be 
associated with the democracy protests.

9.08am: Bahrain: The opposition al-Wefaq party has tweeted graphic images 
purporting to show protesters injured by the Bahraini police.

Pictures that show injuired prodemocracy protesters due to the excessive use 
of shotguns last night n#Bahrain <https://twitter.com/search/%2523Bahrain> 
twitter.com/AlWefaqEN/stat… <http://t.co/xtMJRXcX>

— AlwefaqEN (@AlWefaqEN) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/AlWefaqEN/status/192886394006421504>

9.15am: Syria: Once again Homs has come under bombardment this morning 
underlining the "incomplete" ceasefire.

The British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said its contact were 
reporting mortar fire every minutes. It said the opposition districts of 
Khaldiyeh, Jouret al-Shayah and Qarabis were being targeted.

Activist again circulated by now familiar video clips purporting to show the 
Homs coming under attack. <http://youtu.be/ILz-pIduJb0>

9.31am: Bahrain: In his Guardian interview, John Yates insisted that 
protesters were not being abused by the police. If they were"that would be on 
YouTube" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/18/bahrain-formula-one-yates-safety>
, he insisted.

His remark was an obvious hostage to fortune, and it hasn't taken long for 
activists to post YouTube of "allegedly terrible things" happening to 
protesters.

The opposition al-Wefaq alleges that the Bahrain police were caught red handed 
beating protesters last night in YouTube footage 
<https://twitter.com/#!/AlWefaqEN/statuses/192891455952527361>. 

The clip, which cannot be independently verified, claims to show protesters 
being severely beaten by riot police <http://youtu.be/A8lq-tsaJbo>.

9.46am: Egypt: Presidential candidate Amr Moussa (pictured) set out his 
electoral platform 
<http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/poor-neighborhood-cairo-moussa-promises-prosperity-all-egyptians>
yesterday at a rally in Ezbet el-Hagana, a working-class district of Cairo, the 
Egypt Independent reports.

Some key points:

• Establish an administrative and financial control system that will not only 
track corruption, but cut it out at the root

• Aim to reduce the poverty rate by 40% by the middle of the next decade

• Double Egypt's gross domestic product in 10 years

• Eradicate illiteracy and attract needed international aid

• Push for decentralised governance by dividing responsibilities between the 
central authority and local councils, so as to bring decisionmakers and 
implementers closer to those affected

• Devise a new system of state administration that is based on the empowerment 
of the people, who would be able to elect the governors, the mayors and the 
officials of the local councils

Moussa told the rally: "We are not talking about the realm of the impossible. 
We are not talking about the realm of imagination. We are talking about the 
realm of the achievable."

In an unusual move for an Arab politician, Moussa, who is 75, promised to 
serve only one four-year term if elected.

He is now considered a front-runner in the election following the 
disqualification of 10 other candidates, including Omar Suleiman, Mubarak's 
former intelligence chief, and Kairat al-Shater of the Muslim Brotherhood.

Moussa served 10 years as Mubarak's foreign minister but resigned in 2001 to 
become secretary-general of the Arab League. He posts frequently on Twitter as
@amremoussa <https://twitter.com/#!/amremoussa>.

10.03am: Syria: Once again Russia has decided to stay away from another 
Friends of Syria meeting <http://en.rian.ru/russia/20120419/172910953.html> in 
Paris, RIA Novosti reports.

It quotes a foreign ministry spokesman, Alexander Lukashevich, as saying: 

I can confirm that we have received an invitation to this event. We have also 
sent our reply to the French side. It is negative.

Today's meeting is the third gathering of the Friends of Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> group following previous meetings in 
Tunis and Istanbul.

US secretary of state Hillary Clinton, who will attend the meeting in Paris, 
said yesterday that Syria was at a "crucial turning point" 
<http://translations.state.gov/st/english/texttrans/2012/04/201204184197.html#ixzz1sTa6tX4H>
. Speaking to reporters she said:

Either we succeed in pushing forward with Kofi Annan's plan in accordance with 
the security council direction, with the help of monitors steadily broadening 
and deepening a zone of non-conflict and peace, or we see Assad squandering his 
last chance before additional measures have to be considered.

Now, we will continue to increase the pressure on Assad. I spoke with several 
ministers about the need to tighten sanctions, tighten pressure on the regime, 
on those who support the regime. And we also are going to continue pressing for 
a political solution, which remains the goal of Kofi Annan's plan and the 
understandable goal of anyone who wants to see a peaceful transition occur in 
Syria.

On the UN monitors she said: 

It is, obviously, quite concerning that while we are deploying these monitors 
pursuant to a security council resolution that confirms our commitment to Kofi 
Annan's six-point plan, the guns of the Assad regime are once again firing in 
Homs, Idlib, and elsewhere, and Syrians continue to die. So we are certainly 
cognizant of the very challenging road ahead. We are all here, united in favor 
of Kofi Annan's plan and his urgent call for a robust monitoring force.

10.21am: Bahrain: So much for freedom to protest.

Permission for Alwefaq rally in Manama today was denied. Participation in the 
event is illegal#Bahrain <https://twitter.com/search/%2523Bahrain>

— Ministry of Interior (@moi_bahrain) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/moi_bahrain/status/192904530990596097>

10.51am: Bahrain: A petrol bomb was thrown at the hire car of mechanics from 
Force India, <http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/98957> one of the F1 
teams competing in the grand prix, Autosport reports.

No one was hurt in yesterday's incident but one of the members of the team has 
returned home, it said.

Bahrain International Circuit chairman Zayed R Alzayani played down the 
incident. "The protesters were not targeting the cars, they just happened to be 
there. Nobody was injured," he said.

11.02am: Syria: China says it is considering sending observers to monitor a 
Syrian ceasefire 
<http://www.nowlebanon.com/NewsArticleDetails.aspx?ID=387513#ixzz1sTlp2xRL>, 
Now Lebanon reports.

"China is earnestly looking into whether to send observers to Syria or not," a 
foreign ministry spokesperson, Liu Weimin, told reporters at a regular briefing.

Yesterday Syrian foreign minister Walid al-Moualem told a news conference in 
Beijing that the monitors should come from what he called "neutral" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/18/syria-bashar-al-assad#block-15> 
countries such as Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, all of which 
have been more sympathetic to Assad's regime than the west and the Arab League 
states.

11.06am: Tunisia: The trial of a Tunisian TV station owner charged with 
"insulting sacred values" by screening the award-winning film Persepolis is 
expected to resume today.

The trial of Nabil Karoui, owner of Nessma TV, has been repeatedly postponed, 
but isscheduled to restart today, according to Amnesty International. 
<http://www.amnesty.org/en/news/tunisia-2012-04-18>

Karoui faces a possible three-year jail sentence on charges of spreading 
information "that can harm public order or good morals" after his TV channel 
broadcast the film,Persepolis <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0808417/>, last 
October.

Islamists protested outside the station following the broadcast because they 
regarded the film as blasphemous.

The trial is being seen as a crucial test of the role of Islam in the new 
Tunisia.

11.19am: Syria: A visit by UN observers, complete with blue helmets and flak 
jackets, has become the focus for another anti-government demonstration 
according to video from activists.

The latest clip purports to show monitors in southern town of Kherbet Ghazala 
today <http://youtu.be/QoL8VkJNj4Y>. They visited nearby Dera'a on Tuesday.

11.23am: Bahrain: The ministry for human rights and social development has 
denounced a press release issued by Human Rights Watch 
<http://www.gulf-daily-news.com/NewsDetails.aspx?storyid=328356> last week, 
describing it as "preconceived, deliberate and premeditated to show the 
situation in Bahrain contrary to reality".

Human Rights Watch had criticised Formula One's decision to go ahead with the 
grand prix in Bahrain 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/04/14/bahrain-grand-prix-decision-ignores-abuses>
, saying that the event was "being used by the Bahraini authorities to support 
their claim that the political and human rights crisis in the country is over".

11.39am: Syria: France says the UN observer mission to Syria should be beefed 
up to 300 or 400 monitor 
<http://www.trust.org/alertnet/news/france-says-un-syria-mission-needs-300-400-people?>
s, according to Reuters.

Speaking before the Friends of Syria meeting in Paris, the French foreign 
minster, Alain Juppé, also said: "If it is not possible (to implement the Annan 
plan) then we will look at what new measures need to be taken."

Yesterday Syrian foreign minister foreign minister Walid al-Moualem said the 
agreed level of 250 observers was a "reasonable and logical" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/18/syria-bashar-al-assad#block-8>.

11.54am: Bahrain: The government has missed two recent opportunities for an 
exit from the political crisis, according toElizabeth Dickinson 
<http://www.elizabeth-dickinson.com/> in an article for World Affairs 
<http://www.worldaffairsjournal.org/blog/elizabeth-dickinson/how-long-can-bahrains-opposition-hold-out-dialogue>
. One was an opportunity for political dialogue, and the other an opportunity 
for reform following last year'sBICI repor <http://www.bici.org.bh/>t.

"Both those opportunities, however, came to naught, and the result may deal a 
deathblow, ironically, to the most moderate supporters of Bahrain's uprising," 
Dickinson says.

Opposition groups led by al-Wefaq continue to walk a fine line, organising 
pro-democracy protests but keeping open a door for dialogue with the ruling 
Sunni monarchy ...

Many youth on the street, however, have long ago lost faith in that option. 
Under the umbrella of an online group of activists calling themselves the 
February 14 Coalition, they are talking about other options. For months now, 
protests have chanted "Yasqut, Hamad" – down with the King.

Now, Molotov cocktails are becoming increasingly popular. Some more extreme 
online groups allying with the February 14 Coalition have called for more 
direct attacks on security forces too ...

What this signals for the direction of Bahrain's crisis seems clear: a further 
slide into escalation ...

Salman of al-Wefaq told me on April 5 that his group's position has not 
changed. "To speak clearly, we are with a credible dialogue, a political 
solution … There is no precondition for [that] dialogue."

The question, increasingly, is to whom they will be speaking.

12.12pm: Syria: Fighting is reported today in eastern Syrian near the border 
with Iraq and in Qusair near the Lebanese border, as well as in Homs, the 
Associated Press says, citing activist sources:

The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said clashes broke out 
Thursday in Deir Ezzour, near the border with Iraq, killing one civilian and 
wounding three others.

Syrian troops also began shelling the rebel-held neighborhoods of Qarabees and 
Jouret el-Shayah in Homs which has emerged as a center of the rebellion about 
6:30am and intense shooting and explosions could be heard for hours, according 
to the Observatory.

"We are being subjected to intense shelling with mortars," Abu Joud, an 
activist in the city, said via Skype. The activist urged international 
observers, who began their mission in Syria this week, to visit Homs.

"Until now they haven't come here although Homs is the hardest hit city in 
Syria," Abu Joud said.

Amateur videos posted online showed smoke billowing from a residential area in 
Homs as the sound of shelling could be heard. "This is the destroyed Homs. 
Homes are on fire and people fled. May God help us. Look Kofi Annan," an 
activist could be heard saying.

Activists also said Syrian troops were shelling areas in the nearby town of 
Qusair, near the border with Lebanon. The Observatory and the Local 
Co-ordination Committees, another activist group, said the regime was sending 
reinforcements to the town. Rebels have had control of some areas of the town 
for months.

"A shell is falling every five minutes on Qusair," said Rami Abdul-Rahman who 
heads the Observatory.

Assad's regime has strictly limited reporting in the country so the reports 
could not be independently confirmed.

12.23pm: Tunisia: The trial of Nabil Karoui, owner of Nessma TV which offended 
religious elements by broadcasting the film Persepolis is now under way and
Tunisia Live <https://twitter.com/#!/Tunisia_Live> is tweeting from the 
courtroom.

So far, it says the lawyer who filed the complaint against Karoui has quoted 
the Quran, and a prosecutor has claimed: "My 11-year-old son was traumatised by 
the shocking scenes of Persepolis – couldn't sleep for three nights."

A prosecutor is also quoted as saying: "We want to sue the ones who funded the 
dubbing of Persepolis" [it was dubbed into the Tunisian dialect] and "We are 
committed to responsible freedom of expression which respects that which is 
sacred".

12.27pm: Syria: Flash from the Associated Press: Kofi Annan says Syria and the 
UN agree on rules governing UN truce monitors.

12.39pm: Here's a summary of the main events so far today: 

Syria

• Kofi Annan says Syria and the UN have agreed on ground rules governing the 
UN mission to monitor the unravelling ceasfire. The details have yet to emerge. 
UN monitors were filmed being greeted byanti-government protesters when they 
visited the southern town of Kherbet Ghazala <http://youtu.be/QoL8VkJNj4Y>in 
Dera'a province. The visit comes a day after gunfire disperse protesters during 
UN monitoring visit the Damascus suburb of Arbeen.

• Foreign ministers are meeting in Paris for the third Friends of Syria meeting
. Speaking before the meeting France's president, NicolasSarkozy repeated a 
call for the establishment of humanitarian corridors to help the Syrian 
opposition 
<http://www.trust.org/alertnet/news/france-urges-humanitarian-corridor-in-syria>
. His foreign minister, Alain Juppé, said the number of UN monitors should 
increase to between 300 and 400. China said it was considering sending 
observers as part of the mission.

• Syrian troops clashed with army defectors in an eastern city of Deir Ezzor, 
leaving at least one person dead, while government forces bombarded rebel-held 
neighbourhoods of the central city of Homs. The Syrian Observatory for Human 
Rights said shells were falling every five minutes over three opposition 
districts in Homs at one point this morning.

• The UN secretary general says Syria has failed to comply with its obligation 
under a peace plan to pull troops and heavy weapons out of urban areas. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/19/syria-peace-plan-ban-ki-moon> In 
a letter to the security council, Ban Ki-moon called for an observer mission to 
be expanded to 300 members.

Bahrain

• Opposition activists claim 23 people were wounded with shotgun pellets after 
police broke up pro-democracy protest last night. The ministry of the interior 
accused protesters of rioting and vandalism and have banned an opposition rally 
planned for today.

• Unverified video from activists has challenged a claim by John Yates, the 
former assistant commission of the Metropolitan police who is advising Bahraini 
authorities, that police abuse is not taking place in off site locations. If 
such abuse was taking place it "would be on YouTube", Yates told the Guardian. 
Shortly afterwards a clip appear purporting to show police beating protesters.

• A member of a team competing in this Sunday's grand prix has returned home 
after a petrol bomb was thrown at a hire car used by mechanics. Race officials 
played down the incident involving the Force India team. No one was hurt.

Egypt

• Presidential candidate Amr Moussa has launched his election campaign with a 
pledge to root out corruption. He also said he only wanted to serve one 
four-year term.

• Khairat al-Shater, the Muslim Brotherhood financier who has been barred from 
standing as president, told the BBC that progress towards democracy is in 
danger. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-17761955> Shater said he 
feared the possibility of a rigged election and signalled that Brotherhood 
would increase its pressure, both inside and outside parliament, to ensure that 
the transition to democracy goes ahead.

Tunisia

• The trial of a Tunisian TV station owner charged with "insulting sacred 
values" by screening the award-winning Iranian Persepolis has resumed. The 
trial is being seen as a crucial test of the role of Islam in the new Tunisia. 
A prosecutor told the trial that his son couldn't sleep for three nights after 
seeing the film.

12.52pm: Tunisia: In the "Persepolis" trial, Karoui's lawyer has been 
addressing the court:

Faouzi Ben Mrad,legal representative of #NabilKaroui 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523NabilKaroui> :"General prosecutor did not 
respect legal procedures when filing suit against Karoui"

— Tunisia Live (@Tunisia_Live) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/Tunisia_Live/status/192935778559590400>

Faouzi Ben Mrad condemns the use of #Tunisian 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523Tunisian> #PenalCode 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523PenalCode> in an opinion case #NessmaTV 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523NessmaTV> #NabilKaroui 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523NabilKaroui>

— Tunisia Live (@Tunisia_Live) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/Tunisia_Live/status/192937293156323328>

Fazoui Ben Mrad: "This is a conflict between #Shiia 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523Shiia> & #Sunni 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523Sunni> as a depiction of God is allowed 
according to Shiia"#NabilKaroui <https://twitter.com/search/%2523NabilKaroui> 
#NessmaTV <https://twitter.com/search/%2523NessmaTV>

— Tunisia Live (@Tunisia_Live) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/Tunisia_Live/status/192942583637483522>

12.59pm: Bahrain: The interior ministry would like you to know that it has a 
plan for dealing with traffic jams during the grand prix, and asks everyone to 
cooperate. (Deliberately causing traffic jams is a tactic previously adopted by 
protesters.)

Director of Police Media: General Dir of Traffic prepared a comprehensive plan 
for the F1 to deal with jams, all are called to cooperate

— Ministry of Interior (@moi_bahrain) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/moi_bahrain/status/192943570376851456>

1.03pm: Syria: Almost a quarter of a million civilians have fled their homes 
since the start of the uprising, the Associated Press reports:

A UN-backed survey has found that the number of civilians uprooted inside 
Syria has jumped by some 230,000 since the start of the uprising last year.

A report by the Norwegian Refugees Council and the Geneva-based Internal 
Displacement Monitoring Center says over 600,000 people are now internally 
displaced inside Syria, including some 400,000 from the country's 1967 war with 
Israel.

Tens of thousands more have fled to neighboring countries, making them 
officially refugees. The increase makes Syria the country with the eighth 
highest number of internally displaced people in the world.

1.21pm: Bahrain: The international Business & Human Rights Resource Centre has 
published the responses on human rights issues 
<http://www.business-humanrights.org/Documents/Formula1Bahrain> (or 
non-responses in most cases) from companies and organisations involved in this 
weekend's grand prix.

It says: "Forty-two companies failed to respond, and of the 17 responses 
received, nearly all completely failed to comment on the grave human rights 
concerns that they were asked to address."

1.29pm: Syria: More about the latest developments in Qusair, from the 
pro-democracy website, al-Ayyam. (The Guardian is unable to verify this 
information.)

The Syrian Arab Army started an invasion of the city of Qusair yesterday 
morning despite the UN-brokered ceasefire. The army moved some fifty vehicles 
into the city under the cover of heavy shelling.

Qusair, in the Homs governorate, has witnessed intermittent shelling and heavy 
deployment of military checkpoints over the past month but the invasion started 
yesterday morning. The Syrian Army intensified shelling from three directions; 
Sharshar Bridge, Dabaa Military Airport, and the Sayegh neighborhood.

The army shelled the neighborhood of Qusair's central administration building 
before moving into the city. After the shelling, the army set up an operations 
base in the administration building and inside a nearby school. It then started 
launching its attacks from the new camp.

"They only control half of the city," Rami Yousef an activist told Al-Ayyam. 
"Whenever they want to take a new neighborhood, they shell it brutally before 
bringing their tanks."

Due to the lack of bomb shelters in the city the residents had to make their 
own. Digging large holes in the ground and fortifying roofs with reinforced 
concrete, they hope this will offer them some safety from the Syrian Army's 
onslaught of the city.

1.40pm: Bahrain: Two members of Force India's Formula One team have decided to 
leave Bahrain, the Associated Press reports. This followsan incident yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/19/syria-crisis-bahrain-unrest-live#block-9>
 involving a petrol bomb as one of the team's vehicles was returning to the 
hotel from the the grand prix circuit.

No members of the team were hurt and their vehicle was not directly targeted 
but Force India's spokesman, Will Hings, told AP today that one of them is 
leaving the country and heading back to Europe. Hings said another member of 
the team who was not in the vehicle is also leaving.

"I won't be giving any details of their positions or names ... they were just 
people working for the team," Hings said. "I can't give you any more 
information other than that they're returning home out of their free choice."

1.46pm: Syria: Britain's department for international development (DfID) has 
announced another £4m in aid for Syrian refugees 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/News/Latest-news/2012/Syria-British-medical-aid-/>, 
half for UNHCR and half for other humanitarian organisations. This brings total 
DfID money for Syria's humanitarian crisis to £8.5m.

The announcement comes ahead of tomorrow's meeting in Geneva of a humanitarian 
forum on Syria hosted by the UN relief agency (OCHA), the Organisation of 
Islamic Cooperation, and the European Commission's humanitarian arm (ECHO). 
Refugees have fled Syria to neighbouring Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon.

The aid will include shelter items such as cutlery and blankets along with 
food and water.

Announcing the aid Andrew Mitchell, the international development secretary, 
said:

This new British support will ensure that thousands of people receive 
potentially life-saving help, whether injured as a direct result of the 
regime's violence against its own people or trapped by the fighting and denied 
the medicines they need. And following a increased number of refugees seeking 
assistance in the last two weeks in the face of escalating violence, it will 
also help to meet the basic needs of hundreds of frightened families who have 
fled home with nothing.

1.52pm: Syria: How can a few dozen unarmed soldiers – or even 250 – monitor a 
ceasefire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/apr/19/un-observers-syria-courage-actions-words>
 in a country of more than 22m? That's the question former US envoy to Bosnia 
Daniel Serwer attempts to answer in an article for Comment is free.

Serwer, now professor of conflict management at the Johns Hopkins School of 
Advanced International Studies in the US, says the observers "will need to take 
a proactive stance, reaching out to the Syrian opposition, insisting on going 
where they want when they want, and reporting amply on what they find".

But he adds that liaison with the opposition, while desirable, is also 
problematic.

Anyone the UN observers contact may be tracked and monitored by the Syrian 
security forces. Arbitrary detention, torture and extrajudicial killings are 
common in Assad's Syria. Some courageous individuals will speak up no matter 
what. Others, who are prepared to talk with the observers, will need to move 
quickly to protect themselves thereafter, changing residences, cell phones and 
even identities. This will make it difficult for the observers to maintain 
continuity.

Despite these very real problems, the presence and persistence of the 
observers can deter violence and encourage non-violent protest. The opposition 
will become less bold in provoking the security forces, fearing provocations 
will be visible internationally.

Peaceful demonstrations, which are already common, will become larger and more 
frequent. The security forces will gradually realise that the observers cannot 
be intimidated and that they will return to check and re-check what is going 
on, reporting their findings in ways that will embarrass anyone who is 
continuing the violence. The commanders may begin to behave with less abandon.

2.00pm: Syria: The activist group the Local Co-ordination Committees in Syria 
claims nine people have been killed so far today. According to its count three 
people were killed in both Homs and the Yabroud a town near Damascus. Another 
two were killed Idlib and one died in Deir Ezzor where there were reports 
earlier of clashes between the army and military defectors.

New video footage from Deir Ezzor purports to show troops moving through the 
town who fired at the activist filming the scene.

2.17pm: Syria: Ahmet Himmiche, the Moroccan colonel in charge of the UN 
monitoring mission in Syria, has beenfilmed appealing for calm after being 
mobbed during a visit to a damaged home in Kherbet Ghazala 
<http://youtu.be/2G9DTcwIWmQ>, in southern Syria.

Himmiche explains the monitoring procedure <http://youtu.be/2G9DTcwIWmQ> and 
says what he sees will be recorded in the mission's report.

2.29pm: Syria: The UN secretary general has proposed a 300-strong monitoring 
mission backed by helicopters and to be named Unmis 
<http://turtlebay.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2012/04/19/ban_ki_moon_calls_for_an_expanded_un_mission_for_syria>
 (UN supervision mission in Syria), according to Foreign Policy magazine.

Quoting from Ban Ki-moon's report it says the mission: "would be a nimble 
presence that would constantly and rapidly observe, establish and assess the 
facts and conditions on the ground in an objective manner, and engage all 
relevant parties.

On yesterday's incident in the Damascus suburb of Arbeen, Ban's report said: 

The situation in Arbeen became tense when a crowd that was part of an 
opposition demonstration forced United Nations vehicles to a checkpoint. 
Subsequently, the crowd was dispersed by firing projectiles. Those responsible 
for the firing could not be ascertained by the United Nations military 
observers. No injuries were observed by the United Nations advance team. One
United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> vehicle was 
damaged slightly during the incident.

2.37pm: Syria: Ominously the UN monitoring mission will be conducted "within 
the framework of Syrian sovereignty" 
<http://www.trust.org/alertnet/news/syria-un-sign-agreement-on-monitoring-mission/>
 according to an agreed statement on the ground rules for the mission.

"This agreement outlines the functions of the observers as they fulfil their 
mandate in Syria and the tasks and responsibilities of the Syrian government," 
Ahmad Fawzi, Kofi Annan's spokesman, said in a statement, Reuters reports.

Update: In response to zolotoy's comment below 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/15723127> the line. 
The phrase "within the framework of Syrian sovereignty" was also used during 
Arab League's monitoring mission. It is ominous because it suggests that the 
monitors will not be given free access as was hoped.

2.54pm: Syria: During that visit to Kherbet Ghazala, Ahmet Himmiche, the 
Moroccan colonel leading the observer mission in Syria, insisted he was there 
to monitor a ceasefire not document human rights abuses 
<http://youtu.be/2G9DTcwIWmQ>.

During an exchange with residents Himmiche said: 

I'm not specialist in medicine or human rights. I'm a military man. I have to 
observe what is happening on the ground. I will write everything that I see in 
my report.

According to a translation of a video of the visit by our colleague Mona 
Mahmood a man in clip said: "This house was destroyed by Assad's thugs a week 
ago."

A woman showed Himmiche the identity papers of a man she claimed had been 
arrested three times.

3.06pm: Bahrain: The activist group Bahrain Watch 
<http://www.bahrainwatch.org/> reports "a dramatic escalation" in the use of 
birdshot and live ammunition by police against protesters over the past week, 
as well as a marked increase in related injuries.

It says many individuals are reported injured in the back, raising serious 
questions about whether police are using proportional force and are discharging 
their firearms only as a last resort, as required by Bahrain's new police code 
of conduct.

As we noted earlier reports claim up to 23 people were injured by shotgun 
pellets on the night of 18 April (see 8.50am 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/19/syria-crisis-bahrain-unrest-live#block-2>
). The opposition al-Wefaq party also circulated graphic images purporting to 
show the pock marked bodies purporting to show victims of shotgun attacks (see 
9.08am).

In a statement Bahrain Watch said: "No medical records exist, as birdshot 
victims are treated in private homes; presenting at a hospital with a birdshot 
injury may mean arrest. Through pictures posted by village news networks and 
activists, Bahrain Watch has seen at least 11 of these injured individuals."

Regarding the use of birdshot it added:

Broadly, ammunition for shotguns is referred to as "shot," and consists of 
pellets of a certain material inside a cartridge. Larger pellets are referred 
to as "buckshot," whereas smaller pellets are called "birdshot." Within the 
category of birdshot, shot is assigned a number to indicate the diameter of the 
pellets.

Bahrain Watch has observed two sizes of metallic birdshot in Bahrain: #2 
birdshot (pellet diameter of about 3.8mm), and #8 birdshot (pellet diameter of 
about 2.2mm). Typically, a #2 birdshot cartridge would have on the order of 100 
pellets, whereas a #8 birdshot cartridge would have on the order of 500 
pellets, assuming pellets are made of lead or a similar metal. Bahrain's 
Ministry of Interior denies that it uses #2 birdshot.

Birdshot is typically used for hunting animals, or for clay shooting, where 
competitors shoot to break flying stone discs. Metallic birdshot is almost 
never used for riot control. When shotguns are employed for riot control in 
other countries, officers typically shoot "less-lethal" ammunition such as 
"beanbag rounds."

In contrast, Bahrain's police primarily use cartridges specifically designed 
and marketed for hunting or clay shooting. Eleven civilians were killed with 
birdshot in Bahrain during 2011 according to the Bahrain Independent Commission 
of Inquiry and Human Rights Watch, and scores have been injured throughout 2011 
and 2012.

3.42pm: Bahrain: Security forces fired teargas and stun grenades today at 
hundreds of anti-government protesters, the Associated Press reports, citing 
one of its photographers. AP says the marchers chanted slogans against the 
Formula One grand prix and appealed for the release of Abdulhadi al-Khawaja, 
the jailed activist who is on hunger strike.

The opposition al-Wefaq has posted a photo which is said to show gas canisters 
in Manama today.

الغازات الخانقة تستهدف كل شي في العاصمة المنامة بعد قمع المواطنين فيها #bahrain
 <https://twitter.com/search/%2523bahrain> #alwefaq 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523alwefaq> #14feb 
<https://twitter.com/search/%252314feb> twitter.com/ALWEFAQ/status… 
<http://t.co/dxt3kqXZ>

— Alwefaq Society (@ALWEFAQ) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/ALWEFAQ/status/192981398120964096>

Separately, the Associated Press says two of its journalists are being 
prevented from covering the Bahrain Grand Prix because they havenot received 
visas 
<http://www.heraldonline.com/2012/04/19/3907605/ap-journalists-prevented-from.html>
 to enter the kingdom:

The two writers, based in Dubai, were expected to cover practice and 
qualifying along with Sunday's race. They have been granted accreditation to 
cover the race by the sport's governing body, the Paris-based International 
Automobile Federation. But they have been told by Bahrain's Information Affairs 
Authority that their visa applications to enter the kingdom are still "pending".

3.42pm: Tunisia has announced that it is getting a $500m loan from Qatar 
<http://www.tunisia-live.net/2012/04/19/qatar-lends-tunisia-500-million-to-boost-economy/>
, to be repaid five years from now. The annual interest rate is 2.5%.

4.04pm: Syria: Setting up buffer zones and forming contacts with Free Syrian 
Army are back on the US agenda as the White House is seeking a plan B for 
toppling the Assad,according to Foreign Policy magazine 
<http://thecable.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2012/04/18/obama_administration_searches_for_a_plan_b_in_syria#>
.

The change in tack coincides with a change of personnel at the national 
security council and growing frustration at the failure of diplomatic options. 
It quotes an official saying:

There was a fundamental decision made at the highest level that we need a real 
Syria policy with more options for the president. Our allies were coming back 
to us and saying 'What's your next move?,' and we were forced to admit we 
didn't have one.

The article adds: "There's a growing consensus inside the [Obama] 
administration that the violence in Syria is not abating and that multinational 
diplomatic initiatives such as the plan put forth by UN special envoy Kofi 
Annan are not convincing Assad to enter into a political process to transition 
to democracy, much less yield power and step down."

4.34pm: Bahrain: Today the British foreign office updated its travel advice 
for Bahrain 
<http://www.fco.gov.uk/en/travel-and-living-abroad/travel-advice-by-country/middle-east-north-africa/bahrain>
. Regarding the political situation, it says:

Demonstrations and protests continue across various parts of Bahrain, some of 
which are violent. We cannot confirm where or when any such activity or 
resulting disruption will take place, but you should maintain a high level of 
security awareness, exercise caution, particularly in public places and on the 
roads, and avoid large crowds and demonstrations.

The F1 Grand Prix will take place in Bahrain on 20-22 April. Some groups have 
announced their intention to increase the level of protests, both in the days 
before as well as during the event itself. You should maintain particular 
vigilance during this time.

Please also be aware of the following planned demonstrations:

19 April at 1600, a demonstration is planned in Manama.
19 April at 1600, demonstrations are planned in Juffair and Ghuraifa.
19 April at 1930, a demonstration is planned in the vicinity of Saar.
19 April at 1945, an unauthorised demonstration is planned in Bani Jamrah.
20 April at 1600, a demonstration is planned in the vicinity of Karranah and 
Abu Saiba.
22 April, a demonstration is planned near the University of Bahrain/Bahrain 
International Circuit.

We also expect other protests and disruption in various areas of Bahrain to 
continue through the coming days.

Our assessment remains that travel on the main routes on the island during 
daylight hours is generally orderly and functions at normal levels. Police 
checkpoints remain but have been reduced around the main highways. You should 
exercise caution, in particular on any routes you use to get to these main 
routes, and consider carefully the situation in your local vicinity.

5.00pm: Here's a summary of the main developments today: 

Syria

• Kofi Annan says Syria and the UN have agreed on ground rules governing the 
UN mission to monitor the unravelling ceasefire. The details have yet to 
emerge. UN monitors were filmed being greeted byanti-government protesters when 
they visited the southern town of Kherbet Ghazala <http://youtu.be/QoL8VkJNj4Y>
in Dera'a province.

• Foreign ministers are in Paris for the third Friends of Syria meeting. 
Speaking before the meeting France's president, NicolasSarkozy repeated a call 
for the establishment of humanitarian corridors to help the Syrian opposition 
<http://www.trust.org/alertnet/news/france-urges-humanitarian-corridor-in-syria>
. His foreign minister, Alain Juppé, said the number of UN monitors should 
increase to between 300 and 400. China said it was considering sending 
observers as part of the mission.

• Setting up buffer zones and forming contacts with Free Syrian Army are back 
on the US agenda as the White House is seeking a plan B for toppling the Assad, 
according to Foreign Policy magazine.

• Syrian troops clashed with army defectors in the eastern city of Deir Ezzor, 
leaving at least one person dead, while government forces bombarded rebel-held 
neighbourhoods of the central city of Homs. The Syrian Observatory for Human 
Rights said shells were falling every five minutes over three opposition 
districts in Homs at one point this morning.

• The UN secretary general says Syria has failed to comply with its obligation 
under a peace plan to pull troops and heavy weapons out of urban areas. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/19/syria-peace-plan-ban-ki-moon> In 
a letter to the security council, Ban Ki-moon called for an observer mission to 
be expanded to 300 members.

Bahrain

• Opposition activists claim 23 people were wounded with shotgun pellets after 
police broke up pro-democracy protest last night. The activist group Bahrain 
Watch reports "a dramatic escalation" in the use of birdshot and live 
ammunition by police against protesters over the past week.

• Unverified video from activists has challenged a claim by John Yates, the 
former assistant commission of the Metropolitan police who is advising Bahraini 
authorities, that police abuse is not taking place in off site locations. If 
such abuse was taking place it "would be on YouTube", Yates told the Guardian. 
Shortly afterwards a clip appear purporting to show police beating protesters.

• Two members of Force India's Formula One team are returning home ahead of 
the grand prix following an incident involving a petrol bomb on Wednesday. 

Egypt

• Presidential candidate Amr Moussa has launched his election campaign with a 
pledge to root out corruption. He also said he only wanted to serve one 
four-year term.

• Khairat al-Shater, the Muslim Brotherhood financier who has been barred from 
standing as president, told the BBC that progress towards democracy is in 
danger. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-17761955> Shater said he 
feared the possibility of a rigged election and signalled that Brotherhood 
would increase its pressure, both inside and outside parliament, to ensure that 
the transition to democracy goes ahead.

Tunisia

• The trial of a Tunisian TV station owner charged with "insulting sacred 
values" by screening the award-winning Iranian Persepolis has resumed. The 
trial is being seen as a crucial test of the role of Islam in the new Tunisia. 
A prosecutor told the trial that his son couldn't sleep for three nights after 
seeing the film.

6.42 BST/1.42pm ET: Susan Rice, the US ambassador to the United Nations, has 
taken to Twitter to lay out the new American position on Syria, after Secretary 
of State Hillary Clinton met today in Paris with other members of the "Friends 
of Syria" group.

With six tweets in the last 15 minutes, Ambassador Rice appears to be giving 
voice to a newly forceful US stance on the Syria crisis. Whether the new stance 
translates into new US action on the ground, of course, remains to be seen.

Rice accuses the Assad regime of "horrific" violence even after the signing of 
the ceasefire. She demands that UN monitors be given immediate access to 
"vulnerable cities like Homs. Today" and says "shelling must end – immediately."

What is the price for Assad for ignoring these demands? Is there one? 

U.S. agrees with #UNSG <https://twitter.com/search/%2523UNSG> Ban Ki-moon that 
the cessation of armed violence in#Syria <https://twitter.com/search/%2523Syria>
 is incomplete - to say the least.

— Susan Rice (@AmbassadorRice) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/AmbassadorRice/status/193026624046903296>




Since UNSCR 2042, #Syria <https://twitter.com/search/%2523Syria> has unleashed 
another wave of horrific violence & restricted the movement of the few monitors 
on the ground.

— Susan Rice (@AmbassadorRice) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/AmbassadorRice/status/193027040197353472>




#Syria <https://twitter.com/search/%2523Syria> monitors must be able to go to 
vulnerable cities like Homs. Today.

— Susan Rice (@AmbassadorRice) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/AmbassadorRice/status/193027553236230144>




Shelling of Homs and other cities must end - immediately.

— Susan Rice (@AmbassadorRice) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/AmbassadorRice/status/193027743930269698>




Government must pull back its troops and heavy weapons from the population 
centers - immediately.

— Susan Rice (@AmbassadorRice) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/AmbassadorRice/status/193027917490565121>




#Syria <https://twitter.com/search/%2523Syria>'s government could easily do 
all of these things today.

— Susan Rice (@AmbassadorRice) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/AmbassadorRice/status/193028058930880512>

6.53pm BST/1.53pm ET: Bahrain hopes the return of Formula One will demonstrate 
a new stability in the island nation. But how will the world see this reformed 
kingdom if no outside reporters are allowed in? Earlier today the Associated 
Press reported that its correspondentshad been barred entry 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/19/ap-journalists-bahrain_n_1437250.html?ref=media>
.

Now Sky News correspondent Stuart Ramsay has been denied access to report on 
the Formula One race and attendant protests.

Sky news denied access to report from f1 in bahrain #Bahrain 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523Bahrain>

— Stuart Ramsay (@ramsaysky) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/ramsaysky/status/193020234859417601>




Govt refuses to explain why I can't come in

— Stuart Ramsay (@ramsaysky) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/ramsaysky/status/193020556562538496>




#Bahrain <https://twitter.com/search/%2523Bahrain> govt welcomes f1 but not 
independent journalists who actually understand the complexity of this issue

— Stuart Ramsay (@ramsaysky) April 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/ramsaysky/status/193022203720253442>

7.12pm BST/2.12pm ET: Not only has the United States come around in principle 
on establishing secure "buffer zones" inside Syria – thePentagon has a plan in 
place for doing so, US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta testified today.

The Guardian's Ewen MacAskill reports on the details of the Syrian plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/19/us-military-plan-syria-escalates?CMP=twt_fd>
 as described by Panetta in House testimony:

US defence secretary Leon Panetta disclosed Thursday the Pentagon has plans in 
place for establishing humanitarian corridors in Syria, an idea publicly aired 
by French president Nicholas Sarkozy earlier in the day in Paris.

Panetta, giving evidence to the House armed services committee, said the plan 
for humanitarian corridors was under review in the Pentagon along with other 
military options for intervention aimed at helping the Syrian opposition and 
toppling Syrian presidentBashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>.

The Pentagon remains reluctant to intervene militarily in Syria, saying that 
the conditions that existed for action inLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> do not yet apply in the country.

Panetta, citing the divided nature of opposition groups inside Syria, said: 
"Outside military intervention could make a volatile situation worse".

But Panetta, giving evidence alongside the chairman of the joint chiefs of 
staff, General Martin Dempsey, said that all military options are under review 
in the Pentagon, ready to be implemented if Barack Obama gives the order.

7.28 BST/2.28pm ET: Formula One organizers and Bahrain officials are not 
backing down on plans to hold the event this weekend despite today's violent 
clashes between protesters and security forces, the Guardian's Paul Weaver 
reports from Manama.Here's a new dispatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/19/bahrain-braces-f1-unrest> from 
Weaver and Ian Black:

Bahrain is braced for three days of protests to mark the controversial Formula 
One Grand Prix as the government and organisers insisted that the event would 
proceed as planned.

Sporadic clashes that saw riot police firing tear gas and stun grenades at 
protesters broke out as the authorities in the Gulf island state sought to 
project an image of stability before Sunday's big race.

Violence caught up with F1 when Force India team members were forced to flee 
as petrol bombs were thrown over their vehicle on their way back from the Grand 
Prix racing track at Sakhir. The four mechanics were apparently not 
deliberately targeted but caught up in a clash between protesters and police.

Demonstrators in Manama, the capital, were also hit by tear-gas. In one march, 
hundreds of people – some chanting slogans against Formula One – clashed with 
security forces as they shouted support for a jailed Shia opposition activist, 
Abdulhadi al-Khawaja, who has been on a hunger strike for more than two months 
and is now said to be close to death.

"Manama is under a police lockdown," tweeted activist Ala'a Shehabi.

7.40pm BST/2.40pm ET: The Associated Press is out this afternoon with "Syria, 
by the numbers" 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle_east/syria-by-the-numbers-key-figures-in-the-syria-crisis/2012/04/19/gIQAx9BNTT_story.html>
:

• The number of people killed since the March 2011 start of the uprising 
against President Bashar Assad: 9,000.

• The number of Syrians who have fled their homes and taken refuge since the 
uprising began: 230,000.

• The size of Syria's armed forces: Estimated to be around 250,000 active 
personnel.

• The number of Syria's rebel forces: Estimates start at around 10,000.

• The number of U.N. observers on the ground in Syria: 7.

• The number of observers that U.N. chief Ban Ki-Moon wants: 300.

• Amount of money pledged by Saudi Arabia and other wealthy Arab Gulf states 
to support Syria's rebels and encourage defections from the army: Millions of 
dollars.

• Amount of money actually transferred: None. Syrian opposition members and 
international officials say the Gulf states have yet to start distributing 
money because there is no clear way to make sure the money gets to the right 
people.

(h/t: @ahmed <https://twitter.com/#!/ahmed>)

8.03pm BST/3.03pm ET: Now some perspective on the presidential race in Egypt, 
where three top candidates were disqualified this week and one of them, the 
Muslim Brotherhood's Khairat al-Shater, said he feared the possibility of a 
rigged election.

The election has become an "insult to the revolution" that overthrew Hosni 
Mubarak,writes Mona Eltahawy in Comment Is Free 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/apr/19/insult-revolutionary-egypt-elections?CMP=twt_gu>
:

The circus otherwise known as the presidential elections in Egypt is making an 
anarchist of me. There isn't a single candidate I find either qualified or 
deserving to lead revolutionary Egypt, and I don't believe the elections will 
be free or fair – how can they be, under a military junta that has runEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> since 18 days of revolution forced 
Hosni Mubarak to step down on 11 February 2011?
...

I look at this "choice" and hear the tortured justifications made in their 
favour and they sound awfully similar: hollow.

The whole point of overthrowing Mubarak was that we had ended fear. The 
revolution continues, not just to end military rule but to provide alternatives 
to the best of the worst. We still have a way to go.

8.11pm BST/3.11pm ET: Agence France-Presse joins the list of news 
organizations barred from entering Bahrain to cover the Formula One race. The 
AFP report 
<http://uk.news.yahoo.com/bahrain-denies-visas-foreign-journalists-f1-162721343.html>
 says cameramen already in the country have to put fluorescent stickers on 
their cameras so security forces can see them at a glance and keep track of 
what they're filming.

An AFP photographer, accredited by the sport's governing body, the FIA 
(Federation Internationale de l'Automobile), was informed by Bahrain's 
information affairs authority that there has been a "delay to your visa 
application, so it might not be processed."
...
Meanwhile, cameramen already in Bahrain were required to keep fluorescent 
orange stickers on their cameras so that they would be easily recognisable to 
ensure they do not cover any off-track events, such as ongoing protests.

8.38pm BST/3.38pm ET: There are reports of widespread nighttime clashes 
between protesters and security forces in Syria.

Government forces are using tear gas to break up demonstrations, according to 
reports collected bythe Local Coordination Committees 
<https://twitter.com/#!/LccSy>, which is tracking clashes in Daraa, Idlib, 
Hama, Homs, Damascus, Aleppo, Hassaka and elsewhere.

There are also reports of security forces firing live ammunition in the 
far-flung cities of Daraa in the south, Deir Ezzor in the east and Aleppo in 
the north.

The overall picture is of a night much like the nights that preceded the 
ostensible ceasefire of last week, with demonstrations being met by violent 
crackdowns. The LCC puts the number of dead in Syria today at 29.

8.52pm BST/3.52pm ET: At the end of the Friends of Syria meeting in Paris, US 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called for tougher UN sanctions on Syria if 
the Assad government does not allow an expanded force of observers. The nature 
and scope of thepossible sanctions were unspecified 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/04/19/us-france-syria-idUSBRE83I18F20120419>
.

9.34pm BST/4.34pm ET: Syria Elite Dance to Dawn as Risk of Assad Overthrow 
Fades – that's the headline of a new San Francisco Chronicle story  
<http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/g/a/2012/04/19/bloomberg_articlesM29Q9J0D9L3501-M2PYB.DTL&ao=all#ixzz1sWHP6Ur3>
about how nightlife in Damascus and the outlook of the business community is 
better now than it was a month ago.

The image from the first sentence of "Syria's elite [who] dine and dance till 
dawn on tabletops to the thump of patriotic songs" is a provocative one, 
feeding the perception of a carelessly out-of-touch ruling class embodied by 
the president and his wife.

The article doesn't quite bear out the image as one that is recurrent or 
widespread in Damascus these days, although it does quote a restaurant manager 
as saying that "People seem more comfortable and the international situation is 
more relaxed."

The story, by Donna Abu-Nasr 
<http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/g/a/2012/04/19/bloomberg_articlesM29Q9J0D9L3501-M2PYB.DTL&ao=all>
, says the conflict has caused an elite exodus:

Other rich Syrians have simply left the country for the duration of the 
troubles, "because there's nothing that they can do at the moment, there's no 
business being conducted whatsoever" said Ayesha Sabavala, Syria economist at 
EIU.

Those who have stayed and enjoy the capital's nightlife "are a tiny minority 
whose lifestyle doesn't represent the lifestyle of the rest of Damascus," 
al-Malak said [Bassam al-Malak, a Damascus businessman sympathetic to the 
opposition]. Pro- government Syrians are "those who benefited from the regime 
and they want to safeguard their gains."

(h/t: @ahmed <https://twitter.com/#!/ahmed>)

9.46pm BST/4.46pm ET: Is Bashar al-Assad a war criminal? US Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton won't say so.

CNN posted a portion 
<http://security.blogs.cnn.com/2012/04/18/is-syrias-president-a-war-criminal/> 
of Clinton's interview yesterday with Wolf Blitzer in which he asks her if 
Assad is a war criminal.

"I'm not going to get into the labeling, Wolf," Clinton said 
<http://security.blogs.cnn.com/2012/04/18/is-syrias-president-a-war-criminal/>. 
"We really don't want to be labeling what we see which are clearly 
disproportionate use of force, human rights abuses, absolutely merciless 
shelling with heavy weaponry into unarmed civilian areas, even shelling across 
borders now in Turkey and Lebanon."

(h/t @zaidbenjamin <https://twitter.com/#!/zaidbenjamin>)

10.30pm BST/5.30pm ET: We're going to wrap up our live blog coverage of 
developments in the Middle East. Here's a summary of the latest:

Syria

• Clashes between government forces and the opposition continued into the 
night in cities across the country. Local activists put the number killed at 29.

• The United States notched up its rhetoric, with Ambassador Susan Rice saying 
the government must stop shelling and pull out of cities "immediately." 
Following a meeting of the friends of Syria group in Paris today, Secretary of 
State Hillary Clinton said unspecified sanctions were possible if Syria did not 
comply.

• The US defense department has a plan in place to create "buffer zones" 
inside Syria secured by the United States and partners. There was no indication 
that the plan would be put into effect, however.

• UN Secretary General Ban ki-Moon says Syria has failed to comply with its 
obligation under a peace plan to pull troops and heavy weapons out of urban 
areas. In a letter to the security council, Ban Ki-moon called for an observer 
mission to be expanded to 300 members.

Bahrain

• Authorities used gunfire, stun grenades and tear gas on opposition 
protesters in advance of a Formula One race that will draw international 
attention to the island state this weekend. Opposition activists claim 23 
people were wounded. The clashes were expected to continue through the weekend.

• Foreign journalists have been barred from Bahrain in the run-up to the race, 
including journalists with the Associated Press, Sky News and Agence 
France-Presse.

10.50pm BST/5.50pm ET: We have an addendum: Video has surfaced on the NY Times 
Lede blog 
<http://thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/04/19/getting-in-ahmadinejads-face/?smid=tw-thelede&seid=auto>
 of a trip Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad made earlier this month to a 
Persian Gulf island claimed by both Iran and the United Arab Emirates.

His motorcade encountered crowds with a lot to say. One member of the crowd, 
an agile and apparently fearless woman, had enough to say that she pushed her 
way past security guards and clambered on top of the hood of the president's 
open-top car.

He spoke with her for about 20 seconds.
 