
Update: on 16 September Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> 
announced that it had fixed its connectivity problem.

Telecom company T-Mobile has warned iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> customers not to download 
Apple’s latest software update, adding to an already long list of complaints 
about the iOS10 system.

“Do not download iOS10,” the carrier tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/tmobile/status/776466023193030657> on Thursday to 
customers who use the iPhone 6, 6+ and 5SE models. “We are getting reports of 
connectivity issues [and] Apple is working on a fix.”

T-mobile later reported that Apple had fixed the problem, but the warning from 
a major wireless carrier was just the latest problem to flummox the release of 
iOS10. Customers have already complained that the update hasleft iPhones and 
iPads inoperable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/apples-ios-10-iphone-update-causes-issues-for-some-users>
 and sometimes trapped in a cycle of rebooting on and off.

In a statement on Wednesday, Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> confirmed a “brief issue with 
the software update process affecting a small number of users during the first 
hour of availability”. The company claimed that the problem had been fixed, but 
has also recommended customers back up their devices and download the update 
through iTunes.

Apple billed its software update as its “biggest iOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> release ever” on Tuesday, but 
customers soon complained of a number of problems. Some found that after 
installing the software through Wi-Fi, they were asked to connect it to a 
computer with iTunes – and then the device became inoperable.

To recover their phones, users must connect and then reset the devices by 
holding down the home and power buttons.

Other users have found the software drains their batteries faster or suffers 
connectivity problems with Bluetooth and Wi-Fi, though these problemswill 
probably be resolved <http://www.trustedreviews.com/news/ios-10-problems> as 
the device updates and telecom carriers adjust. But some users have discovered 
problems within specific apps, for instance the newly updated Messages app.

As part of its updates, iOS10 has added a range of animations and images to 
the Messages app, which Apple hopes will compete with Facebook Messenger and 
other services. But when users searched for an image or animation of the word 
“butt”, the app suggested a sexualized gif  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/15/apples-messages-app-my-little-pony-porn-gif-ios-10>
of a My Little Pony character that pulls down its underwear. The app now blocks 
that word, as well as searches for “pornography”, “sex” and other explicit or 
anatomical words, but not the word “drugs”. The company has also disabled 
searches for the word “huge” after explicit images were returned.

The new software is meant to upgrade a range of iPhone and iPad functions, 
including photography settings, enhanced intelligence for the keyboard and new 
notification screen and more uses for the voice-activated assistant Siri.
 