
In a nutshell
A vast, lush crater filled with two million plants, dominated by two shining 
biomes. The path leading to the entrance gives no clue as to the sight that 
awaits, then suddenly you are gazing at what looks like alien spaceships among 
acres of landscaped gardens. One biome houses the world’s largest indoor 
rainforest, the other 1,000 varieties of Mediterranean plants. Outside paths 
wind up and down terraces and past a giant bee and a 3.3 tonne Junkman 
sculpture. Sustainability is at its core, from various water and energy-saving 
devices to local and international community projects.

What’s new in your favourite UK holiday spots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/08/new-attractions-food-uk-holiday-hotspots-family>
Fun fact
230 miles of scaffolding were used to build the biomes.

Best thing about it?
I can’t think of another UK attraction that matches it for visual wow factor. 
In the school holidays there are free themed shows and activities, with an 
educational bent – but always fun and interactive. My five-year old had great 
fun in a messy slime-making session during a half-term science week.Dinosaur 
Uproar <http://www.edenproject.com/visit/whats-on/dinosaur-uproar> is this 
summer’s attraction (until 2 September) with animatronic dinosaurs roaming the 
grounds, a dig pit for mini palaeontologists and activity sessions throughout 
the day. In September (10-27) celebrity chefs – and former the Great British 
Bake Off contestants – will be giving demonstrations as part of the Festival of 
Food.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439898084999%2F590a8f13-569e-4a90-81f5-99ab27fbaaa0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Take%20the%20kids%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Eden%20Project%2C%20near%20St%20Austell%2C%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Take%20the%20kids%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Eden%20Project%2C%20near%20St%20Austell%2C%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439898084999%2F590a8f13-569e-4a90-81f5-99ab27fbaaa0-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Eden Project’s summer attraction, Dinosaur Uproar. Photograph: Steve Tanner
What about lunch?
There’s no shortage of places to eat, and there’s an emphasis on healthy food 
– no fizzy drink dispensers here. The Med Terrace in the Mediterranean biome is 
a pleasant spot for a sit-down lunch with pizzas from £8.50 (kids £5.50), 
paella £9.95, seabass £9. At the Eden Kitchen one main item (say, roast salmon 
or chicken wrapped in prosciutto) with salad costs £7.95; for kids the “grab a 
bag” (wraps, hummus, juice or water, fruit) costs £5.95; a juice bar sells 
mixes from £3.50. Ice-creams come in exotic flavours (mango yogurt, coconut and 
baobab, coffee and brazil nut) for £2 a scoop.

Exit through the gift shop?
The shop is vast, selling gifts, clothes, cards, local beer, wine, food, 
books, gardening paraphernalia and more. But you can scoot around the side of 
it to avoid temptation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439898302412%2F3a5c5a13-ca3f-49e0-b9e8-dfcdb21dd214-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Take%20the%20kids%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Eden%20Project%2C%20near%20St%20Austell%2C%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Take%20the%20kids%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Eden%20Project%2C%20near%20St%20Austell%2C%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F18%2Fthe-eden-project-st-austell-cornwall-family-day-trip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439898302412%2F3a5c5a13-ca3f-49e0-b9e8-dfcdb21dd214-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Exploring the botanical gardens. Photograph: Guido Cozzi/Atlantide 
Phototravel/Corbis 
Getting there
Drivers park for free and there are electric car-charge points. The nearest 
train station is St Austell, then First Bus 101. Visitors arriving by foot, 
bike or public transport get a discount.

Top 10 budget restaurants and cafes in Newquay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/02/top-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newquay-cornwall>
Opening times
9.30am-6pm (8pm some dates in August). In the school summer holidays get there 
when it opens or face long queues.

Value for money?
It’s not a cheap day out but it is a very special place. Advance tickets (they 
are 10% more on the door): adults £22.50, kids (5-15) £12.50, family of four 
£62.50. Tickets to theHangloose <http://hanglooseadventure.com/> thrill rides 
(the Drop, where you jump onto an airbag, England’s longest zip-wire at 660 
metres, and a giant swing) ramp up costs considerably (combined ticket for all 
three £34, bought separately at the Hangloose kiosk). The new onsitehostel 
<http://www.yha.org.uk/hostel/eden-project>, a collaboration between YHA and 
Snoozebox, costs £55 a night (for a family of four). Guests who buy Eden 
Project tickets directly through YHA get 20% off the entry price and unlimited 
access for the duration of their stay.

Verdict
9/10

• edenproject.com <https://www.edenproject.com/> 
 