
In a nutshell
Giant trampoline in the trees: a 1,500-square-metre expanse of enclosed 
walkways, slides and tunnels, made from safety netting suspended between the 
canopies of ancient oak woodland. It’s the first of its kind in the UK – the 
technology comes from France – and its location, at theLake District Visitor 
Centre at Brockhole <http://www.brockhole.co.uk/>, means there’s plenty to do 
when you return to Earth: boat trips, pony rides, vast adventure playground, or 
splashing around on the edge of Windermere.

Take the kids to … Shrek’s Adventure, London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/07/shreks-adventure-london-review> 
Fun fact 
The nets, hand-sewn by French ex-fishermen, were designed to help researchers 
gain access to the highest reaches of the Amazon rainforest.

Best thing(s) about it
The freedom to leap around in the treetops, no harness required. The adjacent 
Treetop Trek <http://www.treetoptrek.co.uk/> high-ropes course takes you, Go 
Ape! <http://goape.co.uk/>-style, over a series of rope bridges, daredevil 
leaps and zip wires (harness essential).

What about lunch?
Fight for a picnic table or laze beside the water. Paninis in the Terrace Café 
(£4.95) come from the nearbyMore? artisan bakery <http://www.moreartisan.co.uk/>
.

Exit through the gift shop?
It sells quirky pocket-money treats, but it’s hidden away in the main house.

Take the kids to ... Powderham Castle, Kenton, south Devon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/30/powderham-castle-devon-family-attraction>
Getting there
Arrive by boat from Ambleside (windermere-lakecruises.co.uk 
<https://www.windermere-lakecruises.co.uk/>) or bus (routes 555 and 599). It’s 
off the A591, halfway between Windermere and Ambleside. Parking from £2 an hour.

Value for money?
Not bad for unaccompanied children (from seven years), but adults must go on 
with three- to six-year-olds (one per two children), so the bill soon adds up: 
two-hour slots cost £16 adults, £16 children (5+), £11 accompanying adults, and 
£11 under-5s. You can spend the rest of the day at Brockhole, though, where the 
playground, walking and orienteering trails are almost free (trail leaflets 
cost 50p-£2).

Opening times
Year round. Booking recommended (treetopnets.co.uk 
<http://www.treetopnets.co.uk/>, 01539 447186).

Verdict
7/10.
 