
Talk radio hosts and bloggers could be given greater access to official White 
House press briefings once theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> takes office, under 
a highly irregular proposal being floated that may also remove briefings from 
the West Wing.

Related: Monica Crowley won't join National Security Council after plagiarism 
reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/monica-crowley-national-security-trump-plagiarism>

Trump’s pick for White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, said on Sunday 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kpi33lCfMM0> that due to “off the chart” 
interest in the new administration, the president-elect was considering moving 
briefings from theJames S Brady press briefing room 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/interactive-tour/james-s-brady-press-briefing-room>
, which has been used by presidents to address the media since 1970, to a venue 
with a greater capacity.

A report published by Esquire magazine 
<http://www.esquire.com/news-politics/news/a52301/trump-evict-press-white-house/>
 on Saturday indicated the venue could be inside theOld Executive Office 
Building <https://www.whitehouse.gov/1600/eeob>, just west of the White House. 

“I know change is difficult sometimes,” Spicer told Fox News. “But sometimes 
change can actually be better.”

Spicer argued the proposal would mean “you can involve more people, be more 
transparent, have more accessibility”. He suggested that this would mean 
outlets that are not traditionally part of the White House press corps would be 
able to ask questions during presidential press briefings.

“There’s a lot of talk radio and bloggers and people that can’t fit in right 
now and maybe don’t have a permanency because they’re not part of the 
Washington elite media,” Spicer said, “but to allow them an opportunity to ask 
the press secretary or the president a question is a positive thing. It’s more 
democratic.”

About 200 journalists make up the White House press corps. The Brady press 
briefing room holds 49 permanent seats for major media organisations, which are 
granted space by the White House Correspondent Association (WHCA). The Guardian 
is among those outlets allocated a space.

White House briefings are open any journalist that seeks access and passes 
security clearance, but the president more typically takes questions from major 
news organisations with an allocated seat.

It remains unclear how the proposal would be implemented, but it is likely to 
be interpreted as a hostile rebuke to conventional media outlets around the 
country.

Jeff Mason, the WHCA president and Reuters White House correspondent, said he 
had a “constructive”, nearly two-hour meeting with Spicer on Sunday. Mason 
“emphasized the importance of the White House press briefing room” and its 
proximity to West Wing officials.

“I made clear that the WHCA would view it as unacceptable if the incoming 
administration sought to move White House reporters out of the press work space 
behind the press briefing room,” Mason said in a statement. “Access in the West 
Wing to senior administration officials, including the press secretary, is 
critical to transparency and to journalists’ ability to do their jobs.”

Spicer agreed to discuss any changes to the current system with the WHCA, 
Mason said.

During a chaotic press conference at Trump Tower on Wednesday, the first the 
businessman has held since July 2016, hundreds of journalistscrammed into a 
small pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-press-conference-twitter-media>
 as Trump frequently lambasted certain media organisations and occasionally 
individual reporters. Trump was incensed by reports on a leaked and 
unsubstantiated dossier, which alleged frequent contacts between his campaign 
team and Russian authorities, and suggested the Kremlin held compromising 
material that could be used to blackmail Trump.


Trump was also asked by a reporter at Breitbart News what his views were on 
media ethics and “fake news”, to which he replied: “Some of the media outlets 
that I deal with are fake news more so than anybody. I could name them, but I 
won’t bother. You have a few sitting right in front of us.

“They’re very, very dishonest people, but I think it’s just something we’re 
going to have to live with. I guess the advantage I have is that I can speak 
back.”

Related: Jared Kushner has Trump’s trust but lacks experience for Middle East 
role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/jared-kushner-has-trumps-trust-but-lacks-experience-for-middle-east-role>

According to the Associated Press 
<https://apnews.com/a189444ade364775b2539b65887f1339>, Breitbart News, branded 
by critics 
<https://www.splcenter.org/hatewatch/2016/11/14/white-nationalists-rejoice-trumps-appointment-breitbarts-stephen-bannon>
 as a racist, far-right news site, was the only media organisation to have a 
reserved seat in the front row for the conference. Steve Bannon, Trump’s 
incoming chief strategist and senior counselor, previously served as the site’s 
executive chairman.

The president-elect’s campaign drew consistent support from numerous 
conservative talk radio hosts and internet conspiracy theory sites, for 
instance Alex Jones’s InfoWars. During the campaign, Trump took the 
unprecedented step of appearing on Jones’s site, known as America’s foremost 
conservative conspiracy theory outlet. Jones has previously dismissed the Sandy 
Hook massacre, in which 20 elementary school students and six school staff were 
murdered, as “completely fake 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/alex-jones-doubles-completely-fake-sandy-hook-claims-article-1.2878305>
”, and has branded the September 11 terror attacks an “inside job 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v4za9OSalz4>”.

Trump was interviewed for about 30 minutes by Jones in December 2015, and 
later called Jones a “nice guy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gut1Uzd8ai0>”. 
Jonesclaimed in November 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/17/us/politics/alex-jones-trump-call.html> 
that Trump called him to thank him for his support after winning the 
presidential election.

 * This story was changed on 16 January 2016, to better describe the rules 
governing White House press access. The headline and standfirst were also 
altered.  