
Tate Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> has marked 
the return of some of its most popular paintings from a tour of north America 
by rehanging its galleries devoted to JMW Turner.

Paintings such as the dazzling Norham Castle, Sunrise 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/turner-norham-castle-sunrise-n01981> and 
the baffling but gorgeous view of Venice,St Benedetto, Looking towards Fusina 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/turner-st-benedetto-looking-towards-fusina-n00534>
, have arrived back in London after being part of one of the most successful 
shows ever staged by the gallery.

“We were slightly bereft,” said David Blayney Brown, Tate curator of British 
art from 1790-1850, who is glad to have the works back. “Although it is always 
wonderful to see things in a different gallery because they come to life in 
such different ways.”

The returned works were part of the gallery’s Late Turner exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/sep/08/late-turner-tate-britain-review>
 which, in late 2014, became the most popular solo show held at Tate Britain. 
It received 267,704 visitors and was seen by nearly 500,000 more in a 
subsequent tour of Los Angeles, San Francisco and Toronto.

Having the works back spurred the Tate to rehang the eight rooms of the Clore 
gallery, the home of Turner’s work in the UK.

Blayney Brown said the gallery felt “completely new”. He added: “I’d like 
people to feel, if they come in regularly, that everything has been refreshed 
and looks much sharper and more exciting. We are trying to do a lot in a rather 
modest way.”

There is a dedicated room showcasing Turner’s British tours, from the Lake 
District to the West Country to Edinburgh, opposite a room exploring his 
European travels, including to Germany, Italy and France. Blayney Brown 
stressed, however: “It was absolutely not a Brexit-related decision.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Ftate-britain-jmw-turner-galleries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfbdd774e5ca13566ea59332da507c226d42c1ee%2F0_519_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tate%20Britain%20revamps%20Turner%20galleries%20after%20paintings%20return%20from%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Ftate-britain-jmw-turner-galleries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tate%20Britain%20revamps%20Turner%20galleries%20after%20paintings%20return%20from%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Ftate-britain-jmw-turner-galleries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfbdd774e5ca13566ea59332da507c226d42c1ee%2F0_519_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Some of the largest rooms have been painted in an ‘Indian red’ believed to 
have been used by the artist himself. Photograph: Nils 
Jorgensen/Rex/Shutterstock 
It is in the European room that three Turner views of Venice are displayed 
together, including St Benedetto, Looking Towards Fusina, which often confuses 
people because there is no St Benedetto church in the city. Look closely and 
nothing seems to be in the right place.

The work – which is “without one single accurate detail”, according to John 
Ruskin – represents the perfect view of Venice that Turner wanted to exist.

Another room showcases the radical late works that were found in his studio 
after his death, including the luminous c1845 painting of Norham Castle, in 
Northumberland.

“It is the ultimate late Turner,” said Blayney Brown, with the subject, 
diffused through blazing light and mist, “dissolving rather than being defined”.

The work, which was never exhibited in the artist’s lifetime, is seen by some 
as an impressionist work before the impressionists, and clearly raises 
intriguing questions.

“Is it a work in progress? Or did Turner make it just for himself, considering 
it too advanced for other people’s taste?” said Blayney Brown. “Did he leave it 
in his studio as a kind of pointer to where art might go? We don’t know.” What 
is agreed is that in the mid-1840s, “nobody else, anywhere, was painting in 
this way”, the curator added.

The 100 works on display are a small sample of the 300 oil paintings and 
36,000 drawings and watercolours that make up the Turner Bequest, left to the 
National Gallery in 1856 and rehoused at Tate at the start of the 20th century.

Blayney Brown said the rehanging was modest but radical. “Mainly we just 
wanted to make the pictures look beautiful and not perhaps labour too many 
points … just let them speak visually.”

The rehanging has also involved repainting walls in the biggest rooms from 
grey to red, which Turner used in his own picture gallery. The exact colour was 
described by a friend of Turner, rather vaguely, as “Indian red, neither pale 
nor dark”.

In the absence of any pictorial evidence of the colour, Blayney Brown hopes 
they have got it right. “It is a red you see in India,” he said.
 