
Tate received £350,000 a year in BP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> 
sponsorship between 2007 and 2011 and a one-off payment of £750,000 for its 
Cultural Olympiad film project, figures reveal.

After years of refusing to publicly reveal sponsorship figures, Tate was 
ordered to publish them by an information tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/29/tate-britain-ordered-to-reveal-bp-sponsorship>
 earlier this summer.

It followed sustained pressure by environmental campaigners, who argue the 
sums are pitifully small and evidence that Tate did not need the money. Tate 
has argued the figures are significant.

The figures show that Tate received £350,000 a year, apart from in 2010 when 
it received £1.1m. That money included a special payment of £750,000for a 
project to get children involved in making an animated movie 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/about/projects/tate-movie-project>.

Emma Hughes, a spokesperson for the campaign group Platform, said the amounts 
were “paltry”.

She added: “The Tate gallery has been forced to reveal that during 2007-11 BP 
was branding its walls for a pittance, just £350,000 most years. That’s less 
than 0.5% of Tate’s income.”

Hughes said the 2010 figure still represented less than 1% of Tate’s funding 
and came at a time when “oil was gushing into the Gulf of Mexico due to BP’s 
Deepwater Horizon disaster”.

“The company tried to buy public support by quadrupling the amount of money 
they gave the Tate. As BP fought over compensation for Gulf of Mexico 
communities in the US courts they were throwing money at the Tate in an attempt 
to de-toxify their brand.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fclimate-activists-stage-tattoo-protest-against-bp-at-tate-britain-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F30%2F1448908384534%2FKP_629712_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20activists%20stage%20tattoo%20protest%20against%20BP%20at%20Tate%20Britain%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fclimate-activists-stage-tattoo-protest-against-bp-at-tate-britain-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20activists%20stage%20tattoo%20protest%20against%20BP%20at%20Tate%20Britain%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fclimate-activists-stage-tattoo-protest-against-bp-at-tate-britain-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F30%2F1448908384534%2FKP_629712_crop_640x360.jpg>
Climate activists stage tattoo protest against BP at Tate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2015/dec/01/climate-activists-stage-tattoo-protest-against-bp-at-tate-britain-video>
BP’s long sponsorship of Tate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> comes to an end in 2017. 
While it is not renewing with Tate or the Edinburgh festival, BP’s longstanding 
relationships with the British Museum, National Portrait Gallery, Royal Opera 
House and Royal Shakespeare Company will continue for a further five years 
after it announced a deal worth £7.5m in total.

Each arts organisation welcomed the deals and praised BP for its 
long-established sponsorship of the arts.

As well as giving money to UK arts organisations, BP has given money to 
institutions such as the Los Angeles County Museum ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> (LACMA) – donating $25m (£19m) 
for the ”BP Grand Entrance”.

Campaigners say the arts sponsorship money is tainted and have vowed to 
continue campaigning against it. That means a continuation of the letters, 
petitions and regular peaceful and artistically staged protests that have 
includedspilling oily black molasses at Tate’s summer party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2010/jun/28/art-activists-tate-crowd-bp>
 in 2010 andwhispering transcripts of the Deepwater Horizon trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/apr/24/liberate-tate-arts-bp> in 
2013.

It is not the first time Tate has been forced to reveal BP sponsorship figures.
In December last year, it was ordered to disclose figures for the 17 years 
before 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/26/tate-reveal-bp-sponsorship-150000-330000-platform-information-tribunal>
. That revealed a total of £3.8m in annual amounts varying between £150,000 and 
£330,000.

A spokeswoman for Tate said it would not be commenting further, beyond 
releasing the figures.
 