
Seated against a deep red backdrop, gazing intently at hand-held mirrors, two 
eunuchs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/apr/16/india-third-gender-claims-place-in-law>
 in sparkling saris inspect their appearance before Raksha Bandhan celebrations 
in the red light district of Mumbai.

The photograph from the Reuters news agency is an arresting contemporary 
scene, but a newTate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> project is aiming to 
inspire deeper reflections with images from its own collection of paintings.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Ftate-britain-project-recognition-artificial-intelligence-photography-paintings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ba607a3518fe78788bc1ddc5ba8d130f60a420d%2F42_229_2182_1309%2F2182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tate%20Britain%20project%20uses%20AI%20to%20pair%20contemporary%20photos%20with%20paintings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Ftate-britain-project-recognition-artificial-intelligence-photography-paintings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tate%20Britain%20project%20uses%20AI%20to%20pair%20contemporary%20photos%20with%20paintings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Ftate-britain-project-recognition-artificial-intelligence-photography-paintings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ba607a3518fe78788bc1ddc5ba8d130f60a420d%2F42_229_2182_1309%2F2182.jpg>
 Detail from Sir Peter Lely’s Two Ladies of the Lake Family (1660), paired with 
the Mumbai scene by the Recognition software. Photograph: Tate 
Launching on Friday, Recognition is the winner of 2016’s IK prize 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/about/projects/ik-prize> – an annual award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/22/tate-sensorium-art-soundscapes-chocolates-invisible-rain>
, this year supported by Microsoft, for a project that embraces digital 
technology to explore and showcase Tate’s collection of British art.

Tate Britain revamps Turner galleries after paintings return from tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/03/tate-britain-jmw-turner-galleries>
This year, the challenge was to do it with artificial intelligence.


The team behind the winning project, from the Italy-based communication 
research centreFabrica <http://www.fabricafeatures.com/people/>, say their 
inspiration came from an intriguing conundrum: how can you apply rational 
thinking to a subject like art?


Their answer is provocative. Recognition matches stunning photographs from the 
24/7 news cycle with centuries-old artworks, and presents them online.


“The team have created and trained a ‘brain’ to a point where it is simulating 
certain human attributes and unleashed it online – and it is creating a 
gallery,” said Tony Guillan, the producer of the IK prize at Tate Britain.


After scanning through about 30,000 digitised artworks from the gallery, the 
system pairs the evocative photograph of the two eunuchs with a mellow scene 
from the brush strokes ofSir Peter Lely 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/sir-peter-lely-343>, the principal painter 
to Charles II. Two women, straight-backed and smiling slightly are seated, one 
holding a stringed instrument, the other resting her hand on the elaborate 
folds of her satin dress.


It is a sumptuous 17th-century work, rich in details. But presented next to 
the contemporary photograph, the comparison can provoke new artistic questions 
- for example about gender identity and the notion of glamour.

“Without knowing it, [the system] has created subjective meaning,” said 
Guillan. “By asking the question ‘how do computers work and think?’ you ask the 
exact same question of humans.”

Guillan said he hoped the project would encourage discussion about how we 
depict scenes and individuals. “News always presents itself as this mimetic, 
glass window on to the world, but of course photojournalism is an art form 
often; it is a mode of communication – and so is art and painting,” he said.

With £15,000 in prize money and £90,000 to produce their vision, the 
four-strong team at Fabrica have spent months developing the project, which 
harnesses a burgeoning form of artificial intelligence known asmachine learning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/28/google-says-machine-learning-is-the-future-so-i-tried-it-myself>
. It will be available in full online and there will be a small exhibition at 
Tate Britain.


“Computers are very good at mathematical operations,” said Andrea Vedaldi 
<http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vedaldi/>, an associate professor of engineering 
science at the University of Oxford, who was not involved in the project. “When 
things start to be very difficult is when you don’t really know how to express, 
in mathematical terms, what it is you want to do. For example, if you want to 
recognise a dog in an image ... it is not very easy to come up with the 
equations of a dog.”


Google says machine learning is the future. So I tried it myself
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/28/google-says-machine-learning-is-the-future-so-i-tried-it-myself>
Machine learning takes a different approach: show a system enough images of 
different canines in different poses, the theory goes, and the system will 
figure out what a dog is. “This process of going from specifics to the abstract 
concept, this is what is really challenging,” said Vedaldi. While progress in 
machine learning has been dramatic in recent years, he said, creating systems 
that truly “understand” images was still a work in progress.


It is a challenge that scientists and engineers such as Vedaldi continue to 
grapple with, developing and exploring powerful systems, including new tools 
based on a branch of machine learning called deep learning.

Recognition takes four different approaches to match images, based on 
technology developed by Microsoft and a team of AI specialists at the 
France-based company Jolibrain. “It can look for objects, like cups and 
saucers, it can look for faces, it can look for composition within an image – 
reading lines and colours – and it can look at the context that is attached to 
an image, so metadata, titles and things like that,” said Isaac Vallentin of 
Fabrica.

Now trained, the system will spend three months continuously analysing new 
photographs from Reuters, comparing each to thousands of digitised paintings, 
sculptures and other works. Where one or more matches can be found, the best – 
as selected by the technology – is entered into a searchable online gallery.

Visitors to the website will also be able to explore details of how the system 
made each match, including the strength of the resemblance across each of the 
four approaches, together with particular features it has recognised, such as 
the age and gender of a face. “We are trying to really honestly represent how 
the software itself is coming to its conclusions,” said Vallentin, adding that 
the system would also be able to create a sentence to explain, to a limited 
degree, each match.


The small, three-section display at Tate Britain will offer further insights, 
with visitors able to compare the matches they would make to those generated by 
the machine. The results will then be scrutinised. “We just want to take these 
two datasets in the end and find the connections, the similarities,” said 
Vallentin. “It is really an experiment for us.”


The team also hope the project will showcase the positive side of artificial 
intelligence – a technology that experts including the physicist Stephen 
Hawking haveraised safety concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/dec/02/stephen-hawking-intel-communication-system-astrophysicist-software-predictive-text-type>
 about.

“Technology is an empowering tool,” said Vallentin. “You can create really 
meaningful things and really helpful things, and beautiful things with 
technology.”


 * The IK prize 2016 takes place online and at Tate Britain from 2 September – 
27 November.
 