
Tate Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain> has been 
ordered to reveal how much sponsorship money it received over five years from 
the oil company BP after an information tribunal ruled in favour of campaigners.

The London gallery has consistently fought against attempts to force it to 
publish its sponsorship income, arguing that the details are commercially 
sensitive; campaigners say the gallery does not want people to see how 
“embarrassingly low” the figures were.


BP sparks campaigners' fury with new arts sponsorship deals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/bp-sponsorship-arts-organisations-british-museum-national-portrait-gallery>
In December 2014, Tate was ordered to release BP sponsorship figures from 1990 
to 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/26/tate-reveal-bp-sponsorship-150000-330000-platform-information-tribunal>
, which showed it received between £150,000 and £330,000 a year over the 
17-year period – a total of £3.8m.

This week, an information tribunal ordered that Tate must also disclose 
figures from 2007 to 2011 within 35 days. In a statement Tate said: “Tate has 
been notified of the tribunal’s decision, which we shall follow. We will 
respond within the time frame.”

The ruling came on the day after BP signed new five-year agreements worth £7.5m
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/bp-sponsorship-arts-organisations-british-museum-national-portrait-gallery>
 with four of the UK’s biggest arts organisations: the British Museum, the 
Royal Shakespeare Company, the Royal Opera House and the National Portrait 
Gallery.

Anna Galkina, a campaigner for Platform <http://platformlondon.org>, said: 
“Oil branding of art is a threat to our galleries and our climate. Tate has 
tried to hide how embarrassingly low BP sponsorship fees were. We’re delighted 
that the information tribunal ruled against Tate’s secrecy.”

Earlier this year, BP announced it was ending its 26-year relationship with 
Tate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-to-end-tate-sponsorship-climate-protests>
, an organisationchaired since 2009 by the former BP chief executive Lord Browne
 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/about/who-we-are/board-of-trustees/tate-trustees/chair-lord-browne-madingley>
. It followed years of regular protests by campaigners Liberate Tate, including
in 2010 when gallons of oily black molasses were “spilled” at Tate’s annual 
summer party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2010/jun/28/art-activists-tate-crowd-bp>
.

Galkina said it was ironic that the ruling came out so close to what she 
called “an even cheaper deal” with other arts organisations.

“This is a rip-off. BP’s pocket change buys it legitimacy and access to 
invaluable advertising space. Sponsorship masks BP’s role in destroying 
indigenous lands, arming dictatorships, and wrecking our climate. These deals 
cannot be allowed to go on for another five years. That’s why art interventions 
and protests will go on.”

Arts organisations disagree and say campaigners fail to understand how 
necessary commercial sponsorship is and how difficult it is to raise the money 
elsewhere.

A former director of the British Museum, Neil MacGregor, last year called BP 
the museum’s closest corporate friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/19/oil-companies-arts-sponsorship-cynical-pr-strategy-says-activist>
. “What would you want companies to do with their profits?” he asked. “Do you 
want them to spend them in a way that benefits the public or not?”

The NPG, British Museum, RSC and ROH on Thursday released statements praising 
BP for its continued sponsorship of the arts. Alex Beard, the chief executive 
of the ROH, said: “BP has been and remains at the forefront of corporate 
investment in arts and culture in the UK, and it’s wonderful for theRoyal Opera 
House <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/royal-opera-house> to have their 
commitment for a further five years.”

The campaigners’ barrister, Julianne Morrison, told theinformation tribunal: “
Tate decided to go ahead with BP’s sponsorship despite a major incident in 
Texas that killed 15 of BP’s workers, and despite the Deepwater Horizon 
disaster in 2010. Why did Tate renew the sponsorship? Was it right to do so? 
The public has a right to know the facts.”

Brendan Montague, director of Request Initiative, the group that made the 
original request for the figures, said artists and activists had long argued 
that Tate was putting BP’s interests above those of the taxpayer and visitor. 
“The years Tate spent obstructing this request on BP’s behalf provides another 
point of evidence that they are right,” he said.
 