
Tate will come under fire again over its relationship with fossil fuel 
companies when it is forced to defend its refusal to disclose details of 
financial payments made to it byBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp>.

BP to continue arts sponsorship deals despite cutting ties with Tate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-arts-sponsorships-to-continue-despite-cutting-ties-with-tate>
The action on Wednesday, in front of the information tribunal in London, has 
been brought by the arts groupPlatform <http://platformlondon.org/>, with 
support from information rights group Request Initiative, despite the oil 
companysevering its ties with Tate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-to-end-tate-sponsorship-climate-protests>
 in March this year.

Tate, whose chair of trustees is former BP boss John Browne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-browne>, has been claiming 
“commercial confidentiality” for not providing information on how much it 
received from the oil group between 2007 and 2011.


“As Tate’s deal with BP ends, the oil company can no longer use Tate’s 
spectacular displays to distract the public from its [environmentally] 
destructive business,” Platform’s Anna Galkina said. “The public still has a 
right to know how much BP paid Tate for this transfer of public trust. And the
British Museum, National Portrait Gallery, and Royal Opera House should join 
Tate in breaking free 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-arts-sponsorships-to-continue-despite-cutting-ties-with-tate>
 from oil branding.”

The Tate previously disclosed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/26/tate-reveal-bp-sponsorship-150000-330000-platform-information-tribunal>
 it received between £150,000 to £330,000 a year between 1990 and 2006 
following a previous legal challenge but has declined to reveal more recent 
sponsorship details.

Fossil fuel companies are under pressure from campaigners and some 
shareholders because burning oil, coal and gas increase carbon emissions which 
cause global warming.
 