
Attempts by Tate to keep secret the scale of its funding from BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> suffered a setback when the 
information commissioner withdrew his support for the arts institution at a 
legal hearing in London.

A fossil fuels-arts world divorce is 'the way the world is moving'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/11/fossil-fuels-arts-world-divorce-is-way-the-world-is-moving-tate-bp>
Lawyers for the Tate had insisted that disclosure of the exact amount of money 
it received from the oil company would break a confidentiality agreement and 
prejudice negotiations with other sponsors.

But the information commissioner dropped his opposition to the disclosure 
after hearing Tate struggled to outline the possible damage while admitting it 
had not even asked BP whether it minded the funding figure being released.

The move was applauded by Brendan Montague, a director of information rights 
campaign group Request Initiative, which brought the legal challenge to an
information tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/08/tate-bp-information-tribunal-oil>
 along with arts group Platform. He said: “We are delighted that the 
information commissioner today performed a dramatic U-turn and has agreed with 
us that there is no justification for Tate’s secrecy around the amount of
sponsorship negotiated with BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-to-end-tate-sponsorship-climate-protests>
.”

The campaigners had been blocked in their first attempt to gain access to the 
BP funding deal when the information commissioner sided with the Tate.

But in a dramatic closing submission to the hearing in front of Judge Fiona 
Henderson on Wednesday, Peter Lockley, counsel for the information 
commissioner, said: “The case for prejudice in fact has not been made.”

Lockley accused Tate of using the confidentiality clause “almost as a trump 
card” to avoid scrutiny. He appeared particularly concerned at the evidence of 
Samuel Jones, head of the Tate Galleries director’s office, who indicated the 
arts organisation was unwilling to disclose financial information unless it was 
forced to do so under a legal ruling from a tribunal.

Lockley said “if this is not contracting out [responsibility] to [the Freedom 
of Information Act], it is only a hair’s breadth away from it” – although he 
still believed the public interest for the particular disclosure sought by 
Platform and Request was relatively small.

Jones said it would not be fair for Tate to hand over details of its 
sponsorship arrangements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/26/tate-reveal-bp-sponsorship-150000-330000-platform-information-tribunal>
 when a third party asked for them. “If we had gone on a default position of 
disclosure, that would be an unreasonable breach of the confidentiality 
agreement,” he said.

“We have a responsibility to generate [private] funds over and above our 
public funds and we should not take any actions to undermine that.”

But under cross examination, his colleague, Polly Bidgood, head of corporate 
development and events at Tate, struggled to show emphatically that previous 
forced disclosures had led to problems with sponsors.

Henderson is to hold a second hearing after which she will make a ruling. The 
information commissioners’s change of heart suggests a ruling against Tate is 
more likely.

Anna Galkina, from Platform, said Tate’s insistence on commercial 
confidentiality was symptomatic of a “broader creeping commercialisation” of 
British public cultural institutions.

“It’s only right that the information commissioner changed his position,” she 
said. “As Tate’s deal with BP ends, the oil company can no longer use Tate’s 
spectacular displays to distract the public from its [environmentally] 
destructive business.”

The sponsorship by fossil fuel companies of arts and cultural organisations is 
increasingly being targeted by campaigners and is becoming part of a wider 
public debate, given that global warming is partially caused by burning carbon.
 