
Amanda Spielman, banker-turned-academy chain adviser, will be the next Ofsted 
chief inspector, it has been announced. A few formalities are necessary, a 
cross-party coalition of MPs will talk to her next Wednesday before giving her 
the final nod, but presuming no funny business occursSpielman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/amanda-spielman-next-ofsted-chief-inspector-ark-academies-ofqual>
 is in.

Overstating the importance of the inspectorate is difficult. Even though the 
current chief inspector, Sir Michael Wilshaw, is forever telling school leaders 
to bemavericks 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2785813/Mediocre-schools-need-maverick-heads-says-Ofsted-chief-Sir-Michael-Wilshaw-wants-teachers-aren-t-afraid-ruffle-feathers-charge.html>
 and take their own path, most heads diligently, even slavishly, follow Ofsted 
pronouncements.

Meanwhile, nervous parents frantically download Ofsted reports seeking comfort 
that the schools nearby are at least labelled “good”, ideally “outstanding”. 
I’ve scoffed in recent months as friends scrabbled for the cash to secure 
houses in reach of outstanding schools. “It could lose the rating next year,” I 
point out. The fact is,Ofsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> is 
still where parents look for guidance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fteacher-ofsted-amanda-spielman-lack-classroom-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42871b8d8d4809d0848c00f753d0136fe7aee6c7%2F0_516_2330_2329%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teacher%20or%20not%2C%20Ofsted%E2%80%99s%20new%20chief%20inspector%20passes%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fteacher-ofsted-amanda-spielman-lack-classroom-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teacher%20or%20not%2C%20Ofsted%E2%80%99s%20new%20chief%20inspector%20passes%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fteacher-ofsted-amanda-spielman-lack-classroom-experience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42871b8d8d4809d0848c00f753d0136fe7aee6c7%2F0_516_2330_2329%2F2330.jpg>
 Sir Michael Wilshaw: his classroom experience didn’t guarantee empathy. 
So is Spielman fit to head such an important organisation? The obvious 
criticism is that she has never been a teacher. Union leaders leapt on this 
fact, with the NUT claiming her selection was a“sad indictment” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-36500257> of the way teachers were viewed.

But Ofsted no longer only inspects schools. Its remit expanded in 2006 to 
include childminders, children’s social services, FE colleges, nursery nurses, 
young offender institutions and immigration removal centres. Do we hear whines 
that Spielman never ran a children’s home? Or that she doesn’t understand life 
on remand?

Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> are where Ofsted began 
and school leaders feel their grades intensely, so the kneejerk reaction is 
understandable. But it’s not as though having classroom experience has 
guaranteed empathy. Since his appointment in 2012, Wilshaw has been a one-man 
walking litany of unfeeling comments, despite his 30-plus years in the 
classroom. In fact, it might be those years that provoked it.

Tell teachers what you want, Ofsted – what you really, really want
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jun/17/teaching-inspections-ofsted-transparency>
Soundbites from his early days in the role have become legendary – teachers who
leave at 3pm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2012/sep/27/teachers-leave-school-not-lazy>
 should be paid less, leaders know they’re doing something right iftheir staff 
are all unhappy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/23/chief-inspector-schools-michael-wilshaw>
, and so on. Even last year, he made the toe‑curling claim that being a 
headteacher is“easier now” <http://schoolsweek.co.uk/sir-michael-wilshaw/> than 
in his time. (Being able to fire teachers apparently makes up for increased 
pressure and squeezed budgets.)

After years of hearing about Wilshaw’s personal tribulations as a school 
leader, and his belief that if only teachers were exactly like him (employing 
his grab-’em-by-the-balls approach to management) everything would be OK, I’m 
amazed more in the profession aren’t overjoyed at Spielman’s lack of classroom 
experience. At least we’ll be spared the “in my day” speeches.

What Wilshaw has done well, and should be congratulated for, is standing up to 
government when he disagreed with ministers. Most recently, he took a stand 
against poor academy chains, sayingweak performers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/10/academy-chains-come-under-fire-from-ofsted-chief>
 were no better than the worst local authorities – a damaging blow to the 
government’s all‑academy plan.

Spielman is from an academies background. She spent the past decade as an 
adviser at Ark, the successful academy trust with more than 25 schools. But any 
fears that this means she’ll be soft on academies would be unfounded. Ark has 
publicly stated its preference for a more hands-on Ofsted inspection of academy 
chains – its leaders often seeming annoyed when others fail to meet Ark’s high 
standards. Spielman’s appointment is likely to see the pressure turned up on 
academy chains, not down.

Ofsted 'should not become the plaything of government'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/ofsted-should-not-become-the-plaything-of-government>
Her laser-like focus on data should also be a good thing for Ofsted. She is 
unusual in having studied maths as part of her degree (most chief inspectors 
studied English or history) and she isn’t afraid to use it. Ark uses data 
incisively to target areas of need – as has the exams regulator, Ofqual, which 
Spielman has chaired for the past five years.

Wilshaw has made a lot of noise in recent months over certain groups and areas 
that he rightly identifies as problematic: white working-class boys, northern 
schools, children educated in illegal schools. But Ofsted has been myopic about 
others who also have poor outcomes. Children with special needs wereentirely 
missed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/20/ofsted-sen-schools-outstanding>
 in one annual report. White pupils were mentioned four times in the most 
recent report; pupils with English as an additional language, who in some parts 
of the country have GCSE pass rates 14 percentage points lower than their 
peers, were ignored. All underperforming groups need flagging, and many people 
wonder why Ofsted under Wilshaw seems to have overlooked vital areas.

In the end, if you oppose the very idea of school inspections – and lots of 
people do – then there wasn’t going to be a person in the land likely to win 
you over to its merits. For the rest of us, who think it a necessary evil, 
Spielman’s status as a non-teacher shouldn’t be cause for concern.

• This article was amended on 21 June 2016. An earlier version said Spielman 
would meet MPs this week to discuss her appointment as chief inspector; the 
meeting will take place next Wednesday.
 