
The outgoing director of the CIA has warned of disastrous consequences if 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> goes ahead with 
his threat of tearing up the US deal with Iran over nuclear weapons.


In an unusually frank interview with the BBC, John Brennan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-brennan> said Trump’s opposition to 
the nuclear deal with Iran was the “height of folly”.

Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Brennan said: “I think it would be 
disastrous, it really would: for one administration to tear up an agreement 
that a previous administration made would be almost unprecedented.”


Nuclear weapons: how foreign hotspots could test Trump's finger on the trigger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-foreign-policy-north-korea-iran-russia>
Spelling out the dangers, the US intelligence chief added: “It could lead to a 
weapons programme inside ofIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> that 
could lead other states in the region to embark on their own programmes with 
military conflict, so I think it would be the height of folly if the next 
administration were to tear up that agreement.”

Brennan also expressed alarm about many of the key foreign policy pledges made 
by Trump during his election campaign, including the president-elect’s 
admiration for Vladimir Putin, his anti-Islamic rhetoric and his willingness to 
use torture.

He said that in Syria, Russia and the Assad regime were responsible for 
“wanton slaughter of civilians that is ... nothing short of outrageous”.

Brennan said he hoped for an improvement in relations between Washington and 
Moscow, but urged Trump to be careful of cosying up to Putin.

After the nuclear deal, the west should not disappoint Iranians for the third 
time | Saeed Kamali Dehghan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/life-iranians-nuclear-deal>
He said: “Russia is a country that will pursue its national interests 
frequently to the detriment of the interests of the peoples of the countries 
wherein it operates. So I think President-elect Trump and the new 
administration need to be wary of Russian promises. Russian promises have not 
given us what it is they have pledged.”

He also warned Trump not to reintroduce waterboarding and other interrogation 
techniques as he has threatened. And he revealed that he would disobey orders 
if Trump ordered him to use waterboarding, and that most in the agency were 
also opposed.

He said: “I would counsel my successor not to go down that route any more. 
Without a doubt, the CIA really took some body blows as a result of its 
experiences in intention interrogation programme. And some that were very, very 
damaging to our reputation as well as to our officers. The overwhelming 
majority ofCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> officers would not 
want to get back into that business.”


Asked about Trump’s talk of the US being at war with radical Islam, Brennan 
said: “The new team needs to be disciplined in the language that they use, the 
messages that they send, because if they are not disciplined their language 
will be exploited by the terrorists and extremist organisations as a way to 
portray the United States and the government as being anti-Islamic, and we are 
not.”

He also cautioned against stepping up targeted assassinations using drones. He 
said: “I truly hope that the next administration understands their obligations, 
their responsibilities when they have these capabilities to be exceptionally 
judicious and prudent in carrying out these activities, because it can have 
tremendous positive advantages, but if it is used and misused in ways that 
increase the number of deaths as well as increases resentment against the 
United States it will not be beneficial to our national security interests. It 
will be counterproductive.”
 