
In 2014, at the launch of the 20th London international festival of theatre 
(Lift), the festival’s director Mark Ball told me that theprogramme reflected 
his feeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/10/london-international-festival-theatre-lift-2014-lineup>
 that theatre was “a map of the world”. That’s true too of the 21stLift 
<https://www.liftfestival.com/> lineup, which was launched this evening and 
includes a thrillingly eclectic range of work from 14 countries including a 
rare UK performance by the incomparable US drag artistTaylor Mac 
<http://www.taylormac.org/about/>, who will be taking a subversive stroll 
through the great American songbook at Hackney Empire.

There’s plenty to tempt including Lies Pauwels’s The Hamilton Complex 
<http://nextfestival.eu/en/event/het-hamiltoncomplex> at the Unicorn 
<https://www.unicorntheatre.com/>, which takes you inside the chaotic mind of 
13 13-year-old girls, caught between childhood and the adult world, and 
Krzysztof Warlikowski’s Phaedra(s), in which Isabelle Huppert meets Greek 
tragedy via Sarah Kane at the Barbican.

In Andrew Schneider’s Youarenowhere <http://andrewjs.com/work/youarenowwhere/> 
at Shoreditch Town Hall, a man from the future will appear with urgent news. 
Inne Goris and Dominique Pauwels use sound, music and movement to stage 
Alessandro Baricco’s novelWithout Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/may/16/fiction.features2> at The Place 
<http://www.theplace.org.uk/>. The Australian Antony Hamilton 
<http://antonyhamiltonprojects.com/home.html> shows what happens when humans 
meet robots in Meeting at Battersea Arts Centre.

Over its long history Lift has been undeniably influential in opening the eyes 
of British theatre-makers to a very different kind of way to make and present 
theatre. I recall a long-ago conversation with a European director who said: 
“Of course, you British make drama; in Europe we make theatre.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Flondon-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ab61d097d4a33d5620cb74af29d179253dd60db%2F0_166_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teen%20riots%20and%20cemetery%20circus%3A%20London%20international%20festival%20of%20theatre%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Flondon-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teen%20riots%20and%20cemetery%20circus%3A%20London%20international%20festival%20of%20theatre%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Flondon-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ab61d097d4a33d5620cb74af29d179253dd60db%2F0_166_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Incomparable … drag artist Taylor Mac. Photograph: Al Pereira/WireImage 
That may have been true then, but is much less the case now as the range of 
work produced by UK writers, directors, designers and theatre-makers has 
changed substantially. Lift has had a lot to do with that, and this year’s 
programme reflects that shift, with pieces including Clare Patey’sEmpathy Museum
 <http://www.empathymuseum.com/>, which allows you to literally walk a mile in 
someone else’s shoes while listening to their story through headphones. From 
Argentina comes Everything By My Side, which will take place beside the Thames 
and allow you to slip into a stranger’s bed and hear a tale from childhood.On 
the Move at the Royal Court <http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/> will take you 
into backstage spaces for 10 intimate glimpses, from writers from the UK and 
Middle East, into the lives of some of the 50 million people forced to leave 
their homes across the world since the second world war. Greece’s Blitz Group 
will be turning The Pit into a ballroom forLate Night 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=18741>, where six 
performers dance a waltz as Europe crumbles around them.

Mark Ball is increasingly presenting work that may have been made thousands of 
miles away but which holds a mirror up to the UK, and particularly to 
multiculturalLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. It’s work that 
fulfils the idea that it the most deeply local can also be the most universal.

Australian circus company Circa 
<http://circa.org.au/about-circa/about-us/about-3/> are presenting Depart which 
will take place inTower Hamlets cemetery park 
<http://www.imvisitinglondon.com/towerhamletscemeterypark.html>, offering up 
unexpected encounters down the shadowy pathways and by Victorian tombs, many 
belonging to migrants to London. In confronting the past it will stimulate us 
to consider the present.

“A lot of the artists we are bringing this year are asking questions around 
how we should live, what is sustainable and what is just and unjust,” says 
Ball, who points toConstanza Macras’s Open for Everything 
<http://www.dorkypark.org/site/exhibit/open-for-everything-2/> at the Royal 
Court, which takes a journey through European Roma culture and communities, 
demonised in the media, to examine how survival is rooted in mutual 
co-operation and support. Or what might we learn fromToco Nikaido’s Miss 
Revolutionary Idol Beserker 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=18774>, at the 
Barbican, a riot of Japanese youth culture that will explode across the Pit 
stage in candy-coloured freneticism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Flondon-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3430e5631ec108506a8be0285102257de714a7b0%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teen%20riots%20and%20cemetery%20circus%3A%20London%20international%20festival%20of%20theatre%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Flondon-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teen%20riots%20and%20cemetery%20circus%3A%20London%20international%20festival%20of%20theatre%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Flondon-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3430e5631ec108506a8be0285102257de714a7b0%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
 A riot of Japanese youth culture … Toco Nikaido’s Miss Revolutionary Idol 
Beserker at the Barbican. Photograph: Cyclone_A 
“Young people in Japan are living in an ossified society where capitalism is 
in deep crisis. So why are so many looking for cultural escapism rather than 
trying to start a revolution?” says Ball, “and what parallels are there with 
our own youth culture and the way it is so atomised?”

Shows such as Lola Arias’s Minefield at the Royal Court, which brings together 
soldiers from Argentina and the UK who fought on opposing sides in the 
Falklands conflict in 1982, have an obvious connection across cultures. What 
aboutNeil Bartlett <http://www.neil-bartlett.com/>’s Stella at Hoxton Hall, a 
meditation on the true story of Ernest Boulton, one half of theVictorian 
cross-dressing duo Fanny and Stella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/25/fanny-stella-neil-mckenna-review>
? “Lift isn’t just about putting on theatre, it’s about creating a place and 
space to reflect, and transgender issues are very much in the news at the 
moment,” says Ball. “Stella allows us to consider ourselves and our attitudes, 
what has changed and what hasn’t.”

Which is pretty much what Lift is about and why the biannual festival remains 
as relevant as ever.

 * London international festival of theatre <https://www.liftfestival.com/> 
runs from 2 June to 2 July.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Flondon-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bae2e6c112adadae4abf4f12f92475694737a86%2F0_67_1772_1063%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teen%20riots%20and%20cemetery%20circus%3A%20London%20international%20festival%20of%20theatre%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Flondon-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teen%20riots%20and%20cemetery%20circus%3A%20London%20international%20festival%20of%20theatre%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Flondon-international-festival-theatre-2016-lineup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bae2e6c112adadae4abf4f12f92475694737a86%2F0_67_1772_1063%2F1772.jpg>
 Unexpected encounters … Depart by Circa in Tower Hamlets cemetery park. 
Photograph: John Angerson  