
A House for Mr Biswas is episodic and packed with conflict. Mr Biswas subverts 
heroic convention: he is smart and funny, but also often petulant, mean and 
unsympathetic. His enemies, who are mostly his relatives, are largely 
unlikable, but they also have their admirable moments. The narrative of the 
novel is propelled by a clear goal – the acquisition of the titular house – 
which, it becomes apparent, can only be achieved by the most exhaustively 
circuitous route. It is a novel of epic length, formal perfection, and contains 
two notable peculiarities: its setting, which, being domestic, is unusual for 
an epic; and its geographical location,Trinidad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/trinidad-and-tobago>, an important island in 
the Caribbean but not a particularly influential one on the world stage. And 
yet, this severely delimited context gave VS Naipaul an entire world of 
experience and feeling on which to draw.A House for Mr Biswas, published in 
1961, is one of the imperishable novels of the 20th century.

From his birth until his untimely death 46 years later, Mr Biswas mostly lives 
in a series of houses that either do not belong to him or are houses unworthy 
of the name. Each of these houses is for Mr Biswas an attempt at solving a 
problem, and each is a wrong answer in a different way. Mr Biswas is like 
a figure out of myth – and indeed his birth is attended by negative portents 
and dour prophecies; he is declared to be “born in the wrong way”, seems doomed 
to live through each of these futile iterations before his destiny can be 
complete. The pointlessness and the wasted effort of these dead-end attempts 
give the novel a comic edge that links it both to picaresque and to the 
existentialist tradition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fteju-cole-vs-naipaul-a-house-for-mr-biswas-trinidad-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6de7743ba59447e1c62562adeb643700c9faea3%2F0_0_2426_2213%2F2426.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teju%20Cole%20on%20A%20House%20for%20Mr%20Biswas%20by%20VS%20Naipaul%20%E2%80%93%20a%20novel%20of%20full-bore%20Trinidadian%20savvy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fteju-cole-vs-naipaul-a-house-for-mr-biswas-trinidad-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teju%20Cole%20on%20A%20House%20for%20Mr%20Biswas%20by%20VS%20Naipaul%20%E2%80%93%20a%20novel%20of%20full-bore%20Trinidadian%20savvy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fteju-cole-vs-naipaul-a-house-for-mr-biswas-trinidad-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6de7743ba59447e1c62562adeb643700c9faea3%2F0_0_2426_2213%2F2426.jpg>
 An entire world of experience on which to draw … VS Naipaul in the 1960s. 
Photograph: John Minihan/Getty Images 
Futility is the way home. In the search Mr Biswas carries his meagre 
possessions and his growing family along, from one unsuitable house to another, 
from Hanuman House to the Chase to Green Vale to Shorthills to a rental in Port 
of Spain. These residences are mere walls and roofs to Mr Biswas. His tragedy 
is not only that none of them is a house for him, but that his awareness of the 
poor fit is acute and constant. Most of the houses belong to his despised 
in-laws, the Tulsis. A couple of them are built by Mr Biswas himself, but these 
are swiftly undermined by their shoddiness and by elemental threat: one 
succumbs to flood, the other to fire. Even an expensive doll’s house he buys 
for his daughter Savi quickly ends up a splintered wreck. Brutal ironies dog Mr 
Biswas every step of the way on life’s journey, the unfairness mounts 
intolerably; and yet it is a funny book, too, full of jagged capers, lively 
malice, clever talk.

The novel opens with relief: Mr Biswas has found his house. How terrible it 
would have been, he thinks, to have failed in this quest, “to have lived 
without even attempting to lay claim to one’s portion of the earth; to have 
lived and died as one had been born, unnecessary and unaccommodated”. In the 
long search for this accommodation – the what and why having been answered in 
the prologue, the novel’s course is about the how – Mr Biswas finds various 
lesser stratagems in which he can be temporarily housed. It begins with his 
name: not the “Mohun Biswas” inscribed belatedly on his birth certificate by a 
solicitor, but the “Mr Biswas” by which we know him, right from the cradle. Mr 
Biswas faces many humiliations, but is rarely shorn of the modicum of dignity 
the honorific guarantees. The retention of this proper form of address is both 
comic and tense, particularly in the early sections of the novel.
 In the days that followed [his birth] Mr Biswas was treated with attention 
and respect. His brothers and sisters were slapped if they disturbed his sleep, 
and the flexibility of his limbs was regarded as a matter of importance.

A schoolboy is rarely singled out from his siblings and mates in this way, 
much less a babe in arms. But the perpetual Mr proves a shelter for Mr Biswas. 
On the rare occasions at which someone calls him by his first name, there’s a 
slight shock to both Mr Biswas and the reader, as though at a sudden solecism. 
For instance, at the office of the solicitor with his mother’s sister Tara:
 “Name of boy?” 
“Mohun,” Tara said. 
Mr Biswas became shy. He passed his tongue above his upper lip and tried to 
make it touch the knobby tip of his nose. 
It is as though, even at a pre-school age, Mr Biswas knows that the “Mr” is a 
precious possession of which he should not be casually deprived.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fteju-cole-vs-naipaul-a-house-for-mr-biswas-trinidad-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F796edc2b9b5c0ea4b8ee9995f5f18d905373feb9%2F0_0_989_1500%2F989.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teju%20Cole%20on%20A%20House%20for%20Mr%20Biswas%20by%20VS%20Naipaul%20%E2%80%93%20a%20novel%20of%20full-bore%20Trinidadian%20savvy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fteju-cole-vs-naipaul-a-house-for-mr-biswas-trinidad-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teju%20Cole%20on%20A%20House%20for%20Mr%20Biswas%20by%20VS%20Naipaul%20%E2%80%93%20a%20novel%20of%20full-bore%20Trinidadian%20savvy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fteju-cole-vs-naipaul-a-house-for-mr-biswas-trinidad-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F796edc2b9b5c0ea4b8ee9995f5f18d905373feb9%2F0_0_989_1500%2F989.jpg>
 VS Naipaul Photograph: PR Image 
Literature is a second form of protection. Most important are Marcus Aurelius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/apr/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview6> 
andEpictetus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/nov/28/stoic-week-stiff-upper-lip>
, whom Mr Biswas brandishes apotropaically. Were he to actually adopt their 
stoic precepts, his experience of life would be different. As it is, they serve 
him as defensive consolation, a carapace for his irredeemably querulous nature. 
Mr Biswas himself nurtures the dream of literature. He writes, assembling the 
dream of writing from its basic building blocks, converting form into 
imagination. Schoolboy calligraphy becomes sign-writing. Sign-writing becomes 
journalism. Journalism edges towards something more lasting.

And Mr Biswas buys things, he acquires things, his wife, Shama, owns things of 
her own. Hemmed in by dissent and discord, given to complaint, Mr Biswas 
marvels at “the endurance and uncomplainingness of inanimate objects”; and 
these many objects, which he houses, house him too. Gradually, they increase in 
number and presence, and at several points in the novel, the reader is given an 
updated inventory of what has been acquired and by what logic. These 
inventories, which may bring to mind the catalogue of ships in theIliad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/feb/09/can-homers-iliad-speak-across-the-centuries>
 or the many descriptions of rooms byDickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens>, are markers of Mr Biswas’s 
modest progress. Moving from the Chase, Mr Biswas and Shama find that they 
cannot move out as they had moved in, with a donkey cart.
 These disregarded years had been years of acquisition … They had acquired a 
kitchen safe of white wood and netting. This too had been awkward to varnish 
and had been painted. One leg was shorter than the others and had to be propped 
up; now they knew without thinking that they must never lean on the safe or 
handle it with violence. They had acquired a hatrack, not because they 
possessed hats, but because it was a piece of furniture all but the very poor 
had.
As a result, Mr Biswas acquired a hat. And they had acquired, at Shama’s 
insistence, a dressingtable, the work of a craftsman, french-polished, with a 
large, clear mirror. 
Slowly, tentatively, with appalling setbacks, Mr Biswas is no longer one of 
the very poor. Later, there’s a rockingchair, then a cherished Slumberking bed. 
(The adjective-noun compounds are a special feature of Mr Biswas’s furnishings, 
as though to intensify the particularity of each item.) Then comes a delicate 
glass cabinet, which immediately loses one of its glass doors. The final time 
the family moves, to the house for Mr Biswas on Sikkim Street in Port of Spain, 
the number of things has become impressive.
 The gatherings of a lifetime: the kitchen safe (encrusted with varnish, layer 
after layer of it, and paint of various colours, the wire-netting broken and 
clogged), the yellow kitchen table, the hatrack with the futile glass and 
broken hooks, the rockingchair, the fourposter (dismantled and unnoticeable), 
Shama’s dressingtable (standing against the cab, without its mirror, with all 
the drawers taken out, showing the unstained, unpolished wood inside, still, 
after all these years, so raw, so new), the bookcase and desk, Théophile’s 
bookcase, the Slumberking (a pink, intimate rose on the headrest), the glass 
cabinet (rescued from Mrs Tulsi’s drawingroom), the destitute’s diningtable (on 
its back, its legs roped around, loaded with drawers and boxes), the typewriter 
(still a brilliant yellow, on which Mr Biswas was going to write articles for 
the English and American Press, on which he had written his articles for the 
Ideal School, the letter to the doctor): the gatherings of a lifetime for so 
long scattered and even unnoticed, now all together on the tray of the lorry.

These moments of inventory are among the most indelible passages in this 
masterwork of realism: one scarcely credits the idea that such meticulous and 
loving checklists could be invention. These things must have had these lives, 
and so they paradoxically underscore the veracity of Mr Biswas’s own 
experiences. But the realism of the human interactions throughout the novel is 
similarly irresistible. Here they all are: Mr Biswas, his mother, Bipti, his 
brothers and sister, his aunt, Tara, and her husband, Ajodha, his wife, Shama, 
his children (Savi, Anand, Myna, Kamla, appearing one by one, becoming real 
before our eyes, and being themselves actively drawn into the contest of life), 
his aggravating in-laws: Mrs Tulsi, Seth, Padma, the indulged sons of the 
family, the absurdly numerous daughters, their husbands, their children; and 
the huge cataract of secondary and tertiary characters, the innominate crowd. 
All are convincingly themselves, and yet all are contained in the arc of the 
novel, brought in to play their parts in the story of Mr Biswas’s life.

The 100 best novels: No 90 – A Bend in the River by VS Naipaul (1979)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/08/100-best-novels-bend-in-the-river-vs-naipaul-review>
Incident, fight, rancour, subterfuge: this is Mr Biswas’s experience during 
the long years he lives with the Tulsis. His principal foes are his 
mother-in-law, Mrs Tulsi, and her brother-in-law, Seth. They hold grudges 
against him, and he out-grudges them. He bickers, insults, mocks. His wife, 
Shama, no fool, plays both sides skilfully, siding with her husband sometimes, 
abandoning him at other times. Some of these battles of will Mr Biswas wins, 
others he loses. Physical violence is commonplace: the frequent beatings the 
children in the extended household receive also spill over, rarely but 
astonishingly, into adult interaction. Pointless impasse is common.A House for 
Mr Biswas hums along to the interweaving tunes of these several discords. But 
the book is also a patient, almost ecstatic evocation, of landscape and social 
life in Trinidad in the first half of the 20th century. And if the human 
interactions are characterised by agony, the times and places – the farms, the 
roads, the villages, the thrumming energy of the city, the mornings, 
afternoons, dusks, nights – are described with profound and vigilant affection. 
Playing the angry and fast-moving currents of badinage against the dreamy swirl 
of memory, the novel’s flow is one of full-bore local savvy. One finally reads 
or rereads Mr Biswas for this balanced totality, this fecund complexity, for 
the way it brings to startling fruition in 20th‑century Trinidad the promise of 
the 19th‑century European novel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fteju-cole-vs-naipaul-a-house-for-mr-biswas-trinidad-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F095bff1ba28ee465ac290072c4181dd3c7fd1929%2F0_0_1370_2055%2F1370.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teju%20Cole%20on%20A%20House%20for%20Mr%20Biswas%20by%20VS%20Naipaul%20%E2%80%93%20a%20novel%20of%20full-bore%20Trinidadian%20savvy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fteju-cole-vs-naipaul-a-house-for-mr-biswas-trinidad-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teju%20Cole%20on%20A%20House%20for%20Mr%20Biswas%20by%20VS%20Naipaul%20%E2%80%93%20a%20novel%20of%20full-bore%20Trinidadian%20savvy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fteju-cole-vs-naipaul-a-house-for-mr-biswas-trinidad-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F095bff1ba28ee465ac290072c4181dd3c7fd1929%2F0_0_1370_2055%2F1370.jpg>
 ‘The thrumming energy of the city’ … dancers at the Trinidad carnival. 
Photograph: BBC 
Great in macrocosm, the novel is also flawless in microcosm. It contains many 
perfect set pieces, strewn like jewels through the book, in which the prose 
gleams with a kind of secret knowledge. Many are the moments of imaginative 
sympathy that continue to bloom in the mind long after the page is turned. 
One such account, of the burning ofpoui sticks 
<http://darkroom.baltimoresun.com/2014/02/stick-fighting-competition-in-trinidad/#1>
 for the rough village sport ofstick-fighting 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4IW1iweI3Y0>, captures the way the scent of 
the sticks opens up in Mr Biswas a sudden seam of memory.

Another, of Mr Biswas working as a bus conductor in his youth, passing by a 
lone hut in the dusk, is a compressed little masterpiece of longing:
 In the gloom, a boy was leaning against the hut, his hands behind him, 
staring at the road. He wore a vest and nothing more. The vest glowed white. In 
an instant the bus went by, noisy in the dark, through bush and level 
sugar-cane fields. Mr Biswas could not remember where the hut stood, but the 
picture remained: a boy leaning against an earth house that had no reason for 
being there, under the dark falling sky, a boy who didn’t know where the road, 
and that bus, went. 
Against that sad obscurity, against surrender, against darkness, A House for 
Mr Biswas is a book for knowledge, for determination, for ragged unyielding 
life, a book that, over its great and complex length, shelters the one who 
reads it.

• Reprinted from the forthcoming Picador Classics edition of A House for Mr 
Biswas by VS Naipaul (published 25 February, £10.99). To order a copy for £7.69 
go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370407/s/a-house-for-mr-biswas/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 