
Little-known Hilton Cartwright believes he’s the answer to Australia’s 
all-rounder conundrum and plans on proving it in the third Test against 
Pakistan starting on Tuesday. The Zimbabwe-born 24-year-old is in line to make 
his Test debut at the SCG and says the chance to show selectors he’s 
Australia’s next long-term allrounder is a dream come true.

“The way it’s been over the last 12, 18 months, there’s been a spot there or 
thereabouts (for an all-rounder). To get that opportunity, I’ll definitely grab 
if it if I get it,” Cartwright said on Sunday.

Steve O'Keefe hopeful a good SCG showing could book India tickets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/okeefe-hopeful-scg-showing-india-series>
Cartwright, who averages 44.50 in first-class cricket and sees himself as a 
batting all-rounder, is tipped to replace the axed Nic Maddinson to shore up 
the middle order and be used as a third or fourth seamer. As selectors mull 
over using two spinners following the inclusion of Steve O’Keefe and Ashton 
Agar in Australia’s 13-man squad, Cartwright may bat at No6 ahead of keeper 
Matthew Wade.

He is confident his bowling is up to the standard required to support 
spearheads Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazelwood – and fellow quick Jackson Bird, 
should selectors only opt for one spinner.

“I can definitely contribute overs during a game,” Cartwright said. “That’s 
always been a part of my game. The bowling’s been there. I’ve just been trying 
to get it to work as close to (as good) as my batting. I’m preparing myself for 
that. So if they say I’m going to be the third seamer, I’m preparing to have 
that opportunity to contribute 10, 15 overs, whatever it may be, to hopefully 
try and cement my spot.”

A member of the 13-man second-Test squad, Cartwright – who went to school with 
Test allrounder discard Mitch Marsh – is almost certain to be handed his debut 
on Tuesday. Seemingly the only way he would miss out would be if selectors 
opted to use Agar – who has two first-class centuries to his credit and 
famously scored 98 on his Test debut in England on Australia’s 2013 Ashes tour 
– as a slow bowling all-rounder batting at No7 while also retaining Bird.

With Nathan Lyon guaranteed one spinner’s spot after answering the selectors’ 
call to step up in the second Test, Agar’s inclusion would also scupper Steve 
O’Keefe’s hopes of a recall.
 