
When 56-year-old Chloe Williams had her ovaries removed, she wasn’t prepared 
to lose her libido. “My sex drive dried up completely; I couldn’t bear the 
thought of it. Apparently, my ovaries had been producing a bit of testosterone, 
even though I went through the menopause a few years ago. After the operation, 
which I had to reduce my risk of cancer, I felt under-powered, tired and not in 
the least bit interested in sex. My GP offered me testosterone, and I jumped at 
it.”

She is far from alone; there is growing interest 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/landia/article/PIIS2213-8587(16)00112-1/abstract>
 in the role of the hormone in both men and women. And scientists are asking: 
do falling levels in old age, or after cancer treatment, damage our health? 
Does testosterone replacement restore vim, vigour and all-round perkiness? And 
can you have too much of a good thing?

Testosterone is often called the male hormone, but women have it, too. It is 
made from cholesterol in the gonads (testes in males, ovaries in females) and 
both sexes also make some in the adrenal glands that sit just above the 
kidneys. Production in the gonads and adrenals is stimulated by hormones 
produced in the brain, and testosterone levels fall gradually as you get older, 
especially in men.

If you suffer from primary hypogonadism 
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/male-hypogonadism/basics/causes/con-20014235>
, the gonads do not produce testosterone, while in secondary hypogonadism, the 
hypothalmus or pituitary in the brain do not pump out enough of two other 
hormones, known as LH (Luteinizing hormone) and FSH 
(follicle-stimulating hormone), to stimulate the gonads into production.

London endocrinologist Dr Mark Vanderpump  <http://www.markvanderpump.co.uk/>
is concerned about rising use of the drug in the UK –prescriptions rose by 
around 90% (from 157,602 to 298,314) between 2000-2010. 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/345/bmj.e5469/rr/645985>

“The key is to get a firm diagnosis before committing a person to a treatment 
for life that isn’t risk-free,” he says. “Every person needs individual, 
tailored management – there’s not one protocol that fits everyone. It’s 
important to monitor red blood cell count that increase the risk of thrombosis.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Ftestosterone-therapy-sex-drive-health-men-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff09108a3d65ebecd15ff2302fc446f1eddc4ada4%2F0_102_3744_5117%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Testosterone%20%E2%80%8Btherapy%20%E2%80%8B%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%8Bhope%20or%20%E2%80%8Bhype%3F%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Ftestosterone-therapy-sex-drive-health-men-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Testosterone%20%E2%80%8Btherapy%20%E2%80%8B%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%8Bhope%20or%20%E2%80%8Bhype%3F%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Ftestosterone-therapy-sex-drive-health-men-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff09108a3d65ebecd15ff2302fc446f1eddc4ada4%2F0_102_3744_5117%2F3744.jpg>
 Women can benefit from testosterone treatment. Photograph: SerrNovik/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
Williams’s GP prescribed a testosterone gel 
<https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/22159>, even though it is not 
licensed for use by women. An alternative would have been an HRT preparation 
that has some testosterone-like effect calledtibolone 
<http://patient.info/medicine/tibolone-tablets-livial>. The Endocrine Society 
says <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25279570>: “Testosterone should be 
reserved for post-menopausal women with sexual dysfunction secondary to 
hypoactive sexual desire, because there is limited data regarding long-term 
efficacy and safety. Testosterone levels do not predict response, and should 
not be routinely measured, but monitoring for signs of androgen excess is 
important.”

Androgen excess – too much testosterone – can cause problems such as excess 
hair and acne. Williams says her libido did improve after a few days, but she 
thinks it might have been psychological. “I think my sex drive was low because 
I was recovering from the impact of surgery and the genetic test that said I 
was at risk of cancer. I’m not sure how I feel about using a drug that may 
cause side effects or be ineffective.” Vanderpump says the small doses 
prescribed to women should be safe.

Adrian Sylvester, 34, went to his GP after he and his partner had been trying 
for a baby for two years. “I’d been finding it hard to get reliable erections 
and my sex drive was rubbish. I put it down to tiredness and stress. Then I got 
so anxious about the whole thing that it put me off sex altogether. My GP 
organised a sperm test that hardly showed any sperm at all.”

Sylvester had blood tests that showed low levels of testosterone, LH and FSH. 
An endocrinologist did further tests, but could not find a specific underlying 
cause. Sylvester was advised to cut out the strong opiate painkillers that he 
was taking for back pain, changed job and took steps to reduce his stress 
levels.

But the endocrinologist explained that while prescribing testosterone might 
help libido, energy levels and muscle bulk, it would not restore sperm 
production. In fact, it could make it worse, because the brain senses the extra 
testosterone in the bloodstream and produces even less LH and FSH. Testosterone 
has been considered as a male contraceptive for this reason. Happily, within 
three months, Sylvester’s hormone levels and sperm-count improved and although 
Adrian’s partner isn’t pregnant yet, the chances are that they will be able to 
conceive naturally in time, but Vanderpump points out that drugs such as opiates
and certain illness can temporarily lower testosterone, so repeat measurements 
are always advised.

Testosterone levels in men peak in their late 20s, declining from around 30. 
Most experts believe it is an inevitable part of ageing 
<http://www.bpac.org.nz/BPJ/2015/August/testosterone.aspx>, but say lifestyle 
changes, such as losing weight and reducing alcohol intake can improve levels 
and symptoms. Confusingly, blood levels of the hormone may not correlate with 
symptoms; some men with low testosterone feel fine, while others with levels at 
the low end of normal feel drained of energy and strength, and improve greatly 
when given the hormone.

Seven placebo-controlled trials are underway 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24686158> in the US to try to establish 
what symptoms men with low levels due to age alone might experience, and 
whether the therapy helps.Findings from the first three 
<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1506119#t=article> showed treatment 
improves sexual function, but has questionable impact on vitality, mood and 
depression. And study authorProfessor Peter Snyder of the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 
<http://www.med.upenn.edu/apps/faculty/index.php/g275/p18180> says that 
decisions about whether to offer treatment depends on knowing the risks, which 
“will necessitate larger and longer trials”.

Professor Eric Orwoll of Oregon Health and Science University, Portland points 
out that the benefits were modest and tended to wane over time. “At this point 
their clinical importance is uncertain. Therapy was not a panacea, and the 
findings alone might be insufficient to support a decision to initiate 
testosterone therapy in symptomatic older men.” The average age of men in the 
study was 72, 90% were white, most were obese and had high blood pressure and 
all had very low testosterone levels.

So who should take testosterone? Young men who aren’t producing testosterone 
because their testicles have failed certainly need to take it, in order to 
prevent bone and muscle loss. But men such as Sylvester, whose low levels 
reflect failure of the brain hormones that stimulate the testes into 
production, should not be given it, as it will impair fertility further.

Women such as Williams can try a low dose, but should not stay on it if it is 
not helping. And older men who are suffering from low libido, energy and 
erectile dysfunction and low testosterone due to age alone, need to wait to 
find out whether it is safe – the trials didn’t flag up any major toxic 
effects, but they weren’t powered to answer the safety question decisively.

Consumer advocate Dr Sidney Wolfe of Public Citizen says testosterone 
prescriptions in the US are 17 times higher per population than in the UK 
overall. And alarmingly, a fifth of those were for the non specific symptom of 
‘fatigue’ and up to 9% were for men who had normal or high levels already. Some 
are given prescriptions without even having their levels checked. In 2014, 
Public Citizen actually filed a petition with the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) requesting a strong health warning on all drugs containing 
testosterone.

Last year, the FDA denied that request but did issue a caution and required a 
labelling change to mention “a possible increased risk of heart attack and 
stroke with use.” Wolfe remains convinced that stronger action is needed to 
stem the rising tide of testosterone use.
 