
 Texas’s attorney general, Ken Paxton, turned himself in on Monday to face 
charges that he misled investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/02/texas-attorney-general-ken-paxton-indicted-felony-fraud>
 and didn’t disclose money he made for referring financial clients as part of 
his private business before becoming the state’s top lawyer in January.

Paxton, a 52-year-old Republican, was fingerprinted and photographed at the 
Collin County jail while a throng of media waited outside. It was a frenzy 
reminiscent of one year ago whenthen Texas governor Rick Perry – who was also 
still in office – was booked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/24/rick-perry-texas-felony-indictment-appeals-court>
 after being indicted on charges of abusing his power with a 2013 veto.

But whereas Perry defiantly welcomed the cameras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/20/texas-governor-rick-perry-mugshot-indictment-rosemary-lehmberg>
 within minutes of being processed at an Austin jail, there was no sign or word 
from Paxton nearly an hour after his release.

Neither Paxton nor his attorney has commented on the matter since news of the 
indictment leaked over the weekend. Other topTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> Republicans have also remained 
silent, including Governor Greg Abbott, who last held the attorney general job, 
and Senator Ted Cruz, a Republican presidential candidate and the state’s 
one-time solicitor general.

The Texas GOP released a statement saying that Paxton deserved his say in 
court and praised his first seven months on the job, including his recent 
investigation of Planned Parenthood.

“There’s a reason why Texans have warily observed this news. Some of the 
outrageous events surrounding this sloppy process certainly do not typify the 
level of quality that Texans expect from our judicial system,” party spokesman 
Aaron Whitehead said in a statement.

Just as Perry was allowed to finish his term after his indictment, Paxton can 
stay on the job while his criminal case proceeds.

Paxton wore a suit and smiled for his booking photo. A small handful of 
Democrats rallied on the courthouse steps, some waving signs that called for 
Paxton’s resignation.

The booking documents released on Monday by the jail in Paxton’s hometown of 
McKinney, a Republican stronghold near Dallas, show that he faces two counts of 
first-degree securities fraud and a lesser charge of failing to register with 
state securities regulators. Each of the fraud counts carries a punishment of 
five to 99 years in prison.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Ftexas-attorney-general-ken-paxton-securities-fraud-charges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb79e98f19e9e31837ea6400e77adf7c33932b522%2F0_92_4430_2659%2F4430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Texas%20attorney%20general%20turns%20himself%20in%20after%20securities%20fraud%20indictment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Ftexas-attorney-general-ken-paxton-securities-fraud-charges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Texas%20attorney%20general%20turns%20himself%20in%20after%20securities%20fraud%20indictment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Ftexas-attorney-general-ken-paxton-securities-fraud-charges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb79e98f19e9e31837ea6400e77adf7c33932b522%2F0_92_4430_2659%2F4430.jpg>
 Protesters calling for Ken Paxton to resign hold signs as they stand outside 
the Collin County courthouse on Monday. Photograph: Tony Gutierrez/AP 
Questions about Paxton’s financial dealings shadowed the Tea Party 
conservative throughout his first seven months on the job. His aides have 
denied any wrongdoing by Paxton and described the criminal investigation led by 
two special prosecutors as a political smear campaign.

Among the allegations is that Paxton encouraged investment in Servergy Inc, a 
tech startup under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The 
Associated Press last month reported the connections between the company and 
Paxton, who listed himself as a shareholder and whose name is among search 
terms that Servergy attorneys used to satisfy a federal subpoena.

In the middle of last year’s heated Republican primary, Paxton admitted to 
violating state securities law by not disclosing to regulators that he was 
receiving commissions for referring law clients to a financial planner. He paid 
a $1,000 fine and chalked it up as an administrative oversight.

Paxton joins other current or recent state attorneys general facing criminal 
charges.

A Pennsylvania grand jury in January recommended that state attorney general 
Kathleen Kane face charges over allegations of engaging in a cover-up and lying 
about her role in a grand jury leak to a newspaper. Kane, a Democrat who took 
office in 2013, has not been charged and has denied breaking any laws. Utah’s 
previous two attorneys general were also arrested last summer on charges of 
running pay-to-play schemes during their combined 13 years in office.



 