
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> 
failed to overrule her Northern Ireland and defence secretaries when they 
proposed dropping emergency powers to detain terrorist suspects without trial.

The dispute over how to balance human rights against security precautions 
erupted in June 1980 almost five years after the ending of internment.

A secret prime ministerial file released to the National Archives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nationalarchives> in Kew on Friday shows that 
Humphrey Atkins, the Northern Ireland secretary, informed Downing Street that 
section 12 of the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1978 should be 
allowed to lapse.

“The powers constitute, individually and collectively, a substantial 
derogation from the ordinary rule of law and the onus is on me to satisfy 
parliament that each of them continues to be needed,” Atkins informed her.

“I have reached the conclusion that I should not seek the renewal of section 
12 ... which contains the power to detain terrorists without trial. [It] has 
not been used since 1975.

“The symbolic value of non-renewal will be especially strong in the minority 
[republican/nationalist] community, to whom the power of detention has always 
been a particular irritant.”

Both police and the general officer commanding, the senior army officer in the 
province, agreed with Atkins’s assessment. The chief constable said it was a 
“matter of fine judgment”. On the memo, Thatcher wrote in felt tip pen: “It 
will be seen as a sign of weakness if it lapses now.”

Atkins stood his ground and secured the support of the defence secretary, 
Francis Pym. “Should a seriously deteriorating security situation point to a 
need to use the power,” Atkins argued, “it could be renewed.”

Thatcher gave way. In a comment on a later letter from Atkins, the prime 
minister noted: “I still think it is unwise but S of S [secretary of state] 
must follow his own decision and stand to it.”
 