
Social isolation and loneliness are well known as causes of depression, mental 
health problems and physical illness. They are conditions usually associated 
with older people, who may experience the profoundly isolating effects of 
retirement, loss of a partner and children moving away.

But loneliness is also something that affects young people, typically in their 
teens to early 20s, who have moved out of home and are yet to establish their 
own networks of family and friends – and may be under or unemployed, in itself 
an isolating experience. And of course, isolation and loneliness are something 
that can be experienced by anyone, whatever their age or situation.


This problem of social isolation is so severe that we have included it as one 
of the five “giant evils” that must be tackled by people working in the public 
and voluntary services,in our updating of the Beveridge report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2014/jul/07/-sp-beveridge-report-revisited-where-now-for-the-welfare-state>
.

We put together a panel of experts to discuss how professionals from local 
government, social care, healthcare and the voluntary sector can work together 
in tackling isolation. If you have any advice, stories or questions, do add 
them in the comments section underneath the article.

The panel

Tracey Robbins, programme manager, Joseph Rowntree Foundation 
<http://www.jrf.org.uk/>

Rachael Byrne, executive director of care & support, Home Group 
<http://www.homegroup.org.uk/Pages/default.aspx>

Paul Cann, chief executive, Age UK Oxfordshire 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/oxfordshire/>

Clare McNeil, senior research fellow, Institute for Public Policy Research 
<http://www.ippr.org/>

Mick Ward, head of commissioning, adult social care, Leeds City Council 
<http://www.leeds.gov.uk/Pages/Default.aspx>

Pamela Holmes, practice development manager, Social Care Institute for 
Excellence <http://www.scie.org.uk/>

Christina Victor, professor of gerontology and public health, Brunel University
 <http://www.brunel.ac.uk/>

Anna Goodman, policy and research officer, Campaign to End Loneliness 
<http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.org/>

Isabella Goldie, head of mental health – Scotland, Mental Health Foundation 
<http://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/>

Julie Wrigley, research manager, Qa research <http://qaresearch.co.uk/>

Who is affected by loneliness?

Anna Goodman: To my mind, loneliness is often characterised by loss and by 
transition. There are certain stages in our lives that can make us more 
vulnerable to loneliness because they erode our social networks. For example, 
retirement removes you from professional/workplace friends. Giving up driving 
will deprive you of a once-greater mobility and flexibility of travel. But loss 
also underpins loneliness and these transition points. Bereavement is an 
obvious trigger, but we shouldn’t also forget the impact of loss of 
sight/hearing, poor health and even loss of confidence in our ability to make 
and maintain friends.

Julie Wrigley: We find, as I am sure most may agree, that it is all ages – not 
just older age groups who can be lonely. People from all backgrounds are 
affected too.

Christina Victor: There are lots of factors involved in “causing” loneliness 
–psychological factors such as self esteem and personality type are important, 
but so are life events, material circumstances, expectations of old age, the 
physical environment... There is no simple “cause” and so there is no simple 
“fix”!

Shona Grange <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38184904>: 
My experience as a social worker for older people has shown me that some 
services designed to overcome loneliness and isolation can actually make people 
feel worse as they are regarded as “cases” or “service-users”. Loneliness can 
affect any of us, sothe project I am working on 
<http://www.welcomeproject.org.uk/> aims to overcome this by encouraging 
engagement with the local community through informal volunteering. We also look 
at overcoming barriers through use of radio and IT.

How can professionals identify if people are lonely?

Goodman: We’ve been working with older people, service providers and 
commissioners to come up with some alternatives to the word “loneliness”, that 
still get to the heart of the issue. I’m afraid I can’t share proper results 
just yet, but questions suggested include: “Are you able to spend enough time 
with the people you like?”, “Are you satisfied with your social life?” and “Is 
loneliness something that affects your life?” (more removed as you don’t say 
you are lonely.)

Isabella Goldie: We also need to skill up staff better to be able to ask those 
questions. Many skirt around them, partly because of their own anxieties and 
the stigma that surrounds loneliness but also for fear of opening a can of 
worms. What will they do if people say they are lonely?

Rachael Byrne: In my experience you dont need to ask “are you lonely”, clients 
we see talk about feeling low, anxious about the small things, they are looking 
for the support to make a first step into something new. Loneliness often comes 
after losing someone close, moving to new area, needing support around mental 
health – it’s talking and giving time that identifies loneliness.

How can different services reach people who are socially excluded?

Paul Cann: I am excited by statutory-voluntary partnerships between 
organisations, for example between the police community support officers and 
local health charities in Manchester, who go around together knocking on doors. 
The statutory agencies often know where the most withdrawn and isolated people 
live, and that kind of partnership to me has great potential but doesn’t seem 
to happen that often.

Byrne: As a supported housing organisation with schemes dispersed all over the 
country, we struggle sometimes to get the levels of client involvement we 
aspire to. Clients told us the geography and public transport were the 
barriers. We seconded a colleague just one day a week to develop opportunities 
for involvement bespoke to the area, our levels of client involvement have gone 
for 50% to 100%. I am not saying thats the full answer but taking the services 
to our isolated clients did seem to be the answer rather than trying to get 
them to a central point!

Clare McNeil: The German government has set up over 500 ‘multi-generational 
homes’ <http://www.mehrgenerationenhaeuser.de/>which bring together all age 
groups – from babies to 80-year-olds – and act as public living rooms. They 
seem to work because they bring together often isolated groups like new mums, 
single parents and their children, migrants, recent retirees and the elderly 
under one roof and evaluations are positive.

How can public services support people to become involved in the community?

Goldie: What we don’t need is public sector staff acting as friends to people, 
but public services that are aware of the impact of loneliness and understand 
that addressing this may be core to what they are trying to achieve. So for 
example a care worker supporting an older person may actually be in a key role 
in terms of helping that older person to connect with the wider world.

Tracey Robbins: Neighbourhood action can reduce the impact of loneliness and 
build more resilient communities. Regardless of the neighbourhood, the evidence 
suggests that the greatest impact was the result of the community development 
approach alongside staff support. The process is crucial to neighbourhood 
approaches to loneliness. The approach offers good value for money. A 
relatively small investment can release significant citizen action. However, it 
won’t happen on its own. Good facilitators are key and the process takes time. 
Resourcing is essential.

Mick Ward: Community led initiatives are critical. In Leeds the heart of these 
are Neighbourhood Networks. 27 organisations led by older people covering the 
whole city commissioned (2.3 million) to tackle social isolation

Like the sofa <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38284402>: 
I do feel that the issue of responsibility for the wellbeing of an ageing 
population lies not only with health professionals and dedicated charities, but 
with the community. Social enterprises, such asGoodgym <http://www.goodgym.org/>
, provide creative solutions to the epidemic of elderly isolation in the UK. In 
connecting runners with those unable to leave their flat, those recently 
widowed, or those that simply crave a bit of additional company, Goodgym 
creates reciprocally beneficial relationships amongst members of the community
 