
The campaigning activities of Peta (People for the Ethical Treatment of 
Animals) are designed to shock, with bucketloads of fake blood, semi-nudity and 
sexy vegetables. But have they gone too far this time? Quite a few cages were 
rattled when Peta announced last week that the best city for vegans in the UKis 
… Glasgow 
<http://blog.peta.org.uk/2013/08/glasgow-named-most-vegan-friendly-city/>. Has 
Brighton really lost its crown?

Glasgow certainly has more vegan eateries than most cities, and its 
city-centre cafe bars give Brighton a run for its money. In the Merchant City 
area,Mono <http://www.monocafebar.com/> is an enormous airy performance space. 
The menu is light and modern, with vegan takes on popular international dishes 
– bean burritos, nasi goreng, Vietnamese salad and porcini risotto. Mono's 
sister,Stereo <http://www.stereocafebar.com/>, a popular bar in the 
Mackintosh-designed building that was once home to the Daily Record, is always 
packed and also offers live music along with an all-vegan tapas-style menu.

The 78 cafe bar <http://www.the78cafebar.com/index.html?pid=1> in the West End 
has a cosier vibe, with a coal fire, comfy sofas and a proper old HMV 78rpm 
record player. For a slightly less bohemian experience, head toSaramago café bar
 <http://www.cca-glasgow.com/saramago-caf/saramago-caf-bar> at the Centre for 
Contemporary Arts for freshly baked organic bread and some vegan haggis 
fritters.

Glasgow, with its history of radical politics, innovative live music and 
bar-based socialising, is a good fit with veganism. More generally, towns with 
large student populations and influential communities of academics are good 
places to look for vegan and vegetarian food. Old trading ports, too, have a 
history of diversity.Scouseveg <http://www.scouseveg.co.uk/>, Liverpool's 
campaigning veggie social group, meets atThe Egg Café 
<http://www.eggcafe.co.uk/> on the roomy top floor of a Victorian warehouse. 
The menu is not particularly adventurous (quiches, soup and garlic bread), but 
the boho vibe is alive and kicking.

Bristol is home to the campaigning group Viva! 
<http://www.viva.org.uk/index.php> and was the first venue for VegFest 
<http://www.vegfest.co.uk/>, originally an annual festival of veggie food and 
music. The city'sBeatroot Café <http://www.beatroot.org/> is a not-for-profit 
"community space" where all kinds of ethical campaign groups choose to meet 
over laptops and Fairtrade coffee. In Bath, an elegant vegetarian dining 
experience can be hadat Demuths <http://www.demuths.co.uk/about/introduction/>. 
Built around local produce, the menu might include truffled broccoli and 
cauliflower pannacotta.

Manchester's self-consciously "alternative" Northern Quarter is a good place 
to find a comforting plate of veggie sausage and mash, but for an exclusively 
vegan lunch, locals head toV-Revolution <http://vrevolution.co.uk/>, a vegan 
shop/vinyl seller/zine outlet where you can grab a burger or a hefty wedge of 
cake. Manchester is proud of its vegetarian credentials. The Vegetarian Society 
started there in 1847, and the city now has two classy vegetarian bistrosnamed 
1847 <http://bistro1847.com/index.html> in recognition of that fact. For a 
cheap and cheerful cafe lunch, head towards the university to findThe Eighth Day
 <http://eighth-day.co.uk/>, which has been serving up cheesy pasta bakes and 
salad since 1970, or tryEarth, a busy vegan cafe 
<http://www.earthcafe.co/index.htm> beneath the Buddhist Centre, for wholesome, 
spicy stews.
 78 Cafe Bar in Glasgow. 
Any city with a wide selection of ethnic eateries is likely to be a good bet 
for meat-free pickings – although Indian food is often laced with yoghurt and 
ghee, so vegans may favour the flavours of east Asia.

Manchester has the "Curry Mile" in Rusholme, with around 70 Asian restaurants. 
In London, Drummond Street is a safe bet. It is home toChutneys 
<http://www.chutneyseuston.co.uk/home.html>, the Diwana Bhel Poori House 
<https://plus.google.com/108536873882938167549/about?gl=uk&hl=en> and the Ravi 
Shankar <http://ravishankaruk.com/>, all longstanding vegetarian favourites.

Inevitably, London has more vegetarian and vegan establishments than anywhere 
else in the UK, with around 130 completely vegetarian restaurants. Relatively 
new developments include theCoach and Horses 
<http://www.coachandhorsessoho.co.uk/> on Greek Street, Soho, which now serves 
exclusively vegetarian pub grub, and a new alcohol-free raw food experience 
calledRedemption <http://www.redemptionbar.com/>.

Brighton has been the most veggie-friendly town in Britain for decades, 
offering quirky little cafes such asIydea 
<http://www.iydea.co.uk/Iydea_Vegetarian_Restaurant/Welcome.html> and Wai Kika 
Moo Kau <http://waikikamookau.co.uk/>; civilised family-friendly dining at Food 
for Friends <http://www.foodforfriends.com/>; funky vegan burgers at Heather 
Mills'sVBites <http://www.vbites.com/>; and the town's most exciting restaurant,
Terre a Terre <http://www.terreaterre.co.uk/>, described by the food critic AA 
Gill as "probably the best vegetarian restaurant in Britain … singularly and 
eccentrically marvellous."

Other vegetarian destination restaurants include David Bann in Edinburgh 
<http://www.davidbann.com/> (smoked tofu fritters with fresh banana chutney), 
andDenis Cotter's Café Paradiso in Cork <http://www.cafeparadiso.ie/> – it is 
well worth a special trip to experience what he can do with local cheeses and 
Gortnanain honey.

Veganism <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/veganism> and fine dining 
have yet to see eye to eye. A tiny minority of top-class chefs are grasping the 
nettle (and pureeing it), but most modern vegan food doesn't have fancy 
aspirations. It is more likely to be a burger or a hot dog, something you can 
grab on the go, not something that requires napkins and sitting up straight. 
Many tiny vegan eateries survive only through happy partnerships with other 
enterprises such as bars, performance spaces, art galleries and tattoo parlours.

And it's not all sweetness and light between vegans and vegetarians either – 
many vegetarian chefs don't exactly go out of their way to attract vegan 
customers. One (now defunct) restaurant in Cheshire told me that if vegans came 
to the door, they were advised to go elsewhere. Apparently, they were "bound to 
cause trouble". Another top vegetarian restaurateur says he doesn't like 
cooking for vegans: "They're people who don't like food. 'Can you make it 
without the cream?' I can, but I'm not going to!"

But the reputation vegans have for not enjoying food is all wrong. The best 
vegetarian food is about celebrating nature and trying to convince a sceptical 
world that a fresh, colourful platter of local fruit and veg is an ideal to 
which we should all aspire. For the most part, the world of veganism punctures 
that pomposity. These days it's largely about pop-ups, guerrilla caterers and 
street food entrepreneurs using the web to summon followers. It's OK if it 
comes out of a can, or even (for veganfreegans <http://freegan.info/>) out of a 
skip. It's OK to decorate a cake with Jammie Dodgers. Lighten up and dig in!
 