
The banana is the world’s most popular fruit crop, with over 100m metric tons 
produced annually in over 130 tropical and subtropical countries. Edible 
bananas are the result of a genetic accident in nature that created the 
seedless fruit we enjoy today. Virtually all the bananas sold across the 
western world belong to theso-called Cavendish subgroup 
<http://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/251899/Banana-growing-guide-cavendish-bananas-1.pdf>
 of the species and are genetically nearly identical. These bananas are sterile 
and dependent on propagation via cloning, either by using suckers and cuttings 
taken from the underground stem or through modern tissue culture.

Can agroecology feed the world and save the planet?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/09/agroecological-farming-feed-world-africa>
The familiar bright yellow Cavendish banana is ubiquitous in supermarkets and 
fruit bowls, but it is in imminent danger. The vast worldwide monoculture of 
genetically identical plants leaves the Cavendish intensely vulnerable to 
disease outbreaks. Fungal diseases severely devastated the banana industry once 
in history and it could soon happen again if we do not resolve the cause of 
these problems. Plant scientists, including us, are working out the genetics of 
wild banana varieties and banana pathogens as we try to prevent a Cavendish 
crash.

One of the most prominent examples of genetic vulnerability comes from the 
banana itself. Up until the 1960s, Gros Michel, or “Big Mike,” was the prime 
banana variety grown in commercial plantations. Big Mike was so popular with 
consumers in the west that the banana industry established ever larger 
monocultures of this variety. Thousands of hectares of tropical forests in 
Latin America were converted into vast Gros Michel plantations.

On the brink: Queensland’s banana growers live in fear of a deadly fungus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/12/what-cane-toads-taught-queenslands-banana-growers-about-defeating-a-deadly-fungus>
But Big Mike’s popularity led to its doom, when a pandemic whipped through 
these plantations during the 1950s and ‘60’s. A fungal disease called Fusarium 
wilt or Panama disease nearly wiped out the Gros Michel and brought the global 
banana export industry to the brink of collapse. A soil-borne pathogen was to 
blame: the fungus infected the plants’ root and vascular system. Unable to 
transport water and nutrients, the plants wilted and died.

Fusarium wilt is very difficult to control – it spreads easily in soil, water 
and infected planting material. Fungicide applications in soil or in the 
plant’s stem are as of yet ineffective. Moreover, the fungus can persist in the 
soil for several decades, thus prohibiting replanting of susceptible banana 
plants.

Yearly, it can take 50 or more applications of chemicals to control the disease

Cavendish bananas are resistant to those devastating Fusarium wilt strains, so 
were able to replace the Gros Michel when it fell to the disease. Despite being 
less rich in taste, and despite the logistical challenges involved with 
merchandising this fruit to international markets at an acceptable quality, 
Cavendish eventually replaced Gros Michel in commercial banana plantations. The
entire banana industry 
<http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/est/COMM_MARKETS_MONITORING/Bananas/Documents/Banana_Information_Note_2014-_rev.pdf>
 was restructured, and to date, Cavendish accounts for47% of the bananas grown 
worldwide <http://www.fao.org/docrep/007/y5102e/y5102e04.htm> and 99% of all 
bananas sold commercially for export 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/01/10/we-have-no-bananas> to developed 
countries.

But the Cavendish unfortunately has its own weaknesses – most prominently 
susceptibility to a disease called Black Sigatoka. The fungusPseudocercospora 
fijiensis attacks the plants’ leaves, causing cell death that affects 
photosynthesis and leads to a reduction in fruit production and quality. If 
Black Sigatoka is left uncontrolled, banana yields can decline by35-50% 
<http://www.apsnet.org/edcenter/intropp/lessons/fungi/ascomycetes/Pages/BlackSigatoka.aspx>
.

Cavendish growers currently manage Black Sigatoka through a combination of 
pruning infected leaves and applying fungicides. Yearly, it can take 50 or more 
applications of chemicals to control the disease. Such heavy use of fungicides 
has negative impacts on the environment and the occupational health of the 
banana workers, and increases the costs of production. It also helps select for 
survival the strains of the fungus with higher levels of resistance to these 
chemicals: as the resistant strains become more prevalent, the disease gets 
harder to control over time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbanana-farming-danger-cavendish-crop-genetics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c135c137d451e594c499add2c86b27b2c6a4cc%2F0_52_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20banana%20as%20we%20know%20it%20is%20in%20imminent%20danger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbanana-farming-danger-cavendish-crop-genetics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20banana%20as%20we%20know%20it%20is%20in%20imminent%20danger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbanana-farming-danger-cavendish-crop-genetics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c135c137d451e594c499add2c86b27b2c6a4cc%2F0_52_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 A crop duster plane sprays fungicide over a banana plantation in the southern 
Philippine island of Mindanao. Photograph: Romeo Gacad/AFP/Getty Images 
To further aggravate the situation, Cavendish is also now under attack from a 
recently emerged strain of Fusarium oxysporum, known as Tropical race 4 (TR4). 
First identified in the early 1990s in Taiwan, Malaysia and Indonesia, TR4 has 
since spread to many south-east Asian countries and on into the Middle East and 
Africa. If TR4 makes it to Latin America and the Caribbean region, the export 
banana industry in that part of the world could be in big trouble.

Cavendish varieties have shown little if any resistance against TR4. Growers 
are relying on temporary solutions – trying toprevent it 
<http://www.promusa.org/Fusarium+wilt> from entering new regions, using clean 
planting materials and limiting the transfer of potentially infected soil 
between farms.

Black Sigatoka and Panama disease both cause serious production losses and are 
difficult to control. With the right monitoring in place to rapidly intervene 
and halt their spread, the risks and damage imposed by these diseases can be 
considerably reduced, as has beenrecently shown in Australia 
<http://www.musalit.org/seeMore.php?id=14394>. But current practices don’t 
provide the durable solution that’s urgently needed.

If there’s a lesson to be learned from the sad history of Gros Michel, it’s 
that reliance on a large and genetically uniform monoculture is a risky 
strategy that is prone to failure. To reduce the vulnerability to diseases, we 
need more genetic diversity in our cultivated bananas.

Over a thousand species of banana have been recorded in the wild. Although 
most do not have the desired agronomic characteristics – such as high yields of 
seedless, non-acidic fruits with long shelf life – that would make them a 
direct substitute for the Cavendish, they are an untapped genetic resource. 
Scientists could search within them for resistance genes and other desirable 
traits to use in engineering and breeding programs.


If there’s a lesson to be learned, it’s that reliance on a large and 
genetically uniform monoculture is a risky strategy

To date, though, there’s been little effort and insufficient funding for 
collecting, protecting, characterizing and utilizing wild banana genetic 
material. Consequently, while almost every other crop used for food production 
has been significantly improved through plant breeding over the last century, 
the banana industry has yet to benefit from genetics and plant breeding.

But we have started taking the first steps. We now know the genome sequences 
of the banana <http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature11241> and the fungi that cause 
Fusarium wilt and Sigatoka. These studies helped illuminate some of the 
molecular mechanisms by which these fungal pathogens cause disease in the 
banana. That knowledge provides a basis for identifying disease-resistant genes 
in wild and cultivated bananas.

Researchers now have the tools to identify resistance genes 
<https://www.google.co.in/patents/WO2011005090A1?cl=en> in wild bananas or 
other plant species. Then they can use classical plant breeding or genetic 
engineering to transfer those genes into desired cultivars. Scientists can also 
use these tools to further study the dynamics and evolution of banana pathogens 
in the field, and monitor changes in their resistance to fungicides.

Availability of the latest tools and detailed genome sequences, coupled with 
long-term visionary research in genetics, engineering and plant breeding, can 
help us keep abreast of the pathogens that are currently menacing the Cavendish 
banana. Ultimately we need to increase the pool of genetic diversity in 
cultivated bananas so we’re not dependent on single clones such as the 
Cavendish or the Gros Michel before it. Otherwise we remain at risk of history 
repeating itself.

This article originally appeared on The Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/us>
 