
A bedside table on wheels is practising three-point turns around the room, 
rising up and down and cheekily cocking its head as it glides, while a furry 
white creature emits plaintive mews from the room next door, flapping its 
flippers for attention. Nearby, hundreds of wiry insects buzz about on a glass 
tray like angry cockroaches awaiting their lunch, while a team of drones whirs 
to life in the corner. You have to watch your step in the basement lab of
Sheffield Robotics <http://www.sheffieldrobotics.ac.uk>, where even the 
furniture has a mind of its own.

“We were wondering what would be an appropriate way for a table to talk to 
you,” says Tony Prescott, the centre’s director and a professor of cognitive 
neuroscience at the University ofSheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield>, as the balletic bedside table comes 
to a halt, like an obedient dog called to heel. “But it might actually be 
better if it didn’t talk and just got on with its job. Maybe your table doesn’t 
need to have a personality.”

Such existential questions have occupied Prescott and his researchers for the 
past four years, while working on everything from assistive robots, geared to 
helping the elderly, to whole swarms of them for search-and-rescue missions. 
But what really drives Prescott, whose background is in psychology, is the 
ultimate quest: to build a robot with a sense of its own self.

He introduces me to iCub <http://www.icub.org>, a toddler-size humanoid with a 
streamlined plastic head from which two huge doe-eyes emerge, complete with 
seductively drooping eyelids. Little red lights then blink behind its mute 
white mask, displaying a downturned mouth and a severe frown. It appears I may 
have angered the robo-baby. Was it something I said to the table? “That’s his 
working face,” says Prescott. “He’s still in the early stages of learning. 
He’ll smile when he achieves a task or gets something right.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432136065893%2F9317a234-ce4c-4d89-9d93-44d69dd41554-2060x1749.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20iCubs%20are%20coming!%20How%20robots%20could%20teach%20our%20kids%20and%20do%20our%20dirty%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20iCubs%20are%20coming%21%20How%20robots%20could%20teach%20our%20kids%20and%20do%20our%20dirty%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432136065893%2F9317a234-ce4c-4d89-9d93-44d69dd41554-2060x1749.jpeg>
 Zeno robots, designed to show motorised facial expressions 
Sheffield is one of a small group of European universities testing out the 
possibilities of this £250,000 robot, developed by the Italian Institute of 
Technology as an open-source vehicle for investigating human cognition and 
artificial intelligence. It is one of the most advanced humanoids of its kind, 
with 53 degrees of movements in its limbs, a sense of touch and hand-eye 
coordination, allowing it to grasp objects, play catch andeven dance to music 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cJbEjfYfFto>.

When I reach out to touch it, a monitor shows exactly where and how hard my 
fingers are pressing. When its voice is switched on, it gets a bit creepy. “I 
like when you touch me in this way,”he says 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?t=39&v=RW425vW4BtQ>, in a matter-of-fact 
monotone. “Please, caress me again.” And he’s a bit sweary, as three-year-olds 
go. When he misses the ball in a game of Pong, he cries: “Bloody hell! That 
isn’t fair!”

Sheffield’s iCub is run by a system modelled on the cognitive architecture of 
the human brain, so it can “think” and learn from the world around it, as a 
toddler would. Over the past couple of years, the team has been developing 
iCub’s object-recognition skills and its sense of its body, all the time 
building up a kind of autobiographical memory to start creating its sense of 
“self”.

“The next stage is giving him understanding, consolidating his experiences for 
future prediction,” says Prescott. “But we probably don’t want to let him 
evolve his own motivation and drives. That’s a bit of a risk.”

The grave results of giving robots free will has been shown all too well in 
countless sci-fi films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2015/jan/08/the-top-20-artificial-intelligence-films-in-pictures>
 – from the sinister plotting of 2001: A Space Odyssey’s cyclopean HAL, to the 
freedom-seeking Ava in Ex Machina, the sentient machines rarely fail to ensure 
that their creators come to a sticky end. But it’s not only Hollywood that’s 
worried about AI.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbd1466e7396fe412e290d329e42c3df1cc78cb6%2F0_243_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20iCubs%20are%20coming!%20How%20robots%20could%20teach%20our%20kids%20and%20do%20our%20dirty%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20iCubs%20are%20coming%21%20How%20robots%20could%20teach%20our%20kids%20and%20do%20our%20dirty%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbd1466e7396fe412e290d329e42c3df1cc78cb6%2F0_243_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The iCub Research Robot with Prof Tony Prescott, at Sheffield University. 
Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
Stephen Hawking, at once enrapt and alarmed by the power of his latest 
speech-synthesis system,has declared that the development of full artificial 
intelligence <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-30290540> “could spell the 
end of the human race”. He has been joined by the future-embracing inventor and 
serial entrepreneurElon Musk <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/elon-musk>
, who thinks AI is “our biggest existential threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/27/elon-musk-artificial-intelligence-ai-biggest-existential-threat>
” describing further research into giving machines intelligence as “summoning 
the demon”. Is Sheffield’s lab, where boffins busy themselves with propellors 
and remote controls, really a front for a techno-Wicca cult that could spell 
the end of humanity?


“I think we project on to robots our fears about ourselves,” says Prescott. 
“Ultimately, the benefits hugely outweigh the risks, from using assistive 
robots to help our ageing population, to using them for repetitive menial tasks 
in agriculture and industry. They’ll be working alongside humans, combining our 
ability to think imaginatively with the computer’s capacity for memory, 
precision and speed.”

But is there a danger they might outperform us? Might the next generation of 
robo-workers find themselves in the sights of Ukip, coming to the UK and taking 
our jobs? “Yes, they’ll take some aspects of our jobs, but it will be the dirty 
and dangerous jobs, letting us focus on the things we are better at. And we’ll 
be wealthier, giving us the time to do what we want to do. They’ll also be 
going places we can’t, with teams of cooperative robots sent into hazardous 
environments too dangerous for people – whether on Mars or to a post-nuclear or 
earthquake disaster zone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432136229927%2F24a0855f-4ed6-45e3-866b-6d430be3bd87-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20iCubs%20are%20coming!%20How%20robots%20could%20teach%20our%20kids%20and%20do%20our%20dirty%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20iCubs%20are%20coming%21%20How%20robots%20could%20teach%20our%20kids%20and%20do%20our%20dirty%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432136229927%2F24a0855f-4ed6-45e3-866b-6d430be3bd87-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Best pet ever … Paro, the harp seal robot  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432136309686%2Fcfddc9fb-72c9-4f2f-9143-85eac1098dba-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20iCubs%20are%20coming!%20How%20robots%20could%20teach%20our%20kids%20and%20do%20our%20dirty%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20iCubs%20are%20coming%21%20How%20robots%20could%20teach%20our%20kids%20and%20do%20our%20dirty%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Ficub-robots-teach-kids-work-dance-swear-snog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432136309686%2Fcfddc9fb-72c9-4f2f-9143-85eac1098dba-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Super-organisms … swarm robots 
The table of creatures buzzing behind us is a test for exactly this kind of 
application. The 900 “kilobots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/15/harvard-kilobot-swarm-future-of-robotics>
” are busy modelling the swarming behaviour of a colony of fire ants, with 
“lead entities” sending out infrared signals that the worker ants follow, 
shuffling around to form clusters in different parts of the table. They make up 
a “super-organism”, potentially capable of working together on anything from 
construction sites to disaster response and mining.

“The benefit is that they can teach each other and then work together 
autonomously,” says Roderich Gross, who leads the research here into such 
self-organising systems, watching as a team of larger robots gang together to 
shunt a big blue object across the room towards a red one. “That’s collective 
decision-making in action,” he says proudly, as if watching his own children 
push a toy across the lab floor.

SociBot: the 'social robot' that knows how you feel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/11/socibot-the-social-robot-that-knows-how-you-feel>
The white furry thing is still mewing away in the corner, so I go over and 
give it a stroke. It writhes with joy and emits ecstatic squeaks. Another 
loving squeeze and the whole thing shudders with delight. Developed in Japan as 
a companion for the elderly and infirm, this isParo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/08/paro-robot-seal-dementia-patients-nhs-japan>
, an avatar of a baby harp seal and the most easily gratified pet I’ve 
encountered. “If someone is distressed or has dementia, the repetitive 
behaviour helps to calm them down,” says Prescott. “And it helps people to 
socialise, giving them something to talk about.” The little seal is packed with 
sensors, receptive to touch, light, sound, temperature and orientation, making 
it seem a good deal more advanced than some dopey real-life pets – and without 
the added mess. It learns your behaviour, too: “It will adapt if you like rough 
play,” says Prescott, as I spin it upside down, to a slightly alarmed squeal.

Which brings us to a branch of robotic development unspoken of here, but which 
Prescott says is likely to be one of the key forces that drives the robotics 
industry, namely the X-rated world of “digital intimacy”. Last year at 
Sheffield’s Festival of the Mind, professor Adrian Cheok from City University 
London presented his “Kissinger 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/read/i-made-out-with-a-robot-mouth-so-i-could-kiss-my-girlfriend-through-the-internet>
” device, a set of pressure-sensitive artificial lips that can transmit a kiss 
from a real mouth to a similar device owned by a partner who might be thousands 
of miles away, ushering forth a world of people slurping into their phones. He 
is also working on a “chat agent”, I-Friend, capable of striking up sexually 
charged conversations, to be integrated into afuture generation of sex robots 
<http://www.newsweek.com/2014/10/31/sex-robots-278791.html> and automated chat 
lines. Let’s just hope that intelligent bedside table doesn’t get too frisky.

• Meet the robots at Fear of Missing Out 
<https://www.ica.org.uk/whats-on/seasons/fear-missing-out>, a talks event at 
the ICA, London, 29-31 May.
 