
What was it about?

Women aged 15-44 are at greater risk from domestic violence and rape than from 
war, cancer, car accidents and malaria 
<http://www.un.org/en/globalissues/briefingpapers/endviol/> combined. No More 
<http://nomore.org/> is a long-term public awareness campaign to end domestic 
violence and sexual assault in the US. The movement behind the campaign 
includes leading advocacy groups, individuals, service providers, major 
corporations and the US Department of Justice.

While it is tempting to use emotional storytelling for a charitable cause, it 
is more effective to empower the audience

No More’s latest campaign video was screened during the ad break of this 
year’s Super Bowl. I liked it because it stood out among the usual frivolity of 
leaping hot dogs and love-sick ponies. The filmfollowed a text message 
conversation between two friends <https://youtu.be/cy6gjkICKfk> and one 
appeared reluctant to join the other at a Super Bowl party. This reluctance, 
coupled with missing a few other social occasions and then a palpable silence 
when questioned about her wellbeing, raised serious concerns for her safety.

The advert ended by calling on viewers to text “No More” to receive advice on 
the common signs of abuse and steps they could take to help victims.

How did it start?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrTJT3fVv1vU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrTJT3fVv1vU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrTJT3fVv1vU&media=>
 Listen, the first No More advertisement to run during the Super Bowl. 
The campaign began in 2013 with a series of print and video ads highlighting 
the myths and excuses that place blame on survivors and allow perpetrators to 
evade accountability. In 2015, the campaign ran its first Super Bowl ad,Listen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rTJT3fVv1vU> (see above), which was viewed 
9.6m times.

What I loved about this campaign

The smartest thing about this advert was the intentionally light handling of 
such a dark issue. Its gentle approach – the everyday familiarity of a text 
conversation – drew the audience in, so when it became apparent that something 
more sinister was happening, it shocked them. This, for me, meant it had a 
stronger impact.

The advert was produced in partnership with the NFL – it donated airtime and 
production costs to the campaign as continued penance for its heavily 
criticised handling ofNFL player Ray Rice’s punching of his then fiancee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/01/ray-rice-can-play-in-the-nfl-again-but-who-would-employ-him>
 in 2014.

What could other charities learn from this campaign?

While it is tempting to use emotional storytelling to show the significance of 
a charitable cause, it is more effective to empower the audience. Charity 
brands should empower people to change the world, just as the No More movement 
is encouraging the public to help end abuse. Organisations should ask 
themselves who they are trying to empower – victims, carers or bystanders? What 
are the obstacles that stand in the way of change and how might advertising be 
instrumental in removing them?

The Dress: are social memes and shock tactics the future of charity marketing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/mar/10/social-memes-shock-dress-charity-marketing>
Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> should also consider 
partnering with other people or organisations that share the same beliefs.

What would I have done differently?

There could have been more of a definitive call to action. The generic request 
to learn how to help failed to capitalise on the emotional engagement the 
advert generated.

The individual pieces of this campaign feel isolated and sporadic. The 
coalition behind it needs to tie all the advertisement together to keep the 
conversation going and growing.

What next?

With one in three American women reporting being physically or sexually abused 
<http://www.dvcpartners.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=48&Itemid=58>
 by a husband or boyfriend at some point in their lives, this is arguably one 
of the most pressing issues of our age. The only conceivable future for this 
campaign must be to crank up the volume.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
 