
Sir Elton John’s image, his glasses askew and playing up for the camera in 
Irving Penn’s 1997 portrait, greets visitors toThe Radical Eye 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/radical-eye-modernist-photography-sir-elton-john-collection>
. It is an endearing gag, leaving one unprepared for an exhibition as serious 
as it is surprising, and which could serve as a short course in the development 
of photography from around 1910 to 1950. The Sir Elton John collection 
currently contains more than 8,000 works, and even though there are fewer than 
a couple of hundred here, what a selection it is.

Tate only began to collect photography seriously and systematically in 2009 – 
late in the game, they could never hope to afford works of this range and 
quality. This show marks the beginning of a long-term collaboration between the 
institution andElton John <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john> and 
David Furnish, who have agreed to give works to the nation. Theirs is a 
collection anyone would give their eye-teeth for.
 Irving Penn’s portrait of Elton John on show. Photograph: Nils 
Jorgensen/Rex/Shutterstock 
It’s a foundational body of work, with as many surprises as there are 
photographs that forever reappear in anthologies and exhibitions. FromBauhaus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bauhaus> abstraction to 1930s social 
documentary, via the staged and the casual, studio portraits and street 
photography, surrealism and still life, this is no idiot rich guy collection of 
trophy art. Sir Elton says he has never bought a work for profit. He has 
educated himself as he has gone on, beginning to collect photographs after a 
period in rehab for alcohol addiction in the late 80s. The collection now has a 
director, a curator (a former gallerist from Atlanta, where Elton has a home), 
and doubtless conservators to look after it.

What he doesn’t have an eye for is picture frames, which are often intrusive 
and over-elaborate; all that gold and distressed silver gilding, all those 
deluxe mats and rebates. After a while, I stopped noticing and the images 
themselves carried me away. It is evident that Elton appreciates photographs 
not just as images, but as objects, from the postage stamp-sizedAndré Kertész 
<http://uk.phaidon.com/agenda/photography/articles/2014/august/05/the-melancholy-life-of-the-amazing-andre-kertesz/>
 1917 Underwater Swimmer, Esztergom, Hungary, which the collector regards as 
the most important photograph in his collection, toMan Ray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/23/in-praise-of-man-ray>’s 
1932 Larmes or Glass Tears, bought for a record sum at auction in 1993, in 
which a woman’s carefully made-up face has glass beads stuck to her cheeks, 
like a modern eroticised saint. Elton already owned a modern copy of Kertész’s 
Swimmer, with its refracted body and veins of light, but later bought the 
photographer’s original print, which bears the pencil marks where he cropped 
the image. A little grey thing, all its detail and tonalities leap out when you 
get up close.
 A Bee on a Sunflower by Edward Steichen. Photograph: The Sir Elton John 
Photography Collection 
The quality of some of the prints here, let alone the images, is astounding – 
Edward Steichen <http://iphf.org/inductees/edward-steichen/>’s portrait of 
silent movie star Gloria Swanson, peering out at us from behind a black, 
flower-decorated veil, looks almost embossed with light and shade, whileLászló 
Moholy-Nagy <http://moholy-nagy.org>’s 1928 vertical view down into a snowbound 
courtyard beneath the Berlin Radio Tower (not printed until the 1940s) has the 
subtlest tonalities.Werner Mantz 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/werner-mantz-14941>’s 1928 view down an 
empty stairwell is as vertiginous as the century. Its plainness is terrifying.

One of Robert Frank’s 1949 Paris photos, looking across the sandy walk near 
the Place de la Concorde, is the best print of this shot that I have ever seen 
– every small gradation is there. Instead of a picture of a couple taking a 
selfie, I’m suddenly alert to the emptiness in the shot, the shadow on a bit of 
gravel, the foreground sweeping away, bright with light on a misty day. I could 
go on and on. There’s so much here.
 Herbert Bayer, Self-Portrait, 1932. Photograph: Herbert Bayer © DACS, 2016 
Elton clearly loves a portrait. Penn’s 1948 series in which Duke Ellington, 
Noel Coward, Joe Louis, Salvador Dalí and others pose in the tight corner 
between two angled walls are opportunities for their subjects to perform for 
the camera. Dalí manspreads aggressively; Coward poses as though he were 
determined to remain insouciant as the walls close in, as if he were a bookmark 
between the pages. There are theatrical portraits with pensive actors toying 
with masks; there’s beefcake, including two half-dressed men together in a 
pre-war Paris gay club by Brassaï. Later we come to the accusatory silent gazes 
of Evans’s dirt-poor whites in Alabama, andDorothea Lange 
<http://www.pbs.org/kenburns/dustbowl/bios/dorothea-lange/>’s breadlines and 
homeless wandering boys, who still have pride if not much hope. Man Ray’s 
portraits of famous artists – Derain, Matisse, Yves Tanguy (which the collector 
refers to as Phil Collins) – take up one section of the show.
 ‘Manspreading aggresively’ … Irving Penn’s portrait of Salvador Dalí. 
Photograph: The Irving Penn Foundation/PA 
On the way there are photograms and shirt collars, Mondrian’s pipe in an 
ashtray,Herbert Bayer <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herbert_Bayer>’s boules in 
the sand and Josef Sudek’s rows of teacups. Some things are easy to miss in the 
long runs of images:Albert Renger-Patzsch 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/display/albert-renger-patzsch>’s 
tremendous Mountain Forest in Winter; Diane Arbus’s early Room With Lamp and 
Light Fixture, New York City.

Imogen Cunningham <http://www.imogencunningham.com/page.php?page=archive>’s 
1927 Gas Tanks hangs next toJaromir Funke <http:// 
http://www.getty.edu/art/collection/artists/1717/jaromr-funke-czech-1896-1945/>
’s 1923 Photographic Construction, pitching a staged, tabletop still life next 
to huge industrial cylinders and gas-holders under the sky. Funke’s staged, 
artificially-lit still life appears to depict a vast abstracted landscape, 
while Cunningham’s gas tanks look like a closeup, as near and quotidian as a 
plate of Cézanne’s apples. Such juxtapositions really count. I’ll have to go 
back. I had no idea The Radical Eye would be so impressive. It makes you want 
to root around the rest of what Sir Elton owns – who knows what’s in there.

 * The Radical Eye 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/radical-eye-modernist-photography-sir-elton-john-collection>
 is at Switch House, Tate Modern, London, 10 November-7 May.
 