
Capacity: 350


Who plays there: Mono hosts fewer shows than most other venues, but tends to 
be more discerning about who it books. They hire out occasionally to local 
promoters – bands I’ve seen here in the past few months have included Crystal 
Stilts, Joanna Gruesome and Perfect Pussy – but mainly it offers its own 
in-house bookings, be it local artists, or touring bands operating outside the 
established booking-agent network. Gigs tend to be early and mid-week, because 
Mono prefers not to charge entry on Fridays and Saturdays when the cafe-bar is 
typically busiest (shows these nights are often free). You get a lot of special 
one-off events here – anniversary gigs, album launches and the like.

Cloakroom: No.

Admission: £5 to £15 is about average. Many events are free.

Bar: Very good by any standards, let alone gig venue standards. There’s a wide 
range of draft lagers from Moretti to Scottish craft brewers Williams Bros, 
which also supplies lots of quality bottled ales. Prices are generally well 
below average for a gig venue.

Food: Excellent, and all vegan. On a normal day food is served until 9pm. 
However, if you’re coming for a gig, be aware that Mono – which is one big 
space, combining cafe-bar and venue – may well close for a spell between about 
5pm and 7pm for sound checks and prep for the evening’s show. So, if you want 
to eat at Mono beforehand, you’ll need to arrive early. You can always nip 
across the road to the 13th Note for a pint or two in the intervening couple of 
hours.

Toilets: Through a door to the right of the bar, and generally well 
maintained. The gents are massive – presumably something to do with the 
premises’ use in a previous life – so pit stops are typically quick.

Wheelchair access: The venue is all on ground level save for the mezzanine and 
the front door is beside the stage, so wheelchair access is very 
straightforward.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-mono-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422969254475%2Fdecdaa9f-fede-4a71-9a84-02ba03085a07-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20Mono%2C%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-mono-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20Mono%2C%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-mono-glasgow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422969254475%2Fdecdaa9f-fede-4a71-9a84-02ba03085a07-1360x2040.jpeg>
 ‘A melting pot’ … Mono. Photograph: John McGovern/Alamy 
Sound: Unpredictable. Mono’s house PA system is small – not really suitable 
for most fully plugged-in bands – so they hire in for larger, full-band shows, 
and quality can vary significantly from one gig to the next. It’s a large and 
awkwardly shaped room, too, with a cupola above the stage and two vaulted 
archways towards the rear, just to make the sound engineer’s job that bit more 
interesting.

Where to stand: In direct line with the stage, anywhere between the stage and 
the bar, the closer to the front the better. Mono’s unconventionality as a 
venue is one of its many charms, but also a weakness, particularly when it 
comes to sightlines: at sold-out shows, a lot of people have to accept a pretty 
diminished view. You can get some elevation over the stage from the mezzanine 
if you’re at the front edge, but your sightline will probably be impaired by a 
speaker stack. Try to avoid the front right of the room as you look at the 
stage – the front door is there, and you’ll possibly have to put up with a fair 
bit of disruption as people drift in and out. Not to mention harsh drafts in 
the winter.

Overall: In technical terms, Mono is inconsistent as a venue, because of all 
the compromises in sound and sight quality. But for atmosphere, integrity and 
community spirit, it’s practically peerless. Mono means much more to Glasgow 
than just a space for live music; it’s the heart and soul of the city’s 
independent music and arts community, a melting pot of sounds and varying 
generations of fans. The cafe-bar is first class, serving some of the best 
affordable food in town, and home to one of the finest record stores in the 
world in Monorail (co-owned by local indie heroes the Pastels). It’s also home 
to the fantastically quirky and colourful Good Press art gallery and book shop. 
You can spend whole days here, from lunchtime until close, eating, drinking, 
shopping, socialising and simply kicking back on beat-up old sofas, before 
catching a band after nightfall. For any music fan in Glasgow for the first 
time, Mono is the first place to visit.

Address: 12 Kings Court, Glasgow, G1 5RB

Telephone: 0141-553 2400 

Website: monocafebar.com <http://www.monocafebar.com/> 

Public transport: Ten minutes’ walk from St Enoch subway and five minutes’ 
walk from Argyle Street and High Street railway stations. Lots of buses stop 
nearby on the Saltmarket and the Gallowgate.
 