
Back in 2009, David Cameron decried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/feb/17/cameron-decentralisation-local-government>
 the fact that Britain had become one of the most centralised countries in the 
developed world. The then-leader of the opposition pledged “nothing less than 
radical decentralisation” to combat this, saying his party would give local 
councils much more power and responsibility.

This agenda was the basis of the 2011 Localism Act 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/localism-act-2011-overview>, which 
included new freedom for local authorities to make decisions about housing 
locally. But those reforms have been shattered by the2016 Housing and Planning 
Act <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2016/22/contents/enacted/data.htm>.

 The end to lifetime council tenancies, the pay-to-stay rule increasing rents 
for council tenants earning more than £40,000, and provisions to force local 
authorities to sell off their high-value homes, will effectivelykill off 
council housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/04/end-of-council-housing-bill-secure-tenancies-pay-to-stay>
. The extension ofright-to-buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/26/right-to-buy-margaret-thatcher-david-cameron-housing-crisis>
 privileges to housing associations also threatens to cause a wider decline in 
affordable housing.

We're scrapping right to buy in Wales to protect vulnerable families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jul/06/wales-government-right-to-buy-policy-social-housing>
But this is not just about housing. The new Act also has immediate 
implications for local democracy, by giving no fewer than32 new powers 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/131955112979/this-bill-is-one-of-the-most-centralising-and>
 to the secretary of state for housing. This means local authorities face 
further financial pressures and will lose vital powers once granted by the 
Localism Act.

Chapter four of the Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> and 
Planning Act outlines the housing secretary’s powers to prohibit local 
authorities from appointing officers to the boards of housing associations, and 
to curtail council voting rights on those boards. The housing secretary is also 
able to change the meaning of the new affordable home, to define the higher 
value threshold at which councils must sell their homes, and to decide how much 
extra rent will be paid by so-called high-income council tenants.

Most councils expect 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/media-releases/-/journal_content/56/10180/7762622/NEWS>
 the Act to result in increased homelessness, longer waiting lists for homes 
and an increase in spending on housing benefit. The Local Government 
Association (LGA) is clear about about the financial impact. Councils are 
footing the bill for the discounts being given to housing association tenants 
wanting to buy their homes, and the LGA estimates that forcing councils to sell 
off homes combined with social rent reductions of 1% a year for the next four 
years will take£2.2bn from council housing budgets 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/media-releases/-/journal_content/56/10180/7668062/NEWS>
 by 2020. The LGA argues that this will make it all but impossible to build 
replacements for homes sold off.



Politically and financially, the Housing and Planning Act is a direct attack 
on local government. But some of its key aspects, including pay-to-stay and the 
sale of high-value homes depend on councils cooperating with the government’s 
demands. If they refuse, that will open up a potential new political battle. A 
creative reinterpretation of localism might yet hold back the government – and 
bring local democracy back to life.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 