
It must be startling to look out of your window and see a centuries-old church 
rolling by. Even more so if you are in communist Romania in the 1980s, where 
news is state-controlled and everyday items rationed. And yet, between 1982 and 
1988 almost a dozen churches, as well as other buildings, were moved hundreds 
of metres in order to save them from destruction, as dictatorNicolae Ceaușescu 
<https://www.britannica.com/biography/Nicolae-Ceausescu> went about radically 
redesigning the heart of Bucharest, the Romanian capital.


That a communist country would go out of its way to save churches is strange 
enough, but the method of saving them, when other countries would probably have 
tried to dismantle the buildings and reassemble them elsewhere, makes the 
achievement all the more impressive.


“We were awestruck at those operations, comparing them with the landing on the 
moon for a country likeRomania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/romania>,” 
says Valentin Mandache, an architectural historian who witnessed the moving of 
several of the churches when he was still a young student.

At the centre of it all was Eugeniu Iordăchescu, a civil engineer who had the 
radical idea to place whole buildings on the equivalent of railway tracks and 
roll them to safety.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd775da16de4ad13203565b076d94d3a49e6f5e39%2F0_253_4752_2850%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20escape%3A%20how%20Bucharest%20rolled%20entire%20churches%20to%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20escape%3A%20how%20Bucharest%20rolled%20entire%20churches%20to%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd775da16de4ad13203565b076d94d3a49e6f5e39%2F0_253_4752_2850%2F4752.jpg>
 Eugeniu Iordăchescu, the ‘saviour’ of Bucharest’s churches. Photograph: Kit 
Gillet 
“I was in the area that was to be knocked down and I saw a beautiful small 
church and started wondering how it was possible to demolish such a jewel,” 
says the sprightly 87-year-old, sitting in his dining room in a nondescript 
apartment in Bucharest, a few miles from where the churches he saved three 
decades ago still stand. “I thought about the idea of moving it.”

At that time 30,000 residents were being forced from their homes, with an 
entire district of historical Bucharest, roughly 9,000 houses as well as 
churches, synagogues and other buildings demolished to make way for Ceaușescu’s 
grandiose vanity project, thePalace of the People <http://cic.cdep.ro/en> and 
surrounding civic centre. The remodelled city centre and palace ­– which still 
dominates the skyline and is said to be the second largest administrative 
building in the world after the Pentagon – were supposedly inspired by 
Ceaușescu’s visit to Pyongyang, the North Korean capital.

Iordăchescu, who worked at engineering and design centre the Project Institute 
in Bucharest, says that when he first broached the subject of moving the church 
with his colleagues he was told that it wasn’t possible, that the building 
would fall over. Some thought he was crazy for even suggesting it, but slowly 
the idea formed in his head.

The engineer says he reached the breakthrough after seeing a waiter pass 
through a crowd of people with a tray of glasses in his hand. “I saw that the 
secret of the glasses not falling was the tray, so I started trying to work out 
how to apply a tray to the building.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F855f97b66f0a24d5c22aee342fcf1270713ed801%2F0_0_2619_2600%2F2619.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20escape%3A%20how%20Bucharest%20rolled%20entire%20churches%20to%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20escape%3A%20how%20Bucharest%20rolled%20entire%20churches%20to%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F855f97b66f0a24d5c22aee342fcf1270713ed801%2F0_0_2619_2600%2F2619.jpg>
 Schitul Maicilor on the move in Bucharest. Photograph: Courtesy of Eugeniu 
Iordăchescu 
Ultimately a process was developed whereby the ground was dug out from under 
the churches, with a large reinforced concrete support created and the 
foundations severed. Tracks were laid, and hydraulic levers and industrial 
pulleys were used to slowly move the buildings to their new locations, often at 
a few metres an hour.

Iordăchescu moved entire apartment buildings with the water and gas lines 
still attached, and people still inside them

One church would require a team of around five engineers for the planning 
phases, and then upwards of 20 workers when the physical work was under way.

They had to rely exclusively on local equipment and technologies, since 
communist Romania was largely cut off from the outside world. Tracks and other 
equipment were reused from site to site to save on costs and materials. 
Meanwhile, the route from one site to the other had to be cleared and the 
logistics of the move planned, including issues of gradients and rotating the 
buildings.

Many were sceptical that it would work, and for the first church they were 
only given verbal permission to go ahead, with no one wanting to sign the 
written approval.

The first church to be moved, the 18th-century Schitul Maicilor 
<http://schitulmaicilor.ro/>, weighing 745 tonnes, was relocated 245 metres 
away from its original site in 1982. The whole project took five months – 
though the actual process of moving the structures would often take just a few 
days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab63b6b1aa08e3fa7017cce927660e438b7ee316%2F0_0_3087_2575%2F3087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20escape%3A%20how%20Bucharest%20rolled%20entire%20churches%20to%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20escape%3A%20how%20Bucharest%20rolled%20entire%20churches%20to%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab63b6b1aa08e3fa7017cce927660e438b7ee316%2F0_0_3087_2575%2F3087.jpg>
 A design for relocating a church. Photograph: Courtesy of Eugeniu Iordăchescu 
Priests, government officials and locals would often gather to watch the final 
spectacle; in some photographs Iordăchescu is seen standing alongside the 
patriarch of the Romanian Orthodox Church.

As time went on the team got more and more ambitious, with the 16th-century 
Mihai Voda Church <http://www.mihai-voda.ro/> being moved in tandem with its 
standalone tower. The largest church that was moved, technically a monastery, 
weighed 9,000 tonnes. It was shifted 24 metres from its original location.

In Bucharest and other cities, Iordăchescu and his colleagues moved a hospital 
and a bank – and even entire apartment buildings, often with the water and gas 
lines still attached and the people still inside them. “One building, people 
inside thought the move would start at 9am so they prepared their luggage, with 
their papers, valuables, but we started at 6am, so at 9am when they went to 
leave it had already moved a couple of metres,” says Iordăchescu, showing me an 
old photograph of himself standing on the balcony of a moving building.

Despite the complexity of the work, all of the buildings made it unscathed to 
their final locations. However, it wasn’t all good news. Iordăchescu has a list 
of 22 churches that were destroyed in the period, some having already been 
given permission to be moved, with Ceaușescu impatient to get on with the urban 
overhaul of the capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ed1f0a4b3656d7eb8ad7fe0be86c4962f4e85f%2F89_130_4108_2772%2F4108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20escape%3A%20how%20Bucharest%20rolled%20entire%20churches%20to%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20escape%3A%20how%20Bucharest%20rolled%20entire%20churches%20to%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fbucharest-moved-churches-safety-communist-romania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ed1f0a4b3656d7eb8ad7fe0be86c4962f4e85f%2F89_130_4108_2772%2F4108.jpg>
 The Mihai Vodă Monastery was moved and placed behind Soviet-style apartment 
blocks. Photograph: Courtesy of Eugeniu Iordăchescu 
Pointing to an image of a church, once located in what is now Piața Unirii – a 
huge brash square that’s effectively a roundabout a few hundred metres from the 
Palace of the People – Iordăchescu’s son Adrian, also a civil engineer, says: 
“It was a tragedy. The priest died of a heart attack. Even the workers didn’t 
want to demolish it, so Ceaușescu got people from prison to do it.”

Adrian, 54, has continued his father’s legacy, using an updated version of the 
technology to recently retrofit the city’s Arcul de Triumf monument.

Many of the moved churches, though, ended up being relocated in the shadows of 
large, soviet-style apartment blocks, often sandwiched tightly as if daring 
those who pass by to blink and miss them. Visitors to the city can find Schitul 
Maicilor hidden behind a huge building that contains several government 
ministries.

Yet, preserving these important churches in the capital, along with their 
hundreds of years of history, ornate interiors and elaborate iconography and 
paintings, has had an important cultural legacy.


How nature turned a failed communist plan into Bucharest's unique urban park
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/14/nature-europe-urban-protected-area-vacaresti-nature-park-romania>
“It is amazing what they were able to achieve,” says Adrian, adding: “During 
the moves all the day he was on site, because at the very beginning he heard 
people from the working team would try to sabotage it, so he would stay 24 
hours a day.”

Highlighting Antim Monastery <http://manastireaantim.ro/>, one of the saved 
buildings, Mandache points to the importance of what was achieved in saving 
those buildings three decades ago. “Antim is a jewel of Brancovan-style 
architecture. Architecture is the most visible identity marker of a community, 
and those churches are among the most important such markers,” he adds.

The relocation of churches and other buildings stopped with the Romanian 
revolution in 1989 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/dec/21/ceausescu-romania-revolution-bucharest>
, and in the years since Iordăchescu has received a number of honorary diplomas 
for his work, as well as a medal from the Romanian Orthodox church. He only 
fully retired a few years ago.

Yet, as the years go by his achievements have become more and more clouded in 
the fog of time. “I’m 54, the younger generation of architects don’t know the 
method,” says Adrian Iordăchescu. “My son is 23 and a student at the 
architectural university. He’s only really discovering what his grandfather did 
in the last year or so.”

Still, Iordăchescu is very proud of what he and his colleagues did. “When I 
see the churches today I still can’t believe it,” he says.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 