
A couple of years after the October revolution of 1917, the painter and 
sculptor Vladimir Tatlin submitted a proposal forthe headquarters of the 
Communist International 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/context-comment/articles/lost-art-vladimir-tatlin>, as 
part of a public sculpture competition. Placed on the banks of the Neva, its 
towering, tilting steel skeleton would have housed the Comintern in glass 
volumes whose rotation would symbolise revolution and the dialectic.

The most famous building in the 74-year history of the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics was never constructed; in fact, it’s unlikely it could ever 
have been constructed, though today’s technology makes it a lot more plausible 
than when it was first proposed in the 1910s. As metaphors go, it sums up 
Soviet state socialism rather neatly. What was actually constructed tells us a 
great deal as well: a state whose history is far from monolithic, lurching from 
openness to terror and back, its architecture from mass production to one-off 
spectacles, and from Russification to intense engagement with local tradition.

1 | Field of Mars, Petrograd – Lev Rudnev, 1917

This memorial to fallen revolutionaries, placed at the centre of a Tsarist era 
parade ground, was actually begun between the February revolution that 
overthrew the Tsar and the October revolution that brought the Bolsheviks to 
power. The square is surrounded by heavy slabs of red granite, topped with red 
flags, with inscriptions by the commissar of enlightenment, Anatoly Lunacharsky 
– the effect is spacious, original and imposing. Rudnev, its young architect, 
became notorious 30 years later for Stalinist skyscrapers in Moscow and Warsaw.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc1c85eff487b97a37067c7a3279ee79d10184a2%2F0_223_3815_2290%2F3815.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc1c85eff487b97a37067c7a3279ee79d10184a2%2F0_223_3815_2290%2F3815.jpg>
 The monument to the ‘victims of the revolution’ in the city now called St 
Petersburg. Photograph: Alamy 
2 | Traktornaya housing development, Leningrad – Gegello, Nikolsky and 
Simonov, 1925

A peculiar outlier in Soviet architecture, and the first major housing scheme 
in the USSR, Traktornaya takes its cue from the classical tradition of St 
Petersburg, with its attractive colour scheme, calm and orderly layout, and its 
strange deconstructed triumphal arches. More comparable toNordic Classicism 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nordic_Classicism> in contemporary Sweden or 
Finland than to Soviet Constructivism, the estate housed workers at the Putilov 
engineering works, who had been the backbone of the Bolshevik ranks in 1917. 
Today it forms part of the Narvskaya Zastava district, a showcase for 1920s 
avant garde architecture.

3 | Narkomfin communal house, Moscow – Moisei Ginzburg, 1928

This much more ambitious housing project was a showcase of what was called 
“the new everyday life” in the 1920s – a Constructivist communal housing 
scheme. A sleek row of duplex flats, many of them without kitchens, are 
connected by walkways to a glass box with collective canteens, a library, gym 
and roof garden, as part of a programme for the reform (or elimination) of 
family life. The social ideas behind the building were abandoned within a 
couple of years of completion, but its architectural ideas were plundered by 
west European architects like Le Corbusier, Wells Coates and Denys Lasdun.The 
building itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/moscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings>
, which sits on extremely valuable real estate, is falling apart. Ironically, 
many of its ideas about social spaces in apartment buildings are widely 
accepted in luxury flats.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aadab3396dc9456815efc65985542dfd2582544%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aadab3396dc9456815efc65985542dfd2582544%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Moisei Ginzburg’ s Narkomfin building – the product of utopian socialist 
ideals Photograph: Itar-Tass Photo Agency/Alamy 
4 | Mayakovskaya metro station, Moscow – Alexey Dushkin, 1938

The Moscow Metro – along with its later cousins in St Petersburg, Kiev, Baku, 
Tashkent, Kharkiv, Yerevan and elsewhere – has a claim to being the most 
astonishing project of Soviet architecture. Mayakovskaya could even be the most 
breathtaking underground station ever constructed. Its gorgeous chrome and 
marble hall was a result of one of the most brutal construction projects of the 
1930s, with appalling safety standards, a high casualty rate and widespread use 
of convict labour. On the domed ceilings of this incredibly deep station – 
built to serve as a bomb shelter, which it did – is a glittering, vertiginous 
mosaic series by the great realist painter Alexander Deineka, depicting a 
“24-hour Soviet sky”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6239ebd22666a2fbbe96fd6b2538841556501150%2F0_79_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6239ebd22666a2fbbe96fd6b2538841556501150%2F0_79_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 With its chrome and marble halls, Mayakovskaya is the most beautiful station 
in Moscow’s metro system. Photograph: Gary Hershorn/Reuters 
5 | Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Moscow – Gelfreikh and Minkus, 1948

After the war, the devastated Soviet state diverted precious resources into a 
seemingly whimsical project of seven triumphalist skyscrapers. Six of them were 
situated along Moscow’s Garden Ring – huge, monsters of buildings taking up 
entire city blocks and rising to spires modelled on those of the Kremlin, 
allegedly at the insistence of Joseph Stalin himself. Three more were built in 
newly acquired, or “fraternal” cities: Riga, Warsaw and Prague. The best ofthe 
Moscow seven <http://architectuul.com/architecture/seven-sisters-moscow> is the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, where the upright, gothic rhythm gives the tower a 
sense of intimidation, horror and evil appropriate to its purpose at the height 
of the Cold War.

6 | Dubulti Railway Station, Jūrmala – Igors Javeins, 1977

When Nikita Khrushchev condemned the “excesses” of Stalinist monumentality in 
1956 <https://www.britannica.com/event/Khrushchevs-secret-speech>, Soviet 
architecture underwent the third of its many sudden stylistic switches, this 
time back to modernism. Some of the results were banal, but a lot of it was 
optimistic, free-form architecture. This seaside railway station in Latvia is a 
superb example, showing an enthusiasm for sculptural concrete shell structures 
that the Soviets borrowed from the 50s architecture of California. Clear, light 
and effortless despite its gravity-defying cantilevered form, it stands between 
the Baltic sea and a river, and now contains an art gallery along with the 
ticket booths. The dates, though, tell a less encouraging story – the building 
looks like a classic design of the 50s, but was completed in 1977, when 
fashions elsewhere had long since moved on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf66b96e62ea831a74078ed0f2ae97c62ad13754%2F0_0_4150_2490%2F4150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf66b96e62ea831a74078ed0f2ae97c62ad13754%2F0_0_4150_2490%2F4150.jpg>
 The Dubulti station claims it is the only modern art space in Europe in a 
functioning train station. Photograph: Alamy 
7 | Crematorium, Kiev – Avram Miletsky, 1968-1981

This sombre, unique building often features today in photo books of “awesome 
futuristic Soviet architecture”. Strange, maternal-looking creatures squat at 
the bottom of a hill near the Ukrainian capital’s main cemetery. Close up, the 
gates to these things (crematoria, it transpires) are twisted metal doors that 
resemble the work ofHR Giger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/13/hr-giger-dies-alien-artist>; 
concrete flames lap around them. The long gestation period reflects the fact 
that the crematorium was originally adjoined by a wall of relief sculptures on 
20th-century suffering, something that Kiev saw more of than most places. 
Controversial from the start, it was covered up with a layer of plaster before 
the building was opened.

8 | Ministry of Highways, Tbilisi – George Chakhava, 1974

This photogenic clustered high-rise office block consists of several mini 
towers intersecting on their way down a steep hill, facing the river Kura. 
Inspired by the pile-up of interlinked Persian-style houses in Tbilisi’s old 
town – according to its architect – it stands as a lone monument on the main 
road out of the Georgian capital, and the difficulty of pedestrian access is 
some sign of the Ministry of Highways’ success.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dda8ef92946808c46bec50ba6c1e4217b15deb3%2F0_121_4427_2656%2F4427.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20USSR%20in%2010%20buildings%3A%20Constructivist%20communes%20to%20Stalinist%20skyscrapers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fussr-10-buildings-stalin-skyscrapers-constructivist-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dda8ef92946808c46bec50ba6c1e4217b15deb3%2F0_121_4427_2656%2F4427.jpg>
 The clustered high-rise is now the main office building of the Bank of 
Georgia. Photograph: David Mdzinarishvili/Reuters 
9 | City Gates, Chișinău – Skvotsova, Markovich and Spasov, 1980


Late Soviet architecture was often a compromise between the heavy, decorative 
monumentality of the Stalin era and the mass production and modernity of the 
20s and 60s. The almost maniacal pomp and grandeur of the Chișinău City Gates 
combine a baroque sense of axial symmetry and approach with prefab concrete 
technology and a lot of architectural sleight of hand. They’re literally the 
first buildings you see on approaching the the Moldovan capital from the 
airport, and as you get further into the centre, the buildings get smaller and 
more dilapidated – the exact opposite of the way most capital cities have been 
designed.

'The graveyard of the Earth': inside City 40, Russia's deadly nuclear secret
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/20/graveyard-earth-inside-city-40-ozersk-russia-deadly-secret-nuclear>
10 | Palace of Pioneers, Dnipropetrovsk – Amosov, Solodovnik, Garsia Ortega 
and Klever, 1991

The completion date for this building in eastern Ukraine’s industrial 
metropolis makes it one of a few candidates for “last Soviet building”. It 
shows another shift; this time to a lightness of touch, even a certain amount 
of wit, that would be lacking in most post-Soviet architecture as much as it 
was in Leonid Brezhnev’s USSR. This “palace” for young people is scaled to meet 
its users, but filled with goofy space-age details for their enjoyment, with 
portholes, mazes, flying walkways and bizarre multicoloured sculptures, on a 
secluded, verdant site near the Dnieper river. The idea behind the Pioneers was 
to raise children to be good communists – unlikely for the generation of kids 
who have used this building since 1990.

What are your favourite Soviet buildings? Tell us in the comments below, or 
follow Guardian Cities onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 