
Capacity: 450.


Who plays there: Up-and-coming bands, cult favourites, never-quite-made-its, 
and perpetually touring tribute acts (especially at weekends). Radiohead, 
Nirvana, PJ Harvey, Muse, Amy Winehouse, Jeff Buckley and Oasis all played here 
before they were famous. Forthcoming shows includeHoneyblood 
<http://honeyblood.co.uk/>, DZ Deathrays 
<http://dzdeathrays.com/blackrat_uk.html>, Dan Sartain <http://dansartain.com/>,
the Phantom Band <http://www.phantomband.co.uk/>, the Jim Jones Revue 
<http://www.jimjonesrevue.com/>, the Besnard Lakes 
<http://www.thebesnardlakes.com/> and King Creosote 
<http://www.kingcreosote.com/>.

Cloakroom: Yes.

Admission: From £5 to £15, and generally on the cheaper side.

Bar: The Fleece used to have its own brewery at the back, and it’s still a 
proper pub with all that entails, including cheap drinks early on weeknights 
and a wide choice of drinks that are reasonably priced the rest of the time. 
Particularly worthwhile is the excellent selection of West Country ciders, 
including Westons Organic. Next door is the very good7 Stars pub 
<http://www.7stars.co.uk/> if you fancy a pre-gig pint elsewhere for any reason 
(such as the almost complete lack of anywhere to sit down).

Food: Yes, during the day. Pub grub.

Toilets: At the back down a corridor. Refreshingly civilised and pleasant.

Wheelchair access: Yes, but it gets very busy and crowded.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-the-fleece-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410861737055%2F255b154d-3fbf-48de-b7e7-bfbd4f246406-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20the%20Fleece%2C%20Bristol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-the-fleece-bristol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20the%20Fleece%2C%20Bristol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-the-fleece-bristol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410861737055%2F255b154d-3fbf-48de-b7e7-bfbd4f246406-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Beware of the pillars … inside the Fleece. Photograph: Adrian Sherratt 
Sound: Very good for rock acts, but delicate acoustic singer-songwriter types 
can easily get drowned out by a busy crowd.

Where to stand: Out of the way of the pillars, which can spoil the view if you 
get stuck behind one – and getting stuck is a real possibility given how busy 
it can get.

Overall: The Fleece is in a beautiful old building just a few minutes’ walk 
from the centre of Bristol in one direction and Temple Meads in the other. It 
has a vibrant history of excellent live music, although it’s lost a little 
cachet in recent years to places such asthe Thekla 
<http://www.theklabristol.co.uk/> and by relying on tribute acts and cover 
bands. Earlier this year it was facing the threat of closure, after developers 
submitted plans to build flats opposite, with the certainty of noise abatement 
orders to follow. The Fleece’s owner, Chris Sharp, mobilised support and got 
30,000 signatures on a petition to save the venue within 48 hours; he also 
secured the backing of Bristol’s mayor. Although the city council approved the 
plans for flats,planning permission was granted subject to conditions designed 
to protect the ongoing viability of the Fleece 
<http://www.thefleece.co.uk/save-fleece/>. So, for now, the Fleece lives on.

Address: 12 St Thomas St, Bristol, BS1 6JJ

Telephone: 0117-929 9008

Website: thefleece.co.uk  <http://www.thefleece.co.uk/>

Public transport: Five minutes’ walk from Bristol Temple Meads railway 
station. Scores of buses pass nearby.
 