
America is a society founded on the words of the Declaration of Independence, 
the arguments of writers like Tom Paine (the author ofCommon Sense), James 
Madison (co-author of the Federalist Papers) and ultimately on the US 
constitution and its 33 amendments. As a country largely made by lawyers and 
journalists through ink and paper, it continues to redefine itself through the 
English language. From generation to generation, its citizens, uniquely, turn 
to books and newspapers to argue for change.

Silent Spring is a classic of American advocacy, a book that sparked a 
nationwide outcry against the use of pesticides, inspired legislation that 
would endeavour to control pollution, and thereby launched the modern 
environmental movement in the US. The great nature writer Peter Matthiessen 
identified its “fearless and succinct” prose as “the cornerstone of the new 
environmentalism”. In a few limpid chapters, and fewer than 300 pages,Rachel 
Carson <http://www.rachelcarson.org> described the death of rivers and seas, 
the scorching of the soil, the annihilation of plant life and forests, the 
silencing of the nation’s birds, the perils of crop spraying, the poisoning of 
humanity (“beyond the dreams of the Borgias”) and the genetic threats posed by 
all of the above, especially in its carcinogenic manifestations.

“We stand now,” writes Carson, “where two roads diverge.” There is, she goes 
on, the superhighway that leads to “disaster”, and there is (echoing Robert 
Frost) “the road less travelled”, on which US citizens can find their voice, 
and are heard.

The unrestricted use of pesticides in north America had boomed after the 
second world war. Carson, whose early work for the US Bureau of Fisheries had 
given her a special understanding of marine pollution, was one of the first to 
realise that DDT, a radical new pesticide, had severe ecological consequences. 
As the great ethnobiologist Edward O Wilson has written: “The effects of 
pesticides on the environment and public health had been well-documented before
Silent Spring, but in bits and pieces scattered through the technical 
literature. Environmental scientists were aware of the problem but they focused 
only on the narrow sector of their personal expertise.”

Carson’s achievement was to synthesise this information into a single message 
(her unforgettable image of a “silent spring”) that scientists and the general 
public could relate to and understand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fsilent-spring-rachel-carson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd29e95f1f379f4aaff5d10886d262d428eabc22e%2F0_211_2749_1649%2F2749.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20100%20best%20nonfiction%20books%3A%20No%2020%20%E2%80%93%20Silent%20Spring%20by%20Rachel%20Carson%20(1962)%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fsilent-spring-rachel-carson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20100%20best%20nonfiction%20books%3A%20No%2020%20%E2%80%93%20Silent%20Spring%20by%20Rachel%20Carson%20%281962%29%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fsilent-spring-rachel-carson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd29e95f1f379f4aaff5d10886d262d428eabc22e%2F0_211_2749_1649%2F2749.jpg>
 Rachel Carson with children and dog in woods near her home. Photograph: Alfred 
Eisenstaedt/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
When Carson, who had written extensively on conservation issues throughout the 
1950s, began to researchSilent Spring, the word “ecology” was still barely 
understood. Conservation biology did not exist. “At the time,” Wilson later 
recalled, “the scientific culture was fixated on the spectacular success of the 
molecular revolution, which had placed physics and chemistry at the foundation 
of biology.” WithNo 15 in this series, The Double Helix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/09/the-double-helix-james-d-watson-100-best-nonfiction-books>
, we have already seen the excitement generated by discoveries like DNA, “the 
molecule of life”. At the time, therefore, Carson’s work was beyond the scope 
of contemporary scientific concerns.

Carson was also battling the postwar renewal of the US economy. By the late 
1950s, exuberant economic growth and a dynamic national quest for limitless 
progress meant that science and technology attracted uncritical national 
support. Environmental warnings were viewed as an irritating distraction from 
the American project.Silent Spring would be published in the same year as the 
Cuban missile crisis: the cold war was at its height.

The chemical industry, which had championed DDT as central to the nation’s 
domestic agriculture, was an unofficial part of the war effort. Carson was seen 
as triply dangerous. First, she was an outsider; second, she was a humble 
biologist with no academic background; and third, she was a woman who addressed 
herself to the general public (writing radio scripts and bestselling books like
The Sea Around Us, 1951). In a word, she was unqualified and unpatriotic.

In a hostile intellectual climate, Carson had to find support wherever she 
could. As she immersed herself in a contentious subject, she approached 
sympathetic writers and journalists to back her cause, notably theNew Yorker 
writer, and author ofCharlotte’s Web, EB White. It was White’s response to 
Carson’s passionate advocacy that led to a commission from theNew Yorker for a 
major article, a piece that would becomeSilent Spring. She was additionally 
helped in her efforts by the outbreak of the “Great Cranberry Scare” of 1959, 
in which the US cranberry harvest was found to contain high levels of a 
carcinogenic herbicide. The FDA’s prohibition of cranberry sales and subsequent 
congressional hearings gave the anti-pesticide lobby renewed publicity and 
encouraged Carson to focus on the dark side of some pesticide programmes, and 
to do this with a quiet indignation that was both rhetorically effective and 
neatly expressed:

“If Darwin were alive today, the insect world would delight and astound him 
with its impressive verification of his theories of the survival of the 
fittest. Under the stress of intensive chemical spraying, the weaker members of 
the insect population are being weeded out.”

In her conclusion to Silent Spring, Carson allowed her rage on behalf of 
nature to become almost majestic: “The ‘control of nature’ is a phrase 
conceived in arrogance, born of the Neanderthal age of biology and philosophy, 
when it was supposed that nature exists for the convenience of man… It is our 
alarming misfortune that so primitive a science has armed itself with the most 
modern and terrible weapons, and that turning them against the insects it has 
also turned them against the earth.”

As Carson’s biographer, Linda Lear, has written, she deliberately “challenged 
the wisdom of a government that allowed toxic chemicals to be put into the 
environment before knowing the long-term consequences of their use. Writing in 
language that everyone could understand and cleverly using the public’s 
knowledge of atomic fallout as a reference point, Carson described how 
chlorinated hydrocarbons and organic phosphorus insecticides altered the 
cellular processes of plants, animals and humans… Carson challenged the moral 
right of government to leave its citizens unprotected from substances they 
could neither physically avoid nor publicly question.”

Carson was helped by the fury of the public debate, which reached as far as 
President Kennedy and the White House

Once Silent Spring was complete, the New Yorker stepped in again, this time 
with a pre-publication serialisation that helped propel Carson’s work to the 
top of the bestseller lists. In part, she was helped by the fury of the public 
debate, which reached as far as President Kennedy and the White House, and also 
the outrage felt by the chemical industry. Carson’s opponents vilified her, in 
Linda Lear’s words, as “a hysterical woman whose alarming view of the future 
could be ignored or, if necessary, suppressed. She was a ‘bird and bunny 
lover’, a woman who kept cats and was therefore clearly suspect. She was a 
romantic ‘spinster’ who was simply overwrought about genetics. In short, Carson 
was a woman out of control. She had overstepped the bounds of her gender and 
her science”.

Tragically, however, she was unable to rebut these slurs or even participate 
in the publicity campaign for her book; Rachel Carson was now mortally ill with 
breast cancer, and died 18 months after publication, on 14 April 1964. In its 
own way, however,Silent Spring marked a profoundly important historical moment, 
which some have compared in social importance to Harriet Beecher Stowe’s 
anti-slavery classicUncle Tom’s Cabin.

Wilson’s verdict is unequivocal. Silent Spring became, he writes, “a national 
political force, largely responsible for the establishment of the Environmental 
Protection Agency”. It also “resulted in the passage in 1973 of the Endangered 
Species Act… easily the most important piece of conservation legislation in the 
nation’s history”. This was the act that also sponsored the saving of the 
American alligator, the grey whale, the bald eagle and the peregrine falcon, as 
well as the east coast population of the brown pelican.

A signature sentence


“On the mornings that had once throbbed with the dawn chorus of robins, 
catbirds, doves, jays, wrens and scores of other bird voices there was now no 
sound; only silence lay over the fields and woods and marsh.”

Three to compare


Henry Thoreau: Walden <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/walden-8.html> (1854)

Edward O Wilson: The Ants (1991)

Elizabeth Kolbert: Field Notes from a Catastrophe 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Field-Notes-Catastrophe-Frontline-Climate/dp/1408860449/ref=sr_1_3?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1464359961&sr=1-3&keywords=Elizabeth+Kolbert>
 (2006).

Silent Spring is published by Penguin (£9.99). Click here 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/silent-spring-2.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 to buy a copy for £7.99
 