
When the world’s nations sit down to talk nowadays, there is a distinct 
difference to the way diplomacy is done. Influence is no longer defined only by 
special relationships and old alliances, but whichWhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> group you are invited into.


The rise of WhatsApp diplomacy is transforming the negotiating chamber. There 
are countless groups of allies and virtual huddles, exchanges over policy 
statements and fine print, and fair amounts of banter and even emojis (Vladimir 
Putin is referred to by widespread use of a grey alien avatar).


“You can form small groups of like-minded allies, take photos of annotated 
documents, ask people what they think without the whole room knowing,” a senior 
western diplomat said.

The tool is useful for communicating with allies who might not be sitting 
close to them, diplomats say, as well as for agreeing negotiating tactics 
during difficult sessions and for organising break-out huddles in a way that 
avoids offending those left out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwhy-do-diplomats-use-this-alien-whatsapp-emoji-for-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F042dcfcef9c29a7ab8682ae1d8f6c16be11dc0c3%2F1076_0_2260_1569%2F2260.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20international%20diplomacy%20by%20WhatsApp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwhy-do-diplomats-use-this-alien-whatsapp-emoji-for-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20international%20diplomacy%20by%20WhatsApp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwhy-do-diplomats-use-this-alien-whatsapp-emoji-for-vladimir-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F042dcfcef9c29a7ab8682ae1d8f6c16be11dc0c3%2F1076_0_2260_1569%2F2260.jpg>
 Putin... Photograph: TASS / Barcroft Images  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwhy-do-diplomats-use-this-alien-whatsapp-emoji-for-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51d1463827caccb59e00300564b709ab1d1a05e6%2F0_0_720_600%2F720.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20international%20diplomacy%20by%20WhatsApp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwhy-do-diplomats-use-this-alien-whatsapp-emoji-for-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20international%20diplomacy%20by%20WhatsApp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwhy-do-diplomats-use-this-alien-whatsapp-emoji-for-vladimir-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51d1463827caccb59e00300564b709ab1d1a05e6%2F0_0_720_600%2F720.png>
 ...and his emoji Photograph: Whatsapp/Android 
One notable recent example of WhatsApp summitry occurred at last month’s 
breakthrough talks in Kigali, Rwanda, about banning HFCs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/15/hfc-greenhouse-gases-emissions-coolant>
. At these talks the instant messaging tool owned by Facebook was used widely 
to coordinate meetings, discuss strategy during talks and drum up support for 
different policy positions, said a consultant who was present.

The adviser said the kinds of exchanges included: “Let’s meet outside to talk 
about x,” or “Make sure you interrupt now,” or “Speak at the plenary in support 
of x.”

“You might have a country making a proposition and then there’ll be another 
opposing proposition, so you’d line up your allies on WhatsApp to say ‘make 
sure you express your view’ so there’s a lot of support. And if there are a lot 
of voices in favour of a proposition it can get through.”

The consultant first started seeing WhatsApp used at high-level diplomatic 
events two years ago but said that recently she has seen more diplomats and 
lobbyists using it, because of the availability of Wi-Fi and the app’s 
convenience.

“You don’t have to leave the room to have a chat ‘outside’,” the consultant 
said. “It allows some discretion if you don’t have to be seen grouping in a 
corner.”

Used by a billion people worldwide, WhatsApp is tailor-made for modern 
diplomacy. It is as fast and intuitive as texting while the group feature, by 
which several users can share messages, allows for the formation of fluid 
informal alliances. And it is secure, with end-to-end encryption since April 
this year.
 A fictional WhatsApp conversation. Photograph: WhatsApp 
“You can send a more secure message through WhatsApp now than most government 
information systems,” said Jon Alterman, a former state department policy 
planning staff official now senior vice-president at the Centre for Strategic 
and International Studies.

WhatsApp use has flourished particularly in multilateral institutions such as 
the UN and at EU headquarters, where there are large numbers of diplomats 
needing to communicate rapidly and secretly. Furthermore a lot of business in 
these international settings is done inside large buildings with deep basements 
where there is no mobile phone reception but strong Wi-Fi signals, favouring 
WhatsApp over texting.

An internal report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/09/internal-report-slams-culture-in-uk-foreign-office>
 at the UK’s Foreign Office this year found that rather than make use of 
specially tailored government encryption, many British diplomats use WhatsApp 
to discuss sensitive issues.

There is a WhatsApp group for British diplomats working around the world on 
Syria issues, for example.

“Even 10 years ago the standard form of diplomatic lobbying would often start 
with anote verbale, a heavily scripted and formulaic diplomatic message sent 
from an embassy to a foreign ministry,” said the report’s author, Tom Fletcher, 
a former British ambassador to Lebanon.

“The ambassador would then wait for the response, and follow up with a meeting 
or occasionally a telephone call. Now, all of that can be short circuited by 
text message – or, more favoured by diplomats as it is seen as more secure – 
WhatsApp.

“Most of my day-to-day communication with Lebanese leaders was done in this 
way. Of course there is no substitute for the rapport and trust built up by 
face-to-face encounters. But a huge amount of diplomacy can now be handled in 
this way, and any ambassador who doesn’t have the ability to WhatsApp key 
ministers will quickly fall behind.”

Fletcher, the author of Naked Diplomacy, that calls for a new generation of 
“digital interventionists” abroad, added: “The smartphone is now as essential a 
part of the modern diplomat’s armoury as courage, patience and a strong 
stomach. But it is also a threat to the diplomat – heaven forbid that leaders 
should start WhatsApping each other direct, without needing to go through their 
diplomatic envoys.”

The challenge with text is people read into what’s not there, and miss what is 
there
Jon Alterman 
“When you are sitting around a table, negotiating a document, you are not 
necessarily going to be sitting next to like-minded countries. This is a way to 
communicate while the negotiations are under way,” a senior diplomat said.

“It can be used for practical organisational stuff, to say we’re meeting in a 
huddle outside this room,” the diplomat said. “Or for lighthearted venting, 
taking the piss out of a colleague or sending around a picture of someone who’s 
fallen asleep.”

WhatsApp conversations are increasingly punctuated by emojis, which are 
evolving as a diplomatic shorthand. The full array of flags are ideal for that 
purpose as are the dove, and of course, the shaking hands, symbolising a done 
deal. Vladimir Putin is frequently embodied as a grey alien face emoji.

In Brussels, WhatsApp is used for organising some of the EU’s many meetings. 
Messaging services have been used by officials for planning an out-of-town 
meeting for 28 national ambassadors or getting an EU leader from summit table 
to press podium without any glitches. One embassy started using WhatsApp after
the Brussels attacks <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brussels-attacks> as a 
way of sharing information quickly.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwhy-do-diplomats-use-this-alien-whatsapp-emoji-for-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F697da64021345de1a0102fc1afa0a07b85f4bade%2F0_99_2976_1786%2F2976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20international%20diplomacy%20by%20WhatsApp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwhy-do-diplomats-use-this-alien-whatsapp-emoji-for-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20international%20diplomacy%20by%20WhatsApp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwhy-do-diplomats-use-this-alien-whatsapp-emoji-for-vladimir-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F697da64021345de1a0102fc1afa0a07b85f4bade%2F0_99_2976_1786%2F2976.jpg>
 Now then, what emoji shall we use for the Greek economy? Photograph: Sander de 
Wilde/Corbis via Getty Images 
However flexible, informal and secret WhatsApp may be, Alterman argues that no 
messaging system can ever be a substitute for eyeball-to-eyeball diplomacy.

“It still matters if you are in the room with someone. It’s hard to read body 
language from a text message. Text doesn’t communicate intonation at all,” he 
said. “The challenge of text-based communication is that people read into it 
what’s not there, and miss what is there.”
 