
Shares in Deutsche Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank>, 
Germany’s largest bank, took a dive after news that the institution faces a 
$14bn (£10.5bn) charge over mis-selling mortgage securities in the US. Here are 
some of the questions raised by the bank’s latest spat with regulators.

Why is Deutsche Bank in trouble?

The prospect of a $14bn penalty from the US Department of Justice has rattled 
investor confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/european-banking-shares-unsettled-by-deutsche-bank-fine-fears>
 in Deutsche. Sentiment was already weak following aturbulent start to the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/09/deutsche-boss-tells-staff-the-bank-is-rock-solid>
 when prospects of a slowdown in global growth and lower interest rates raised 
questions about the bank’s future profits and dented the share price. The 
penalty aims to settle allegations, dating back to 2005, about the way the bank 
selected mortgages, packaged them into bonds and sold on to investors. These 
bonds are known as residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS).

Can Deutsche afford the bill?

Deutsche Bank has been quick to describe the fine as an “opening position” 
from Washington. It is easy to see why. It would be one of the largest ever 
fines levied by the US. It could also strain the bank’s finances. For 2015, the 
bank reported its first annual loss since 2008 and could be heading for another 
loss this year regardless of the threatened justice department fine. According 
to Tomas Kinmonth, an analyst at Dutch bank ABN Amro, a settlement on that 
scale could impede Deutsche’s ability to pay coupons – or regular interest 
payments to investors – on a special type of bond. “Not only are clouds over 
their profitability still above them, but the fine announcement will come as 
very unwanted news indeed,” said Kinmonth. The bonds are known as AT1s, which 
are intended to shore up Deutsche in a time of crisis.

The bank, though, has made clear it has no intention of agreeing to a fine at 
this level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/deutsche-bank-must-pay-14bn-fine-to-settle-us-mortgage-case>
and has stressed it has the resources to keep making payments on the bonds 
until 2017, at least. However, one analyst told Reuters that any fine topping 
€5bn would force it to raise fresh funds in the financial markets by tapping 
shareholders for cash.

Is this the end of Deutsche Bank’s regulator troubles?

The bank has set aside €5.5bn for litigation costs but does not spell out 
exactly what that sum is for. It is battling more than 7,000 legal cases, 
although the ones gaining most attention are the RMBS case and one relating to 
activities in Russia, where the bank is facing an investigation into so-called 
mirror trades, where clients bought shares in Russia and simultaneously sold 
similar shares abroad in foreign currency.Regulators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/regulators> are investigating whether or 
not these trades skirted international sanctions against Russia by turning 
Russia-held roubles into dollars held outside the country.

Why have shares in RBS taken a dive as well?

For at least a year, the bailed-out UK bank has been warning the City it faces 
a penalty over RMBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/30/royal-bank-of-scotland-expects-further-fines-dividend-delay>
. Only on Monday 
<http://investors.rbs.com/~/media/Files/R/RBS-IR/results-center/barclays-conference-slides-12-sep-2016.pdf>
, finance director Ewen Stevenson told investors that its $5.6bn provision for 
various claims relating to these mortgage bonds might not be enough. “This 
provision does not include or reflect potential penalties and compensatory 
damages that may be imposed by US DoJ, which may be substantial,” Stevenson 
said. The potential scale of the penalty facing Deutsche has raised anxiety 
about the possible fine facing RBS, which is 73% owned by taxpayers and yet to 
make an annual profit since its bailout in 2008.

Could other European banks be affected? 

Deutsche is the first European bank that appears to have started talks with 
the DoJ over RMBS. Barclays and the Swiss bank UBS are among others waiting for 
settlement talks to be concluded. Their shares also fell on Friday.
 