
As an artist who regularly invites complete strangers to hold hands in public, 
I could not ignore the incident at a Sainsbury’s in Hackney, east London, last 
week,when two gay men were asked to leave by a security guard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/sainsburys-security-guard-men-holding-hands-leave-shop-london>
. Much of what happened makes for depressing reading: the woman who complained 
about their same-sex hand holding, the guard’s decision to approach the couple 
and, of course, the impact on the two men involved.

‘Kissathon’ protest at Sainsbury’s store where gay couple were ejected
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/14/kissathon-protest-sainsburys-hackney-london-gay-couple-were-ejected>
But there are also positives: the fact that the incident was widely reported 
by national news outlets; the overwhelming support for the gay couple in 
question, followed bya public kiss-in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/14/kissathon-protest-sainsburys-hackney-london-gay-couple-were-ejected>
 at the same supermarket. Could these be signs that homophobia is finally 
becoming a thing of the past; a rare and shocking occurrence, to be publicly 
shamed with this kind of widespread solidarity? In reality, I fear there are 
still many men and women across the country for whom the idea of being able to 
hold their partner’s hand in a local supermarket feels like a farfetched dream.

For the past five years, I have been touring Walking:Holding 
<https://rosanacadedotcom.wordpress.com/projects/walkingholding/>, which takes 
one audience member at a time on a walk through their town or city, and invites 
them to hold hands with six different individuals along the way. The 
hand-holders are local participants who range in age, gender, race, sexuality 
and background. The idea is to give people an opportunity to experience their 
hometown from someone else’s perspective; and to see what can happen when you 
share an intimate act with a complete stranger.

I developed the performance in Glasgow in response to my own experiences. My 
first girlfriend was much older than me and wanted to hold my hand everywhere, 
which was fine in London but felt completely different and difficult in the 
small Hertfordshire town where I grew up. Another partner in Glasgow preferred 
not to draw attention to herself. Hand-holding always felt like a complex act – 
the tussle between visibility and risk, public and private intimacy, activism 
and fear.

Same-sex hand-holding is a tussle between visibility and risk, public and 
private intimacy, activism and fear

Since 2011, I have toured the work to more than 30 locations in the UK, Europe 
and Hong Kong, in each place recruiting new people to perform as the 
hand-holders. It’s always an open invitation to anyone interested in exploring 
intimacy and identity in public. I’ve worked with people who identify as 
disabled, homeless people, children, older people, an ex-Tory councillor – all 
bringing unique perspectives on where they live.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fradical-art-of-holding-hands-with-strangers-rosana-cade-walking-holding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d69ab6adf7906e48888021524e6dea80d42871e%2F0_0_2048_2796%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20radical%20art%20of%20holding%20hands%20with%20strangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fradical-art-of-holding-hands-with-strangers-rosana-cade-walking-holding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20radical%20art%20of%20holding%20hands%20with%20strangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fradical-art-of-holding-hands-with-strangers-rosana-cade-walking-holding%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d69ab6adf7906e48888021524e6dea80d42871e%2F0_0_2048_2796%2F2048.jpg>
 Walking:Holding in Glasgow. Photograph: Rosie Healey 
As it has developed, this intimate interactive performance has gone beyond 
addressing only sexuality. However, its roots lie firmly in the experience of 
lesbian, gay and bisexual people, and my understanding of same-sex hand-holding 
has broadened massively through the conversations I’ve had with participants.

We have spoken positively about it as a political act, that declares the space 
where you are as one where same-sex love is permitted and where queer 
sexualities and gender expression should be allowed. Conversely, some lesbian 
and gay people I’ve spoken to have said they avoid hand-holding, as they don’t 
feel comfortable with their relationship being displayed as a political action.

Many others, predominantly men, talk about how the fear of violence prevents 
them from ever holding hands with a partner. I have met many people who have 
suffered violent homophobic abuse in the UK in the past five years. A woman in 
Brighton had been targeted by a group of men when she was holding hands with 
her girlfriend. They jumped out of a car and attacked them, then drove off. She 
now suffers a lot of anxiety in public spaces.

The simple, and you would think harmless, act of holding hands, so often an 
act of protection or care, can – in some situations – expose you to real 
danger. For a generation that remembers when homosexuality was illegal, there 
is a lot of unlearning to do before believing it safe to hold hands, or that, 
actually, it’s being homophobic that is the crime.

There are still many places around the world where homosexuality is illegal, 
but the codes around intimacy and same-sex hand-holding also vary greatly. In 
parts of Africa and the Middle East, it is more common to see two men holding 
hands than a mixed-sex couple – but the hand-holding isn’t seen as a sign of a 
sexual relationship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fradical-art-of-holding-hands-with-strangers-rosana-cade-walking-holding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d96c69fafe6249b8136edd585917643456f6d90%2F0_0_1800_2700%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20radical%20art%20of%20holding%20hands%20with%20strangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fradical-art-of-holding-hands-with-strangers-rosana-cade-walking-holding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20radical%20art%20of%20holding%20hands%20with%20strangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fradical-art-of-holding-hands-with-strangers-rosana-cade-walking-holding%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d96c69fafe6249b8136edd585917643456f6d90%2F0_0_1800_2700%2F1800.jpg>
 Abandoning fear. Photograph: Pari Naderi 
Visibility can be tiring, frightening and detrimental to intimacy. For some 
couples, it might feel easier and safer not to bother. We can never tell 
whether there is a real threat of homophobic abuse, but the fear is real. And 
when that fear prevents us from holding our partner’s hand, an act of 
homophobia is taking place. Not the type that will be reported on the news, but 
a subtle, internalised homophobia that still pervades many lesbian, gay and 
bisexual people’s lives.

It might affect the route they take through a town, where and when they hold 
hands with their partner, what they wear, and how they speak. But what do we 
risk by hiding who we are on a regular basis out of fear? How do we bring about 
change in attitude if we remain in hiding?

Walking:Holding gently encourages people to abandon fear and trust the hands 
of strangers. What emerges is often uplifting and empowering. While the 
awareness that it is a performance allows for this abandonment, it is also 
“real life” and in a public space – anyone en route could be a potential 
hand-holder. I am interested in turning the stranger into a human, turning the 
“other” into a human, and, yes, seeing a wider range of queer hand-holding.

This week, the show comes to Leith, Edinburgh, as part of Forest Fringe’s 10th 
anniversary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/aug/16/forest-fringe-edinburgh-festival-theatre>
. We first performed it there in 2013 – after one of the male participants had 
been banned from the local Tesco for walking through in women’s clothing. I’m 
interested to return three years on and discover what has changed in the area 
and how the performance will be received in 2016.

Hold hands? No thanks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/dec/12/hold-hands-public-affectionate>
• Walking:Holding 
<https://rosanacadedotcom.wordpress.com/projects/walkingholding/> is at Forest 
Fringe, Edinburgh, from 18 to 20 August; Appetite, Stoke on 27 and 28 August; 
DNweekeND, Doncaster, on 3 and 4 September; and Compass festival, Leeds on 11 
and 12 November.




 