
Capacity: 2,900 standing or 2,200 seated.


Who plays there: As the main venue for the Edinburgh international festival 
since 1947, the Usher Hall has been historically more associated with classical 
music and opera han it is with rock and pop. That has changed considerably in 
recent years, since a £25m refurbishment and expansion was completed in 2010. 
With both seating and standing capacity, not to mention its grand design, it’s 
now ​used by artists appealing to a slightly more mature audience, from Adele 
and Paolo Nutini to Bombay Bicycle Club and the xx.​ Usher Hall hosted a few 
rock legends way back in the mists of time: the Rolling Stones in 1964, Led 
Zeppelin and Fleetwood Mac in 1970, Pink Floyd in 1974 and Paul McCartney and 
Wings in 1975. Its forthcoming attractions include Passenger, John Grant and 
Ben Howard.

Cloakroom: Yes.

Admission: From £20 up to around £40.

Bar: There are several bars dotted around the wings on the ground and upper 
floors, including the cafe-bar ​in the new glass annexe added to the building 
as part of the 2010 refurbishment. The beer is pretty bog-standard, and pricey, 
but service is generally fairly quick.

Food: No.

Toilets: Lots of them and well maintained.

Wheelchair access: There’s level access to the ground floor of the new wing, 
​from the Grindlay Street side of the building​, and lift access to all levels 
of the hall. There are 12 wheelchair accessible spaces​; you need to advise the 
box office when booking if you need one. Assistance dogs are welcome.

Sound: Excellent – this is a custom-designed concert hall, after all, albeit 
one more used to dealing with orchestral music than amplified guitars and drum 
kits. It’s generally high-end artists only who tour here, such is the venue’s 
size. Some suit the space better than others, but in general you shouldn’t have 
any complaints sound​wise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fgig-venue-guide-usher-hall-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416308092527%2Fbe001a57-3a21-4f20-be0f-cdc22647d39b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20Usher%20Hall%2C%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fgig-venue-guide-usher-hall-edinburgh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20Usher%20Hall%2C%20Edinburgh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fgig-venue-guide-usher-hall-edinburgh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416308092527%2Fbe001a57-3a21-4f20-be0f-cdc22647d39b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Usher Hall has hosted everyone from Pink Floyd to Adele. Photograph: Andy 
Buchanan/AFP/Getty Images 
Where to stand: ​Usher Hall is a tall, curved venue, with ​grand ​circle and 
​upper ​circle seating rising two steep levels above the stage and the stalls. 
Again, being a custom-designed concert hall, sightlines are generally good 
wherever you choose to sit or stand (the stalls seating is removed for many 
rock and pop shows), though be aware that there are a few seats with a limited 
view or restricted access, particularly in the ​upper ​circle. If you book 
direct from the venue over the phone they’ll tell you which seats, but ​if you 
buy from a ticket agent you might not find out until ​the night of the 
performance. Don’t underestimate how high up and ​vertiginous that top tier is 
– you ​feel like you’re in the heavens. It’s not recommended for people who are 
even moderately scared of heights​.

Overall: A beautiful, ornate space in which to watch a concert, all elaborate 
plaster panelling​, cornicing and brass fittings. ​Usher Hallcelebrated its 
centenary 
<http://www.usherhall.co.uk/screenloader.aspx?page=style/UsherHall/history.html&type=include>
in March 2014,​ after being bankrolled by a local whisky baron as a gift to 
Edinburgh. It​s resurgence as a rock and pop venue over the last few years has 
been a gift in itself, and timely​, especially given that Edinburgh was left 
with no ​dedicated large-scale venue of ​this kind in the city centre after the 
closure of the nearby Picture House in 2013. Owned and operated by the City of 
Edinburgh​, it’s been an ​unusual success story for a ​council often criticised 
for its lack of support for live music. It is small venues that the Scottish 
capital increasingly lacks more than anything – see Young Fathers’ comments to 
the Guardian after winning the Mercury prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/30/young-fathers-mercury-music-prize-winners-interview>
 for a taste of what some local artists make of Edinburgh ​council’s support 
for the grassroots music scene. But any place that routinely brings bands to 
Edinburgh as good as Efterklang, the National, John Grant and the War on 
Drugs​, and does them justice with its setting, has to be a good thing for the 
city and for its music fans.

Address: Lothian Road, Edinburgh, EH1 2EA


Telephone: 0131-228 1155

Website: usherhall.co.uk <http://www.usherhall.co.uk>

Public transport: ​Usher Hall lies roughly equidistant between Edinburgh’s two 
main train stations, Waverly and Haymarket, so take your pick. There are tram 
stops nearby on Princes Street and Shandwick Place. Buses 1, 10, 11, 15, 16, 
24, 34 and 47 all stop outside the venue on Lothian Road.

 