
In 1980, as Ronald Reagan was in the process of being elected president, Joel 
Sternfeld was embarking on one of the many road trips across America he had 
been making since being awarded a Guggenheim grant in 1978. “The reason I am 
showing this work now,” he says of his forthcoming exhibition, “is that I 
remember feeling similar fears back then as I do now. If anything, there is an 
even stronger sense of apocalypse in the air today.”

With the Guggenheim money, Sternfeld purchased a Volkswagen campervan and a 
large format 8x10 inch camera that had to be mounted on a tripod. He was intent 
on leaving behind the generic New York street photography that had earned him 
the award for a more complex vision of America, which he pursued through 
large-scale colour prints full of fine detail and arresting tableaux. “I had so 
little money, I often couldn’t afford to have a contact sheet printed,” he 
says, laughing. “I was propelled by this very strong sense that I might 
disgrace myself, that I was taking this wonderful opportunity and absolutely 
blowing it.”

Related: Stop the campervan! On the road with Joel Sternfeld and his visions 
of America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2017/jan/11/joel-sternfeld-visions-of-america-in-pictures>

The book that emerged, 1987’s American Prospects 
<http://www.luhringaugustine.com/artists/joel-sternfeld/artworks/american-prospects>
, is now regarded as a classic. With its merging of the deadpan and the 
ominous, it has been as influential on succeeding generations of documentary 
photographers asStephen Shore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/09/stephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s>
’s Uncommon Places orWilliam Eggleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/apr/05/william-eggleston-photography-americana>
’s Guide. Its often ironic images – a circus elephant stranded on a rural road, 
a fireman apparently shopping for a pumpkin at a roadside stall while a house 
blazes in the background – are punctuated by more sinister elements: a looming 
battleship in Mobile, Alabama; a primed missile in White Sands, New Mexico; a 
row of aircraft carriers lining the horizon beyond a sunbathing, bikini-clad 
woman on a Florida beach.

Looking at American Prospects now, it’s almost comforting to be reminded that 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s election 
victory has echoes ofReagan’s equally unlikely ascendancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/19/political-myth-ronald-reagan-republican-moderate-conservative>
. “When I was making the work,” says Sternfeld, “I went to seeJohn Szarkowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jul/20/john-szarkowski-photography-moma>
, who was the cool new curator at the time. He was totally against hot maple 
syrup humanism and concerned photography of any kind. And here I come with 
images that have some social concern in them so suddenly he’s calling me ‘the 
worried photographer’. I didn’t quite fit into the old tradition or the new 
one.”
 Kansas City, Kansas, May 1983 by Joel Sternfeld. Photograph: Joel Sternfeld 
courtesy Luhring Augustine Gallery and Beetles + Huxley Gallery 
Intriguingly, the new London exhibition, called Colour Photographs: 1977-1988, 
includes several images that have not been seen before. At 72, Sternfeld is, 
for the first time, delving into his archive. “I’ve been so busy making work, 
going from one project to the next without pause, that I’ve never had the time 
to reflect on what I’ve done.” By way of illustration, he tells me that many of 
the photographs in a more recent book, First Pictures, were discovered in an an 
old box containing a hundred rolls of film left unprocessed since the early 
1970s. “I just never got round to it.”

Sternfeld’s images are often not quite what they seem. Called McLean, 
Virginia, 1978, that shot of the fireman, the pumpkins and the burning house is 
indeed a record of an actual event he witnessed, but the blaze is part of a 
training exercise from which the fireman is taking a break. “You take 35 
degrees out of 360 degrees and call it a photo,” he told the Guardian in 2004. 
“No individual photo explains anything. That’s what makes photography such a 
wonderful and problematic medium.” Today, he reiterates that sentiment: “A 
photograph is only a fragment of a shattered pot.”

Sternfeld remains busy. As well as teaching in New York, he currently has 
three series in production, including one provisionally titled A Book of 
Resemblances that gathers recent photographs, including a mummified sacrificial 
victim revealed by a melting glacier in Peru and a waxwork of Kim Kardashian. 
As ever, the sinister and the sly sit side by side.

The photographer is an affable, if slightly eccentric, interviewee whose 
answers often roam far and wide though history, literature and art. “I’m 
utterly staggered by what has happened over the last 7,000 years,” he tells me, 
unprompted, at one point. A native New Yorker, he has roamed through America 
constantly since earning a BA inArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> from Dartmouth College, New 
Hampshire, in 1965, already obsessed with “the great underlying theme of my 
work: the utopian vision of America contrasted with the dystopian one”.
 Grafton, West Virginia, February 1983. Photograph: Tom Powel Imaging 
Inc./Joel Sternfeld courtesy Luhring Augustine Gallery and Beetles + Huxley 
Gallery 
The latter is explored in On This Site: Landscape in Memoriam 
<http://www.luhringaugustine.com/artists/joel-sternfeld/artworks/on-this-site>, 
wherein ordinary places are rendered ominous by the terrible things that 
happened there; the former by the self-explanatorySweet Earth: Experimental 
Utopias in America 
<http://www.luhringaugustine.com/artists/joel-sternfeld/artworks/sweet-earth-experimental-utopias-in-america>
. Other equally ambitious books have trod the line between the two: inStranger 
Passing 
<http://www.luhringaugustine.com/artists/joel-sternfeld/artworks/stranger-passing>
, Sternfeld made full-length portraits of the random people he encountered on 
his journeys, while the quietly beautiful images inWalking the High Line 
<http://www.luhringaugustine.com/artists/joel-sternfeld/artworks/walking-the-high-line>
 chronicled the grass, weed and wildflower-strewn tracks of the disused 
elevated railway that ran through the west of Manhattan. It has since been
transformed into a meticulously landscaped nature walkway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/sep/22/final-stretch-new-york-high-line-complete>
.

Sternfeld’s sensibility, he says, was formed in childhood. He is tightlipped 
about his upbringing and personal life, even refusing to reveal where exactly 
he was brought up in New York, but he does tell me that he planted a little 
garden to grow peas, aged just three. At seven, while his friends played ball 
on the street, he pored over pictures of fields, woods, forests and streams in
Outdoor Life <http://www.outdoorlife.com/> magazine. He was also the only kid 
in his New York neighbourhood to have a pet fox, bought as a gift to himself. 
Aged 11,he read Thoreau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/16/walden-for-the-21st-century-kickstarter-update-henry-david-thoreau>
 and discovered “with a sense of utter relief that there was such a thing as 
transcendentalism and I was not alone”.

Most photographers were idiots – magical things could be happening and they 
were too busy fumbling with lenses to see

When, I ask, did photography impinge on his consciousness? “Not until much 
later and, even then, not with the same force as the nature books I read as a 
child. Every body of work I have done has come out of my childhood discovery of
The Young Trailers serie 
<http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/the-young-trailers-series-all-eight-novels-joseph-altsheler/1113884112?type=eBook>
s by Joseph Altsheler, which featured a guy who had been raised by Indians. 
With Walking the High Line, I could have looked up to the New York skyline, but 
I decided to follow the foot trails though the grass like the hero in those 
books. If you look closely, you can see paths of beaten down grass in many of 
the pictures.”

For all his epic undertakings, Sternfeld’s work remains relatively 
underexhibited. “Again, I have been too busy making work to show it that much.” 
he says, “but for me, the best place to see the images is in the books.” Was he 
influenced by any great photography books along the way? “No. I didn’t care 
about photobooks.” he says matter-of-factly. “I thought most photographers were 
idiots.” Can he elaborate? “Well, it often seemed to me that some beautiful, 
magical things could be happening in the world and they were too busy fumbling 
with their lenses to see it. There are exceptions, of course. I’ve never seen a
Robert Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/apr/07/robert-adams-around-the-house-fraenkel-gallery>
 photograph that hasn’t amazed me, but my point is you need to look out to the 
world.”

• Joel Sternfeld, Colour Photographs: 1977-1988 is at Beetles + Huxley, 
London, 27 January to 18 February 
<http://www.beetlesandhuxley.com/exhibitions/joel-sternfeld.html>.
 