
The Gherkin, one of London’s most recognisable skyscrapers, has been bought by 
the billionaire Brazilian banker Joseph Safra, in a deal thought to be worth 
more than £700m.

Safra, who has a $14.9bn (£9.4bn) fortune according to Forbes magazine 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/joseph-safra/>, bought 30 St Mary’s Axe – better 
known as the Gherkin – from the receivers. No price was disclosed but the
Financial Times said Safra paid £726m 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1c1c5a9c-68be-11e4-af00-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3If1Tnn2t>
(£) for the 180 metre-high Norman Foster-designed tower.

“While only 10 years old, this building is already a London icon that is 
distinguished from others in the market, with excellent value growth potential,”
Safra Group said in a statement 
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/the-safra-group-to-acquire-london-premier-property-30-st-mary-axe-282106331.html>
. “We intend to make the building even better and more desirable through active 
ownership that will lead to a range of enhancements that will benefit tenants.”

The building was put up for sale earlier this year with a guide price of £650m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/aug/24/the-gherkin-for-sale-london> 
after its previous owners, private equity firm Evans Randall and German 
property investor IVG, defaulted on a loan. They bought the tower from 
reinsurer Swiss Re – the largest tenant – for £600m in 2007.

The Gherkin is the second-tallest tower in the City of London and the 
sixth-highest in London. The glass dome at the very top of the building – which 
boasts 360 degree views of London – can be hired out for business functions and 
weddings.Tickets for a New Year’s Eve party in the dome cost £290 per person 
<http://searcys.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/Searcys-at-The-Gherkin-New-Years-Eve-2014.pdf>
 for people who are not members of Searcy’s, the club that runs the top three 
floors of the Gherkin.

Safra, 74, was born into a rich banking family in Lebanon. The family moved to 
São Paulo, Brazil, in 1952. Joseph Safra founded Banco Safra, now Brazil’s 
eighth biggest bank in 1955.

Safra Group recently announced a $1.3bn deal to buy US banana giant Chiquita 
in partnership with Brazilian juice company Cutrale.
 