
Betty Friedan <http://www.pbs.org/fmc/interviews/friedan.htm>, the godmother 
of the postwar US women’s movement, was an accidental feminist. “Until I 
started writing [The Feminine Mystique]” she confessed in 1973, “I wasn’t even 
conscious of the woman problem.” Friedan had begun her research into “the 
problem that has no name” – a catchy homage to “the love that dare not speak 
its name” ofOscar Wilde’s fin-de-siècle disgrace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1997/oct/05/biography.oscarwilde> – as part 
of her work for a questionnaire of her former college classmates on their 15th 
reunion in 1957, thinking that she would “disprove the current notion that 
education had fitted us ill for our role as women”.

Few books in this series have enjoyed such a direct and immediate influence on 
their readership

When Friedan discovered that many of her former classmates were unhappy with 
their lives as women in society she pitched an article based on the 
questionnaire toMcCall’s magazine, which “turned the piece down in horror”. By 
now, she was sure she was “on the track of something. But what?” Gradually, 
“from somewhere deep within me”, a project that was now becoming a book began 
to take shape. “I have never experienced anything as powerful, truly mystical, 
as the forces that seemed to take me over when I was writingThe Feminine 
Mystique”, she wrote later, in an almost perfect summary of that peculiar 
literary phenomenon, the zeitgeist book.

As the critic Jay Parini has written, Friedan’s work “almost single-handedly 
ignited a revolutionary phase that has deeply affected the lives of countless 
American women and men”. Or, as Alvin Toffler put it, hers was a book “that 
pulled the trigger on history”. Rarely has a title in this series flown off the 
shelves as this did, selling 300,000 copies within the first year. Thirteen 
foreign language translations followed. Within three years of the book’s 
publication, Friedan had sold more than 3m copies.

Friedan herself professed puzzlement about what it was she had identified, 
right up to publication. After five years research and hard work in the New 
York Public Library, she continued to see herself as the prisoner of “that 
mystique, which kept us passive”. Indeed, in common with many American women of 
the early 1960s, she “thought there was something wrong with me because I 
didn’t have an orgasm waxing the kitchen floor. I was a freak, writing that 
book.”

Today, The Feminine Mystique seems far from freaky, at times even staid 
verging on reactionary. Still, it retains a polemical undertow that’s plainly 
designed to shift the minds of her readers. Compared to the other classic 
postwar statement of feminism,The Second Sex by Simone de Beauvoir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/12/society.simonedebeauvoir>, 
Friedan speaks quite practically to the concerns of middle-class American 
housewives, but mainly about the independent woman’s life in house and home. 
“The problem,” begins Friedan’s narrative, “lay buried, unspoken, for many 
years in the minds of American women. Each suburban wife struggled with it 
alone. As she made the beds, shopped for groceries, chauffeured Cub Scouts and 
Brownies, lay beside her husband at night – she was afraid to ask even of 
herself the silent question – ‘Is this all?’”

In a society famously dedicated to “the pursuit of happiness”, Friedan 
reported that American women had lost their smiles. “I feel empty,” declared 
this first generation of desperate housewives. Friedan intensified her argument 
by braiding it with one of many personal admissions: a slave to the feminine 
mystique, she had made her own sacrifices for “the dream of love”, and become 
frustrated. (She, and her estranged husband, Carl, would fight about their 
marriage up to and beyond their eventual divorce.) Away from her failing home 
life, as a seasoned magazine journalist she conducted more reportage into the 
condition of female college students (“I don’t want a career I’ll have to give 
up”, says one) following this up with a fairly simplistic assault on Freud 
(“the puritan old maid who sees sex everywhere”) and then against social 
anthropology, andMargaret Mead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/24/euphoria-lily-king-review-margaret-mead-new-guinea>
, whom Friedan convicts for “the glorification of the female role”.

Having anatomised this crisis of identity among American women, at least to 
her own satisfaction, Friedan wrenches her argument back to the present. She 
and her generation, she argues, are victims of the 20th century, specifically 
the depression, the second world war, and the anomie of the atomic age. The 
baby boom, she says, was a reaction to more than a decade of dehumanising 
crisis, an instinctive quest for the traditional comforts of hearth and home. 
She is not really against this, rather determined to level the playing field 
for husbands and wives.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqfgxHKli9CU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqfgxHKli9CU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqfgxHKli9CU&media=>
Watch an interview with Betty Friedan on Canada’s CBC. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qfgxHKli9CU> 
As Friedan’s narrative works through sex, consumerism and dehumanisation, she 
builds to her stirring conclusion: “the feminine mystique has succeeded in 
burying millions of American women alive”.

Finally, after a call to have contemporary women taking up roles “requiring 
initiative, leadership and responsibility”, her book becomes a rallying cry, 
exhorting women to make change happen for themselves. This path to liberation, 
she concedes, would not be easy. Nevertheless, now was the time for a final 
breakthrough: “In the light of women’s long battle for emancipation, the recent 
sexual counter-revolution [of the 1950s] has been perhaps a final crisis before 
the larva breaks out of the shell into maturity.”Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, who had allowed the 
liberation of wartime to be taken away from them, would soon recognise their 
self-incarceration and break free, sexually and socially.

Friedan’s sometimes awkward, occasionally inspired rhetoric would underpin 
women’s lib, which in turn would morph into the ongoing feminist revolution in 
the writing of Susan Brownmiller, Germaine Greer (No 13 in this series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/25/female-eunuch-germaine-greer-100-best-nonfiction-books>
),Gloria Steinem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/19/gloria-steinem-this-much-i-know-autobiography-my-life-on-the-road>
,Kate Millett <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jun/19/gender.uk>, even 
Naomi Wolf’sThe Beauty Myth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/oct/18/classics.shopping> (1991), and 
many more. Few books in this series have enjoyed such a direct and immediate 
influence on their readership. Friedan, who died in 2006, was a magazine 
journalist more than a literary writer, but unquestionably a 20th-century icon. 
To her admirers, she was the woman who changed the course of history for 
American women. Inher obituary notice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/feb/07/gender.bookscomment>, Germaine 
Greer wrote a more careful verdict. Friedan had pioneered something important, 
even if subsequent feminists were uneasy in her company, and “though her 
behaviour was often tiresome, she had a point. Women don’t get the respect they 
deserve unless they are wielding male-shaped power.”

A signature sentence

“With a vision of the happy modern housewife as she is described by the 
magazines and television, by the functional sociologists, the sex-directed 
educators, and the manipulators dancing before my eyes, I went in search of one 
of those mystical creatures.”

Three to compare

AC Kinsey, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B015628UTO/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1>
 (1948)
Kate Millett: Sexual Politics  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/392506/>(1969)
Susan Brownmiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/21/feminist-icons-movement-continues-without-them>
:Against Our Will 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Against-Our-Will-Women-Rape/dp/1439504903> (1975)
 