
Capacity: 400 standing, up to 296 seated


Who plays there: A hive of roots/folk/world activity, with notable acts such as
Dar Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/jan/06/popandrock.shopping7>, Cate Le 
Bon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/17/cate-le-bon-mug-museum-interview>
 and Sidi Touré often dropping by. There’s also the odd noisy wildcard like
Drenge <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/24/new-band-drenge>, and 
indie action in the form ofJoan as Police Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/22/joan-as-police-woman-review>, et 
al.

 Cloakroom: Yes

 Admission: Very reasonable – around £8 – for newish acts; for established 
acts, prices are in line with London, around £20.


Bar: The Komedia's is a destination in its own right, given that the venue 
nestles in the heart of the North Laine area, with al fresco drinking for 
summer evenings. If you're staying inside, there are two air-conditioned bars.


Food: Cakes and coffee are available, but if you want a full meal, the 
upstairs cinema – Duke's at Komedia – has a bar/restaurant specialising in US 
soul food, including nachos, pulled-pork sandwiches, meatball subs and southern 
fried chicken. And Duke's serves bottled and draught beers in line with 
customer feedback, rather than just cans of Red Stripe.


Toilets: Downstairs, off the main room.


Wheelchair access: No.


Sound: Not bad, but probably best during acoustic gigs.


Where to stand: You’re better off sitting. To accommodate the low ceiling, the 
stage is only a couple of feet high; if it’s a standing show, be prepared not 
to see much unless you’re at the front. There are handy pillars halfway back 
for slouching against.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F29%2Fgig-venue-guide-komedia-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F28%2F1406566960745%2F8638b419-25c3-4247-9860-3a5ca2dab3d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%20%E2%80%93%20Komedia%2C%20Brighton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F29%2Fgig-venue-guide-komedia-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%20%E2%80%93%20Komedia%2C%20Brighton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F29%2Fgig-venue-guide-komedia-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F28%2F1406566960745%2F8638b419-25c3-4247-9860-3a5ca2dab3d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The place for a knees-up? Duke's Cinema at the Komedia Photograph: Dominic 
Dibbs/Alamy 
Overall: The Komedia has the ambience of an arts centre, because, in effect, 
that’s what it is. Upstairs is a branch of Brighton’s venerated indie cinema, 
the Duke of York’s, while theKrater comedy club 
<http://www.komedia.co.uk/brighton/krater/> is a weekly institution. Until 
recently, the music venue was upstairs; when the Duke of York’s took over that 
space, music was moved to the refitted basement. As a result, it’s still fairly 
pristine down there – and the place attracts the sort of punter who isn’t 
likely to besmirch it by spilling drinks, anyway. It’s one of the city’s most 
grown-up venues, but it’s never lost its boho charm.


Address: 44-47 Gardner Street, Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton>, East Sussex BN1 1UN

Telephone: 01273 647101


Website: komedia.co.uk/brighton <http://www.komedia.co.uk/brighton/>


Public transport: 10 minutes’ walk from Brighton railway station. Nearest bus 
stop (1, 2, 5, 7, 12) is about five minutes away.
 