
Whenever you have a league followed by play-off games, there’s the worry that 
the flash-in-the-pan side will prevail over the consistent one. That did not 
happen in thisIPL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl>. The best team, by a 
distance, won the trophy. Mumbai Indians started the season 1-5, while Chennai 
Super Kings were 6-1 at halfway. Thereafter, Mumbai won nine out of 10 while 
Chennai lost six games, including two to Mumbai in the play-offs. Starting with 
their final league game – a knockout tie in all but name against Sunrisers 
Hyderabad – Mumbai were just imperious, winning the matches that mattered by 
nine wickets, 25 runs and 41 runs.

Top man


Lendl Simmons. His international career has been underwhelming, but Simmons 
was in his element this IPL. David Warner made more runs, AB de Villiers scored 
far quicker, and Chris Gayle whacked almost twice as many sixes, but the West 
Indian finished off with 48 (off 44 balls), 65 (51) and 68 (45). It took his 
tally to six half-centuries in 13 innings. According to the Impact Index 
measure that Wisden India uses, he was the highest impact batsman of the 
tournament, ahead of Ajinkya Rahane, Virat Kohli, De Villiers and Rohit Sharma, 
whose 119-run partnership with Simmons was crucial in the final.

Bowler everyone wanted in their side


The highest impact bowler in the competition has been one of Mumbai’s 
stalwarts for years. Lasith Malinga is no longer svelte and he’s nowhere near 
as quick as he once was either. This season (24 victims at 18.5, and an economy 
rate of 7.40), he took two fewer wickets than Dwayne Bravo, and wasn’t as 
economical as R Ashwin (5.84) or Mitchell Starc (6.76).But in the pivotal 
matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/17/ipl-sunrisers-hyderabad-mumbai-indians>
, he had figures of two for 17, three for 23 and two for 25. The new-ball 
partnership with Mitchell McClenaghan (third-highest impact bowler after Starc) 
was central to the Mumbai renaissance.

Young gun


Yuzvendra Chahal and Harshal Patel, who both proved such able foils to Starc 
in the Bangalore line-up, are both 24, and have definitely put their names into 
contention for the World Twenty20 that India will host next year. But the real 
eye-opener wasShreyas Iyer, who followed up a strong Ranji Trophy season for 
Mumbai with 439 runs for an otherwise disappointing Delhi Daredevils side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/12/ipl-2015-delhi-daredevils-chennai-super-kings>
. If he can avoid sophomore blues, across formats, he could well be the next 
Mumbai batsman to watch out for.

Most nail-biting finish


Delhi did have the consolation of featuring in the match of the tournament. 
Having scored 184, they then reduced Rajasthan Royals to 78 for four in the 
11th over. Rahane’s 47 and a blistering 25-ball 54 from Deepak Hooda kept 
Rajasthan in the game, but 12 were needed from the final over bowled by Angelo 
Mathews.With eight needed off the last three, Chris Morris and Tim Southee 
struck a four each to condemn Delhi to an 11th successive IPL defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/12/ipl-2015-last-ball-four-rajasthan-royals-delhi-daredevils>
.

Most impressive catch


There were goalkeeper-like efforts from the likes of Simmons, Bravo and Faf du 
Plessis, but the catch of the tournament – and one of the best you’ll ever see 
– came as early as the third game. George Bailey launched a full delivery from 
James Faulkner towards deep midwicket. It took incredible agility for Southee 
to even reach the ball, leave alone grab it one-handed.Realising that he was 
about to cross the rope <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cYYGvuxAcAs>, he 
palmed it back in forKarun Nair to dive low to his right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/apr/10/ipl-2015-kings-xi-punjab-v-rajasthan-royals-live>
, as though at forward short leg, and pouch it half a foot off the ground. 
Teamwork, presence of mind, quicksilver reflexes – this catch had everything.

Comeback kids of the tournament


Both Harbhajan Singh and Ashish Nehra were key performers when India won the 
World Cup on home soil in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/apr/02/india-world-cup-cricket-victory>
. Nehra, now 36, hasn’t played for India since, while Harbhajan’s last 
international outing was in March 2013. Nehra’s 22 wickets were the most for an 
Indian pace bowler, and he maintained an impressive economy rate of just over 
seven until Kieron Pollard and friends took 23 off his final over. Harbhajan, 
who turns 35 in July, took two for 26 and two for 34 in the playoffs, but there 
were more than a few raised eyebrows whenhe was recalled to the Test squad 
after only six wickets (from three games) in the last first-class season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/20/harbhajan-singh-recaled-india-bangladesh>
.

Most important game-changer


When he was good, Andre Russell was exceptional. Kolkata Knight Riders’ 
defence of the title went off-piste largely because of the uncertainties over 
Sunil Narine’s bowling action, but Russell’s all-round exploits still took them 
within a point of the playoffs.His 326 runs came at a strike-rate of 193 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/10/ipl-kolkata-knight-riders-kings-xi-punjab>
, while his 14 wickets came at an economy rate of less than eight. Shakib Al 
Hasan’s absence – he played only four matches because of international 
commitments – was barely felt as Russell filled in with aplomb.

Biggest disappointment

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F25%2Fipl-awards-2015-mumbai-chennai-lendl-simmons-lasith-malinga-shreyas-iyler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F25%2F1432549562140%2F541fe013-5ef5-4e4e-9f42-394fac04db3a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20IPL%202015%20awards%3A%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F25%2Fipl-awards-2015-mumbai-chennai-lendl-simmons-lasith-malinga-shreyas-iyler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20IPL%202015%20awards%3A%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F25%2Fipl-awards-2015-mumbai-chennai-lendl-simmons-lasith-malinga-shreyas-iyler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F25%2F1432549562140%2F541fe013-5ef5-4e4e-9f42-394fac04db3a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 MS Dhoni celebrates with Ravindra Jadeja in 2011 after a one-day win over 
England in Mohali Photograph: Gareth Copley/Getty Images 
Last July, Ravindra Jadeja was one of the heroes of a famous India Test win at 
Lord’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/20/ravindra-jadeja-jimmy-anderson-india-england-lords>
. Since then, starting with a not-guilty verdict for Jimmy Anderson in the 
aftermath of ‘Pushgate’ at Trent Bridge, it’s been downhill. Dropped from the 
Test side later in that series, and now not even part of the squad, Jadeja 
managed just 132 runs and 11 wickets this IPL. He wasn’t the only marquee 
player to fail for Chennai, but his woes had a severe impact on their team 
balance.

The thanks-for-the-memories-but-it’s-time-to-move-on award


Mahendra Singh Dhoni made 372 runs but the strike-rate of 121.96 was as low as 
it has ever been in eight seasons. This was Chennai’s fourth defeat in six 
final appearances and the look of helplessness on Stephen Fleming’s face long 
before the end suggested that the captain-coach combination might have taken 
Chennai as far as they can. Rohit has now won the IPL twice in three seasons as 
captain, while Kohli’s Bangalore – who won seven and lost just two of their 
last 11 games – would undoubtedly have given Mumbai a keener contest. Chennai’s 
once-envied settled core has seen better days. Renewal is the name of the 2016 
game.
 