
“If anyone has a medical condition they can get their money back now.”

The tour guides at the Gobbins are nothing if not careful. It’s contagious, 
judging by the number of us wearing white plastic climbing helmets while 
sitting in a room watching the safety video.

Northern Ireland’s newest visitor attraction has only been open three weeks, 
but with weekends booked up to the middle of October, it’s already a hot 
ticket. Even though it’s over 100 years old.

Berkeley Deane Wise <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkeley_Deane_Wise> was 
the chief engineer on the Belfast and Northern Counties Railway at the start of 
the 20th century. He was also a one-man tourist board, coming up with new 
attractions to increase passenger numbers. Like the Gobbins Path, skirting the 
bottom of the Gobbins cliffs of Islandmagee on the east Antrim coast.
 The original Gobbins path 
While the waves of the North Channel crashed below, workmen in bowler hats 
hammered metal pins into basalt and suspended bridges from them. Walkways were 
laid through caves and over coves, railings were installed to keep gentlemen 
and ladies on the straight and narrow, and an Edwardian travellers trail was 
born.

It was a hit with tourists and visiting engineers, but over the next 40 years 
the decline in the fortunes of the railway company, as well as the huge 
maintenance costs of all that cast iron sprayed with salt water, led to its 
closure in 1954. It disappeared from the guidebooks for over half a century;
growing up in Derry, 70 miles to the west 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/video/2013/jan/08/my-city-an-undertones-derry-video>
, I was unaware of its existence.

But four years ago, work started on a 21st-century version of Wise’s creation, 
with stainless steel replacing the cast iron and patches of new concrete where 
old steps had crumbled away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-gobbins-cliff-path-antrim-northern-ireland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442324748284%2F5c80aa4b-973b-45b8-a0b4-c5b8f03b5a83-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20return%20of%20Antrim%E2%80%99s%20Gobbins%20Path&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-gobbins-cliff-path-antrim-northern-ireland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20return%20of%20Antrim%E2%80%99s%20Gobbins%20Path&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-gobbins-cliff-path-antrim-northern-ireland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442324748284%2F5c80aa4b-973b-45b8-a0b4-c5b8f03b5a83-2060x1236.jpeg>
As it’s an important nesting site for puffins, kittiwakes and razorbills, 
today the Gobbins can only be visited with a guide. Robert led us, with Clare 
bringing up the rear, making sure no one got left behind and reassuring one 
young woman who didn’t like the sudden darkness of one of the caves. They’re 
still new at this, which means the guides were as enthusiastic as we were about 
the 2½-hour round trip.

Islandmagee, near the ferry port of Larne, is where many citizens of Belfast 
spent their holidays when the shipyards and mills closed for a fortnight each 
summer. When we reached one of the bridges, called the Gallery, Robert told us 
that workers on holiday from the Harland and Wolff shipyard stood here 100 
years ago, watching the sea trials of the ships they’d spent the year building: 
the Olympic, the Britannic and, yes, the Titanic.

There are no ocean-going liners these days but remnants of Edwardian 
engineering can still be seen along the mile-long path; rusting handrail posts 
running parallel with the new (and more reassuring) stainless steel 
replacements, left in place in honour of the men who laid them using hand tools 
rather than tungsten-tipped power drills. Wise prided himself on safe working 
for his men, and despite an absence of steel-capped boots, safety harnesses and 
hard hats, no one was killed or injured building the first Gobbins Path.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-gobbins-cliff-path-antrim-northern-ireland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442324570692%2F2d6b1bbf-4cf7-428f-9eb7-37a2f510e93d-1020x679.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20return%20of%20Antrim%E2%80%99s%20Gobbins%20Path&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-gobbins-cliff-path-antrim-northern-ireland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20return%20of%20Antrim%E2%80%99s%20Gobbins%20Path&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-gobbins-cliff-path-antrim-northern-ireland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442324570692%2F2d6b1bbf-4cf7-428f-9eb7-37a2f510e93d-1020x679.jpeg>
 The centrepiece of the original project was the Tubular bridge, replaced by 
this replica. Photograph: Aaron McCracken/Harrisons 
The centrepiece of the original project was the Tubular bridge, spanning 20 
metres to an outcrop called the Man O’War. The bridge was a cylindrical cage 
designed by Wise himself. It has been replaced by a replica, lowered from a 
crane perched on top of the cliffs 60 metres above.

Those cliffs are crowded with seabirds during the nesting season, but they are 
few and far between at this time of year (on the upside, we were in no danger 
of being hit by fresh guano from above) and instead we had sunshine, which is 
equally unexpected and unusual in late summer.

We could see the coast of Scotland in the distance but it was the close-up 
view of the basalt, plants and sea that really makes the Gobbins experience 
stand out. We reached the end of the path and looked over to our left, where a 
cormorant was casually ignoring our cameras. We joined him in admiring the view 
from down by the water.

“Right,” said Robert. “Time to head back. Take your time, now.”

We had waited the best part of a century for this. We weren’t going to be 
rushed.

• The Gobbins Visitor Centre, Islandmagee, is open daily from 9.30am-5.30pm. 
Tours run every hour and last approximately 2½ hours; £8.50 adults, £6 children 
and concessions, family ticket (two adults, three children under 16) £23, 
028-9337 2318,thegobbinscliffpath.com <http://thegobbinscliffpath.com/>. The 
nearest train station is Ballycarry, one mile from the Gobbins
 