
For some people in the US, 2016 wasn’t all bad. While the news cycle around 
them projected prominent incidents of death and despair, they managed to do 
their best work in spite of 2016’s worst fortune, and in many cases, because of 
it.

Here are some of America’s winners of 2016.

Samantha Bee

Samantha Bee <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/samantha-bee>, the only 
female host on late-night TV, revealed herself as one of the sharpest and 
funniest tongues criticizing Donald Trump.

Samantha Bee meets Glenn Beck: 'It's all of us against Trumpism'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/20/samantha-bee-glenn-beck-interview-full-frontal>
After years as a Daily Show correspondent, Bee launched Full Frontal With 
Samantha Bee in February this year. Her show is known for having one of the 
most diverse writing teams in television, and instantly began telling stories 
not just from a white dude’s perspective.

Her monologues and stories on the election dominated Facebook and Twitter 
feeds, fromquestioning whether Trump can read 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7LFkN7QGp2c>, to interviewing his 
pearl-wearing young supporters <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zWlUgI4cB4M> and
calling out white people for voting for him 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1SaD-gSZO4>.

A furious Bee called bullshit on white male TV executives and hosts who 
tacitly supported Trump with TV appearances 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=urMYjS97omY>. “They’re not gonna live under a 
president who thinks of them as a collection of sex toys,” she declared.

Michelle Obama

The first lady is the most popular person on “the American political stage”, 
according toa WSJ/NBC poll 
<http://qz.com/812189/michelle-obama-outscores-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-and-her-own-husband-on-favorability-a-new-wsjnbc-poll-shows/>
 in October, which found 59% of people had a favourable opinion of her. She was 
the Hillary Clinton campaign’s go-to surrogate in 2016, giving speech after 
speech in key swing states in an effort to shore up the vote and offering a 
warm, open contrast to Clinton’s more reserved personality.

Before she took to the trail, Obama’s speech at the Democratic national 
convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/michelle-obama-convention-speech-female-president>
 was every bit as soaring and memorable as her husband’s breakthrough address 
in 2004. Many in the crowd wept as Obama recapped the strides made as a result 
of her husband’s election and looked ahead to what Clinton’s election would do 
for the country.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmichelle-obama-laughs-after-audience-member-shouts-madam-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Run%20for%20president!%E2%80%99%3A%20Michelle%20Obama%20laughs%20off%20interruption%20at%20veterans%20summit%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmichelle-obama-laughs-after-audience-member-shouts-madam-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Run%20for%20president%21%E2%80%99%3A%20Michelle%20Obama%20laughs%20off%20interruption%20at%20veterans%20summit%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmichelle-obama-laughs-after-audience-member-shouts-madam-president-video&media=>
‘Run for president!’: Michelle Obama laughs off interruption at veterans summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/michelle-obama-laughs-after-audience-member-shouts-madam-president-video>
“I wake up every morning in a house that was built by slaves,” Obama told the 
crowd. “And I watch my daughters, two beautiful, intelligent black young women, 
playing with their dogs on the White House lawn.”

Her response to the tenor of Trump’s campaign, “When they go low, we go high”, 
was seized upon by Democrats and was more powerful than any slogan that Clinton 
was able to muster during her 18-month campaign.

The year ended with calls for Obama to run for office herself. But for now she 
seems ready to let her husband go down as the only President Obama.

Bernie Sanders

He didn’t win the Democratic primary. He didn’t win the presidency. But Bernie 
Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> awakened and 
excited millions of predominantly young voters during his improbable campaign.

‘He wasn’t terribly charismatic’: Bernie Sanders leads a civil rights protest 
in 1962
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/16/bernie-sanders-civil-rights-protest-chicago-1962-photography>
At the Democratic national convention the success and popularity of Sanders’ 
campaign helped the senator and his supporters shape themost progressive 
Democratic party platform in decades 
<https://berniesanders.com/democrats-adopt-progressive-platform-party-history/>
. It called for a $15-an-hour minimum wage, stronger climate protections, and 
an amendment calling for all police shootings to be investigated by the 
Department of Justice.

While Clinton didn’t win, Sanders’ influence could help shape the future of 
the Democratic party and progressive politics for a long time to come.

He set up the Our Revolution organization in August with the aim of advancing 
liberal reforms, and the group will be a key part of the Democrats’ attempted 
fightback during 2017 and the 2018 midterms.

Lin-Manuel Miranda

It would be hard to overplay how big a year it’s been for Lin-Manuel Miranda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/lin-manuel-miranda>, the creator of 
Broadway’s Hamilton. In February he won a Grammy, in April he won the Pulitzer 
prize for drama, and in June Hamilton won 11 Tony Awards.

Lin-Manuel Miranda: the bard behind Broadway's Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/20/lin-manuel-miranda-musicals-hamilton-broadway-disney-hiphop>
Miranda composed the music for the Disney film Moana, announced he’s starring 
in the new Mary Poppins film and also brought together a stack of music’s 
biggest names to create the Hamilton mixtape.

The hip-hop musical credited with changing everything from real estate in 
upper Manhattan to founding father Alexander Hamilton remaining on the $10 bill 
is sold out on Broadway until November 2017 (apart from the occasional $750 
premium ticket), with new productions slated to open around the world in the 
coming year.

And in the middle of the madness stands Miranda, excitedly tweeting with fans 
about how lucky he is to be alive right now.

Kellyanne Conway

Few people outside of political circles had heard of Kellyanne Conway before 
she was parachuted into Donald Trump’s campaign as an adviser on 1 July. By 
August she was Trump’s campaign manager – his third. Trump was 10 points behind 
Clinton in the polls at that point.

Conway’s skill at interpreting Trump’s unconventional beliefs, whether on 
immigrants, election laws, or the appropriateness of sexual assault – was 
essential as the campaign wheeled from one distraction to the next.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fkellyanne-conway-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kellyanne%20Conway%3A%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20master%20of%20spin%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fkellyanne-conway-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kellyanne%20Conway%3A%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20master%20of%20spin%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fkellyanne-conway-donald-trump-video&media=>
Kellyanne Conway: Trump’s master of spin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/22/kellyanne-conway-donald-trump-video>
By the end of the election Conway was a household name and a recurring 
Saturday Night Live character – portrayed by Kate McKinnon as a frazzled 
employee constantly exasperated at her boss’s ignorance, hypersensitivity and 
idiocy.

In December Conway turned down 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/12/politics/kellyanne-conway-trump-press-secretary/>
 the job of White House press secretary, but she is likely to remain a visible 
– and influential – presence in 2017.

LeBron James

It’s time to call LeBron James what he is: the NBA's greatest ever player
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/20/lebron-james-cleveland-cavaliers-nba-title-goat>
No professional Cleveland sports team had won a title for 52 years before 
LeBron Jamesdragged the Cleveland Cavaliers to the NBA title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/cleveland-cavaliers-win-nba-title-golden-state-warriors-game-7-nba-finals>
 in June. After four games of the finals the Cavs were down 3-1, but James 
launched a blistering comeback as the team won the required three games in a 
row.

James became only the third player 
<http://www.nba.com/2016/news/06/19/lebron-james-finals-mvp.ap/> to record a 
triple-double – with 27 points, 11 rebounds and 11 assists – in game 7 of an 
NBA finals, and was named the finals MVP.

In December Forbes magazine estimated 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kurtbadenhausen/2016/12/13/lebron-james-net-worth-275-million-in-2016/#79214af177e3>
 his net worth as $275m, and in the same month he was named Sports 
Illustrated’s “sports person of the year”. Forthe magazine’s cover photo 
<http://www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/18268653/cleveland-cavaliers-star-lebron-james-wears-safety-pin-sports-illustrated-cover>
 he wore a safety pin on the lapel of his jacket – a symbol of solidarity with 
those who feel threatened by Trump’s election.

Simone Biles

Pocket rocket Simone Biles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/simone-biles> 
flew into the hearts of Americans this year. She was declared the greatest 
gymnast of all time by many observers even before attending the Olympics, but 
she turned up in Rio and took home four gold medals, including the Individual 
All Round, and a bronze.

Why I love… Simone Biles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/18/why-i-love-simone-biles> 
Her moves seem to defy physics (she can leap to nearly double her 4ft 9in 
height) but her demeanor makes it look like she’s having more fun than anyone 
in the room. Even when she slightly slipped on the beam, she quipped on 
Snapchat afterwards: “fall on beam, get bronze.”

In the closing ceremony, the 19-year-old from Ohio carried the US flag and was 
slowed down by queues of athletes demanding a selfie with her. The only time 
Biles lost her cool was when the Today Showflew out her celebrity crush Zac 
Efron to meet her during the Games <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kx3iOhkbQSc>
.

Since Rio, she’s gone on a stadium tour with the rest of the Famous Five 
gymnastics team, become an award show regular and was just named Woman of the 
Year by ESPN magazine.

Chance the Rapper

After several years of buzzy mixtapes and live performances, 23-year-old 
Chance the Rapper exploded in 2016. The musician from the south side of Chicago 
co-wrote several tracks for Kanye West’s Life of Pablo, and rapped one of the 
most notable verses on the whole album.

Chance The Rapper is the world's first truly independent artist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/19/chance-the-rapper-album-coloring-book-mixtape-billboard-charts-stream-music>
Then his solo effort Coloring Book, a gospel-influenced hip-hop album packed 
with optimism and joy, became one of the biggest albums of the summer.

He created a musical festival for the south side of Chicago (with appearances 
from Alicia Keys, John Legend and Kanye West), performeda musical tribute to 
Muhammad Ali <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pMTZB24dv2A> at the Espys and 
sang at the National Christmas Tree Lighting, where Sasha Obama knew all his 
lyrics.

But the rapper, real name Chancelor Bennett, steadfastly remains independent 
and refuses to sign to a record label. “I don’t make songs for free, I make 
them for Freedom,” he sings on Blessings. Now he’s nominated for seven Grammy 
awards.

Ben Carson

Ben Carson’s presidential bid didn’t end as well as it seemed to start. He 
went fromleading the Republican primary polls 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/11/02/politics/ben-carson-donald-trump-poll/> to 
winning just three delegates out of a possible 600 on Super Tuesday and dropped 
out of the raceamid questions 
<https://twitter.com/bencjacobs/status/687859032397344768> about whether his 
entire campaign had been a direct mail scam.

But whether by good judgment or luck, Carson’s year soon took a remarkable 
turn. He was one of the first of the fallen Republican candidates to endorse 
Donald Trump. That stood him in good stead when Trump was considering names for 
his cabinet in November.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fben-carson-campaign-rap-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Straight%20outta%20Carson%3A%20Republican%20candidate%20releases%20campaign%20rap%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fben-carson-campaign-rap-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Straight%20outta%20Carson%3A%20Republican%20candidate%20releases%20campaign%20rap%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fben-carson-campaign-rap-video&media=>
Straight outta Carson: Republican candidate releases campaign rap – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/05/ben-carson-campaign-rap-video>
Carson declared himself unqualified to serve in Trump’s cabinet. But he got 
the job anyway and in 2016 – Senate willing – will serve as housing and urban 
development secretary.

He still doesn’t have any experience. But Carson somehow tripped, stumbled and 
fumbled his way to a fantastic 2016.

Beyoncé

Best albums of 2016: No 1 Lemonade by Beyoncé
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/dec/16/best-albums-of-2016-no-1-lemonade-beyonce>
This was the year the country’s biggest living pop culture icon got political. 
Beyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> slayed with her February 
release of Formation, a song referencing the Black Lives Matter movement and 
black pride. Her performance at the Super Bowl with her dancers marching in 
Black Panthers-inspired outfits turned her into one of the country’s biggest 
news stories with people calling to “Boycott Beyoncé” for her supposedly 
anti-police stand.

But it was the release in April of Lemonade, her visual album exploring 
infidelity, family, marriage and southern black womanhood, that proved a 
masterpiece and launched a thousand think pieces. Women from Serena Williams to 
the mothers of children killed by police appear like queens, a study in black 
female strength.

During a concert in Glasgow, Scotland, she held a minute’s silence for two 
black men killed that week by police, projecting the names of dozens of black 
people killed by police. Oh, and she sold “Boycott Beyoncé” T-shirts as part of 
her Lemonade tour merchandise.
 