
The red flags and marching songs of Syriza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syriza> during the Greek crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debt-crisis>, plus the expectation that 
the banks would be nationalised, revived briefly a 20th-century dream: the 
forced destruction of the market from above. For much of the 20th century this 
was how the left conceived the first stage of an economy beyond capitalism. The 
force would be applied by the working class, either at the ballot box or on the 
barricades. The lever would be the state. The opportunity would come through 
frequent episodes of economic collapse.

Instead over the past 25 years it has been the left’s project that has 
collapsed. The market destroyed the plan; individualism replaced collectivism 
and solidarity; the hugely expanded workforce of the world looks like a 
“proletariat”, but no longer thinks or behaves as it once did.

If you lived through all this, and disliked capitalism, it was traumatic. But 
in the process technology has created a new route out, which the remnants of 
the old left – and all other forces influenced by it – have either to embrace 
or die. Capitalism, it turns out, will not be abolished by forced-march 
techniques. It will be abolished by creating something more dynamic that 
exists, at first, almost unseen within the old system, but which will break 
through, reshaping the economy around new values and behaviours. I call this 
postcapitalism.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again.  
Watch: Capitalism is failing, and it’s time to panic 
As with the end of feudalism 500 years ago, capitalism’s replacement by 
postcapitalism will be accelerated by external shocks and shaped by the 
emergence of a new kind of human being. And it has started.

Postcapitalism is possible because of three major changes information 
technology has brought about in the past 25 years. First, it has reduced the 
need for work, blurred the edges between work and free time and loosened the 
relationship between work and wages. The coming wave of automation, currently 
stalled because our social infrastructure cannot bear the consequences, will 
hugely diminish the amount of work needed – not just to subsist but to provide 
a decent life for all.

Second, information is corroding the market’s ability to form prices 
correctly. That is because markets are based on scarcity while information is 
abundant. The system’s defence mechanism is to form monopolies – the giant tech 
companies – on a scale not seen in the past 200 years, yet they cannot last. By 
building business models and share valuations based on the capture and 
privatisation of all socially produced information, such firms are constructing 
a fragile corporate edifice at odds with the most basic need of humanity, which 
is to use ideas freely.

Related: British capitalism is broken. Here’s how to fix it | Will Hutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/11/british-capitalism-broken-how-to-fix-it>

Third, we’re seeing the spontaneous rise of collaborative production: goods, 
services and organisations are appearing that no longer respond to the dictates 
of the market and the managerial hierarchy. The biggest information product in 
the world –Wikipedia <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wikipedia> – is 
made by volunteers for free, abolishing the encyclopedia business and depriving 
the advertising industry of an estimated $3bn a year in revenue.

Almost unnoticed, in the niches and hollows of the market system, whole swaths 
of economic life are beginning to move to a different rhythm. Parallel 
currencies, time banks, cooperatives and self-managed spaces have proliferated, 
barely noticed by the economics profession, and often as a direct result of the 
shattering of the old structures in the post-2008 crisis.

You only find this new economy if you look hard for it. In Greece, when a 
grassroots NGO mapped the country’s food co-ops, alternative producers, 
parallel currencies and local exchange systems they found more than 70 
substantive projects and hundreds of smaller initiatives ranging from squats to 
carpools to free kindergartens. To mainstream economics such things seem barely 
to qualify as economic activity – but that’s the point. They exist because they 
trade, however haltingly and inefficiently, in the currency of postcapitalism: 
free time, networked activity and free stuff. It seems a meagre and unofficial 
and even dangerous thing from which to craft an entire alternative to a global 
system, but so did money and credit in the age of Edward III.
 Sharing the fruits of our labour. Illustration by Joe Magee 
New forms of ownership, new forms of lending, new legal contracts: a whole 
business subculture has emerged over the past 10 years, which the media has 
dubbed the “sharing economy”. Buzzwords such as the “commons” and 
“peer-production” are thrown around, but few have bothered to ask what this 
development means for capitalism itself.

I believe it offers an escape route – but only if these micro-level projects 
are nurtured, promoted and protected by a fundamental change in what 
governments do. And this must be driven by a change in our thinking – about 
technology, ownership and work. So that, when we create the elements of the new 
system, we can say to ourselves, and to others: “This is no longer simply my 
survival mechanism, my bolt hole from the neoliberal world; this is a new way 
of living in the process of formation.”

 ...

The 2008 crash wiped 13% off global production and 20% off global trade. 
Global growth became negative – on a scale where anything below +3% is counted 
as a recession. It produced, in the west, a depression phase longer than in 
1929-33, and even now, amid a pallid recovery, has left mainstream economists 
terrified about the prospect of long-term stagnation. The aftershocks in Europe 
are tearing the continent apart.

The solutions have been austerity plus monetary excess. But they are not 
working. In the worst-hit countries, the pension system has been destroyed, the 
retirement age is being hiked to 70, and education is being privatised so that 
graduates now face a lifetime of high debt. Services are being dismantled and 
infrastructure projects put on hold.

Even now many people fail to grasp the true meaning of the word “austerity”. 
Austerity is not eight years of spending cuts, as in the UK, or even the social 
catastrophe inflicted on Greece. It means driving the wages, social wages and 
living standards in the west down for decades until they meet those of the 
middle class in China and India on the way up.

Meanwhile in the absence of any alternative model, the conditions for another 
crisis are being assembled. Real wages have fallen or remained stagnant in 
Japan, the southern Eurozone, the US and UK. The shadow banking system has been 
reassembled, and is now bigger than it was in 2008. New rules demanding banks 
hold more reserves have been watered down or delayed. Meanwhile, flushed with 
free money, the 1% has got richer.

Neoliberalism, then, has morphed into a system programmed to inflict recurrent 
catastrophic failures. Worse than that, it has broken the 200-year pattern of 
industrial capitalism wherein an economic crisis spurs new forms of 
technological innovation that benefit everybody.

That is because neoliberalism was the first economic model in 200 years the 
upswing of which was premised on the suppression of wages and smashing the 
social power and resilience of the working class. If we review the take-off 
periods studied by long-cycle theorists – the 1850s in Europe, the 1900s and 
1950s across the globe – it was the strength of organised labour that forced 
entrepreneurs and corporations to stop trying to revive outdated business 
models through wage cuts, and to innovate their way to a new form of capitalism.

The result is that, in each upswing, we find a synthesis of automation, higher 
wages and higher-value consumption. Today there is no pressure from the 
workforce, and the technology at the centre of this innovation wave does not 
demand the creation of higher-consumer spending, or the re‑employment of the 
old workforce in new jobs. Information is a machine for grinding the price of 
things lower and slashing the work time needed to support life on the planet.

Related: Occupy was right: capitalism has failed the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/13/occupy-right-capitalism-failed-world-french-economist-thomas-piketty>

As a result, large parts of the business class have become neo-luddites. Faced 
with the possibility of creating gene-sequencing labs, they instead start 
coffee shops, nail bars and contract cleaning firms: the banking system, the 
planning system and late neoliberal culture reward above all the creator of 
low-value, long-hours jobs.

Innovation is happening but it has not, so far, triggered the fifth long 
upswing for capitalism that long-cycle theory would expect. The reasons lie in 
the specific nature of information technology.

...

We’re surrounded not just by intelligent machines but by a new layer of 
reality centred on information. Consider an airliner: a computer flies it; it 
has been designed, stress-tested and “virtually manufactured” millions of 
times; it is firing back real-time information to its manufacturers. On board 
are people squinting at screens connected, in some lucky countries, to the 
internet.

Seen from the ground it is the same white metal bird as in the James Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> era. But it is now both an 
intelligent machine and a node on a network. It has an information content and 
is adding “information value” as well as physical value to the world. On a 
packed business flight, when everyone’s peering at Excel or Powerpoint, the 
passenger cabin is best understood as an information factory.
 Is it utopian to believe we’re on the verge of an evolution beyond 
capitalism? Illustration by Joe Magee 
But what is all this information worth? You won’t find an answer in the 
accounts: intellectual property is valued in modern accounting standards by 
guesswork. A study for the SAS Institute in 2013 found that, in order to put a 
value on data, neither the cost of gathering it, nor the market value or the 
future income from it could be adequately calculated. Only through a form of 
accounting that included non-economic benefits, and risks, could companies 
actually explain to their shareholders what their data was really worth. 
Something is broken in the logic we use to value the most important thing in 
the modern world.

The great technological advance of the early 21st century consists not only of 
new objects and processes, but of old ones made intelligent. The knowledge 
content of products is becoming more valuable than the physical things that are 
used to produce them. But it is a value measured as usefulness, not exchange or 
asset value. In the 1990s economists and technologists began to have the same 
thought at once: that this new role for information was creating a new, “third” 
kind of capitalism – as different from industrial capitalism as industrial 
capitalism was to the merchant and slave capitalism of the 17th and 18th 
centuries. But they have struggled to describe the dynamics of the new 
“cognitive” capitalism. And for a reason. Its dynamics are profoundly 
non-capitalist.

During and right after the second world war, economists viewed information 
simply as a “public good”. The US government even decreed that no profit should 
be made out of patents, only from the production process itself. Then we began 
to understand intellectual property. In 1962, Kenneth Arrow, the guru of 
mainstream economics, said that in a free market economy the purpose of 
inventing things is to create intellectual property rights. He noted: 
“precisely to the extent that it is successful there is an underutilisation of 
information.”

You can observe the truth of this in every e-business model ever constructed: 
monopolise and protect data, capture the free social data generated by user 
interaction, push commercial forces into areas of data production that were 
non-commercial before, mine the existing data for predictive value – always and 
everywhere ensuring nobody but the corporation can utilise the results.

If we restate Arrow’s principle in reverse, its revolutionary implications are 
obvious: if a free market economy plus intellectual property leads to the 
“underutilisation of information”, then an economy based on the full 
utilisation of information cannot tolerate the free market or absolute 
intellectual property rights. The business models of all our modern digital 
giants are designed to prevent the abundance of information.

Yet information is abundant. Information goods are freely replicable. Once a 
thing is made, it can be copied/pasted infinitely. A music track or the giant 
database you use to build an airliner has a production cost; but its cost of 
reproduction falls towards zero. Therefore, if the normal price mechanism of 
capitalism prevails over time, its price will fall towards zero, too.

For the past 25 years economics has been wrestling with this problem: all 
mainstream economics proceeds from a condition of scarcity, yet the most 
dynamic force in our modern world is abundant and, as hippy genius Stewart 
Brand once put it, “wants to be free”.

There is, alongside the world of monopolised information and surveillance 
created by corporations and governments, a different dynamic growing up around 
information: information as a social good, free at the point of use, incapable 
of being owned or exploited or priced. I’ve surveyed the attempts by economists 
and business gurus to build a framework to understand the dynamics of an 
economy based on abundant, socially-held information. But it was actually 
imagined by one 19th-century economist in the era of the telegraph and the 
steam engine. His name?Karl Marx <https://www.theguardian.com/books/karl-marx>.

...

The scene is Kentish Town, London, February 1858, sometime around 4am. Marx is 
a wanted man in Germany and is hard at work scribbling thought-experiments and 
notes-to-self. When they finally get to see what Marx is writing on this night, 
the left intellectuals of the 1960s will admit that it “challenges every 
serious interpretation of Marx yet conceived”. It is called “The Fragment on 
Machines”.

In the “Fragment” Marx imagines an economy in which the main role of machines 
is to produce, and the main role of people is to supervise them. He was clear 
that, in such an economy, the main productive force would be information. The 
productive power of such machines as the automated cotton-spinning machine, the 
telegraph and the steam locomotive did not depend on the amount of labour it 
took to produce them but on the state of social knowledge. Organisation and 
knowledge, in other words, made a bigger contribution to productive power than 
the work of making and running the machines.

Given what Marxism was to become – a theory of exploitation based on the theft 
of labour time – this is a revolutionary statement. It suggests that, once 
knowledge becomes a productive force in its own right, outweighing the actual 
labour spent creating a machine, the big question becomes not one of “wages 
versus profits” but who controls what Marx called the “power of knowledge”.

In an economy where machines do most of the work, the nature of the knowledge 
locked inside the machines must, he writes, be “social”. In a final late-night 
thought experiment Marx imagined the end point of this trajectory: the creation 
of an “ideal machine”, which lasts forever and costs nothing. A machine that 
could be built for nothing would, he said, add no value at all to the 
production process and rapidly, over several accounting periods, reduce the 
price, profit and labour costs of everything else it touched.

Once you understand that information is physical, and that software is a 
machine, and that storage, bandwidth and processing power are collapsing in 
price at exponential rates, the value of Marx’s thinking becomes clear. We are 
surrounded by machines that cost nothing and could, if we wanted them to, last 
forever.

In these musings, not published until the mid-20th century, Marx imagined 
information coming to be stored and shared in something called a “general 
intellect” – which was the mind of everybody on Earth connected by social 
knowledge, in which every upgrade benefits everybody. In short, he had imagined 
something close to the information economy in which we live. And, he wrote, its 
existence would “blow capitalism sky high”.

Marx imagined something close to our information economy. He wrote its 
existence would blow capitalism sky high

...

With the terrain changed, the old path beyond capitalism imagined by the left 
of the 20th century is lost.

But a different path has opened up. Collaborative production, using network 
technology to produce goods and services that only work when they are free, or 
shared, defines the route beyond the market system. It will need the state to 
create the framework – just as it created the framework for factory labour, 
sound currencies and free trade in the early 19th century. The postcapitalist 
sector is likely to coexist with the market sector for decades, but major 
change is happening.

Networks restore “granularity” to the postcapitalist project. That is, they 
can be the basis of a non-market system that replicates itself, which does not 
need to be created afresh every morning on the computer screen of a commissar.

The transition will involve the state, the market and collaborative production 
beyond the market. But to make it happen, the entire project of the left, from 
protest groups to the mainstream social democratic and liberal parties, will 
have to be reconfigured. In fact, once people understand the logic of the 
postcapitalist transition, such ideas will no longer be the property of the 
left – but of a much wider movement, for which we will need new labels.

Who can make this happen? In the old left project it was the industrial 
working class. More than 200 years ago, the radical journalist John Thelwall 
warned the men who built the English factories that they had created a new and 
dangerous form of democracy: “Every large workshop and manufactory is a sort of 
political society, which no act of parliament can silence, and no magistrate 
disperse.”

Today the whole of society is a factory. We all participate in the creation 
and recreation of the brands, norms and institutions that surround us. At the 
same time the communication grids vital for everyday work and profit are 
buzzing with shared knowledge and discontent. Today it is the network – like 
the workshop 200 years ago – that they “cannot silence or disperse”.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again.  
Manuel Castells: how modern political movements straddle urban space and 
cyberspace 
True, states can shut down Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, even the entire internet and 
mobile network in times of crisis, paralysing the economy in the process. And 
they can store and monitor every kilobyte of information we produce. But they 
cannot reimpose the hierarchical, propaganda-driven and ignorant society of 50 
years ago, except – as in China, North Korea or Iran – by opting out of key 
parts of modern life. It would be, as sociologist Manuel Castells put it, like 
trying to de-electrify a country.

By creating millions of networked people, financially exploited but with the 
whole of human intelligence one thumb-swipe away, info-capitalism has created a 
new agent of change in history: the educated and connected human being.

...

This will be more than just an economic transition. There are, of course, the 
parallel and urgent tasks of decarbonising the world and dealing with 
demographic and fiscal timebombs. But I’m concentrating on the economic 
transition triggered by information because, up to now, it has been sidelined. 
Peer-to-peer has become pigeonholed as a niche obsession for visionaries, while 
the “big boys” of leftwing economics get on with critiquing austerity.
 Information wants to be free. Illustration by Joe Magee 
In fact, on the ground in places such as Greece, resistance to austerity and 
the creation of “networks you can’t default on” – as one activist put it to me 
– go hand in hand. Above all, postcapitalism as a concept is about new forms of 
human behaviour that conventional economics would hardly recognise as relevant.

So how do we visualise the transition ahead? The only coherent parallel we 
have is the replacement of feudalism by capitalism – and thanks to the work of 
epidemiologists, geneticists and data analysts, we know a lot more about that 
transition than we did 50 years ago when it was “owned” by social science. The 
first thing we have to recognise is: different modes of production are 
structured around different things. Feudalism was an economic system structured 
by customs and laws about “obligation”. Capitalism was structured by something 
purely economic: the market. We can predict, from this, that postcapitalism – 
whose precondition is abundance – will not simply be a modified form of a 
complex market society. But we can only begin to grasp at a positive vision of 
what it will be like.

I don’t mean this as a way to avoid the question: the general economic 
parameters of a postcapitalist society by, for example, the year 2075, can be 
outlined. But if such a society is structured around human liberation, not 
economics, unpredictable things will begin to shape it.

For example, the most obvious thing to Shakespeare, writing in 1600, was that 
the market had called forth new kinds of behaviour and morality. By analogy, 
the most obvious “economic” thing to the Shakespeare of 2075 will be the total 
upheaval in gender relationships, or sexuality, or health. Perhaps there will 
not even be any playwrights: perhaps the very nature of the media we use to 
tell stories will change – just as it changed in Elizabethan London when the 
first public theatres were built.

Think of the difference between, say, Horatio in Hamlet 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Hamlet&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 and a character such as Daniel Doyce in Dickens’sLittle Dorrit 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Little+Dorrit&order=relevance&dir=desc>
. Both carry around with them a characteristic obsession of their age – Horatio 
is obsessed with humanist philosophy; Doyce is obsessed with patenting his 
invention. There can be no character like Doyce in Shakespeare; he would, at 
best, get a bit part as a working-class comic figure. Yet, by the time Dickens 
described Doyce, most of his readers knew somebody like him. Just as 
Shakespeare could not have imagined Doyce, so we too cannot imagine the kind of 
human beings society will produce once economics is no longer central to life. 
But we can see their prefigurative forms in the lives of young people all over 
the world breaking down 20th-century barriers around sexuality, work, 
creativity and the self.

The feudal model of agriculture collided, first, with environmental limits and 
then with a massive external shock – the Black Death. After that, there was a 
demographic shock: too few workers for the land, which raised their wages and 
made the old feudal obligation system impossible to enforce. The labour 
shortage also forced technological innovation. The new technologies that 
underpinned the rise of merchant capitalism were the ones that stimulated 
commerce (printing and accountancy), the creation of tradeable wealth (mining, 
the compass and fast ships) and productivity (mathematics and the scientific 
method).

Present throughout the whole process was something that looks incidental to 
the old system – money and credit – but which was actually destined to become 
the basis of the new system. In feudalism, many laws and customs were actually 
shaped around ignoring money; credit was, in high feudalism, seen as sinful. So 
when money and credit burst through the boundaries to create a market system, 
it felt like a revolution. Then, what gave the new system its energy was the 
discovery of a virtually unlimited source of free wealth in the Americas.

A combination of all these factors took a set of people who had been 
marginalised under feudalism – humanists, scientists, craftsmen, lawyers, 
radical preachers and bohemian playwrights such as Shakespeare – and put them 
at the head of a social transformation. At key moments, though tentatively at 
first, the state switched from hindering the change to promoting it.

Today, the thing that is corroding capitalism, barely rationalised by 
mainstream economics, is information. Most laws concerning information define 
the right of corporations to hoard it and the right of states to access it, 
irrespective of the human rights of citizens. The equivalent of the printing 
press and the scientific method is information technology and its spillover 
into all other technologies, from genetics to healthcare to agriculture to the 
movies, where it is quickly reducing costs.

Related: David Graeber interview: ‘So many people spend their working lives 
doing jobs they think are unnecessary’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/21/books-interview-david-graeber-the-utopia-of-rules>

The modern equivalent of the long stagnation of late feudalism is the stalled 
take-off of the third industrial revolution, where instead of rapidly 
automating work out of existence, we are reduced to creating what David Graeber 
calls “bullshit jobs” on low pay. And many economies are stagnating.

The equivalent of the new source of free wealth? It’s not exactly wealth: it’s 
the “externalities” – the free stuff and wellbeing generated by networked 
interaction. It is the rise of non-market production, of unownable information, 
of peer networks and unmanaged enterprises. The internet, French economist Yann 
Moulier-Boutang says, is “both the ship and the ocean” when it comes to the 
modern equivalent of the discovery of the new world. In fact, it is the ship, 
the compass, the ocean and the gold.

The modern day external shocks are clear: energy depletion, climate change, 
ageing populations and migration. They are altering the dynamics of capitalism 
and making it unworkable in the long term. They have not yet had the same 
impact as the Black Death – but as we saw in New Orleans in 2005, it does not 
take the bubonic plague to destroy social order and functional infrastructure 
in a financially complex and impoverished society.

Once you understand the transition in this way, the need is not for a 
supercomputed Five Year Plan – but a project, the aim of which should be to 
expand those technologies, business models and behaviours that dissolve market 
forces, socialise knowledge, eradicate the need for work and push the economy 
towards abundance. I call it Project Zero – because its aims are a 
zero-carbon-energy system; the production of machines, products and services 
with zero marginal costs; and the reduction of necessary work time as close as 
possible to zero.

Most 20th-century leftists believed that they did not have the luxury of a 
managed transition: it was an article of faith for them that nothing of the 
coming system could exist within the old one – though the working class always 
attempted to create an alternative life within and “despite” capitalism. As a 
result, once the possibility of a Soviet-style transition disappeared, the 
modern left became preoccupied simply with opposing things: the privatisation 
of healthcare, anti-union laws, fracking – the list goes on.

Related: The non-virtual elephant in Paul Mason’s postcapitalist 
sharing-economy room | Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/21/non-virtual-elephant-in-paul-mason-postcapitalist-sharing-economy-room>

If I am right, the logical focus for supporters of postcapitalism is to build 
alternatives within the system; to use governmental power in a radical and 
disruptive way; and to direct all actions towards the transition – not the 
defence of random elements of the old system. We have to learn what’s urgent, 
and what’s important, and that sometimes they do not coincide.

...

The power of imagination will become critical. In an information society, no 
thought, debate or dream is wasted – whether conceived in a tent camp, prison 
cell or the table football space of a startup company.

As with virtual manufacturing, in the transition to postcapitalism the work 
done at the design stage can reduce mistakes in the implementation stage. And 
the design of the postcapitalist world, as with software, can be modular. 
Different people can work on it in different places, at different speeds, with 
relative autonomy from each other. If I could summon one thing into existence 
for free it would be a global institution that modelled capitalism correctly: 
an open source model of the whole economy; official, grey and black. Every 
experiment run through it would enrich it; it would be open source and with as 
many datapoints as the most complex climate models.

The main contradiction today is between the possibility of free, abundant 
goods and information; and a system of monopolies, banks and governments trying 
to keep things private, scarce and commercial. Everything comes down to the 
struggle between the network and the hierarchy: between old forms of society 
moulded around capitalism and new forms of society that prefigure what comes 
next.

...

Is it utopian to believe we’re on the verge of an evolution beyond capitalism? 
We live in a world in which gay men and women can marry, and in which 
contraception has, within the space of 50 years, made the average working-class 
woman freer than the craziest libertine of the Bloomsbury era. Why do we, then, 
find it so hard to imagine economic freedom?

It is the elites, cut off in their dark-limo world, whose project looks forlorn

It is the elites – cut off in their dark-limo world – whose project looks as 
forlorn as that of the millennial sects of the 19th century. The democracy of 
riot squads, corrupt politicians, magnate-controlled newspapers and the 
surveillance state looks as phoney and fragile as East Germany did 30 years ago.

All readings of human history have to allow for the possibility of a negative 
outcome. It haunts us in the zombie movie, the disaster movie, in the 
post-apocalytic wasteland of films such asThe Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131971/road> or Elysium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/22/elysium-review>. But why should 
we not form a picture of the ideal life, built out of abundant information, 
non-hierarchical work and the dissociation of work from wages?

Millions of people are beginning to realise they have been sold a dream at 
odds with what reality can deliver. Their response is anger – and retreat 
towards national forms of capitalism that can only tear the world apart. 
Watching these emerge, from the pro-Grexit left factions in Syriza to theFront 
National <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> and the isolationism 
of the American right has been like watching the nightmares we had during the
Lehman Brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers> crisis 
come true.

We need more than just a bunch of utopian dreams and small-scale horizontal 
projects. We need a project based on reason, evidence and testable designs, 
that cuts with the grain of history and is sustainable by the planet. And we 
need to get on with it.

 * Postcapitalism is published by Allen Lane on 30 July. Paul Mason will be 
asking whether capitalism has had its day at a sold-out Guardian Live event on 
22 July. Let us know your thoughts beforehand attheguardian.com/membership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership>.

Postcapitalism by Paul Mason (Allen Lane, £16.99). To order a copy for £12.99, 
go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/316569/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 