
Capacity: The official capacity is 2,000, but that’s for events spanning both 
the big and small main arches (the place is enormous, including masses of space 
not seen by the public). The big arch, for all-standing shows, is more like 800 
capacity, and the small arch around 300.


Who plays there: All kinds of artists big and small, at shows either promoted 
in-house by the Arches, or by any of Scotland’s several major promoters, from 
DF to PCL and Synergy. Recent visitors have included Nina Nesbitt, Prides, the 
Phantom Band, Temples and Martha Reeves and the Vandellas, as well as part of 
Glasgow’s annual January folk and roots festival Celtic Connections. Such is 
the Arches’ reputation as a clubbing mecca that many a monster of electronic 
music has played a significant early show here – everyone from Underworld to 
Calvin Harris and Daft Punk, who made their UK live debut at the Arches in 
January 1997.

Cloakroom: Yes.

Admission: Anything from £8 to £25.

Bar: Pretty good. The Cafe Bar does a good range of local and imported draft 
and bottled lagers and ales, which can be brought into the venue if you ask for 
a plastic glass. The bar inside the venue is a little more basic in its stock 
choices – mainly you’re talking common-or-garden lagers and ciders such as 
Tennent’s draft and cans of Heineken. Prices are steep, but not inordinately so.

Food: Nothing in the actual venues, but the Arches Cafe Bar & Restaurant is 
highly recommended for pre-gig dining – whether for a quick bar snack or a 
refined sit-down meal, depending how refined you consider a pork and Buckfast 
burger to be (yes, this is actually a thing).

Toilets: Not the best, though, especially considering the amount of traffic 
they can see on an especially busy night, not the worst either.

Wheelchair access: Very considered. There is level access to the main arch and 
a wheelchair-accessible lift down to the Cafe Bar. There are accessible 
toilets, with a radar key, and personal assistants can get a free ticket.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-the-arches-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427127953423%2F112fc13d-7c55-488e-9f83-03ed5c4a8670-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20the%20Arches%2C%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-the-arches-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20the%20Arches%2C%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-the-arches-glasgow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427127953423%2F112fc13d-7c55-488e-9f83-03ed5c4a8670-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cult post-punkers Pere Ubu play a live improvised score to the film It Came 
From Outer Space at the Arches in 2004. Photograph: Max Reeves 
Sound: Generally very high quality, especially considering the challenge sound 
engineers face here in making artists sound good in about the most impractical 
spaces imaginable – long, narrow, vaulted, stone-ceilinged archways. It can be 
very boomy and echoey towards the back of the arches, especially at more 
sparsely-attended shows, but when there are plenty of bodies in to soak up the 
sound, you shouldn’t have any complaints. Trains rumbling overhead can be 
audible during quieter songs, but that’s all part of the Arches’ special 
subterranean charm and atmosphere.

Where to stand: There are pros and cons, sight-wise, to watching a gig in a 
long archway. Unless you get stuck just around the corner to the entranceways, 
coming in from the back right and left – and the crowd can spill around the 
corners at sold-out shows – you’ll have a front-on view of the stage pretty 
much wherever you stand. However, it’s awkward to move around within the space 
– it’s dark and narrow with no access from the flanks, so if you want to get in 
deep, or come and go to the bar or the loos, you have to push and weave all the 
way through the crowd the long way, unfortunately. Best arrive early.

Overall: A mostly self-funded, not-for-profit 
<http://www.thearches.co.uk/about-us> multi-arts venue, and among the most 
famous and respected of its kind in Europe, The Arches has an interesting and 
unique history. Until the late 1980s it was a rat-infested warren of empty, 
disused vaults beneath Central station. Then an enterprising theatre producer 
called Andy Arnold saw potential for a cutting-edge creative space – potential 
which he innovatively funded with revenues from club nights during the 
early-90s acid house boom. Theatre and clubbing remain what The Arches is best 
known for, but in live-music terms, it’s one of the best, most important and 
most atmospheric places in the city too. It’s been host to countless standout 
gigs over the years, by everyone from MIA to Caribou, Battles, M83 and James 
Blake. Its significance in local music folklore, at the axis of the indie and 
clubbing worlds, was enshrined in a pivotal lyric to Arab Strap’s iconic 1996 
ode to thrills, pills and spills,The First Big Weekend 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g9Krvl7AEAs>. “Then on Friday night,” drawls 
Aidan Moffat, just before a thumping beat kicks in, “we went through to the 
Arches.”

Address: 253 Argyle Street, G2 8DL.

Telephone: 0141 565 1000.

Website:  thearches.co.uk <http://www.thearches.co.uk/>.

Public transport: The Arches is built literally beneath Glasgow Central 
railway station, so transport-wise it could hardly be more handily located. St 
Enoch’s subway station is also just two minutes’ walk away, and countless buses 
stop on Union Street and Argyle Street.
 