
For months, the image of the Donald Trump’s supporter has been the face of an 
angry white man. But it was white women who pushed Trump to victory.

A night of shattered dreams: inside election day with Hillary Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-us-election-night-reaction>
Rejecting the candidate who had aimed to be America’s first female president, 
53% of white women voted for Trump, according to CNN exit polls.

White women without a college degree supported Trump over Hillary Clinton by 
nearly a two to one margin. White women with a college degree were more evenly 
divided, with 45% supporting Trump, compared with 51% supporting Clinton.

“There’s your shy Trump vote,” Republican pollster Kristen Soltis Anderson 
tweeted on Tuesday night, noting that Trump had only lost white women with 
college degrees by a narrow margin.

Women of color, in contrast, voted overwhelmingly for Clinton: 94% of black 
women supported her, and 68% of Latino women. While exit polling data has 
flaws, the early responses underline a stark racial divide among American 
women: the majority of white women embraced Trump and his platform, while women 
of color rejected him.

The strong support for Trump among white women suggests that many of them, if 
not “overtly racist”, simply “don’t think racism is a big deal”, said Mikki 
Kendall, a feminist cultural critic.

“For them, it’s not real. They don’t have to worry about it, so you must be 
exaggerating. It’s Ivanka Trump [saying], ‘I’ve never had to deal with sexual 
harassment,’ and she’s only worked for her dad and companies she’s owned.”

The Clinton campaign and many commentators suggested that Clinton’s attempt to 
break the nation’s “highest, hardest glass ceiling” would draw strong support 
from women across the country. But in interviews, white women who support Trump 
said his record as a businessman and his policy positions resonated with them 
more strongly than Clinton’s candidacy as a woman.

Aimee Riley, a 34-year-old orthopedic surgeon from Richmond, Virginia, said 
she did not want the government to raise taxes on top earners. “I have worked 
so hard to get out of poverty,” she said. “I was raised to earn my own success, 
and feel strongly that I deserve every dollar I will now earn as a surgeon.”

In her everyday hospital work, Riley said, she saw many people “who think they 
deserve a handout and aren’t willing to do the work they are capable of”. Trump 
is “business-minded and not handout-minded, and I think this will instill a 
sense of effort and hard work in our country”, she said.

'Move to Canada' threats return – but actually emigrating there is difficult
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/move-to-canada-trump-election-immigration>
Like other Trump supporters, white women emphasized the importance of having a 
president who would nominate the right kind of supreme court justice. “I was 
delighted to vote forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, because he’s a pro-life 
advocate,” said Laurie Jones, 45, outside a polling station in New York City. 
Jones was accompanied by her seven-year-old daughter.

Jones, a nutritionist who lives in downtown Manhattan, hoped that Trump’s 
selection of supreme court justices would be able to overturn Roe v Wade and 
return the question of abortion rights to the state.

“I voted for Trump because America has struggled with simple economics and 
needs a change,” said Lizzie Whitmire, 35, a Catholic mother of two from 
Dallas. “I also want someone who is angry about terrorism and radical Islam.”

After the publication of a video that showed Trump boasting about how he could 
get away with kissing and groping women because he was famous, followed by 
accusations of sexual assault from 12 different women, the received wisdom was 
that Trump had lost the female vote.

But white women who voted for Trump downplayed his behavior to different 
degrees. Some said they believed he fundamentally respected women. Others said 
they did not, but thought his sexism would not undermine his ability to carry 
out the change they wanted.

Jones called Trump an “imperfect person, like all of us”. She said: “I do 
believe he does like women. He cares for his daughters and wife and female 
employees. He does respect women.”

Whitmire said: “I do not agree with Trump’s language and behaviour, and that 
is definitely not why I voted for him. But I am not worried that Trump’s 
misogynistic language and sexist behaviour will have any interference with the 
reasons I want him in office. These are no more than actual actions of past 
presidents who were exactly the same way, just never recorded under a hot mic.”

Like other Trump supporters, white women who supported him said Clinton’s 
political record and her failings were much more troubling that anything Trump 
had done.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
“To me, Hillary’s cover-up story on Benghazi and repeated lies to the American 
people are extremely corrupt,” Whitmire said. “Hillary took responsibility for 
the security at the compound that left four Americans killed, and we are 
talking about Trump’s language and behaviour. Trump has never killed people and 
lied about it.”

Yvonne Cipperly, 64, from East Norriton, Pennsylvania, called Trump “the 
lesser of two evils”.

“He may not know enough about the politics, but he’ll improve,” Clipperly, a 
longtime Democrat, said.

Clinton “can’t tell the truth”, she said. Her husband spent 22 years in the 
military and she was also worried about what Clinton would have done to her 
military benefits. Asked about Trump’s actions towards women, she shrugged. “He 
didn’t kill anyone,” she said.

While white women had the strongest support for Trump, 26% of Latino female 
voters also supported him. “I voted for Donald Trump because he’s a businessman 
and knows how to get things done,” Noemi Martinez, 58, said outside a polling 
station in Phoenix. Her mother, 76-year-old Noemi Garza, had voted for Clinton, 
but Martinez had not.

“Hillary has been there so many years and what has she done? She lies,” she 
said. Trump “has a few issues, but people change”, she said. “I figure it’s 
take a liar or take a chance, and I figure take a chance.”

I've heard enough of the white male rage narrative | Hadley Freeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/misogyny-us-election-voters>
Kendall said white women’s reactions to Black Lives Matter and to the fight 
over the Dakota Access pipeline had left her unsurprised that so many white 
women had come out for Trump.

“There’s an assumption that white women vote based on gender, and I did not 
quite buy that,” she said. “It’s not like the patriarchy stops because you have 
a vagina.”

Rebecca Carroll, an author who writes frequently about race, said: “White 
women are, of course, targets of heinous misogyny and hatred and sexism. We 
just saw Hillary Clinton deflect misogyny and hatred and sexism at every turn 
during her campaign from the guy who won, no less – but they are still in many 
ways so protected and favored and privileged.

“I am struck as I see these comments from white women on Twitter, especially 
along the lines of: ‘How could this happen?’ I immediately think, what world 
are you living in that you didn’t see that this could and would happen?”
 