
We recently ran a livechat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/20/what-will-the-uks-future-transport-systems-look-like-livechat>
 on the Guardian public leaders network, where our expert panellists discussed 
what the UK’s future transport systems will look like. Some of the topics 
included:

 * What are the biggest transport issues of today that stop journeys from 
being as affordable, easy and efficient as possible and which technology and 
innovation can best help to overcome these? 
 * What are the best examples of transport innovation and what might transport 
policymakers be able to learn from them? 
 * How will new technologies shape our future transport and the way we get 
around our cities? 
 * How can local authorities and transport operators make the most of 
digitalisation and data to make journeys easier and cheaper? 
Here’s our roundup of the best bits from the live discussion:

Autonomous vehicles

Clare Cornes, transport strategist for Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for Greater Manchester, said 
autonomous vehicles could present the opportunity of more transport choices for 
customers overall. “However, I do think it’s important more investment and 
research is put into a wider range of autonomous vehicles, including public 
transport vehicles and smaller, demand responsive shared vehicles, to highlight 
future opportunities that aren’t car-focused.” she said. 

Mohamed Mezghani, deputy secretary general of the International Association of 
Public Transport <http://www.uitp.org/> responded: 
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16843625> Guardian contributor 
MedMezghani  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16843625> 27 October 2016 
12:35pm <https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/86286426> 
But autonomous cars alone cannot will not solve the mobility problems. They 
should be integrated with a mass transit system which should remain the 
backbone of the city transport network

Nathan Marsh, intelligent mobility business development director at Atkins, 
said there will be a range of benefits from new vehicles. Some of the early 
benefits, he said, would be  “lower emissions, better use of the road capacity, 
safer journeys, more efficient journeys due to car sharing and possible savings 
due to different insurance or ownership arrangements”.


Cyber security - should we be careful when adopting new technologies into 
transport systems?

Part of the problem with the Internet of Things from a security point of view 
is that sectors that have not had to historically deal with cyber security now 
do – and they don’t always understand how to protect themselves or how big an 
issue it is, pointed out Harry Armstrong, a senior researcher at UK innovation 
foundation Nesta. “There will always be the potential for cyber attacks and if 
some one really wants to cause damage to your system they will find a way so we 
need to be aware that cyber attacks are a threat but not completely 
unavoidable. We can, however, make targets more difficult to hack and therefore 
less desirable targets.”



Making towns and cities more walkable... 

Marsh, at Atkins, said UK core cities are looking at walking as something they 
can support and integrate into the wider network. He said cycle hubs, covered, 
well-lit and safe dedicated walkways with clear signage are being invested in 
via local sustainable transport funds. “More has to be done to capture the 
health and quality of life benefits.”

Sarah Sharples, professor of human factors in the Faculty of Engineering at 
the University of Nottingham and non-executive director of Transport Systems 
Catapult, responded:
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16870227> Guardian contributor Sarah 
Sharples  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16870227> 27 October 2016 
12:19pm <https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/86284996> 
I think a real challenge here is what the business value is of these 
innovations. We know that by providing information - such as walking times for 
examples (and we see maps of these used really effectively during the tube 
strikes) - people can change their behaviour. But could a small startup make 
money from, say, an app that communicated walking times? So are we dependent on 
government or local authorities to fund these initiatives?

... and better for cycling

Sally Cairns, a senior research working at the Transport Research Laboratory 
and University College London, said she had recently worked on a project 
exploring the potential to widen the appeal of cycling via 
electrically-assisted bikes. “These are still a minority mode in the UK but 
being taken up much more widely in some other parts of Europe,” she said. “I’d 
like to see greater discussion about whether these should receive the same 
support as electric cars.”


Philippa Oldham, head of transport and manufacturing at the Institute of 
Mechanical Engineers, said that the UK has very few people cycling to work 
compared with the rest of Europe, with just 2% regularly choosing this mode as 
a way to get to work compared with 20% in Denmark. “As an island we need to 
look at how people move about,” she said. “A number of years ago the 
Institution produced a Transport Hierarchy with four priority areas – the first 
one being reduce demand for powered transport by encouraging walking and 
cycling.”

That prompted this response from Susan Claris:
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13836093> Guardian contributor 
SusanClaris  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13836093> 27 October 2016 
12:39pm <https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/86286863> 
I agree Philippa, but I think walking needs to be considered separately to 
cycling as otherwise cycling tends to dominate. We saw this clearly with the 
Department for Transport consultation Cycling and Walking Investment Strategy - 
all the coverage and attention was on cycling. I also wish to see more cycling 
in our towns and cities - but realise that getting a non-cyclist to start 
cycling is a big ask, whereas the walking message is a simpler one - walk more. 
We need walking strategies and walking champions to redress the balance.

Mobility as a service


 Sharples said people will increasingly have choice about how or when they 
travel, and will use personal and public data to help make these choices. “This 
could radically change the way that people behave, and how transport and 
technology providers work together to provide new mobility solutions.”

Top 10 transport apps for smarter travel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/sep/15/top-10-transport-apps-smarter-travel>
Jonathan Bray, director of the Urban Transport Group, listed some of the 
developments about which he was most excited: “The potential use of emerging 
and open data to make transport planning more collaborative, responsive and 
democratic; reducing carbon emissions through the electrification of transport: 
by greening the grid and use it to power an electrified transport system; and 
looking at where city authorities can make synergies between smart cities / 
smart grids / smart transport systems to make cities more exciting and greener 
places to be.”

Mezghani, of the IAPT, responded:
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16843625> Guardian contributor 
MedMezghani  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16843625> 27 October 2016 
12:30pm <https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/86285975> 
The most exciting technologies should be those which make citizens’ mobility 
easy, efficient and affordable. So we think of course about autonomous vehicles 
for example as they will redefine the place of cars in the city and will have 
an impact in how teh city will look like in the longer term

Rethinking freight to unblock traffic


Jonathan Bray, director of the Urban Transport Group, pointed out that van 
traffic is increasing at a time when people also want cities that are greener, 
cleaner, less congested and more attractive places to be.


“We think that we should be aiming to get as much long distance freight as 
possible into urban areas by rail and water with last mile(s) deliveries by low 
impact means; from cycle logistics to low or zero emissions vans. One of the 
challenges on consolidation has been a commercial model for making it work 
however there is a lot the public sector could do on consolidation given the 
scale of deliveries to universities, schools, hospitals, council buildings and 
so on.”



What about rural communities?

One participant asked the question:
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16877182> GarethBlackett  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16877182> 27 October 2016 12:31pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/86286119> 
Hello, my name is Gareth Blackett and I'm the Director of a new startup, 
Accessibility Solutions. We are developing 'Accessibility as a Service' as an 
offer to rural communities, but can MaaS-type sharing solutions be feasible in 
low density areas devoid of the benefits of agglomeration? I would like to hear 
the Panel's responses to this question please?

Stuck in the country: it's not just cities that need decent transport
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/sep/22/country-cities-decent-transport-cuts>
Oldham, of the IME, responded: “This is a real problem, particularly as it is 
often the rural bus routes that get cut first. We have a growing ageing 
demographic too in our rural communities and so this definitely needs to be 
something that moves up the agenda. I am not sure if you are familiar with the 
Transport Systems Catapult reportTravellers Needs 
<https://ts.catapult.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Traveller-Needs-Study.pdf>
 but it might provide some additional information. In addition to this 
understanding the needs of local rural communities could be of real benefit as 
transport could be tailored to their needs.”

Improving commutes

One livechat participant asked:
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13420161> mapmypubcrawl  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13420161> 27 October 2016 1:24pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/86291014> 
Would we be better off investing in reducing commute distance than increasing 
commuter capacity?



Yes this should be the long term objective,” responded the IAPT’s Mezghani. 
“It will happen by integrating land use and transport, mixing activities, 
developing activities around transport nodes, etc. It’s pity that some new 
built cities didn’t consider this aspect during their design/planning stage.”

How quickly will change happen?

One element of cultural change is trust, said Marsh, of Atkins. “People (we) 
need to understand and help design the new systems and schemesto help us trust 
them, and then use them 
<http://www.atkinsglobal.com/en-GB/angles/all-angles/getting-vehicle-security-basics-right-to-build-trust>
. This has happened in London with cEMV on buses showing us we are happy to let 
a transport entity access our personal, ticketing, journey and in this case 
bank data.”

Bray, of the Urban Transport Group, said there was was a danger of cities 
getting swamped by the speed of technological change and the ambitions of some 
of the newer players, particularly the large Californian corporations that 
dominate the internet and now have turned their attention to transport.

“Cities will need to be forward thinking, agile and smart in the way that they 
respond. Critically it’s important that cities don’t get dazzled by the 
technology itself but remain focused on how they respond to these changes in a 
way that meets their larger aspirations for cities to be prosperous, inclusive, 
green and exciting places to be.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. 

 