
It is rare for MPs to reject the government’s nomination for a public 
appointment, as theeducation select committee notes in its report opposing 
Amanda Spielman’s candidacy 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/education-committee/news-parliament-2015/ofsted-pre-appointment-report-published-16-17/>
 for the top job at Ofsted. But it is not unprecedented, nor is it unheard of, 
for the government to overrule a committee, as Nicky Morgan, education 
secretary, confirmed was her intention today.

The rules do not empower the legislature to block the executive. With the 
exception of the Treasury committee’s say in the top job at the Office for 
Budget Responsibility, there is no veto. The system is unlike the US process of 
“confirmation hearings” – and deliberately so. The separation of powers is not 
so clean in the UK’s messy constitution. The question of whether it should be 
is, for now, secondary to the practical reality that the secretary of state is 
entitled to assert her will.

Her position is bolstered by the strong case she makes in response to the 
committee’s criticisms of Ms Spielman.Ms Morgan refutes on factual grounds 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/letter-from-nicky-morgan-appointment-of-amanda-spielman-as-hmci>
 one of the objections – that her preferred candidate was wrong about Ofsted’s 
responsibility for failures of child protection. Ms Spielman’s observation that 
ultimate responsibility belongs to “those who are actually directly responsible 
for the children day to day in social care” is correct.

The chief inspector must view responsibility for children’s services with the 
utmost gravity, but no one supposes that Ms Spielman would do anything else. 
The concern that she lacks experience in this area is a more meaningful charge 
but one that may be intrinsic to the job description.Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> has become a vast bureaucracy 
whose remit, aside from inspecting a labyrinth of different kinds of schools, 
takes in children’s services, parts of the prison service, and even immigration 
removal centres.

To expect the chief executive to display encyclopedic command of every aspect 
of that brief is unrealistic. More important, as Ms Morgan argues, is a 
strategic understanding of the role and managerial capability, on which point 
the committee raised no substantial objection. Their criticism of Ms Spielman 
for lacking “passion” is a flimsy one based on the style of her response to 
questions, not the substance of her answers. Arguably, her cautious, pragmatic 
view of the task is a recommendation if the alternative is glib theatricality. 
Ofsted might benefit from some understated technocratic leadership.

Ms Spielman’s lack of frontline classroom experience is a more salient 
concern, since she must command some confidence among teachers. But the 
incumbent, Sir Michael Wilshaw, spent 30 years at the chalkface and still 
managed to alienate swaths of the profession.

It would be unwise simply to sweep aside MPs’ concerns, not least because 
doing so undermines the principle of pre-appointment hearings. If the 
government is determined to confirm Ms Spielman’s candidacy, it is essential 
that she and her ministerial sponsors respond in more detail to the concerns 
raised about an experience deficit. But, since the scale of the job makes it 
improbable that any one candidate will embody every available sphere of 
expertise, the pertinent question may not be whether Ms Spielman is the perfect 
candidate, but whether the bloated Ofsted remit might be beyond the scope of 
any one individual – or one institution.
 