
I was 17 years old when I arrived at Haydar Pasha Station in Istanbul. I got 
off the train and walked down the marble steps where the Station met the sea. 
Instead of admiring the Station’s magnificent facade, I stared at the old city 
across the Bosphorus. I saw Istanbul for the first time then.

I had taken the Blue Train the night before at 11pm and reached the last stop 
at eight in the morning. Haydar Pasha Station was the end of the railway line 
on the Asian continent. There began the sea, then Europe. I came to Istanbul to 
study law but I was more excited with the city itself than studying at the 
university. It was a warm day. I could see historical buildings through a thin 
fog: the city walls, the roofs of Topkapi Palace, the dome of Hagia Sophia 
Church and the minarets of the Blue Mosque.

Whenever I recall that moment, I think of what Herman Melville wrote about his 
visit to Istanbul in 1856. It was a few years after the publication ofMoby-Dick
. He was an unsuccessful writer despite his great books and was still floating 
from one sea to another. He wrote in his diary:

“The fog lifted from about the skirts of the city. It was a coy disclosure, a 
kind of coquetting, leaving room for the imagination and heightening the scene.”

I sensed on the first day that Istanbul would always embrace me with a light 
curtain of fog. Any time I would return to Haydar Pasha after school holidays, 
I would meet Istanbul through that curtain. As the years roll on I now realise 
that my past has become more distant, the fog of my old days are denser, and 
the Station’s vivid times are vague.

There are some cities you don’t need to see in order to fall in love with. 
Istanbul is one of them.

Haydar Pasha Station was designed as the beginning point of a railway line 
towards Asia-minor and improved to accommodate the northern terminus of the 
Baghdad Railway line in 1904. Because of increased traffic, a larger building 
was needed, and two German architects, Otto Ritter and Helmut Conu, were 
appointed to carry out the job. They chose a neo-classical style to build the 
new station. The origin of the Station’s name is not certain but it is assumed 
that it was given in honour of a high ranking Ottoman officer, Haydar Pasha, 
who had served to the Sultan Selim III.

It is rather a gate opening to a great city than a mere station. As you come 
out of it you see a few steps going down to the pier where a ferry takes you to 
the city. It is the spot where Istanbul and the rest of the country unite. 
Trains carry people from small towns in the provinces to that picturesque spot 
by the Bosphorus.

The poetry book of Human Landscapes From My Country by Nazım Hikmet begins 
there, in front of the Station:

“Haydar Pasha Station,
spring 1941,
3 p.m.
On the steps, sun
fatigue
and confusion.
A man
stops on the steps,
thinking about something.
Thin.
Scared.”
 An undated picture of Turkish writer Nazim Hikmet. Photograph: Tarik 
Tinazay/EPA 
It is not a coincidence that Nazım Hikmet picked Haydar Pasha Station for the 
opening of his grand book. It is a kind of verse-novel: 17,000 lines describing 
different people, through whom a whole picture of a country can be seen. Hikmet 
(1902–1963) is regarded as the greatest poet of modern Turkish literature. He 
began to writeHuman Landscapes during the Second World War, while in prison, 
serving a twenty-eight-year sentence for his communist beliefs. He gave the 
stories of the people on the train — in its cars, its restaurant, in the 
locomotive — and talked about their past and their dreams. He used his pen in a 
cinematographic way and presented the collective memory of a nation, alongside 
its fears and hopes, in an epic style.

If you are an author in Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> you 
are destined to write about Istanbul sooner or later. I have come to that point 
in my third novel,Istanbul Istanbul. When I was working on it, my mother — my 
lifelong advisor — asked me what I was writing about. “About Istanbul,” I said. 
There was a pause on the other end of the telephone line. “The train station,” 
she said with a tender and confident voice, “you should not forget to mention 
the train station.” I scanned my mind to recollect what I had been covering in 
my novel. Writing about Istanbul required plenty of work. I had done my 
research, taken notes down and formed stories. But on hearing my mother’s 
words, I realised that I didn’t have a story taking place around Haydar Pasha 
Station. She, an illiterate Kurdish woman from rural Anatolia, opened a crack 
in my mind, as she had always done with her fairytales when I was a little 
child. She had fed me not only with milk but also with stories about rascal 
jinnies, faraway seas and invisible cities. And now she once again blew her 
breath into my chest and led me to put some ornaments of her mind into my 
novel. InIstanbul Istanbul there are some pages, like the opening story of 
chapter nine, written and designed in line with her wish. It is a story that 
takes place on the steps of Haydar Pasha Station, where helpless lovers fall in 
despair and at the same time find a glimpse of light. They are the same steps 
where Hikmet’sHuman Landscapes began.

There are some cities you don’t need to see in order to fall in love with. 
Istanbul is one of them. I had fallen for her before I arrived at Haydar Pasha 
Station. I knew her through stories, novels, paintings and songs. But meeting 
her was not easy for a boy of 17, like me. The speed, the enormity, the finely 
tuned chaos of the city was a world away from where I grew up, a small town in 
the middle of the plains. And the times were not easy for the people of Turkey 
either. There had been a military coup a couple of years before, in 1980. A 
heavy atmosphere was hanging over the city. Curfews, prohibitions, tortures, 
and book burnings were part of daily life. But despite all this, we had dreams 
in our hearts. We had an imagination of another way of life. We knew Istanbul 
was not a calm city to live in. The cost of living was high, and there were 
unemployment, traffic, crime, and intolerance. But it has always left room for 
the imagination as Herman Melville wrote: “The fog lifted… leaving room for the 
imagination.”
 The Hagia Sophia and the Blue Mosque, as seen on the Golden Horn inlet of the 
Bosphorus. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
In France they say, “All poets are born in the countryside but die in Paris.” 
Istanbul has the same essence. Our poets and writers pen shady lines or lively 
scenes and indicate through them where they should be buried. Some acknowledge 
Istanbul as the junction of historical geographies, the meeting point of East 
and West. Some see it as a land of desire and mysticism and relate it to past 
eras. The Turkish poet Yahya Kemal, the short-story writer Sait Faik, and the 
novelists Ahmet Hamdi Tanpınar and Orhan Pamuk have approached Istanbul from 
different perspectives. Each of them has created his own city, unlike the 
others in its literature.

In Istanbul Istanbul, I wanted to portray the city as the unification point of 
time and space and the melting pot of opposing tendencies in life. I preferred 
not to talk about past golden ages. That approach has already been used up in 
our literature. In my novel, space and time converge on a prison cell three 
floors underground. When you are underground there is only one direction that 
matters: upwards, toward the sky. Time moves differently underground. On the 
surface, time is linear — past and future eclipse all else, and what matters is 
less where are you than where you’re going. Underground, past and future mean 
nothing. There is only the eternal, often agonising, now. By focusing my novel 
on prisoners in a subterranean cell, discussing the city above, I wanted to 
unite time and space, hope and hopelessness, darkness and brightness. They are 
all together and one. Istanbul is the name of that wholeness. Wherever you were 
born, you come to Istanbul to be part of its wholeness.

And now the word ‘beauty’ is not only an aesthetic word but a political word, 
too.

Istanbul is too real and at the same time too ambiguous. It makes possible 
both good and bad. When I was in one of those interrogation cells I felt the 
underground was the place for evil, while aboveground seemed to be the place 
for good. But instead of writing about good and evil, I wanted to explore the 
shades between them and to show how they exchange places.

Istanbul as a metropolis is not only the heart of this country but also the 
future of it. The beautiful and the ugly in Istanbul reflect the future of our 
people. That’s why it is now also the heart of our politics.

The Conservative bodies believe in the past. They think the best days are 
behind us. With passed utopias before their eyes, they don’t hesitate to ruin 
the present. They are wiping out the city’s green areas and constructing tall 
buildings. They call it progress. That’s why people feel obliged to defend this 
city against greediness. And now the word ‘beauty’ is not only an aesthetic 
word but a political word, too. When people call for beauty in Istanbul, the 
responses they get are police, tear-gas and the rise of construction firms in 
the stock market.
 People run as Turkish riot policemen fire tear gas on Taksim square on June 
11, 2013. Thousands of anti-government demonstrators gathered initially to 
contest the urban development plan for Taksim Gezi Park. Photograph: Bulent 
Kilic/AFP/Getty Images 
In the tales of my childhood there was always a place for heroes to suffer and 
then emancipate. Istanbul is now the place of both suffering and emancipation 
in our contemporary writing. We write about Istanbul with the hope that its 
beauty will shape our future.

After having witnessed two world wars, the invasion of the British army and 
the exile of Armenian intellectuals, the Haydar Pasha Station met its latest 
disaster on 28 November 2010, when a fire began on top of the roof. The fire 
was stopped before it was too late, but following the fire the station was 
closed down.
 The blaze that engulfed the roof of Istanbul’s historic Haydar Pasha train 
station in 2010. Photograph: AP 
It was a suspicious fire. It came about the same time as legal debates were 
being held regarding Haydar Pasha Station and its surroundings. The government 
wanted a new development in the area, turning Haydar Pasha’s castle-like 
building into a fancy hotel. But the public opposed it and the legislative 
charter for the development was suspended by the court. Various international 
institutions, like the New York-based World Monument Fund, have added Haydar 
Pasha to their agenda, emphasising the uncertain future of the railway.

Local authorities promised to renew railway lines and resume train journeys 
again by the end of 2015. But not a single rail line has been renewed so far, 
nor has there been any sign of reopening the Station. Istanbul dwellers are 
aware that Haydar Pasha might be another victim of urban gentrification. That’s 
why they have formed a new civic organization under the name “Haydar Pasha 
Solidarity” and launched an effort to save the Station, organizing concerts, 
exhibitions, and demonstrations. They also read out some lines fromHuman 
Landscapes,where Nazım Hikmet, many years ago, pointed out the merciless face 
of urban gentrification, which tears apart past and present:

“Concrete villas.
Lined up all the way to Pendik.
The trees are mere saplings,
the grapevines just greening.
The 3:45 train goes screaming past.
Concrete villas.
The Secretary Pasha’s summer house,
a forty-room marvel,
has been torn down.
Now it’s concrete villas,
concrete villas
all the way to Pendik.”

 * Burhan Sönmez is the author of Istanbul, Istanbul (2015), Sins & Innocents 
(2011), and North (2009). He was born in Turkey and grew up speaking Turkish 
and Kurdish. He worked as a lawyer in Istanbul and was a founder of the 
social-activist culture organisation TAKSAV (Foundation for Social Research, 
Culture and Art). He has written in various newspapers and magazines on 
literature, culture and politics. He was seriously injured following an assault 
by police in Turkey and had to move to Britain to receive treatment with the 
support of Freedom from Torture in London. He now lives in Cambridge and 
Istanbul.
 