
We Found a Hat by Jon Klassen (Walker, £12.99)

The award-winning author of I Want My Hat Back tells big stories simply. He is 
at his glorious best inWe Found a Hat, which, with a minimum of words and the 
sparest of pictures, wittily captures the intense difficulty of sharing. Two 
turtles find a hat; they both want it very badly. Politely, they discuss the 
merits of the hat and flatter each other when they try it on. However, since 
there is only one hat and there are two of them, they decide they must leave it 
alone and settle down to sleep. Or do they? Against a stylised desert 
background shown in sepia tones, the two turtles consider the possible 
scenarios surrounding the hat – including just what lengths they might go to in 
order to become the sole owner.(2+)

The Journey by Francesca Sanna (Flying Eye, £12.99)

Through beautiful and powerful illustrations, The Journey vividly explores the 
universal story of all those who have had to leave behind the place and people 
they love. Drawing on contemporary stories of displacement and migration, and 
re-imagining them through the eyes of a child, Francesca Sanna’s simple, 
unsensational text tells of a coming war, a perilous journey and the 
possibility of security in a story that is propelled by a deep sense of hope 
and courage.(4+)

The Wolves of Currumpaw by William Grill (Flying Eye, £14.99)
 Illustration by William Grill. Photograph: Nobrow 
A magnificent large-scale picture book, The Wolves of Currumpaw gives 
narrative non-fiction a new dimension. William Grill, the award-winning 
illustrator ofShackleton’s Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/18/shackleton-s-journey-william-grill-review>
, uses a range of styles to tell this true story of American naturalist Ernest 
Thompson Seton, a wolf-hunter whose views on protecting wildlife were changed 
forever by his encounter with Old Lobo, the leader of a wolf pack. In huge 
wordless and immersive spreads Grill evokes the world of the wolves, showing 
the immense territory in which they roam and the vast starlight skies under 
which they travel. In the same style, he brilliantly recreates late 
19th-century New York City. The story is deeply moving, and Grill ends by 
linking Seton’s tale to the history of conservation of wildlife and its great 
importance today.(7+)

Coming to England by Floella Benjamin, illustrated by Michael Frith 
(Macmillan, £9.99)

First published 20 years ago and as resonant now as it was then, Floella 
Benjamin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/oct/01/floella-benjamin-my-famimly-values>
’s story of her journey from one way of life in Trinidad to another in London 
is a brilliant memoir that also speaks to universal experiences of children 
coming to the UK. Initially left behind with relatives in Trinidad, Floella and 
her brothers and sister then travel alone to England to be reunited with their 
parents. Steeped in stories about the British “Motherland”, and proud of 
belonging to it, they are ill equipped to deal with the reality, and with the 
reception they get. Benjamin’s upbeat personality infuses the story and gives 
hope without diminishing the challenge of assimilation.(9+)

Oxford Roald Dahl Dictionary by Susan Rennie, illustrated by Quentin Blake 
(Oxford, £14.99)

A glorious dictionary that gleefully juxtaposes “grinksludging” with “grip” 
and “rumpledumpus” with “run”, as Roald Dahl’s neologisms are included 
alongside more familiar words. Dahl’s best loved characters, such as Matilda 
Wormwood andTrunky the Elephant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/may/18/the-best-picture-books-on-crocodiles>
, are here too, with explanations of their names. Quentin Blake’s illustrations 
from the Dahl canon are skilfully used to inject as much fun as possible.(9+)


Sweet Pizza by GR Gemin (Nosy Crow, £6.99)

Joe’s Italian family have run the cafe in Bryn Mawr for generations but now 
his mother, sick of the struggle to keep it going, wants to sell up. Joe loves 
the cafe and believes its Italian flavour has a role to play in keeping the 
community together. Drawing on his sick grandfather’s memories of arriving in 
Wales as a young man, and with some help from his Italian cousin, Mimi, who 
turns up just in time, Joe turns the cafe into an irresistible centre of food, 
family and opera. Rich in both Welsh and Italian culture,Sweet Pizza is a 
delightfully heartwarming and imaginative story which also reflects the true 
story of Welsh-Italian integration. (10+)

Beetle Boy by MG Leonard (Chicken House, £6.99)
 Illustration by Júlia Sardà from Beetle Boy. 
A hugely entertaining adventure with a cast of characters worthy of Roald Dahl,
Beetle Boymakes the impossible come almost frighteningly alive. 
Thirteen-year-old Darkus Cuttle does not believe what he is told about his 
father’s disappearance from inside a locked room in the Natural History Museum. 
Determined to find out the truth, he turns super-sleuth, helped by an unlikely 
sidekick, Baxter the rhinoceros beetle. With the help of two human friends and 
beetle power, Darkus uncovers the terrible secrets behind the work of the evil 
Lucretia Cutter, a wonderful villain with a dangerous taste for insect 
jewellery.(10+)

The Smell of Other People’s Houses by Bonnie-Sue Hitchcock (Faber, £7.95)

In a series of gutsy, realistic and moving adventures, The Smell of Other 
People’s Houses weaves together four different stories of family life and the 
complications of adolescence. The setting of Alaska in 1970 plays a powerful 
role; the experiences and dreams of Ruth, Dora, Alyce and Hank have been shaped 
by the geographical isolation of the country, the harshness of its climate and 
the strong sense of community, with deeply rooted traditions and expectations. 
Each thread of the novel, which is told in alternating narratives, is 
convincing and compelling. Life is tough; the choices are few and big mistakes 
are made but, for each of the four, there are moments of kindness that give 
them confidence to face the future.(13+)

Related: Alex Wheatle: ‘I felt like the token black writer who talks about 
ghetto stuff’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/18/alex-wheatle-interview-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize-crongton-knights>

Crongton Knights by Alex Wheatle (Atom, £6.99)

Winner of the 2016 Guardian children’s fiction prize, Crongton Knights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/18/alex-wheatle-interview-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize-crongton-knights>
, with its bleak estate setting and a background of hardship and crime, should 
be a gruelling story of everyday life. And so it is. But Alex Wheatle’s 
optimism makes it also hopeful, warm and, above all, funny, as it celebrates a 
group of teenagers’ good instincts, especially around friendship and family. 
Life on the South Crongton estate is tough. McKay and his friends are all 
dealing with different problems, but they are united in knowing the importance 
of sticking together. The boys risk all in order to save a girl’s reputation 
when they set off on a dangerous mission deep into the territory of another 
gang. Their journey is an epic one and when they finally return safely, they 
are wiser. Wheatle’s readers are, too, as he gently philosophises about 
difficult choices in life.(13+)

• Save at least 30% on this year’s critics’ choices when you buy at the 
Guardian Bookshop. Visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/genres/books-of-the-year-2016.html/?utm_source=>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Support the Guardian and its journalism with every book 
you buy this Christmas. *Free UK p&p for online orders over £10. Minimum £1.99 
p&p applies to telephone orders.

Best book lists of 2016

 * Best fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/30/best-fiction-2016-paul-beatty-zadie-smith>
 * Best crime and thrillers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/30/the-best-crime-books-and-thrillers-of-2016>
 * Best science fiction and fantasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/30/best-sf-and-fantasy-books-2016-adam-roberts> 