
The story of Ashya King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/31/ashya-king-found-spain-parents-arrested>
 and his parents is desperately sad. One feature is that his family want him to 
receive proton therapy. This is not a “magic bullet” treatment and without 
knowing his medical details it is impossible to say what the risks and benefits 
would be for Ashya. However, proton therapy is in use around the world, and 
indeed on the NHS, and does in some cases have some huge advantages over other 
treatments. This article makes no comment on the specific case, it is simply an 
explanation of the physics behind the therapy.

Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> treatment with radiation, 
or particle, beams relies on the fact that the beams scatter off the atoms and 
molecules in the tissue of the tumour, and this damages, and hopefully kills, 
the tumour.


The problem is that the beams are dumb. They don’t know or care whether a 
given molecule is part of a tumour, or part of some healthy tissue, perhaps in 
a vital organ. As they pass through the body of the patient, they will scatter 
off molecules, leaving their energy behind, and damaging everything as they go. 
The trick is to make the beams lose most of their energy in the tumour, and as 
little as possible in the healthy tissue they have to pass through on the way 
in and out of the patient.


This can be done to a large extent by careful targeting of the beam, 
triangulating on the tumour. But, in the plot above, you can see the advantage 
that protons, or indeed carbon ions, have over X-rays. X-rays are energetic 
photons (quanta of light). They have no mass, and as they pass through the 
tissue they lose energy more-or-less continuously (see the blue line in the 
plot above). They also scatter around, and the beam spreads out.

Because protons, carbon ions and other hadrons are heavier, they behave 
differently. They interact mostly with the outer electrons of an atom or 
molecule, and because they are hundreds or thousand of times heavier than an 
electron, they hardly change direction when they hit them, and they lose very 
little energy. Imagine a snooker ball travelling through a cluster of 
table-tennis balls, perhaps.

In fact the energy lost by the proton (and thus deposited in the tissue) 
increases as the speed of the proton drops, roughly like one divided by the 
square of the speed. At some point, when the speed gets very low, the energy 
loss increases catastrophically, and most of the energy is lost in a small 
volume of tissue. This rapid loss of energy is called the Bragg peak (see the 
green and red lines in the plot above), and if you can make it overlap with the 
tumour, this is perfect. The tumour dies, and minimal damage is done to 
surrounding healthy tissue.

This is particularly important for cancers near the brain, and for cancers in 
chidren, where cell-division is still happening a lot and is very sensitive to 
radiation damage.

A few percent of the protons will also interact with the nuclei, sometimes 
smashing them up and leading to secondary radiation.


Major challenges include delivering a beam with the precise energy and angle 
required, measuring the position of the tumour, the beam and the Bragg peak 
inside the patient, monitoring secondary doses, and more.


The NHS in the UK does have a treatment centre 
<http://www.clatterbridgecc.nhs.uk/patients/treatment/protontherapy/> for some 
cancers, and will covertreatment abroad 
<http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/commissioning/spec-services/npc-crg/group-b/b01/>
 for some others. Major new centres are planned inLondon 
<https://www.uclh.nhs.uk/News/Pages/ProtonbeamtherapycomingtoUCLH.aspx> and 
Manchester 
<http://www.christie.nhs.uk/about-the-christie/our-ambitions-developments/new-developments/proton-beam-therapy.aspx>
.


Rob Appleby, a particle physicist who researches in this area, wrote this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2011/aug/17/favourite-particle-proton>
 about the topic forLife and Physics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics> back in 2011.


Jon Butterworth’s book, Smashing Physics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/02/smashing-physics-jon-butterworth-review-cern-higgs-boson-particle>
, isout now 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781472210302>
. A bunch of interesting events where you might be able to hear him talk about 
it etc are listedhere. <http://lifeandphysics.wordpress.com/> Also, Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/jonmbutterworth>.
 