
One February night a few years ago I found myself standing on the bank of a 
wide, dark river. Pastel-coloured lights melted across the glossy surface of 
the water. The rainbow arch of one great bridge was echoed downstream by the 
blue-green span of another. The glass of great buildings glimmered and a cool 
wind blew from the east. I felt as I had in other great cities at night - as if 
I was in a timeless and magical place. It took me some while to reconcile this 
with the knowledge that I was in Newcastle.

I say this not from lofty metropolitan disdain. Newcastle is the nearest city 
to where I was born, the nearest city to where I live now. I have been visiting 
it for long enough to remember when it looked like it does in the film Get 
Carter – all brick, slate and smoke. I have come here to watch football and see 
bands, to eat and drink, and to shop for goods from Airfix kits years ago to 
prams and pushchairs more recently. But until that winter evening I had never 
really noticed Newcastle. Familiarity had bred indifference. It was like that 
moment in a corny Hollywood movie when the frumpy girl next door takes off her 
glasses and – aw, gee! – it’s Grace Kelly!

That Newcastle has been voted the best UK city by readers of the Guardian and 
Observer therefore comes as little surprise. Certainly no local will do a 
double take on hearing the news. Indeed the fact the city was only ranked fifth 
last year is more likely to register as a shock. You see, Newcastle’s 
atmosphere of almost pathological friendliness and good humour stems from one 
simple thing: all Geordies believe themselves blessed to have been born here. 
Theirs is the boisterous self-confidence of a chosen people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fnewcastle-travel-best-uk-city-galleries-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F19%2F1416417756132%2Fdbcf51c4-78aa-437f-bc9f-1fb2bff5e4da-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20best%20city%3A%20in%20praise%20of%20Newcastle%20upon%20Tyne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fnewcastle-travel-best-uk-city-galleries-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20best%20city%3A%20in%20praise%20of%20Newcastle%20upon%20Tyne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fnewcastle-travel-best-uk-city-galleries-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F19%2F1416417756132%2Fdbcf51c4-78aa-437f-bc9f-1fb2bff5e4da-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The Literary & Philosophical Society. Photograph: Alamy 
Newcastle is noted as a party city. On Saturdays, hen and stag dos roll in 
from early morning. When the Test Match is being played at Chester-le-Street as 
well, it’s not uncommon to find yourself the only person in the splendidly 
restored Central Station who isn’t wearing a sombrero or a Superhero outfit. 
But you don’t have to wear a pink cowboy hat, a T-shirt with your nickname on 
your back, or a PVC nurse’s outfit to enjoy yourself in the city.

Newcastle is founded on innovation and engineering. You get a good sense of 
its Victorian heyday at theLiterary and Philosophical Society 
<http://www.litandphil.org.uk/index.shtml>, a short walk from the station with 
its neo-classical frontage. Started in 1793 as a “conversation club, the Lit & 
Phil is a private library with the feel of a Pall Mall club. Oscar Wilde and 
Edith Sitwell have lectured there, and comedian Alexander Armstrong is current 
president. Only members can take books out, but the public are free to wander 
in, sit in a leather armchair, buy a cup of tea and biscuit from the hatch and 
read the periodicals while admiring the burnished wood interiors.

Traditional pubs were once almost obliterated on Tyneside by the vogue for 
high-turnover drinking houses with flashing lights, fizzy lager and booming 
music. At one point it seemed like only the redoubtableCrown Posada  
<http://www.crownposadanewcastle.co.uk/>on The Side was keeping the notion of a 
quiet pint of ale alive. Not any more. There’s a thriving micro-brewery culture 
across Tyneside, County Durham and Northumberland these days and plenty of 
places to try them. TheCumberland Arms <http://www.thecumberlandarms.co.uk/> in 
James Place Street, Ouseburn, has pickled onions, pork pies, excellent real ale 
from local breweries such as Northern Alchemy and Allendale. Nearby in St 
Lawrence Road is the equally fineFree Trade Inn 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheFreeTradeInn>: watch the sun setting behind the 
Tyne Bridge from its front garden for a touch of true northern romance.
 Free Trade Inn, Newcastle 
The Baltic Centre for Contemporary Art <https://www.balticmill.com/>, on the 
south side of the river in Gateshead, has an outpost in High Bridge,Baltic 39 
<https://www.balticmill.com/39/what-is-baltic-39>, with changing exhibitions 
and events in its top-floor project gallery. It put on the original version of 
the critically acclaimedThey Used to Call it the Moon 
<https://www.balticmill.com/whats-on/exhibitions/detail/they-used-to-call-it-the-moon>
 exhibition, which has now moved to the bigger space over the Tyne.

Twenty years ago decent places to eat were thin on the ground. That’s no 
longer the case. TheSettle Down Cafe  <http://www.thesettledown.com/>on 
Thornton Street has a back room like the parlour of your nan’s house. The food 
is good too, particularly the cakes (which you can buy to take away at theSugar 
Down Bakery <https://twitter.com/settledown>, round the corner in Pink Lane, a 
narrow alley that is also home to the excellentPink Lane Coffee 
<http://www.pinklanecoffee.co.uk/>) and the service is notably friendly even by 
Newcastle standards. The Sugar Down supplies bread to another burgeoning new 
institution,Quilliam Brothers Tea House 
<http://www.quilliambrothers.com/theteahouse.php>, which is in a baronial 
Victorian building behind the university that once housed a bookshop. The 
Quilliams import the tea themselves, in around 60 varieties, and they’ve 
recently opened a cinema in the basement. Fittingly, Newcastle’s splendid 
art-deco cinema,The Tyneside <https://www.tynesidecinema.co.uk/> also has 
several good cafes.

The restaurant scene is also undergoing a renaissance, with Michelin-star 
chasing House of Tides <http://houseoftides.co.uk> and real ale and sourdough 
pizza jointDAT Bar  <http://www.datbarnewcastle.co.uk/>joining Terence 
Laybourne’s tweedy gastro-pubThe Broad Chare <http://www.thebroadchare.co.uk> 
and old-school family- friendly SardinianPanis  <http://paniscafe.co.uk/>among 
the local favourites.

One final tip: Geordies like to talk. Visitors are advised to allow at least 
10 minutes just to buy a newspaper.
 