
R Luke DuBois <http://lukedubois.com/> an artist who works with data, and a 
professor at NYU. For his videoAcceptance <https://vimeo.com/51423044> (2016), 
he wrote software to synchronize Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump’s convention 
acceptance speeches, so they appear to be reading each other’s words in a 
never-ending crossfire. In another one of his recent installations,Take a 
Bullet for the City 
<https://medium.com/intelligent-cities-technology-policy-and-planning/take-a-bullet-for-the-city-by-r-luke-dubois-4b7396b9d456#.v0p0bwpcj>
(2014), a semiautomatic handgun connected to a police feed fires every time 
someone is shot in New Orleans. ForA More Perfect Union 
<https://vimeo.com/19662829> (2011), DuBois downloaded 19m online dating 
profiles and ran word analyses across them, finding out how people in different 
cities described themselves. His most recent fascination is the process of 
voting – how we vote, and how we make choices.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F179101658&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F179101658>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F179101658&media=>
For his latest show, The Choice is Yours, currently on view at Bitforms 
<http://www.bitforms.com/> gallery in New York, he hacked an array of 
old-school American voting machines – hulking machines made of steel, built in 
the mid-20th century. They look like set pieces from a 1960s episode of Doctor 
Who – sci-fi contraptions that resemble proto-synthesizers, or vintage 
computers.

“I was enamored by these machines,” says DuBois. “They’re mechanical. They’re 
like analog computers. There’s no electricity … they’re these beautiful weird 
steel boxes with opaque mechanisms hidden under the faceplate. They’re the 
classic example of a ‘black box’. You put the inputs in and you pull a lever 
and you’re not sure what happens, but then you have to trust that your vote is 
counted.”

DuBois started collecting the voting machines earlier this year, and 
originally thought he would make them into music boxes. Then he decided to hack 
them in other ways, to create a larger commentary about voting. DuBois calls 
the hacked voting machines “learning machines”, inspired by classic concepts in 
artificial intelligence and machine learning. Visitors to the exhibition can 
actually “vote” on the machines, on an array of offbeat words drawn from 
various databases.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fr-luke-dubois-exhibition-voting-machines-us-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9f4cf742778d2ceff9386bed959d8a293326417%2F0_0_720_960%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20choice%20is%20yours%3A%20artist%20hacks%20voting%20machines%20for%20US%20election-themed%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fr-luke-dubois-exhibition-voting-machines-us-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20choice%20is%20yours%3A%20artist%20hacks%20voting%20machines%20for%20US%20election-themed%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fr-luke-dubois-exhibition-voting-machines-us-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9f4cf742778d2ceff9386bed959d8a293326417%2F0_0_720_960%2F720.jpg>
 Voting Machine, 2000. Photograph: John Berens 
“A lot of the art I do is about language and politics, and language and 
society,” DuBois says. “We don’t pay attention as much as we should to to the 
words we use or the words we’re given … we choose our words. We choose to 
listen or not listen. Voting is the ultimate choosing thing we do in our 
society as a big group. Election day is ‘choice day’, but we make choices all 
the time, day to day.”

One of the voting machines takes its choices from Hillary Clinton and Donald 
Trump television commercials, with Clinton and Trump edited out of them.

“I got a list of characteristics of campaign B-roll from Hillary Clinton and 
Donald Trump commercials,” DuBois says. “If you take the campaign ads and 
remove footage from the candidates, and you look at the other footage they use 
– it’s pretty specific. Hillary has tons of ads where she starts with a shot of 
blue sky. Donald Trump has lots of ads where he shows the American flag.

“When Hillary shows cities she shows people,” he continues. “When Trump shows 
cities he tends to show empty playgrounds, or bombed-out public housing. It’s 
pretty different. What I did was extract 12 sets of words. Do you want blue or 
red? Sky or ground? Do you want a building or people? Based on how you choose 
you get an image montage – you get your own personal one-minute video.”

Another voting machine makes odd text mashups based on how you vote, using 
classic book titles like Pride and Prejudice and Tropic of Capricorn, drawn 
from theProject Gutenberg database 
<https://www.gutenberg.org/wiki/Gutenberg:Offline_Catalogs>. A voting machine 
next to it creates sound. It draws its categories from Luigi Russolo’s classic 
1913 Futurist manifestoThe Art of Noises 
<http://www.unknown.nu/futurism/noises.html>; you can vote on categories like 
roar, whistle, bang, hiss and mumble. When you’re done voting, the machine 
makes you a custom piece of music collaged from theBBC sound effects library. 
<http://shop.prosoundeffects.com/products/bbc-complete-sound-effects-library> 
Another machine makes drawings for you on a small screen, inspired by Logo, the 
brainchild of the late MIT professor Seymour Papert <http://www.papert.org/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fr-luke-dubois-exhibition-voting-machines-us-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e1b308e46690178d5a24b081cf524cc1b527d72%2F0_0_720_540%2Fmaster%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20choice%20is%20yours%3A%20artist%20hacks%20voting%20machines%20for%20US%20election-themed%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fr-luke-dubois-exhibition-voting-machines-us-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20choice%20is%20yours%3A%20artist%20hacks%20voting%20machines%20for%20US%20election-themed%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fr-luke-dubois-exhibition-voting-machines-us-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e1b308e46690178d5a24b081cf524cc1b527d72%2F0_0_720_540%2Fmaster%2F720.jpg>
 Learning Machine #4: Language, using a machine from 1960. Photograph: John 
Berens 
A red velvet curtain in a corner of the gallery encircles a giant voting 
machine from the 1950s – a behemoth weighing over 600 pounds. This machine 
draws its values from theMyers-Briggs personality test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/myers-briggs-employee-personality-test-accurate>
. An overwhelming sea of choices faces you, in alphabetical order – 
compassionate, dutiful, ecstatic, fashionable – on a massive steel panel. The 
choices feel like they were part of the original machine; DuBois had a 
collaborator, the designerKsenya Samarskaya <http://www.samarskaya.com/>, 
design a special vintage typeface for the choices that recalls the 1950s.

A computer connected to the machine then looks up your choices on Instagram 
and the New York Times. A screen next to the machine shows the results in real 
time, in a disorienting, endless scrolling collage. Looking up the choices on 
Instagram brings up lots of strange selfies. The New York Times database brings 
up lots of obituaries. “We tend to only use these values when people are dead,” 
DuBois says. “We don’t tend to use these values to describe living people.”

In another corner of the gallery lurks the infamous voting device that 
produced the “hanging chads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/15/2016-election-old-voting-machines-hanging-chad>
” seen in Florida in the 2000 presidential election, complete with plenty of 
punched card ballots so you can try your hand at producing a hanging chad 
yourself. A glass vitrine nearby houses pieces of the old voting machines, so 
you can see the intriguing backs of them – along with gears, keys and other 
ephemera.

“By drilling it down to playing with these machines, and doing these seemingly 
low-stakes actions with media, I wanted people to just meditate on what it 
means to have options, and to not understand what these options mean,” DuBois 
says. “I don’t think that we think as much as we should about it. This show is 
more lyrical; I’m not trying to hit you over the head with a specific point of 
view.

“It’s an admittedly modest contribution to the discourse, but rather than 
making a show that’s just bashing Donald Trump, I wanted to get people to focus 
more on what Tuesday is all about, which is choosing. We have to decide. There 
are 300-something million people in this country and they have to decide what 
country they want.”

 * The Choice is Yours is on view at Bitforms in New York City until 23 
December 2016. Acceptance (2016) is currently on view in San Francisco, at the 
Bitforms 15th anniversary show at Minnesota Street Project
 