
The US secretary of state, John Kerry, has set out the parameters for a 
potential resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in alast throw of the 
dice on this issue for the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/obama-and-allies-seek-to-isolate-netanyahu-before-trump-takes-office>
. His speech focused on the “two-state solution”.

What’s the basic idea?

For decades, the two-state solution has been held up by the international 
community as the only realistic deal to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 
Its basis is two separate states,Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and Palestine, living peacefully 
side by side on the land between the western bank of the Jordan river and the 
Mediterranean Sea. This territory would be divided broadly along the pre-1967 
armistice line or “green line” – probably with some negotiated land swaps. 
Jerusalem, which both sides want as their capital, would be shared.


What are the obstacles?

Past negotiations have failed to make progress and there are currently no 
fresh talks in prospect. The main barriers are borders, Jerusalem, refugees, 
Israel’s insistence on being recognised as a “Jewish state” and the 
Palestinians’ political and geographical split between the West Bank and Gaza.


The Palestinians demand that the border of their new state should follow the 
green line, giving them 22% of their historic land. But Israel, which hasbuilt 
hundreds of settlements on the Palestinian side of the green line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 over the past 50 years, insists that most of these should become part of 
Israel – requiring a new border which would mean, according to critics, the 
annexation of big chunks of the West Bank. Land swaps could go some way to 
compensate but negotiations have stalled on this fundamental issue.


Jerusalem is another obstacle. Israel has said it cannot agree any deal which 
sees the city shared or divided between the two sides. The Palestinians say 
they will not cede their claim and access to their holy sites, all of which are 
located in East Jerusalem, on the Palestinian side of the green line.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fjohn-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Kerry%3A%20Israel%20must%20adopt%20two-state%20solution%20for%20lasting%20peace%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fjohn-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Kerry%3A%20Israel%20must%20adopt%20two-state%20solution%20for%20lasting%20peace%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fjohn-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video&media=>
John Kerry: Israel must adopt two-state solution for lasting peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/28/john-kerry-israel-palestine-speech-video>
The Palestinians have long insisted that refugees from the 1948 war and their 
descendants should have the right to return to their former homes, although 
many diplomats believe they would settle for a symbolic “right of return”. 
Israel rejects any movement on this issue.


Israel insists that the Palestinians must recognise Israel as a “Jewish 
state”. The Palestinians say this would deny the existence of the one in five 
Israeli citizens who are Palestinian.


Any potential deal is complicated by the political breach between Fatah and 
Hamas, the two main Palestinian factions, and the geographical split between 
the West Bank and Gaza.


Can it still happen?

For years, international diplomats, Palestinians and some Israelis have been 
warning that time is running out as Israel’s continued settlement expansion 
swallows up land that would become part of Palestine. Many Palestinians and 
some Israelis now say the line has already been crossed and the two-state 
solution is impossible; privately many diplomats agree.


What is Trump’s view?

During his election campaign, Donald Trump pledged to move the US embassy to 
Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/israel-donald-trump-netanyahu-jerusalem>
, a potentially explosive move as it would signal that the US considered the 
city to be Israel’s capital. The president-elect has also suggested that the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict simply may not be a priority for his 
administration.

He has appointed as US ambassador to Israel David Friedman, a fervent opponent 
of a two-state solution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
, a big supporter of settlement expansion and a vocal champion of an undivided 
Jerusalem as Israel’s “eternal capital”.


Is there an alternative?

The Israeli hard right has pushed for annexation of the West Bank, with its 
Palestinian population living permanently under military rule or being pressed 
to relocate to neighbouring Arab countries.


Many Palestinians and some Israelis now advocate a “one-state solution”, with 
the focus turning to a civil rights campaign for Palestinians – who would soon 
be a majority in a binational state. This would effectively be the end of the 
Jewish homeland, and thus unacceptable to the vast majority of global Jews and 
many others.

 