
From Hollywood to Hollyweed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/hollyweed-californias-hollywood-sign-changed-in-post-election-prank>
, residents of Los Angeles’s most famous neighbourhood woke up on New Year’s 
Day to find a prankster had scaled the 45ft letters and, with the help of some 
tarpaulin drapes, changed the last two “O”s to “E”s. It’s not the first time 
the Mount Lee sign has been transformed overnight. Other examples include
“Hollyweed” (again) in 1976 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2017/01/hollyweed-sign-at-it-again>, to mark a 
relaxation in the state’s marijuana laws,“Ollywood” in 1987 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1987-07-20/news/mn-3143_1_hollywood-sign>, a 
comment on Oliver North and the Iran-Contra scandal, and “Oil war” in 1990 in 
protest at the first Gulf war.

'Hollyweed': California's Hollywood sign changed in post-election prank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/hollyweed-californias-hollywood-sign-changed-in-post-election-prank>
For as long as there have been landmarks, there have been people willing to 
deface them in the name of politics, art, fame or sheer stupidity.

Duke of Wellington, Glasgow 

The longstanding tradition of placing a traffic cone on the head of the 
equestrian statue in Royal Exchange Square nearly came to an end in 2013 when 
the city council pledged to stop the practise. It apparentlycosts £10,000 to 
remove the cone 100 times a year 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equestrian_statue_of_the_Duke_of_Wellington,_Glasgow>
. A social media campaign to “save Wellington’s cone” gathered thousands of 
signatures within hours. The cone remains defiant.

Golden Gate bridge, San Francisco

One morning in 2001, the shell of an old red VW Beetle was found dangling from 
the Golden Gate bridge 
<http://www.sfgate.com/news/article/Beetle-Overboard-VW-hung-off-GG-Bridge-in-prank-2955618.php>
. A group of Canadian engineering students, who had spent the night laying 
cable underneath the bridge, took responsibility for the intricate prank.
 The beheaded Little Mermaid. Photograph: Terence Spencer/The LIFE Images 
Collection/Getty Images 
The Little Mermaid, Copenhagen

Based on the Hans Christian Andersen fairytale and more than 100 years old, 
the statue ofthe Little Mermaid has been painted, beheaded twice, blown up, and 
had her right arm sawn off 
<https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/landmark-princess/>. She has also been 
draped in a burqa, given a vibrator to hold, and been festooned with a sign 
reading “Free Pussy Riot”.

The Angel of the North, Gateshead

In 1998, Antony Gormley <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gormley>’s 
monumental sculpture briefly wore a giant replica ofAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer>’s Newcastle United shirt. 
It took 25 United fans, who chipped in £100 each for the shirt, to carry out 
the prank using fishing line, rubber balls and catapults.The shirt stayed up 
for 20 minutes <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/92891.stm>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fart-of-defacing-landmarks-hollyweed-blood-red-fountain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f42255142733b237515e3ce6daffdb78807dcca%2F6_386_1897_2370%2F1897.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fine%20art%20of%20defacing%20landmarks%3A%20from%20%E2%80%98Hollyweed%E2%80%99%20to%20Wellington%E2%80%99s%20cone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fart-of-defacing-landmarks-hollyweed-blood-red-fountain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fine%20art%20of%20defacing%20landmarks%3A%20from%20%E2%80%98Hollyweed%E2%80%99%20to%20Wellington%E2%80%99s%20cone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fart-of-defacing-landmarks-hollyweed-blood-red-fountain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f42255142733b237515e3ce6daffdb78807dcca%2F6_386_1897_2370%2F1897.jpg>
 Jim Morrison’s grave. Photograph: Rick Colls/REX/Shutterstock 
Winston Churchill, London

During the May Day demonstrations in London in 2000, the Winston Churchill 
statue in Parliament Square was defaced by a former soldier whomade the wartime 
leader look as though blood was dripping from his mouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2000/may/08/mayday.world>. The statue also 
temporarily gained a grass mohican <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/740524.stm> 
crafted out of a strip of turf.

Jim Morrison’s grave, Paris

The Doors singer, who died in Paris in 1971 from a suspected drugs overdose, 
is buried in Père Lachaise cemetery, where his tomb – the most visited in a 
cemetery where Edith Piaf, Max Ernst and Oscar Wilde are also buried – is 
routinely covered in graffiti, poems, flowers, candles, alcohol and underwear. 
It became so renowned for vandalism, with a bust of Morrison stolen in 1988, 
thatsecurity guards were employed to patrol the site 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/celebritynews/3098803/Security-guards-patrol-Jim-Morrisons-grave-to-ward-off-vandals.html>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fart-of-defacing-landmarks-hollyweed-blood-red-fountain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F539366275dec5d1e97eb7fc9395ca95a2d61812c%2F0_190_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fine%20art%20of%20defacing%20landmarks%3A%20from%20%E2%80%98Hollyweed%E2%80%99%20to%20Wellington%E2%80%99s%20cone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fart-of-defacing-landmarks-hollyweed-blood-red-fountain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20fine%20art%20of%20defacing%20landmarks%3A%20from%20%E2%80%98Hollyweed%E2%80%99%20to%20Wellington%E2%80%99s%20cone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fart-of-defacing-landmarks-hollyweed-blood-red-fountain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F539366275dec5d1e97eb7fc9395ca95a2d61812c%2F0_190_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
 The blood-red Trevi fountain. Photograph: Christophe Simon/AFP/Getty Images 
Trevi fountain, Rome

In 2007, a man claiming to be an artist from the Italian futurist movement 
tipped a bucketful of dye into the 18th-century baroque monument and turned its 
waters a lurid red. It was dubbed “a deplorable act of vandalism, and an 
offence against Rome 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/1567003/Officials-see-red-over-Trevi-Fountain-stunt.html>
” by Anita Ekberg, the actor who famously splashed around in the fountain inLa 
Dolce Vita <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/17/features.worldcinema>. 
 