
The last significant survey of Islam’s holy book in the west was held at the 
British Museum in London in 1976. Into that void comes the first major exhibit 
on the Qur’an in the United States, The Art of the Qur’an: Treasures from the 
Museum of Turkish and Islamic Arts, at the Sackler Gallery in Washington DC. On 
display are more than 60 richly decorated manuscripts that span nearly a 
millennium, cover a vast area of the Islamic world and encompass an array of 
styles and formats, from simple sheets of parchment to large bound tomes.

The exhibit offers “an unparalleled view of some of the greatest [Islamic] 
calligraphy, illumination and binding”, said museum director Julian Raby. 
“Above all, we convey the sense of how artists from north Africa to Afghanistan 
found different ways to honor the same sacred text ofIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>.”

The objects are primarily drawn from the superb holdings of the Museum of 
Turkish and Islamic Arts (TIEM) in Istanbul, which has loaned 47 priceless 
works dating from the late seventh to early 17th centuries, the majority of 
which have never before been shown outside of Turkey; these are juxtaposed with 
about 16 items from theFreer and Sackler museums’ <http://www.asia.si.edu/> 
permanent collection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fart-of-quran-exhibit-smithsonian-sackler-washington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaede66cfc00eee6155e0986c21877f63eda42ad%2F0_30_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Art%20of%20the%20Qur%E2%80%99an%20%E2%80%93%20landmark%20exhibit%20shows%20holy%20book%20as%20text%20and%20work%20of%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fart-of-quran-exhibit-smithsonian-sackler-washington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Art%20of%20the%20Qur%E2%80%99an%20%E2%80%93%20landmark%20exhibit%20shows%20holy%20book%20as%20text%20and%20work%20of%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fart-of-quran-exhibit-smithsonian-sackler-washington%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaede66cfc00eee6155e0986c21877f63eda42ad%2F0_30_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Massumeh Farhad, left, and Simon Rettig, curators of the exhibit, look at 
pages from a 5ft-by-7ft Qur’an displayed at the Sackler Gallery in Washington. 
Photograph: Molly Riley/AP 
While some may read a deeper significance into the timing of the exhibit – 
which opens amid an extremely contentious and politicized atmosphere 
surrounding Muslims in the US – museum officials say it is entirely 
happenstance. It’s the culmination of a collaboration between the two 
institutions, for which the seed was planted back in 2010, when the TIEM 
organized its own monumental Qur’an survey.

Massumeh Farhad, the Freer and Sackler’s chief curator and curator of Islamic 
art, draws a parallel with the Sackler’s landmark 2006 show on biblical 
manuscripts, In the Beginning: Bibles Before the Year 1000. “Doing this 
exhibition is really a continuation of bringing the cultures of Asia, whether 
social, political or religious, to America, especially to Washington,” Farhad 
said.

The Art of the Qur’an aims to introduce visitors to the Islamic holy book as 
both foundational sacred text – the divine message for Muslims, received by the 
Prophet Muhammad between 610 and 632 – and work of art. Early sections present 
key aspects of the Qur’an, such as its references to previous prophets 
(including Abraham and Moses) and continuity with earlier monotheistic 
scriptures, and themes including revelation, Judgment Day and the mercy of God.

The latter half focuses on what co-curator Simon Rettig calls the “artistic 
traditions that originated from transcribing the Qur’an” over the centuries. 
“It’s this idea of transformation [from a purely oral text] into a book, and 
adaptation.”

Artist Sophia Al-Maria: 'People hate Islam, but they're titillated by it too'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/27/sophia-al-maria-video-artist-interview-islam-qatar-us-whitney-museum-black-friday>
The show includes some of the oldest extant Quranic manuscripts, created 
within a century of Muhammad’s death in 632, which survived in part because the 
revered texts could never be thrown away. Two parchment folios dated to before 
725 during the Umayyad period in the Near East, for example, are marked in 
plain brown ink in the vertically oriented Hijazi script, with simple designs – 
such as a palm tree or geometric pattern – separating different chapters, or 
suras.

Due to the Islamic proscription on figurative images in religious contexts, 
the words of the Qur’an took on great visual importance, leading to the 
development of varied styles of calligraphy, as well as ornate decorative and 
binding techniques – particularly after the introduction of paper by the 11th 
century, which, according to Farhad, led to an “incredible burst of creativity”.

“The Qur’an can never be illustrated, so it was through illumination, whether 
using gold, or gold and other colors, that you could decorate the holy text,” 
she explained. “Many of the manuscripts were really intended to dazzle, whether 
by their size, their illuminations, their calligraphy, choice of paper or 
choice of ink. The experience of these manuscripts was very important.”

Indeed, some of the most magnificent works are thought to have been made 
primarily for show, given that those publicly reciting the sacred text already 
knew it by heart. “The written Qur’ans were in many instances meant to help the 
believers to recite,” said Farhad. “We repeatedly come back to the orality of 
the message and how critical that is.”

The Qur’ans on view at the Sackler are some of the finest existing examples 
from diverse historical eras and cultures, including the Umayyad and Abbasid 
Arab caliphates, Iran and Afghanistan during the Seljuk period, the Mongol 
Il-Khanid dynasty and Timurid empire, Mamluk Egypt and the Safavid Persian and 
Ottoman empires.

Many of the pieces were commissioned and collected by sultans, viziers and 
other notables – including, during the Ottoman period, a number of women in the 
royal family; others were acquired as gifts or plunder. On a military campaign 
in Iran in 1533, for instance, the Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent 
brought back sections of a stunning 30-volume Quran in dramatic black and gold 
muhaqqaq script that the Mongol ruler Uljaytu had commissioned in Baghdad in 
the early 1300s.

Rather than holding on to them for personal use, Muslim elites often endowed 
these Qur’ans to particular religious institutions such as mosques, madrasas or 
mausoleums. The exhibit explores “what it is about these manuscripts that is so 
important that sultans, emirs, viziers [were] collecting them from all over the 
Islamic world, brought them to the Ottoman domain and then … [were] donating 
them to their mosques, their tombs, for people to hear the message,” explained 
Farhad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fart-of-quran-exhibit-smithsonian-sackler-washington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94b5004433223c7e85c7263133315719b383f6c0%2F0_0_4677_3600%2F4677.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Art%20of%20the%20Qur%E2%80%99an%20%E2%80%93%20landmark%20exhibit%20shows%20holy%20book%20as%20text%20and%20work%20of%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fart-of-quran-exhibit-smithsonian-sackler-washington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Art%20of%20the%20Qur%E2%80%99an%20%E2%80%93%20landmark%20exhibit%20shows%20holy%20book%20as%20text%20and%20work%20of%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fart-of-quran-exhibit-smithsonian-sackler-washington%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94b5004433223c7e85c7263133315719b383f6c0%2F0_0_4677_3600%2F4677.jpg>
 The single-volume Qur’an from late 16th-century Shiraz that was acquired by 
Sultan Selim II’s wife, Nurbanu. Photograph: Supplied 
Later rooms examine the history behind specific works, shedding light on the 
people involved, from the master calligraphers and illuminators – some 
particularly renowned – who produced them, to their ownership lineage, which 
was in some cases meticulously documented. A strikingly colorful single-volume 
Qur’an from late-16th-century Shiraz, Iran, has an endowment note indicating 
that Nurbanu Sultan, the powerful wife of Selim II, donated it to Istanbul’s 
Atik Valide mosque in 1583; it was later moved to an imperial mosque 
commissioned by Selim II’s sister Mihrimah.

That so many exquisite examples did not end up damaged, lost or in the hands 
of private collectors is no accident. In 1914, as the Ottoman empire was in its 
waning days, government officials ordered manuscripts and other valuables 
housed at religious institutions across the Ottoman domains to be brought for 
safekeeping to Istanbul, thus ensuring their preservation. The objects formed 
the basis of the then newly opened Museum of Islamic Endowments, later renamed 
the TIEM. (Those currently on loan at the Sackler comprise just a fraction of 
the more than 3,000 Qur’ans and over 250,000 loose-leaf fragments in the TIEM’s 
collection.)

“There are manuscripts here of a standard that you don’t see in other 
collections,” said museum director Raby, noting that even many Muslim visitors 
are unlikely to have “had the chance to see material like this before”.

The curators are hopeful that, aside from being dazzled by the works’ visual 
splendor, non-Muslims will gain a greater awareness and appreciation of the 
holy text of roughly a quarter of the world’s population.

“What we hope is really to offer a different perspective on the Qur’an than 
has been presented, and is repeatedly presented given the state of the world,” 
said Farhad. “And by doing that, to encourage more nuanced understanding and 
discussion about both the Qur’an and about Islam and its culture.”

 * The Art of the Qur’an: Treasures from the Museum of Turkish and Islamic 
Arts is on view at the Smithsonian’s Arthur M Sackler Gallery through 20 
February 2017
 