
The Montreal protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/sep/16/movingonfrommontreal> is 
the most successful environmental treaty in history, and arguably one of the 
most successful of any international pact. It phased out the gases that were 
destroying the ozone layer, averting potential catastrophe and healing the hole 
that human activities had opened in our protective layer. Unfortunately, it had 
a side-effect overlooked when it was signed in the 1980s: some of the chemicals 
substituted for the ozone-destroyers had an effect on the climate thousands of 
times higher than carbon dioxide. This month, world governments agreed to 
address that byeliminating the substitute chemicals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/15/climate-change-environmentalists-hail-deal-to-limit-use-of-hydrofluorocarbons>
 – called HFCs – potentially reducing rising temperatures by as much as 0.5C in 
a relatively short time. Scientists put the safe limit on future rises at 2C 
above pre-industrial levels by the middle of this century: beyond that, 
catastrophic and irreversible climate changes are judged likely. So the 
reduction agreed under the Montreal protocol could have an enormous, and swift, 
impact.

This is just the beginning of the good news. The International Civil Aviation 
Organisationagreed this month to measures 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/aviation-is-first-global-industry-to-limit-carbon-emissions/>
 to combat the impact of flying. Planes are not only a rising source of 
greenhouse gases, but also contribute through the vapour they produce, which – 
coming at such high altitudes – has a greater warming effect. This week,
international shipping will debate similar rules to cut its impacts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/19/shipping-progressives-call-for-industry-carbon-emission-cuts>
. This is a trillion-dollar business, and ships use particularly dirty fuel. 
Governments should take the simple measures needed. Altering the fuel to be 
less polluting, preventing outflow during shipping and harbourage, and 
improving monitoring to reduce emissions need not be costly and will be 
invaluable in the fight against marine and air pollution as well as climate 
change.

These progressive moves, though belated and insufficient, must be welcomed. 
They represent an unprecedented run of helpful measures set out internationally 
since the Paris accord on climate change was signed last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
. In further good news, the Paris accord itself has now been ratified, making 
it harder for future governments in any nation, and of any stripe, to unpick 
it. Supporters said Paris would unleash a slew of contributory measures that 
would help reverse the rising trend in greenhouse gases. Based on these 
conclusions, it looks as if they were right.

Now the bad news. Last Tuesday, Nasa confirmed that September was the hottest 
on record, albeit by a small margin, making 11 out of the last 12 months 
record-breakers. This year is expected to set a new record –as last year did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/20/2015-smashes-record-for-hottest-year-final-figures-confirm>
, and 2014 before it. These results give the lie to climate sceptics’ claim 
that global warming has “paused”.

The biggest obstacle to action on climate remains, as it has been for more 
than 20 years, the US political system. The US has led the world on other 
environmental reforms, but the Senate is, incredibly, threatening to block the 
improvements to the Montreal protocol, apparently from partisan spite, industry 
lobbying and climate denialism rather than any rational basis. And if Donald 
Trump were to win the White House, though polls nowindicate that is unlikely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/trump-clinton-polls-brexit>, 
all bets on action on global warming would be off. He has declared himself a 
climate change denier and vowed to renege on the Paris agreement.

Scientists say we have a rapidly closing window to reorient the world’s 
economies to a low-carbon future, just a few years before we are locked into 
dangerous levels of warming. In 1987, the Montreal protocol was agreed despite 
clamour from industry that phasing out these destructive gases would be 
technically impossible or economically catastrophic. Those voices were wrong: 
the change happened ahead of schedule, with no discernible economic effect. 
Multiple studies, not leastthe landmark 2006 Stern review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jan/27/nicholas-stern-climate-change-davos>
, have shown that reducing greenhouse gases will have an economically 
beneficial effect. Industries such as coal can be compensated while others 
flourish, creating jobs and economic opportunity.

To achieve what is needed before the window closes, we must recapture the 
sense of urgency that motivated the Montreal protocol. Then, a clear and 
imminent danger – based on only two decades of scientific research, compared 
with more than 100 years of global warming – led nations, even during the cold 
war, to come together to protect our planet.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/scienceofclimatechange> may be 
slow-burning compared with the ozone layer’s destruction, but it is no less 
threatening. Montreal should provide the template by which we tackle it.
 