
The first and only vice-presidential debate of 2016 is in the can. Here’s a 
summary:

 * It was punchy, not a bit flat, it moved fast, covered a lot of policy 
ground, and featured Virginia senator Tim Kaine going after Donald Trump’s 
jugular like a bloodthirsty terrier while Indiana governor Mike Pence 
projected, mostly, a demeanor of steely calm and determined focus. 
 * Pence was criticized afterward for failing to defend most any of the 
controversial statements Trump has made, instead pretending that Trump had not 
said those things.

VP debate fact-check: Mike Pence and Tim Kaine's claims reviewed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/04/vice-president-debate-fact-check-mike-pence-tim-kaine>
 * Kaine was criticized afterward for interrupting Pence too much. Many of 
those interruptions included a call for Trump to release his tax returns, which 
Kaine mentioned many many times. 
 * Each side accused the other of running a campaign of insults. An “avalanche 
of insults,” Pence called it. 
 * At which Kaine rattled off about 16 insulting things Trump had said and 
accused Trump of having “kind of a personal mount Rushmore” of dictators he 
likes. 
 * “Oh please,” Pence replied. “Did you work on that one a long time? Because 
it had a lot of creative lines.” 
 * “See if you can defend any of them,” Kaine retorted, pointing out that he 
was merely repeating verbatim things Trump had said. issie lapowsky 
(@issielapowsky) 
Top moment on Facebook of #VPDebate 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/VPDebate?src=hash>: “He is asking everybody to 
vote for somebody that he cannot defend.” -@timkaine 
<https://twitter.com/timkaine>
 <https://twitter.com/issielapowsky/status/783499699928064004> October 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/issielapowsky/status/783499699928064004> 
 * There were fireworks. Kaine said Trump was exactly the “fool or maniac” 
Ronald Reagan had warned about when it came to nuclear weapons. “Senator,” 
Pence replied, “that is even beneath you and Hillary Clinton, and that is 
pretty low.” 
 * Pence denied that Trump had proposed punishing women for abortion, then 
sort of admitted Trump had said that, explaining: “He’s not a polished 
politician.” 
 * Pence also denied that he had called Russian president Vladimir Putin “a 
stronger leader <https://twitter.com/scottbix/status/783490972562882560>” than 
Barack Obama, denied past support forprivatizing social security and denied 
that Trump had called for morenations to get nuclear weapons. 
 * The unflappable Pence did show some frustration with Kaine on “this whole 
Putin thing,” “this Iran thing” and, in an unfortunate choice of words, at one 
point said, “Senator, you whipped out that Mexican thing again.” CSPAN (@cspan) 
.@Mike_Pence <https://twitter.com/mike_pence>: "You whipped out that Mexican 
thing again."@TimKaine <https://twitter.com/timkaine>: "Can you defend it?" 
#VPDebate <https://twitter.com/hashtag/VPDebate?src=hash> #debatenight 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/debatenight?src=hash> #debates 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/debates?src=hash> #Debates2016 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Debates2016?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/UCJJpFuIdf 
<https://t.co/UCJJpFuIdf>
 <https://twitter.com/cspan/status/783499694542614528> October 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/cspan/status/783499694542614528> 
 * Pence rolled out a Syria policy that Trump hasn’t mentioned, including safe 
zones and a muscular American response if Russia continues its involvement in 
the bombing of civilians. 
 * Kaine successfully tied Trump’s apparent non-payment of taxes to 
non-support for US troops. Pence: “Donald Trump would support our troops.” 
Kaine: “He doesn’t pay taxes.” 
 * Two different world views were on display. Pence: “You’ve got to err on the 
side of the safety of the American people.” Kaine: “By trashing all Syrians? By 
trashing all Muslims?” 
 * “The thought of Donald Trump as commander in chief scares us to death,” 
Kaine said of himself and Clinton. Sabrina Siddiqui (@SabrinaSiddiqui) 
Clinton campaign aides say fundamental takeaway from tonight is that Mike Pence
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence> did not show up to defend 
Trump, promoted himself instead.
 <https://twitter.com/SabrinaSiddiqui/status/783501063206952960> October 5, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/SabrinaSiddiqui/status/783501063206952960> Donald J. 
Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Mike Pence won big. We should all be proud of Mike!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/783495937708527616> October 5, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/783495937708527616>  