
Comics are going through a bad patch. Recent surveys have shown that eleven 
year olds, usually their most avid readers, are now more likely to prefer 
books, and there is also evidence that fewer children are buying them on a 
regular basis.

Rapidly rising prices probably contribute to this decline. Very few comics now 
sell for less than 20p, and some have deteriorated in quality, depending upon 
photo strips as an economic but unsatisfactory substitute for original cartoon 
drawings.


It would be impossible nowadays to publish anything of the calibre of the 
original and long departed Eagle for much less than 50p. Look And Learn, 
admittedly not a comic in the strictest sense of the word but closely 
resembling the Eagle in style and format, expired recently after a run of 20 
years. At the time of its demise the price has risen to 40p and the readership 
had dwindled to a few thousand.


Ironically, while the market for comics is depressed, comic books flourish as 
never before. Publications with comic style illustrations caught on in the mid 
sixties with the introduction from America of the Dr Seuss books which combined 
a controlled vocabulary with a sense of humour enhanced by funny illustrations.


Books with a cartoon format were slower to gain in popularity but their 
success was assured when it became apparent that the Asterix the Gaul series 
could be translated from French without doing violence to the puns.


Interest has also been boosted by the work of the brilliant American 
author-illustrator Maurice Sendak whose strange, disturbing Outside Over There 
is already a collector’s item. When Sendak’s first comic style book Where the 
Wild Things Are was published in this country it had a generally rough 
reception from educationalists who thought its grotesque monsters would terrify 
many of the young children for whom it was intended. What the critics did not 
anticipate was that young readers would find the drawings amusing.


Two British illustrator-authors have also contributed significantly to the 
rise of the comic book. Roger Hargreaves’s Mr Men series has simple comic style 
characters in the bold colours which most young children like.


Sales have topped the 30 million mark and the enterprise has been extended to 
Mr Men rulers, erasers, and pencil cases plus a Little Miss set of books which 
will, perhaps, calm the critics who claim that the Mr Men characters are sexist.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcomics-books-decline-1982%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5877d4255e57abcaa76e3de61c54d32d24ae35%2F0_129_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20decline%20of%20comics%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%209%20November%201982&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcomics-books-decline-1982%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20decline%20of%20comics%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%209%20November%201982&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcomics-books-decline-1982%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5877d4255e57abcaa76e3de61c54d32d24ae35%2F0_129_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
 The Elephant and the Bad Baby by Raymond Briggs. Photograph: Felix Clay for 
the Guardian 
Raymond Briggs <https://literature.britishcouncil.org/writer/raymond-briggs>’s 
first cartoon book, Father Christmas, has as its eponymous hero a grotty rather 
than grotto Santa Clause far removed from the good humour and hearty ho ho’s of 
the conventional stereotype. He appealed to children at once.


A sequel, Father Christmas Goes on Holiday, was followed by The Snowman, a 
story with illustrations which more than compensate for the complete absence of 
words. Then came Fungus the Bogeyman, for all the adolescents who have ever 
been told to wash behind their ears, and Gentleman Jim, the story of a 
frustrated toilet attendant whose impossible dreams materialise into stark but 
touching reality.


Briggs’s latest book, Where the Wind Blows, reflects a growing concern with 
social issues. A biting commentary on the consequences of a nuclear holocaust 
for ordinary people, its message is tempered by the naive, rueful bravery of an 
elderly couple attempting to cope with a form of warfare completely beyond 
their understanding.


One reason for the success of comic books is that they have been accepted, 
albeit sometimes grudgingly, in schools and public libraries. Clad in the 
respectability of hard covers, cartoon and comic style material is frequently 
more daring than it could ever be in the pages of the Dandy or Roy of the 
Rovers. Educationalists might take some exception to Sendak’s stripped-off 
little boys parading their masculinity or to Briggs’s Father Christmas on the 
lavatory, but in general such peccadilloes are forgiven.


So when is a comic not a comic? The answer might well be “When it’s a book” – 
a response by no means as simple as it might seem. The creators of comic books 
tend to work slowly and with care. Since the death of his collaborator,René 
Goscinny <http://www.asterix.com/the-creators/rene-goscinny/>, who provided the 
words,Albert Uderzo <http://www.asterix.com/the-creators/albert-uderzo/> works 
seven days a week for seven months on each Asterix book. Raymond Briggs brings 
out a new story every eighteen months, Sendak takes years. In contrast, 
cartoonists and writers on comic papers are under pressure to provide original 
material week in week out.


The spectacular success of comic books, however, is unlikely to herald the end 
of the line for comic papers. Asterix the Gaul and Fungus the Bogeyman are not 
too far removed from Desperate Dan and the Bash Street Kids, although they tend 
to be better drawn.

Comics are nothing if not resilient. One needs to look no further than the old 
Dundee firm of D. C. Thomson. With decades of experience behind them – some of 
the earliest readers of the Beano and the Dandy will now be grandparents. 
Thomson’s understanding of what makes a successful comic is profound. The 
ingredients seem to be slapstick humour of the kind which appeals to seven to 
eleven year olds, allied to competent draughtsmanship and the development of 
amusing characters whose popularity is enduring. At 10p a copy the Beano has to 
be value for money.


Geoff Fenwick is a senior tutor of In-Service Studies at the City of Liverpool 
College of Higher Education.

 