
The health and lives of gay men matter. That’s what the high court ruled on 
Tuesday morning. Last year,NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
England decided against rolling out a treatment called PrEP – which prevents 
the transmission of HIV. The wellbeing of gay men was overriden by other 
priorities. Given it costs substantially more money to treat HIV than to 
prevent it, even financial considerations weren’t a good reason.

NHS can fund 'game-changing' PrEP HIV drug, court says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/nhs-can-fund-game-changing-prep-hiv-drug-court-says>
On Tuesday, NHS England was defeated in court and told it was responsible for 
funding the treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/nhs-can-fund-game-changing-prep-hiv-drug-court-says>
, and that they have a “preventative role and power tocommission preventative 
function <https://twitter.com/PositiveLad/status/760407789160267780>”. Pressure 
must now be placed on the NHS to start rolling this drug out immediately. As 
the British Medical Journal pointed out, “delays by NHS England will cost lives 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/354/bmj.i3515>”.

If you want to stop HIV spreading, then PrEP is one among many solutions. It 
works. Asstudies in the United States have shown 
<http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/prep/index.html>, if taken every day, it has been 
shown to reduce the risk of HIV infection in high-risk individuals by up to 
92%. The objections to PrEP, in truth, are based on moral objections. If you do 
not want the risk of HIV, goes the argument, then wear a condom. Those who get 
HIV are, by implication, morally condemned for bringing it on themselves.

Of course, safer sex messages must always emphasise the importance of condoms: 
after all, they protect against many other STIs. But – in the real world, 
rather than the non-existent world of the morally self-righteous – things are 
more complicated. People get carried away; people get drunk (yes, in the real 
world imperfect people sometimes drink more than the recommended daily amount); 
condoms break. The same moralising is used against the right of women to have 
control over their own bodies, whether it be the right to abortion or even the 
morning-after pill. The standards set by the “morally pure” cause harm – or 
even kill.

We have come so far with the treatment of HIV, once a disease that ravaged the 
gay world. But according to the Terence Higgins Trust, there are 45,000 men who 
have sex with men living with HIV; and thousands of them do not know they even 
have it. The annual rate of newly infected men in 2014 washigher than the 
decade before 
<http://www.tht.org.uk/sexual-health/About-HIV/How-common-is-HIV_qm_>. If you 
genuinely want to send HIV infection rates hurtling into reverse, then PrEP is 
not the only solution – but it is a good one.

Gay people, their health and their lives, matter. That’s a court judgment. NHS 
England must now accept the defeat – and start doing its job: protecting health 
and saving lives.
 