
Donald Trump's presidential transition is basically reality television | 
Richard Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/donald-trump-president-transition-reality-television-the-apprentice>
Swamp monsters are about to take over the White House, and the consequences 
for the environment are terrifying. Tech millionaires are known for making 
lofty promises on climate. Now that they’ve jumped into the bed with Trump, 
they’ll be quick to say they can “disrupt” the administration from within. 
That’s nonsense.


At a meeting in New York on Wednesday, Trump gathered a slew of industry 
all-stars – including Uber’s Travis Kalanick, Facebook’s Sheryl Sandberg and 
Apple’s Tim Cook – to talk jobs and economic development. Among the more 
surprising faces at the table was Elon Musk, the media darling and renewable 
energy magnate whocriticized 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/elon-musk-donald-trump-advisory-council-a7474416.html>
 Trump during the campaign, and has long raised alarm bells about the 
potentially disastrous impacts of man-made climate change.


Now, Musk looks poised to become part of a small but growing group of 
green-tech millionaires willing to work with Trump. Musk had an intimate 
meeting with just Trump and Cook. He’ll also join Kalanick and JPMorgan Chase 
CEO Jamie Dimon on Trump’s Strategic and Policy Forum.


He’s not the only one who thinks Trump can be reasoned with. Al Gore – now 
making a modest fortune 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/11/the-planet-saving-capitalism-subverting-surprisingly-lucrative-investment-secrets-of-al-gore/407857/>
 as a green-tech investor – was optimistic about the potential for finding “
common ground 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/12/05/504463711/al-gore-meets-with-donald-and-ivanka-trump-in-search-for-common-ground>
” with Trump on climate following a recent meeting with him. “[I]n this energy 
space,” Bill Gates said after his own meeting with Trump, “there can be a very 
upbeat message that [Trump’s] administration [is] going to organize things, get 
rid of regulatory barriers, and have American leadership through innovation.”


While “innovation” may help Musk, Gore and Gates turn a profit, it alone won’t 
save the planet fromDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> – or his cabinet picks. Exxon 
CEO Rex Tillerson is poised to become the United States’ chief diplomat. In 
line to head the Department of Energy is former Texas governor Rick Perry, who 
sits on the board of the company behind the Dakota Access pipeline and once 
suggested the BP Deepwater Horizon disaster was an “act of God”.


Still, the rosy views coming from these “eco-optimists 
<https://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/the-eco-optimists>” is tempting. As 
federal regulatory agencies face threats from inside and out, a simple and 
market-friendly solution would seem to offer an easy out for a problem as big 
as climate change.

If inventors could simply unlock the potential of clean energy technology – 
through tax incentives and a healthy injection of start-up capital – solar 
panels and wind turbines could proliferate, making dirty fuels obsolete.

Democrats: don't try to work with Donald Trump. Just say 'no' | Steven W 
Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/democrats-donald-trump-presidency-normalize-administration>
For such thinking, Musk, Gates and Gore have all been hailed as saviors of a 
sort, quirky geniuses who offer a pragmatic and optimistic approach to solving 
the climate crisis – not to mention a whole lot of capital. Leveraged 
effectively, they say, technology can create a world-saving “Breakthrough,” as 
the name of Gates and other billionaires’ new$1bn clean energy fund 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kerryadolan/2016/12/12/bill-gates-launches-1-billion-breakthrough-energy-investment-fund/#339d4baf59a7>
 suggests.

But there’s one big problem with such an apparently quick and harmonious fix: 
the fossil fuel industry, along with its $5.3tn in subsidies and men on its 
payroll who are snapping up cabinet positions. There’s nothing inherent to an 
uptick in clean energy that means we’ll start digging up less fossil fuels. As 
climate scientists have been warning for years, that’s exactly what we need to 
do.

For just a two-in-three shot 
<http://www.csduppsala.se/2016/09/05/watch-the-lecture-with-kevin-anderson/> of 
keeping below the 2C (3.6F) target outlined in the Paris agreement, wealthy 
nations like the US should fully decarbonize their energy systems by 2035.

In other words, we need to phase fossil fuels out of our economy entirely 
within just 20 years – no pipelines, no drilling and no gas-powered cars. 
That’s not just a problem for the future, either. Simply burning fossil fuels 
is alreadykilling 5 million people each year 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/121032/map-climate-change-kills-more-people-worldwide-terrorism>
.


Granted, market signals and technological innovations are a critical part of 
transitioning away from fossil fuels. But the main task of climate policy over 
the next four years is no different than what it was before Trump was elected: 
challenging the power of the fossil fuel industry on all fronts.


That now entails challenging the administration itself, and defending agencies 
like the EPA from theclimate deniers and free market zealots 
<http://www.sierraclub.org/sierra/green-life/meet-scott-pruitt-man-picked-lead-epa>
 now in charge of them. There’s no path to a low-carbon future without strict 
regulations on coal, oil and natural gas. And every signal from Trump’s 
transition team points to a free reign for fossil fuel developers, in the 
United States and around the world.

A more moderate Donald Trump? His taste in men shows otherwise | Angelina 
Chapin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/donald-trump-moderate-extreme-cabinet-picks>
Musk, Gore, Gates and the other so-called climate champions who choose to 
collaborate with Trump should beware. They will be guilty of their own form of 
climate denial if they can’t see the glaring conflict between what he says 
behind closed doors and the havoc his cabinet threatens to wreak on the planet. 
Left to their own devices, Trump and hisSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> allies will just slap 
more Teslas and solar panels onto a burning planet.

 * This article was amended on 15 December 2016 to correct the day of the 
summit. It was on Wednesday, not Tuesday. The article was amended again on 16 
December to clarify that there is a two-in-three chance of global warming 
staying below 2C, not one-in-three.
 