
One of the charges against Rachel Dolezal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rachel-dolezal>, the “biologically white” 
woman who recently resigned from the Spokane chapter of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, is that she misrepresented 
herself in her application to Howard University, an elite and historically 
black university where she did a master of fine arts. Because of her interest 
in African American art, the admissions office assumed that she was black.


A number of people have made the connection between Dolezal and Coleman Silk, 
the hero of Philip Roth’s novelThe Human Stain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jan/17/fiction.philiproth> – a 
light-skinned black man who spends most of his academic life passing for 
Jewish, until a slip of the tongue gets him fired. He refers to two chronically 
absent students as “spooks” – the students are black, which he didn’t know, and 
they lodge a complaint against him for using a term that can be understood as 
racist abuse. As it happens, Silk also went to Howard – where, going off-campus 
in Washington DC, he heard the word “nigger” used against him for the first 
time – and reacted against the strong racial identification that he felt was 
forced on him there. Just one in a series of events and reactions to events 
that persuaded him eventually to pass himself off as white.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438274603521%2F0e894bfd-5ac6-4737-b434-fa4be4b96e9c-1840x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Adventures%20of%20Huckleberry%20Finn%3A%20how%20to%20write%20about%20race%20in%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Adventures%20of%20Huckleberry%20Finn%3A%20how%20to%20write%20about%20race%20in%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438274603521%2F0e894bfd-5ac6-4737-b434-fa4be4b96e9c-1840x2040.jpeg>
Of course, Roth himself is guilty (if that’s the right word) of writing 
intimately about what it feels like to be black. He brings his usual ravenous 
intellectual appetite to the task, but one of the curious things about his 
description of Silk is the similarity to another famous Roth hero, “Swede” 
Levov, fromAmerican Pastoral, another almost-all-American kid, star athlete and 
scholar, whose “almost” stems from the fact that Levov isn’t a Wasp – he’s 
Jewish. Silk is a high-school track champion andGolden Glove-level boxer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Gloves>. He first passes himself off as 
white at a tournament at West Point, where his Jewish coach (Silk is the only 
non-Jewish fighter) tells him to let everyone assume he’s just another one of 
the boys. Roth takes us through Silk’s conversion step by step, in exhaustive 
and persuasive detail. Nevertheless, you feel running through his account the 
knowledge that exclusion from the US mainstream was undercut in his experience 
and others’ by their love of American sports.

The questions this raises is whether the Jewish experience and the black 
experience are translatable into each other – Roth raises it himself – or 
whether there’s some essential difference between the two classes of American 
outsider, some human stain, that keeps showing through. One difference, of 
course, between being Jewish and black is that you can opt to become Jewish; 
there’s a process for that. And various commentators have referred to Dolezal 
as transracial, as though the softening of the boundaries between the genders 
might apply to race as well. Other experts are brought in to oppose this view. 
But the truth, for novelists at least, is that all these boundaries are 
supposed to be permeable. Otherwise, how are you going to write?

In 1984, on the 100th anniversary of the publication of Huckleberry Finn, 
Norman Mailer wrote in the New York Times: “Reading [the novel] one comes to 
realise all over again that the near-burned-out, throttled, hate-filled dying 
affair between whites and blacks is still our great national love affair, and 
woe to us if it ends in detestation and mutual misery. Riding the current of 
this novel, we are back in that happy time when the love affair was new and all 
seemed possible.”

My own experience of that love affair has necessarily been a very narrow one – 
we live only the one life. The neighbourhood I grew up in had a foundingmap 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plat> that specified that no one of African 
descent could live there, except in the capacity of servant. Of course, by the 
time my family arrived in Austin, Texas, in 1975, that condition had become 
illegal and unenforceable – but it didn’t need to be enforced. No black family 
lived on our street, and I doubt I saw many black kids in the local park. My 
parents bought our house from an old Texas woman whose African American servant 
lived in the hut at the bottom of the garden. It was tiny; we later called it 
the playhouse, and used it as a base for the kind of cute Tom Sawyer-like 
escapades that spoil the ending of Huckleberry Finn.

Rachel Dolezal's deception: her 'black' identity doesn't make sense – or make 
her black
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2015/jun/12/rachel-dolezal-black-identity-civil-rights-leader>
The junior high I got bussed to was a specialist school in east Austin, one of 
those neighbourhoods urban planners had managed to separate by highway from the 
rest of the city because black people lived in it. A friend of mine once 
complained to me that he felt a bit like “salt in a pepper pot” in that school. 
This is not the kind of phrase a 12-year-old makes up. He must have heard it 
somewhere.The fact that this line has stuck with me for 30 years suggests that 
even then it left a taste in my mouth, but it’s also true that I had no black 
friends, except for one kid on the basketball team, who used to ride the bench 
with me. He did very good Bill Cosby impersonations. My mother says he visited 
our house once (a big clapboard colonial revival from the 1920s) for a 
playdate, but if he did I’ve blocked out the memory, and in any case I never 
got invited back.

And yet it was a love-affair, too, though unreciprocated. The ballplayers I 
liked were all black. Michael Jordan was something of an obsession, and shone 
at the tip of that constellation of celebrity reference points by which my 
family navigated the supper-table conversation (along withPhilip Larkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiplarkin> and Cheers’s Sam Malone). But 
I readLangston Hughes <https://www.theguardian.com/books/langston-hughes>, too, 
in the same way I read Heinrich Heine – because I was a nerd with a jones for 
intellectual folk-simplicity. Every day, the school bus drove through the 
run-down streets surrounding the school: cars in the grass, peeling paint, 
sagging roofs, people sitting on the porch. I didn’t know anyone who lived 
there.

Last week I reread The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, which I had loved in 
high school. Mailer, in his NYT piece, describes it playfully as a wonderfully 
precocious first novel, full of talent and energy. This isn’t quite a 
backhanded compliment but he also meant to put the book in its place. Part of 
what impressed Mailer is the fact thatHuck Finn is the kind of novel that could 
still launch a career today – that would still seem fresh and promising. A 
semi-orphaned boy heads off down the Mississippi with a runaway slave. The 
central conceit of the book is that Huck feels guilty about not turning Jim in 
– basically, because by helping Jim he’s participating in a robbery. Jim 
“belongs” to the widow Miss Watson, who had always been kind to Huck. And yet 
he can’t help liking Jim too, admiring and sympathising with him, so that his 
refusal to shop Jim becomes just another part of Huck’s general depravity, his 
refusal to become “civilised”. The reader, feeling this tension in him between 
what he should do and what he thinks he should do, can’t help rooting for the 
kid to follow his instinct.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438014943176%2F367ad4fd-b12b-4d40-a6b7-59f2d7f4da02-2060x1522.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Adventures%20of%20Huckleberry%20Finn%3A%20how%20to%20write%20about%20race%20in%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Adventures%20of%20Huckleberry%20Finn%3A%20how%20to%20write%20about%20race%20in%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438014943176%2F367ad4fd-b12b-4d40-a6b7-59f2d7f4da02-2060x1522.jpeg>
 ‘Reading Huckleberry Finn one comes to realise all over again that the 
near-burned-out, throttled, hate-filled dying affair between whites and blacks 
is still our great national love affair’ … Norman Mailer in 1984. Photograph: 
Michael Brennan/Getty Images 
Five years before Mailer’s piece, James Baldwin gave a lecture at Berkeley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8klsr2TB5pA> in which he talked about his 
struggles as a writer to find literary models. “I did not agree at all with the 
moral predicament ofHuckleberry Finn concerning nigger Jim.” (His audience – 
mostly white? – can be heard laughing.) “It was not after all a question about 
whether I should be sold back into slavery.”Baldwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesbaldwin>, very elegantly, is laughing a 
little too. And of course he’s right. The appeal the novel makes depends on a 
very obvious assumption about his audience: the drama, for Twain, is about a 
white man fighting his conscience, not a black man fighting for his freedom.

But what’s curious about Baldwin’s remark is that a few minutes earlier he had 
been discussing his need, as a writer, to find an American vernacular – one of 
the legacies ofHuck Finn. For Baldwin, the rhythms of the language he wanted 
couldn’t be heard or found while he was living in the States; he needed to go 
to Paris before they came to him, just asSaul Bellow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/saulbellow>, another cultural outsider to 
Wasp America, didn’t find the voice for Augie March until he saw Parisian 
cleaners sweeping the streets.

Baldwin is one of the few US writers of his generation as comfortable writing 
white characters as black characters (or the other way around). But if this is 
the standard (and it seems as good as any other) for a novelist who has come to 
terms with the “problem of America”, Bellow makes an interesting test case. One 
of the running subplots of Bellow’sMr Sammler’s Planet, which won the National 
book award in 1971, involves a black pickpocket whom Sammler watches from the 
windows of a bus. Eventually the thief notices that he’s been noticed and 
stalks the ageing Jewish hero back to the lobby of his apartment building. 
There he pushes Sammler into a corner and pulls down his own pants, exposing 
his large cock, forcing the old guy to admire it. Bellow comments: “[Sammler] 
was never to hear the black man’s voice. He no more spoke than a puma would.” 
There’s more along these lines, none of which looks great now; even at the 
time, it probably didn’t look great. To my race-sensitive ears, on reading it 
45 years after the novel was published, it was almost enough to make me give up 
on the book.

But the truth, for novelists, is that all these boundaries are supposed to be 
permeable. Otherwise, how will you write?

In 2007, Penguin reissued the novel with a new introduction, by the black 
writer and essayist Stanley Crouch. “When it arrived, the deeper meanings ofMr 
Sammler’s Planet were missed by those afraid that Bellow had become a racist 
and a fuddy-duddy who didn’t recognise the importance of all the changes that 
were streaking – butt naked – across the American scene.” Crouch’s essay is a 
polemic in favour of high culture: “In this time of low democratic morale it is 
good to remember that some writers in this country aren’t afraid of the big bad 
wolves of popular culture and refuse to slink along with the cowards of our 
academies, those who are all too willing to add materials to the reading lists 
of their courses – if that means their most self-serving colleagues and 
orneriest students will pick some other people to harass.”

That phrase, “the cowards of our academies”, suggests exactly the sort of 
people who refused to stand up for Coleman Silk inThe Human Stain. According to 
Crouch, the great failure of the American novel is that it has not adequately 
addressed the diversity of the American experience for fear of gettingthe other 
wrong. Television, he argues, has done a better job. Of course, there are white 
writers who have taken it on. Crouch praises Faulkner forGo Down, Moses 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_Down,_Moses_(short_story_collection)>, but 
more recently, Bill Cheng inSouthern Cross the Dog, Jonathan Lethem in The 
Fortress of Solitude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/dec/20/featuresreviews.guardianreview21>
 and Michael Chabon inTelegraph Avenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/05/telegraph-avenue-michael-chabon-review>
 have not only written about black characters (from a white point of view) but 
adopted their voices as well. Chabon’s book was generally well received, but 
came under fire from black writers who disliked his appropriation of a black 
voice, and suffered from the hesitations of white reviewers who felt 
unqualified to judge it.

Crouch connects these hesitations to the rising influence of memoir or what 
the writer David Shields refers to as “reality hunger”: “If I don’t write about 
you, you won’t write about me. I’ll stick with my favourite subject – myself – 
and I suggest you do the same.” Crouch traces the history of this failure back 
to the publication of William Styron’s Confessions of Nat Turner, “which told 
the fictionalised story of the slave who led a bloody and squelched revolt in 
South Carolina in 1831”. Styron’s book won the Pulitzer prize, but it also 
received a “public flogging” from a number of black intellectuals who published 
a lengthy “response” to it.“Styron was no Faulkner,” Crouch writes. “His book 
was not good, which may have been one of the reasons that James Baldwin … loved 
it so and said that it expressed his own feelings with such accuracy.”

The trouble is writing is hard, and bad writing is congruent to bigotry – it 
imagines people to be less profound than they really are. If I write badly 
about expat American half-Jews living in London, then that’s just bad writing. 
But if I make the same mistakes about any other group it looks like and may 
well be a reflection of some deep prejudice. All of which means that taking on 
substantial characters whose experiences differ widely from your own can be an 
act of small courage for a writer.

But white writers can be criticised for not writing black characters, too. 
Lena Dunham responded to this complaint in the second series ofGirls. Hannah 
Horvath briefly dates a black Republican, and the couple share an uncomfortable 
scene that leaves unclear whether the relationship fails because of political 
or racial differences. It’s a clever piece of self-critical self-consciousness, 
but in its way may be no less “symbolic” than Bellow’s pickpocket. As Ta-Nehisi 
Coates put it in a largely favourable response, “I have never met a black 
Republican in all my time in New York. And I’m black. So I have trouble 
believing that Hannah found that one black dude in Brooklyn who is 
anti-marriage equality, anti-abortion, pro-guns and anti-health care.” Whether 
or not this kind of Republican exists,Girls doesn’t give him much of a chance 
to explain his political position – possibly because the writers of the show 
can’t really imagine it. “We must tell our stories,” Coates concludes. “And 
other people must tell theirs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438015107625%2F9a1da83f-d07a-43cc-bc9b-000511f9da7e-2060x1325.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Adventures%20of%20Huckleberry%20Finn%3A%20how%20to%20write%20about%20race%20in%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Adventures%20of%20Huckleberry%20Finn%3A%20how%20to%20write%20about%20race%20in%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438015107625%2F9a1da83f-d07a-43cc-bc9b-000511f9da7e-2060x1325.jpeg>
 Lena Dunham and Donald Glover in Girls. Photograph: HBO/Everett/Rex 
Shutterstock 
Fiction should offer the freedom to tackle these subjects; there should be a 
presumption of artistic innocence

As a kid, my main contact with African American life came from my experience 
on basketball teams. I heard the N-word often enough, though I would never have 
used it myself – and even now, after the C-word and the F-word have lost their 
power, I can barely bring myself to write it. Which is probably just as well, 
though it also seems a little suspicious to me – a kind of perpetuation of the 
wrong kind of magic. Even in high school, I had white teammates who could call 
the black players it, as they sometimes called each other, as a matter of 
friendly abuse. It was partly a class thing. I was a nerd; they weren’t. And 
there’s no question that these guys basically got along with our black 
teammates better than I got along with either.

One of the striking and uncomfortable things about the race conversation in 
the US is how much of it is framed by sports. InBlack Planet 
<http://davidshields.com/books/black-planet-facing-race-during-an-nba-season/>, 
David Shields writes about the obsession with which “white people (including 
especially myself) think about black heroes, black scapegoats, black bodies”. 
He followed an NBA basketball team for a year and analysed the way the media 
covered the games. For Shields, black athletes embodied the sort of argument 
against “civilised” America that Huck Finn had intuitively felt in his sympathy 
for Jim. The book was widely praised for dealing honestly with an uncomfortable 
subject, but Crouch, in an excellent essay, “Blues for the Artificial White 
Man”, attacked it for admiring the antisocial, thuggish behaviour of athletes 
who look good only in the context of a white man’s need to delegate his 
transgressions to people he has no real desire or ability to emulate. He was 
standing up for Mr Sammler.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438013873888%2Ffeefa458-5fea-4f7a-a812-6dfbc425638d-1273x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Adventures%20of%20Huckleberry%20Finn%3A%20how%20to%20write%20about%20race%20in%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Adventures%20of%20Huckleberry%20Finn%3A%20how%20to%20write%20about%20race%20in%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fhuckleberry-finn-mark-twain-rereading-benjamin-markovits-race-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438013873888%2Ffeefa458-5fea-4f7a-a812-6dfbc425638d-1273x2040.jpeg>
 ‘I did not agree with the moral predicament of Huckleberry Finn concerning 
nigger Jim’ … James Baldwin. Photograph: Sten Rosenlund/Rex Features 
Part of the problem with the Dolezal story is that to exclude people from a 
whole category of experience imposes on the members of that category a certain 
amount of pressure to put up a unified front: if they can’t speak for us, then 
we have to agree with each other. But this leaves little room for the 
corrections and counter-corrections that should make up any conversation about 
something as complicated as race. And yet to ignore the boundaries doesn’t seem 
right either. When Chris Rock jokes, “I love black people, but I hate niggers 
…” even the biggest fans of permeable racial boundaries might feel that this is 
not a joke for a white comedian to make. And yet much of his audience is white, 
and you can’t help wondering, on either side of the divide: what are we 
laughing at? Is it what they are laughing at?

Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction>, I’d like to think, should 
offer the freedom to tackle these subjects; there should be a kind of 
presumption of artistic innocence. But it doesn’t always feel that way from the 
inside. It often feels like guilt. My first job after grad school was teaching 
English in New York, at a wealthy private school that also offered me my first 
intimate experience of a black middle class – the people I taught with, the 
people I taught. One of the new biology hires, a young Midwestern woman, skinny 
and white, in her first year out of college, who played Ultimate Frisbee on the 
weekends and sometimes after school, was telling me a story about the night 
before, when they had played at some field in Harlem. A real “sketchy” kind of 
place. And I said something stupid like, “So you came packing heat, right?”

One of my colleagues, a black woman in her 50s, overheard me. “Excuse me,” she 
said. “Excuse me. What did you just say?” I stared at her for a minute, 
blushing; my heart sank. “You’re talking about somewhere people live,” she 
said. I didn’t mean anything by it; I just liked saying the phrase. “You watch 
too many movies,” she told me. “Don’t believe what you see on TV.”

Afterwards a friend of mine pulled me aside. Another English teacher who 
wanted to be a writer, a black guy from Princeton, who lived in Harlem as it 
happens, and was probably my best friend on the staff. “Don’t worry about her,” 
he said. “She’s always getting on her high horse.” For the rest of the week, I 
kept arguing with her in my head, but my self-defending didn’t make me feel any 
better – it rarely does. And now from this distance I can see they were 
probably both in the right.

Not long ago I gave a reading in Cambridge, Massachusetts – an excerpt from 
You Don’t Have to Live Like This, whose narrator is supposed to be a little off 
about race. Not racist, but not right in his mind about it, either. There were 
maybe 40 or 50 people at the event, all of them white, except for two people 
sitting towards the back – a father and his teenage son. In the passage, my 
narrator mocks a preppy friend of his for introducing himself to the black guy 
behind the counter in their college dining hall. The guy is embarrassed and 
carefully wipes his palm on his apron before shaking hands. “It doesn’t matter 
if you call him Willy, he’ll still call you sir,” I read out, suddenly and 
uncomfortably aware of the weird, hard-to-pin-down presumptions that lay behind 
this line – and not quite sure what I was communicating to that kid at the 
back. Afterwards his father raised a hand to ask a question.

“What do you feel about Alex Ferguson’s retirement?” he said.

“Totally gutted,” I told him in a mock-English accent, though what I actually 
felt was relief.
 