
We now know how Donald Trump will take on Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> this autumn – by framing 
her as a criminal who should be sent not to the White House, but to jail.

Trump had already signalled as much via the two-word label he likes to hang 
around the neck of his Democratic opponent:Crooked Hillary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/25/donald-trump-crooked-hillary-clinton-nickname-ignore-fight>
. But the Republican convention in Cleveland, which on Tuesday formally 
nominated Trump as its presidential candidate, has given colour and shape to 
that strategy. Now we know how it will look and sound.

Speaker after speaker has pressed the same themes: that Clinton is a liar who 
regards herself as above the law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/chris-christie-republican-national-convention-hillary-speech>
, that she is corrupt, that she is stained by a series of scandals going back 
25 years. On Tuesday night, New Jersey governorChris Christie used his turn at 
the podium <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xLRzksXmAfU&feature=share> to play 
prosecutor, asking the audience in the hall and watching on TV to act as a 
“jury of her peers” and sit in judgment on Hillary Clinton as he laid out the 
case against her.
Paul Owen (@PaulTOwen) 
Republican crowd chants "lock her up" about Hillary Clinton. Chris Christie: 
"All right, we're getting there"https://t.co/A7BCEidbl0 
<https://t.co/A7BCEidbl0>
 <https://twitter.com/PaulTOwen/status/755578508684832768> July 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/PaulTOwen/status/755578508684832768> 
He had barely got going when the crowd in front of him began chanting “Lock 
her up! Lock her up!” Christie smiled indulgently, beforepromising: “All right, 
we’re getting there.” <https://twitter.com/PaulTOwen/status/755578508684832768>

It was a telling moment, for it confirmed that, when it comes to this line of 
attack, the Republican party and the Trump campaign are following as much as 
they are leading. The activists of the right have been banging this same drum 
for months; some of them have been doing it for years. On Monday, in a lakeside 
Cleveland park, a rally convened by longtime Trump backer Roger Stone and the 
conspiracy theorist Alex Jones was peppered with posters urging“Hillary for 
Prison” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/28/hillary-clinton-honest-transparency-jill-abramson>
, alongside placards depicting the Democratic candidate as “wanted”, in the 
style of the old west. Also spotted around town: picturesof Clinton in an 
orange jumpsuit and behind bars 
<https://twitter.com/Freedland/status/755053522278813696>.
Jonathan Freedland (@Freedland) 
And a poster on a Cleveland street corner as the city prepares for the 
anointing of Donald Trump#RNC2016 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/RNC2016?src=hash>
pic.twitter.com/4cs4OD5OmO <https://t.co/4cs4OD5OmO>
 <https://twitter.com/Freedland/status/755053522278813696> July 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Freedland/status/755053522278813696> 
Christie sought to give substance to those slogans and memes. Much of his case 
related to policy decisions Hillary Clinton had taken, especially as secretary 
of state. But now those decisions – to negotiate a nuclear deal with Iran or to 
thaw relations with Cuba – were refashioned as crimes. And as he worked through 
each item – Libya, Syria, China – he invited delegates to bellow their verdict. 
Never mind that some of the accusations were bizarre – including the claim that 
Clinton was an “apologist” forBoko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> – the hall answered loudly and 
in chorus: “Guilty!”

The old favourites got a run-out too, naturally. Hillary, said Christie – who 
having been passed over as a vice-presidential choice hopes to be attorney 
general in a Trump administration – had lied about the deaths of four US 
diplomats in Benghazi, deaths for which, according to earlierspeakers in 
Cleveland, Clinton was directly culpable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/republican-convention-trump-gop-grief-exploitation>
. And she had lied about her use of a private email server, offering an account 
which, Christie reminded his audience, the director of the FBI had recently 
deemed untrue.

The audience lapped it up, of course they did. For this is the one thing on 
which allRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>, those 
who backed Trump and those who opposed him, can agree: that Hillary Clinton is 
so corrupt that she must not be allowed to become president. Indeed, my 
conversations with delegates previously hostile to Trump suggest that this is 
what enables them to fall in behind the nominee: their belief that, morally 
speaking, Clinton is even worse.

Backing for the wall spells the end of Republican decency | John Paul Brammer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/backing-wall-republican-donald-trump-gop>
Strategically, you can see Team Trump’s logic. The polls are staggeringly bad 
for Clinton on this, with some67% of Americans regarding her as not honest or 
trustworthy 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/h-a-goodman/bernie-sanders-will-becom_b_9289066.html>
. It makes sense for Republicans to exploit that weakness.

But there is a larger calculation at work. The Trump campaign has clearly 
concluded that there is not much it can do about their man’s stratospherically 
high disapproval ratings. (He is regarded as dishonest by 62% of Americans, for 
example, and his other numbers are even worse.) So if they can’t lift him up, 
they might as well tear her down.

The result will be a relentlessly negative campaign from now until November, 
with both candidates depicting the other as the greater evil. And if talk of 
evil, rather than the merely criminal, sounds excessive, consider Tuesday’s 
closing speech by one of Trump’s former fellow candidates, Ben Carson.He 
suggested Clinton was a devotee of a man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/04/ben-carson-ends-republican-presidential-campaign>
, the long-ago radicalSaul Alinsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/richard-adams-blog/2012/jan/24/republican-presidential-nomination-2012-newt-gingrich>
, who had once praised … Lucifer. Yes: Hillary Clinton was just one degree of 
separationaway from Satan <https://twitter.com/ddale8/status/755593095710773248>
. If this is what the Republicans are saying about their Democratic opponent in 
July, imagine what they’ll be saying come November.
 