
The rhetoric is familiar: the demands to take the country back. The railing 
against an out-of-touch elite. The anger at a rigged economic system.

But now the insurgent cries that propelled Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> to the White House have been 
taken up by stunned opponents as they try to galvanise anger and fear over his 
election into a strategy to resist his policies and remake the left as a 
credible political alternative.

Obama has become a therapist for those suffering from Trump anxiety
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/barack-obama-us-politics-europe-trip-donald-trump>
“People came out on the streets because they were in shock,” said Gregory 
McKelvey, an experienced activist who founded a protest group,Portland’s 
Resistance <http://www.pdxresistance.org>, as thousands joined spontaneous 
demonstrations in the liberal west coast city within hours of Trump’s victory. 
“Now we are seeing a rising up of people to say it’s supposed to be our 
country. The government’s supposed to fear us, not the other way around.

“The majority of Americans feel like it’s time for a big change and Donald 
Trump is pushing for one form of drastic change. We are pushing for another.”

The tide of protests that swept US cities was matched by a wave of individual 
acts of resistance. Some rallied on the streets and online under the banner Not 
My President. Facebook groups popped up to plan how to challenge Trump over 
climate change and misogyny. Donations to civil liberties groups surged in 
defence of Muslims, immigrants and freedom of speech.

An online petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/electoral-college-electors-electoral-college-make-hillary-clinton-president-on-december-19>
 demanding delegates to the electoral college switch their support to Hillary 
Clinton because she won the popular vote has received more than 4m signatures. 
Activists in California and Oregon began the legal process for their states to 
declare independence from the US, albeit an unlikely prospect.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Protests%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20continue%20across%20US%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Protests%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20continue%20across%20US%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video&media=>
Protests against Donald Trump continue across US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/11/protests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video>
But as shock and protest gave way to more considered strategies, the focus 
shifted from the twin issues of opposition to the more egregious of Trump’s 
proposed policies and how to build a liberal political movement more 
representative of working Americans, with or without the Democratic party.

Social justice organisations supporting immigrant rights, fighting for the 
environment or tackling institutional racism have been abruptly forced to shift 
their attention from long-term policy to defence of existing rights in the face 
of Trump’s threat of mass deportations, climate change denial and attacks on 
Black Lives Matter.

The environmental group 350.org <http://350.org/> called Trump’s election “a 
disaster” and said: “The climate movement will put everything on the line to 
protect the progress we’ve made.”

Latino organisations are laying plans to shield young undocumented immigrants 
who benefitted from an Obama presidential executive order protecting them from 
deportation. Trump can abolish it with the stroke of a pen.

Some cities have promised to remain places of “sanctuary” for undocumented 
immigrants. In Portland, the public schools board passed a resolution limiting 
immigration officials’ access to campuses. The city’s schools superintendent 
warned of a rise in racism tied to Trump: “We have seen a number of incidents 
of hate speech over the last several months, and it has risen significantly 
since (the election).”

In other parts of a state sharply divided between liberal cities and strongly 
Republican rural areas, groups opposing discrimination say there has been a 
sharp increase in attacks on minorities.


Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&media=>
Stephen Bannon and the ‘alt-right’ in the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/stephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Other activists are focused on how to exploit what they see as the inevitable 
failure of Trump’s economic policies when they do not deliver the jobs and 
prosperity he has promised.

“What you’re seeing with this current reaction to Trump is it’s going to 
expand, especially as Trump [puts in place] his economic plans which will be 
terrible for all these people,” said Kevin Zeese, a lawyer and co-director of 
the Washington DC-basedPopular Resistance <https://popularresistance.org/>, a 
movement bringing together groups from Occupy to Veterans for Peace. “You’re 
going to see him funnel money to the top, trillions of dollars to the top, and 
most people’s lives getting worse. You’re going to see healthcare go out of 
control. People who voted for him on economic issues are going to realise they 
were bamboozled by a salesman.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-protests-economy-opposition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b9326c5d6f9487ded04b1751766d915a3ca6b6%2F0_13_4637_2784%2F4637.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20anti-Trump%20resistance%20takes%20shape%3A%20'Government's%20supposed%20to%20fear%20us'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-protests-economy-opposition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20anti-Trump%20resistance%20takes%20shape%3A%20%27Government%27s%20supposed%20to%20fear%20us%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-protests-economy-opposition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b9326c5d6f9487ded04b1751766d915a3ca6b6%2F0_13_4637_2784%2F4637.jpg>
 Clinton’s defeat has re-energised Sanders backers who say the election proved 
the socialist contender was right to focus on economic injustice. Photograph: A 
Jones/PacifiC/Barcroft Images 
Zeese said Trump would be exposed as no more than a front for corporate 
interests and that would only fuel opposition. He said the example for popular 
resistance to the new president’s policies was the widespread popular 
opposition to theTrans-Pacific Partnership trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/12/tpp-trade-deal-congress-obama>
. Obama pushed it hard but communities blaming lost jobs and industries on 
other trade deals, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement which moved 
factories to Mexico, resisted.

“This is a victory of mass movement. That’s what won. The people defeated 
transnational corporate power. The most powerful corporations in the world and 
they lost,” he said. “It is a model for what the movement should be doing next.”

One of the most divisive questions among progressive activists is where the 
Democratic party now fits into the opposition to Trump. There is wide 
acceptance that Clinton lost because she was a poor candidate, too closely tied 
to corporate interests and who failed to connect with large numbers of voters 
who see the economy as working against them. Above all, she was a candidate of 
continuity in an age demanding change.

Adam Green, co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee 
<http://boldprogressives.org/> who worked for the Democratic National Committee 
on John Kerry’s 2004 presidential campaign, said Clinton issued a flurry of 
policy papers on important economic issues that failed to address the central 
issue of a rigged economy and had little resonance with voters.

“The Democrats need to be willing to say that our economy is rigged against 
the little guy, our democracy is corrupted by big money and we will fight 
Trump’s pro-corporate agenda and dedicate ourselves to fixing this rigged 
system,” he said.

McKelvey was a delegate for Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> to the Democratic 
convention. He reluctantly cast his ballot for Clinton in the general election.

“I voted for Hilary Clinton out of fear. I was worried that this was an 
election of change and an election where we don’t know what’s going to happen 
and it’s possible that Donald Trump could even win,” he said.

Like other Sanders supporters, McKelvey was resigned to Clinton’s victory and 
deeply unenthusiastic about the prospect of her presidency. But Clinton’s 
defeat re-energised Sanders backers who say the election proved the socialist 
contender was right to focus on economic injustice and the corruption of 
American politics by big corporations, and that the Democratic party needed to 
embrace that.

McKelvey takes it as a good sign that Sanders, who is an independent, not a 
Democrat, and Elizabeth Warren have been given leadership roles by the party in 
the Senate. The leading contender for chair of the Democratic National 
Committee, a despised organisation among Sanders supporters because it worked 
in favour of Clinton’s nomination, is Keith Ellison, the first Muslim elected 
to Congress and widely regarded as one of the more authentic voices in the 
party.

The New York Times reported that Democrats in Congress were trying to forge a 
policy agenda that exploits Trump’s divisions with his own party on issues from 
trade agreements to increased infrastructure spending and maternity benefits.

That’s a strategy that will be eyed warily by some opponents of Trump, who say 
that he will get the credit for policies that succeed and Democrats will be 
blamed if they don’t.

“The real question is, do Democrats stand up with backbone for longtime 
progressive principles or do they treat Donald Trump like a normal president, 
which he’s not, and compromise their principles?” said Green.

Others have proposed following the Tea Party’s example and running more 
progressive candidates for Congress in Democratic primaries which, even if they 
do not win, might have the effect of shaping policy.

Donald Trump's economic policies could go badly wrong – but not soon enough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/19/trump-economic-policies-growth-us-economy>
Zeese is not confident the party will change its ways. 

“The Democratic party has to choose between the Wall Street big donor 
interests and their voters. They conflict,” he said. “They have to put forward 
economic policies that show they’ve really listened, that they got the message 
from this election. We get it. It’s the economy, stupid, and it’s not working 
for most Americans.”

Zeese said the party was not helped in its efforts to win back support by what 
was perceived in parts of the US as prosperous liberals smearing economically 
struggling voters for their support of Trump.

 “If you look at the states that essentially decided the election – Michigan, 
Ohio, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania and Indiana – they’re all states that have voted 
for Obama in the past. These are not racist voters. They voted for the first 
African American president. They did so because of economic issues,” he said. 
“We need to unite around issues. Identity politics gets in the way of that. 
Democrats make a mistake playing that card. It means a lots of white working 
class [people] whose interests are not being represented. There are legitimate 
issues around race and injustice, women and injustice, but they have to be put 
into the context of an economy that doesn’t work for most people in United 
States.”
 