
I enjoy triathlons. Obviously not the initial immersion in freezing water: 
that is not fun. And not the subsequent half hour of being repeatedly kicked in 
the face by other swimmers before you jump on a bike, only to find the ride 
ruined by your cold, wet clothes. That sets up the chest infection, of course, 
that spoils the run. Actually, when I think about it, I only really enjoy the 
transitions, those few blessed minutes of rest between sports when you munch 
away contentedly at your sandwiches, swig some coffee, and gaze indulgently at 
the obsessive, furrowed faces of those who take it too seriously.

Precious moments! I’ve often wished they could be longer and a little bit more 
luxurious. And now, in Carmarthenshire, a county that clearly thinks like I do, 
they have come up with a great idea: triathlons done at your own speed, 
possibly over an entire weekend, and on a selection of routes. You can swap 
your least favourite activity with another: paddle-boarding or kayaking instead 
of swimming, for example. You can even replace yourself with another person 
which is what I plan to do: daughter Maddy, aged 12, loves swimming so she can 
do that section, while my partner Sophie likes running so that’s her sorted. 
All I have to do is get on my bike for a few hours. It’s a family tri, and the 
transitions are extended over several hours in cafes, pubs and accommodation. 
Carmarthenshire has, I reckon, done the impossible: they have perfected the 
triathlon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe203fce58b6fd5667425e94dcd0cdeddcce0b534%2F0_0_5146_3087%2F5146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scenic%20Welsh%20triathlon%20for%20the%20non-competitive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scenic%20Welsh%20triathlon%20for%20the%20non-competitive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe203fce58b6fd5667425e94dcd0cdeddcce0b534%2F0_0_5146_3087%2F5146.jpg>
 Dylan Thomas’s Boathouse at Laugharne. Photograph: Alamy 
Our preparation begins with a night in Brown’s Hotel in Laugharne. This was 
once a drinking hole for Dylan Thomas, whose photo adorns the bar and whose 
writing hut is around the corner. A poet from an age when serious exercise was 
eight pints, an ounce of best shag, and a chip supper, I can only imagine his 
baffled response to the phenomenal rise in popularity of the triathlon: “Rage, 
rage against the buying of the Lycra.”

Thomas’s ghost haunts every inch of Laugharne, the inspiration for his 
fictitious Llareggub in Under Milk Wood. At night, I wander the streets, 
wishing I had downloaded a recording of it on my phone – the Richard Burton 
one, of course: “Swim, cycle, run? In your crow-black kit? You’ll die of 
blisters” – the perfect soundtrack for strolling under Laugharne’s castle 
walls. I watch the curlews scatter into the moonlight, then climb up to 
Thomas’s writing shed with its views of four estuaries. This was where he wrote 
Do Not Go Gentle Into That Good Night and honed Under Milk Wood. At least we 
brought the collected works and can read them ourselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc51569205748208a17cb5a4b02023896fdd5ed03%2F0_159_5376_3227%2F5376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scenic%20Welsh%20triathlon%20for%20the%20non-competitive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scenic%20Welsh%20triathlon%20for%20the%20non-competitive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc51569205748208a17cb5a4b02023896fdd5ed03%2F0_159_5376_3227%2F5376.jpg>
 Exploring a shipwreck on Pendine Sands. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
In honour of Thomas we decide to do our triathlon backwards, starting from 
Pendine, five miles down the road. The day is good: buttery sunlight spreads 
across the vast swathe of sand and Sophie sets off, running up the cliff path 
while Maddy and I wander along the beach. It was here that land speed records 
used to be attempted: Malcolm Campbell being the first to break the record in 
1924. For the next three years he and Welshman John Parry Thomas battled to 
hold the record until Thomas died in a crash on the sands in 1927. His car, 
Babs, is in the Museum of Speed in Pendine, sadly closed the day we visit.

The sands are pretty busy these days, too: men digging for ragworms, 
dog-walkers, even one brave swimmer. Not us, that’s tomorrow. A peregrine 
falcon swoops over the dunes, passing a kestrel and a buzzard. Then Sophie 
reappears, full of running and completely energised by the clifftop path. We 
follow her back to Pendine and go for our first transitional treat in the 
beachfront cafe.

After lunch, I get my bike out of the car and set off on a 40km loop inland, 
heading back through Laugharne and up into the hills. The sunshine of the 
morning has sadly gone, but the road is quiet. It’s a fine ride, but I regret 
not vetting the route carefully with an OS map beforehand. The Welsh hills are 
full of wayward, rollercoaster lanes and a couple of wrong turns leave me 
bamboozled. Eventually, however, I pop out above Pendine and negotiate the 
steep drop back into the village. The triathlon is two-thirds done.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa385e5b9ac2f6ec0dcfd342f35ef2a231119cb4%2F0_0_4459_2677%2F4459.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scenic%20Welsh%20triathlon%20for%20the%20non-competitive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scenic%20Welsh%20triathlon%20for%20the%20non-competitive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa385e5b9ac2f6ec0dcfd342f35ef2a231119cb4%2F0_0_4459_2677%2F4459.jpg>
 Nick from Llandyssul Paddlers leaps into the river. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
That night we stay at Blaenfforest Cottages near Newcastle Emlyn, a 
beautifully restored barn with a hot tub tucked away in woodlands, and are 
disturbed only by the occasional screech of a peacock. The countryside around 
here, like much of Wales outside of Snowdonia and Pembrokeshire, feels 
undiscovered and under-visited. Our swim next morning provides a good example. 
The village of Llandyssul is hardly on the tourist map of the country and yet 
it boasts a fabulous stretch of whitewater river dashing madly through the 
centre. We head down there with Nick and Vincent from Llandyssul Paddlers, a 
kayak outfit which also does river swimming. The plan was for Maddy to be the 
sole family representative, but I can’t resist. Sophie can.

The two of us don helmets, wetsuits and life jackets. Nick takes us through a 
warm-up and some safety drills. Then we get in. Water temperature is about 10C. 
“White water is graded one to six by kayakers,” explains Nick, “And we’ll swim 
a one, a two and a two-plus.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cca64239fd974923bb0ea2dd9112dfe3ae30165%2F466_73_4097_2460%2F4097.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scenic%20Welsh%20triathlon%20for%20the%20non-competitive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scenic%20Welsh%20triathlon%20for%20the%20non-competitive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falternative-triathlon-carmarthenshire-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cca64239fd974923bb0ea2dd9112dfe3ae30165%2F466_73_4097_2460%2F4097.jpg>
 Maddy enjoying the rapids. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
A nervy stagger out on a rocky ledge washed by thigh-deep water ends with a 
sudden drop and the current sweeps me away. I dip under and emerge. There’s 
Vincent waiting under the village bridge. I do an awkward front crawl for a few 
seconds and climb out. Maddy and Nick arrive. I reckon we have completed half 
the triathlon distance in about a minute. Even the world-champion Brownlee 
brothers could not match this.

Next we do a rougher section, then the big one. It looks scary but in reality 
I’m swept along, bouncing from wave to wave, having great fun. We do some 
celebratory leaps off high rocks and finish with a plunge from the bridge. It’s 
been a wonderful triathlon: no competitiveness, no pressure, no worries, and no 
running – not for me. And best of all those fabulously extended transitions 
over pints of beer: even Dylan Thomas might have grudgingly accepted that 
triathlons can be fun, at least in part.

Way to go

The trip was provided by Discover Carmarthenshire. Visit 
discovercarmarthenshire.com 
<http://www.discovercarmarthenshire.com/active/travellerstriathlon.html> for 
triathlon routes, accommodation and restaurants.Llandysul Paddlers 
<http://www.llandysul-paddlers.org.uk/home/index.htm> can arrange half-day 
river swim activities, from £25 adult/£20 junior; it also organises whitewater 
kayaking courses.Browns Hotel <http://www.browns-hotel.co.uk/> in Laugharne has 
doubles from £95 per night B&B. A three-night break atThe Granary 
<http://www.cottageholidayswales.com/index.php/granary> at Blaenforrest (sleeps 
four) costs from £294
 