
Capacity: 216 seated or 450 standing. The performance room can change between 
the two setups.


Who plays there: Being a proper arts centre, the Phoenix’s listings are 
exceptionally diverse, and not limited to music either – dance classes, cinema, 
art exhibitions, a digital media centre and a radio station all live under the 
same roof. So, as well as touring indie alternative bands and artists – 
including Wild Beasts, Idlewild, Patrick Wolf, Wire, the Orb, Willy Mason, Mr 
Scruff, the Damned, the Magic Numbers, British Sea Power, Joan as Police Woman, 
and Public Service Broadcasting – you also get acts such as Harold Budd, the 
Necks, Lee “Scratch” Perry, Martha Reeves and the Vandellas, Gong, the Dhoad 
Gypsies of Rajasthan, as well as jazz acts, reggae sound systems, blues 
guitarists and folk singers.

Cloakroom: Yes.

Admission: £5-£20.

Bar: A good selection of local ales and lagers that regularly changes, plus 
the usual spirits and mixers, with a twist of sophistication. Reasonably priced 
and well kept, the Phoenix is a great spot for a quiet afternoon drink as well 
as a night out to see a band.

Food: Yes. A good value selection of tapas and mezze-style offerings is served 
Monday to Saturday, 10am to 3.30pm and 5.30pm to 9pm.

Toilets: Level-access toilets on all floors.

Wheelchair access: Yes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F04%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-exeter-phoenix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F4%2F1415100018187%2F998a2a51-9e9c-478e-b90f-00c46664aeb7-2060x1621.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20Exeter%20Phoenix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F04%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-exeter-phoenix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20Exeter%20Phoenix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F04%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-exeter-phoenix%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F4%2F1415100018187%2F998a2a51-9e9c-478e-b90f-00c46664aeb7-2060x1621.jpeg>
 The Phoenix is good for a quiet afternoon drink – or a lively night out. 
Photograph: Clive Chilvers/Alamy 
Sound: Routinely excellent, thanks to good equipment and a dedicated full-time 
staff to look after it. Small-scale and acoustic acts particularly shine, but 
more amplified and electronic acts fare very well, too.

Where to stand: Or sit, given that the performance room is flexible and can be 
set up either for standing or with tiered seating. Standing, it’s a nice, 
square, purpose-built room with good acoustics, so you’ll be fine pretty much 
wherever you fancy. The sound is best right in front of the mixing desk, but 
it’s a struggle to get out of the performance room and back to the bar from 
there. If the setup is for seating, try to get as central and near the front as 
you can, especially if vertigo is an issue – the seats at the back are pretty 
steep.

Overall: Given that it’s an arts centre, the Phoenix can feel a little dry and 
middle-class, but the facilities, location, sound, bar, food, plus the 
diversity and quality of the acts it attracts are all first rate. If you’re 
after something spikier, the punky, subterranean Cavern is barely 100 yards 
away; if that’s not a concern, the Phoenix is a cultural beacon for the 
south-west.

Address: Bradninch Place, Gandy Street, Exeter, EX4 3LS


Telephone: 01392 667 080

Website: exeterphoenix.org.uk <https://www.exeterphoenix.org.uk>

Public transport: Exeter Central railway station is about 100 yards away. 
Local buses pass down the High Street, just around the corner.
 