
Take me there 

Not since the Titanic launched has Belfast's shipbuilding quarter been the 
subject of so much optimism. As the countdown begins to the centenary of the 
ship's doomed voyage in April 1912, preparations are being put in place for the 
opening of the Titanic Belfast exhibition. The €113m attraction is expected to 
bring massive regeneration to the shipyards, now rebranded the Titanic Quarter. 
The building will house nine interactive galleries, including a ride through 
the recreated shipyards of 1911. It opens on 31 March. Admission: adult £13.50, 
child £6.75 (titanicbelfast.com <http://titanicbelfast.com>). For details of 
the city's Titanic Festival, themed walking tours and packages, go to
discoverireland.com <http://discoverireland.com>.

Travel clinic: hen weekends


The dilemma I've been given the task of organising my friend's hen weekend in 
May. She wants something "classy and low key". There will be 14 of us, ages 
ranging from 35 up.Yasmina, by email

Joanne replies I'm sensing that L-plates, stretch limos and strippers are off 
limits? Let's give hen party hot spots Newcastle and Brighton a miss then in 
favour of something more genteel. With its beautiful Georgian architecture, 
great shops and serious spa credentials, Bath rarely fails to delight.
 Take a soak with a view 
Start your weekend by soaking in the heated rooftop pool at the Thermae Bath 
Spa, then enjoy a champagne afternoon tea in the glorious setting of the Pump 
Room. Bath Tourist Information Centre offers great packages combining the two 
with a visit to the Roman Baths for £63.50pp. Visit its website to book these 
and other creative ideas, including narrowboat trips and craft workshops (
visitbath.co.uk/groups/itinerary-ideas/hen-party-ideas 
<http://visitbath.co.uk/groups/itinerary-ideas/hen-party-ideas>).

The Big Domain has a selection of large self-catering houses. The Duchy is an 
elegant Georgian townhouse in the city centre which sleeps 16, with prices from 
£50pp per night (
thebigdomain.com/large-houses/the-duchy-prince-charles-townhouse-in-bath 
<http://thebigdomain.com/large-houses/the-duchy-prince-charles-townhouse-in-bath>
). 

If you have a travel dilemma, email Joanne O'Connor at magazine@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>

Three of the best… Hockney sites


Have you been inspired by the Royal Academy's David Hockney exhibition? Then 
head to Yorkshire to discover three iconic locations that are intimately 
connected with the artist.

1. Salts Mill, Saltaire, Bradford 
Imposing former mill in Hockney's home town that features a substantial 
collection of the artist's work. Free (saltsmill.org.uk 
<http://saltsmill.org.uk>)

2. Kilham 
Featured in several artworks, this Wolds village is a great base for a Hockney 
trail. Stay at the lovely Kilham Hall hotel. From £130 (kilhamhall.co.uk 
<http://kilhamhall.co.uk>)

3. Thixendale 
Hike the Wolds Way to see the beauty spot captured in the Three Trees near 
Thixendale paintings (nationaltrail.co.uk/yorkshirewoldsway/ 
<http://nationaltrail.co.uk/Yorkshire WoldsWay>)
 