
At the beginning of the 18th century, Poland was one of the largest states in 
Europe, a sovereign, multi-ethnic republic. By the end of the century it had 
vanished from the map, absorbed by the expanding empires ofRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, Prussia and Austria.

Intelligence figures fear Trump reprisals over assessment of Russia election 
role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/intelligence-agencies-cia-donald-trump-russia>
Poland was brought down not by invading armies, but by the weaknesses of its 
political system, which could be paralyzed by a single noble’s veto and thus 
easily compromised by outside powers offering bribes. By the end, Catherine the 
Great of Russia had even taken the king of Poland as a lover.

Three centuries have passed, but Poland’s experience carries uncomfortable 
lessons for the US in 2016.

Last week, Barack Obama ordered the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/us-election-hacking-russia-barack-obama-review>
 to review evidence that Russia was behind a series of cyber-attacks that 
compromised Hillary Clinton’s campaign and may have helped Donald Trump win the 
presidency. There is also a strong consensus that Trump’sbusinesses 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/heres-what-we-know-about-donald-trump-and-his-ties-to-russia/2016/07/29/1268b5ec-54e7-11e6-88eb-7dda4e2f2aec_story.html?postshare=1431481492048590&tid=ss_fb&utm_term=.c933b87dd520>
 and advisers have extensive connections to the Russian government.

In short, the Kremlin appears to have directly interfered with an American 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/fbi-russia-trump-election-harry-reid-james-comey-wikileaks>
 in order to boost a presidential candidate with a Russia-friendly foreign 
policy.

It shouldn’t be surprising that Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> would want to interfere in 
US politics to advance Russia’s foreign policy goals – from curtailing Nato to 
ending sanctions over the conflict in Ukraine and preserving Bashar Assad’s 
regime in Syria. And as many critics of US foreign policy have noted, 
Washington has its own long history of meddling in foreign elections, including 
in Russia and its closest neighbors. Maybe the turnabout is fair play.

But what should surprise and disturb all Americans is that our political 
institutions, and above all the Republican party, are so vulnerable to Russian 
interference. The Republican party, traditionally associated with a hawkish 
stance toward Moscow, threw its support behind a presidential candidate who
openly called on Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hillary-clinton-emails-dnc-hack>
 to hack his opponent’s campaign.

According to CIA sources who spoke anonymously to the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/obama-orders-review-of-russian-hacking-during-presidential-campaign/2016/12/09/31d6b300-be2a-11e6-94ac-3d324840106c_story.html?utm_term=.90d2357f6c61>
, Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell told Obama and leading Democrats that 
he would regard any effort to release evidence of Russian interference before 
the election as partisan. In other words, he put his own party’s interest in 
electing Trump and gutting the welfare state ahead of the national interest.

Neither he, nor House speaker Paul Ryan, nor any other leading Republican 
seems the slightest bit apologetic about the Republican party’s all but open 
alliance with Putin.

Before 2016, it would have been unthinkable that Russia, or any foreign power, 
could exert this kind of influence on the US political process. That’s because 
no national politician before Trump would ever have been comfortable aligning 
so shamelessly with a rival government.

Trump has obliterated this norm, along with so many others, and his party has 
gone along with him. The Republicans’ contempt for the democratic process and 
the national interest have created an opening Putin never could have created 
himself.

Besides the Republican party, America’s weakness can be seen in what appears 
to be an escalating war between our domestic intelligence agency, the FBI and 
our foreign intelligence agency, the CIA. The FBIreleased damaging information 
about Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/hillary-clinton-james-comey-letters-emails-election-defeat>
 shortly before the election, which may have swung the outcome in key states 
and allowed for the election of Trump on a law and order platform. Meanwhile, 
the CIA isbelatedly undermining Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
 by releasing information about his foreign ties. This is not the sign of a 
healthy democracy.

Rex Tillerson: an appointment that would confirm Putin's US election win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
America’s political system is as broken as that of 18th-century Poland. Our 
territory may not be under threat, but our ability to govern ourselves without 
outside interference is. Our antiquated electoral system has yielded a 
president-elect who is unqualified and temperamentally unstable, and who is 
openly building a kleptocratic state closely modeled on Putin’s, to whom he 
arguably owes his victory. Given America’s vast arsenal and international 
commitments, a government that can be so easily swayed by outside powers 
represents a danger to the entire world.

In an 1838 speech in Illinois, a young Abraham Lincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/14/sidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump>
 considered how the United States might fall, asking: “Shall we expect some 
transatlantic military giant to step the ocean and crush us at a blow? Never!”

Instead, he warned, “If destruction be our lot, we must ourselves be its 
author and finisher. As a nation of freemen we must live through all time or 
die by suicide.”

Today, Russia may be a transatlantic giant, but the author and finisher of 
America’s destruction is weeks away from the White House, with Lincoln’s party 
firmly behind him.
 