
The year was 1967 and Mike McInnerney had been asked to design the poster for 
the 14 Hour Technicolor Dream, an event headlined by Pete Townshend, Pink Floyd 
and Yoko Ono.

The gig at London’s Alexandra Palace was an all-night “free-speech benefit” 
for Europe’s first underground newspaper, theInternational Times, which had 
just been raided by the police for allegedly breaking the obscenity laws. 
Storming the basement of the Indica bookshop in London’s Southampton Row, they 
had taken away posters, books and magazines.

Rock stars queued up to play the benefit as a gesture of solidarity, which 
gave McInnerney, then art editor of theInternational Times, a huge headache. 
“The list of people kept expanding,” he says, “so I had to use Letraset to keep 
adding names.”

Along with Hapshash & the Coloured Coat, Alan Aldridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/oct/05/art1> and Martin Sharp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/dec/02/martin-sharp-australian-artist-who-came-to-symbolise-the-60s-dies-aged-71>
, McInnerney is one of the “designers of the revolution” who gave the posters, 
publications and record sleeves of the time their distinctive look.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Frevolutionary-artists-60s-counterculture-v-and-a-you-say-you-want-a-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b14088a1e9651ab993f2698a23471ee822eec30%2F129_573_3610_4937%2F3610.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revolutionary%20artists%20of%20the%2060s%E2%80%99%20colourful%20counterculture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Frevolutionary-artists-60s-counterculture-v-and-a-you-say-you-want-a-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revolutionary%20artists%20of%20the%2060s%E2%80%99%20colourful%20counterculture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Frevolutionary-artists-60s-counterculture-v-and-a-you-say-you-want-a-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b14088a1e9651ab993f2698a23471ee822eec30%2F129_573_3610_4937%2F3610.jpg>
 McInnerney’s poster for the 14 Hour Technicolor Dream gig, with its 
ever-expanding list of bands. Photograph: V&A Images 
Their work features in the Victoria & Albert Museum’s new exhibition, You Say 
You Want A Revolution? Records and Rebels 1966-1970, which shows how the world 
was transformed in five short years. While Dylan, the Velvet Underground and 
the Rolling Stones challenged popular music in terms of arrangements and 
instrumentation, the late 60s ushered in a new “golden age” of design, as 
artists produced psychedelic posters, murals and editorial graphics for the 
alternative press, clubs and events (dubbed “be-ins” and “freak-outs”).

The posters were earthy, naive. “They were plastered on the walls of London. 
They were ephemeral, they weren’t there to be collected and exchanged for 
money,” says Hapshash’s Nigel Waymouth today. “That only happened a little 
later when people realised that kids were trying to strip them off and pin them 
up in their bedsits.”

The designers knew their art history. The aesthetic of the late 1960s 
counterculture, with its bubble lettering, op art graphics, unjustified margins 
and collage effects, drew on the work of art nouveau artists Aubrey Beardsley 
and Alphonse Mucha, as well as abstract paintersBridget Riley  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/16/bridget-riley-learning-from-seurat-review-london>
and Josef Albers.

“It was very decorative,” says the show’s co-curator, Victoria Broackes. 
“There was an Aubrey Beardsley exhibition here in 1966, as well as an Alphonse 
Mucha show in 1963, and both of those were hugely influential on the 
psychedelic movement. Beardsley was almost an icon of the counterculture and 
directly copied; boutiques like Granny Takes a Trip hung Beardsleys on the 
walls. So it’s rather nice to be bringing that back into the V&A.”

Nigel Waymouth and Michael English of Hapshash only worked together for 18 
months but today their rainbow silk-screened posters for underground 
happenings, clubs and concerts are collectors’ items.

Waymouth, then co-owner of Granny Takes a Trip in the King’s Road in London, 
studied economics at UCL but fell into designing posters. Then he was put 
together with artist Michael English by Joe Boyd and John “Hoppy” Hopkins of 
the psychedelia club UFO, in Tottenham Court Road, and the magic happened. He 
compares their working partnership to freeform jazz, as they inked over each 
other’s designs and did the different layers of acetate together.

Their name came from Queen Hatshepsut, who Waymouth read about in a book of 
Egyptian art. “Inevitably, we misspelled it.’ They developed silk screening 
techniques that merged two or three colours with gold, silver and fluorescent 
colour “because fluorescents came up very strongly in the black light at the 
UFO club”. The English street poster tradition was very wordy, he recalls, so 
Hapshash wanted maximum visual impact with little text. Any lettering was 
indistinct. ‘People who were interested would find out the hidden messages 
rather than having them shoved in their face.”

Arguably, one of the most famous images of the late-60s counterculture is 
Martin Sharp’s Mister Tambourine Man poster. In 1966, when Sharp moved from 
Sydney to London with Richard Neville, the editor of underground magazineOz, 
which they had co-founded, he met Cream’s Eric Clapton and moved into his 
King’s Road residence, just as Clapton was entering his psychedelic phase. 
Sharp became the art director of the British version ofOz and later designed 
the cover for Timothy Leary’sPolitics of Ecstasy. Alan Aldridge, who was the 
fiction art director for Penguin Books, brought a new twist to paperback art. 
He also designed the album cover for The Who’sA Quick One and edited and 
illustrated the lyrics for both volumes of the Beatles’Illustrated Lyrics.

McInnerney was dazzled by the “vibrating” colour of 60s counterculture after 
the austerity of the postwar years. “London was a black town, damaged from the 
war, and the soot of many years was clinging to the buildings.” Many of his 
designs were inspired by attending the UFO Club, which featured light shows, 
film projections and bands. “I was into liquid forms and poured forms and soft 
forms. I really loved [American artist] Claes Oldenburg.” In retrospect, he 
realises he was reacting to the “oppressive” sharpness and right-angles of 
modernism. “When I became art director ofInternational Times I became part of 
the drug culture and took LSD and smoked, which led to a desire to go for 
softer forms.”

And colour was almost a political act. In 1970, “the hippies” were awarded the 
Sikkens prize <http://www.sikkensfoundation.org/en/sikkensprijs/hippies.html>, 
a Dutch award for groundbreaking work in the use of colour (other recipients 
have included Riley and Dutch designer and architect Gerrit Rietveld).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Frevolutionary-artists-60s-counterculture-v-and-a-you-say-you-want-a-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc568031ee6f0f0695674b882afe82a3787daa77a%2F108_72_3463_5240%2F3463.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revolutionary%20artists%20of%20the%2060s%E2%80%99%20colourful%20counterculture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Frevolutionary-artists-60s-counterculture-v-and-a-you-say-you-want-a-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revolutionary%20artists%20of%20the%2060s%E2%80%99%20colourful%20counterculture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Frevolutionary-artists-60s-counterculture-v-and-a-you-say-you-want-a-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc568031ee6f0f0695674b882afe82a3787daa77a%2F108_72_3463_5240%2F3463.jpg>
 A poster for the fashion shop Hung on You, by Hapshash and the Coloured Coat, 
1967. Photograph: V&A Images 
The counterculture of the time was local, homemade, entrepreneurial – the 
alternative to mainstream. “It was a very artisan approach to making food and 
clothes and new tastes and attitudes,” recalls McInnerney. We see the beginning 
of gender fluidity, open-air festivals, yoga and meditation. McInnerney even 
ended up designing the cover of the Who’sTommy album (1969) because he and Pete 
Townshend shared a fascination with the Indian spiritual master, Meher Baba, 
and hung out in each other’s kitchens in Twickenham.

The underground was soon infiltrating mainstream culture. Jonathan Miller’s 
trippy BBC TV adaptation ofAlice in Wonderland was broadcast in 1966, 
popularising the “down the rabbit hole” imagery of Lewis Carroll. And the 
“straight” press was fascinated. In the V&A show there’s a December 1967 copy 
of theObserver magazine dedicated to the underground scene in Britain, in which 
George Melly talks to poster designers, including Hapshash. “The underground is 
the first of the pop explosions to have evolved a specifically graphic means of 
expression,” he writes.

Today, Waymouth, an “artist painter” who does a lot of portrait commissions, 
is back in London after spending 12 years in California. McInnerney is now 
based in Brighton and paints on the South Downs, in woodlands and nature 
reserves.

They stress so much happened to them by chance. There were no contracts, no 
career plans. But the era’s pioneering and radical graphic design influenced 
everyone who came afterwards – punk was only a few years away with its DIY 
graphics. McInnerney can see the links with acid house and the summer of love. 
And of course Blur and Oasis plundered 60s counterculture.

Everyone stresses that the V&A show is not just a nostalgia trip. “It’s 
actually seeking to explore what that period might mean for us today, at a 
period of political turmoil,” says Broackes, “and repeatedly questioning 
whether we have lost the ability to imagine a better world.”

You Say You Want a Revolution? Records and Rebels 1966-70 is at the V&A 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/exhibitions/you-say-you-want-a-revolution-records-and-rebels-1966-70#shop>
, 10 September-26 February 2017, sponsored by Levi’s and Sennheiser
 