
Few things are more traditional in the run-up to Christmas than the shopping 
for and purchase of gifts. These days, however, instead of traipsing around the 
high street shoppers are increasingly surfing the web for presents.Surveys 
suggest 
<http://realbusiness.co.uk/sales-and-marketing/2016/11/24/uk-christmas-spending-hit-record-77-56bn-in-2016/>
 that e-commerce accounts for more than a quarter of the £80bn spent by British 
shoppers in the holiday season. The world seems to move ever more online – 
human life appears often an appendage to a dimly lit screen, with only the 
bobbing of a head attached wirelessly to a tiny phone to denote conscious 
thought.

But a backlash has begun. Earlier this month more money was spent on vinyl 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-38221420> records than on 
downloaded albums, the first reversal of fortune for such technology. In 
America the biggest-selling purely audio device is nowthe humble turntable 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/prospero/2016/10/new-groove>. This year in the 
UK, sales of printed books grew for the first time in four years – while ebooks 
suffered their first ever decline. Paper notebooks and wipeable whiteboards are 
favoured by Silicon Valley types. Thanks to Edward Snowden, perhaps, 
typewriters are enjoying a renaissance.

Some of this is simply nostalgia or a form of hipster advertising. One poll 
revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/15/vinyl-love-records-memories-record-store-day>
 that almost half of people who bought a vinyl album last month have yet to 
listen to it. In other cases the attraction is that the promise of technology – 
its claim of efficiently delivered inexhaustible plenty – is never quite 
realised. Sitting rooms become littered with remote controls for televisions, 
set-top boxes and stereos that are all meant to talk to each other but rarely 
converse more than to tell you they can’t. When your broadband breaks down, so 
does your music streaming service.

Compare such experiences with the sensuous act of consuming art old-style. The 
satisfying ping of a typewriter; the drop of a needle on a black spinning disc 
of vinyl; the rustle of pages in a much-loved book. In an increasingly digital 
world, where physical objects and experiences are being replaced by virtual 
ones, it seems the analogue world is the one wreathed in the joy of creating 
and possessing the tangible.

These real-world, direct, lived pleasures are essential to the sense of being 
human – allowing the mind to connect to hand via the eye and ear in a creative 
pursuit. This has wider ramifications for a society that buzzes to the sound of 
an algorithmic whirr. As theAmerican philosopher Eric Hoffer noted 
<https://quotefancy.com/quote/1240677/Eric-Hoffer-Nothing-so-bolsters-our-self-confidence-and-reconciles-us-with-ourselves-as>
: “Nothing so bolsters our self-confidence and reconciles us with ourselves as 
the continuous ability to create; to see things grow and develop under our 
hand, day in, day out.” Hoffer, perspicaciously perhaps, noted that the decline 
of the “creative flow within” made the individual frustrated and increasingly 
susceptible to mass movements.

The best of technology recognises that humans gain greatly from learning from 
the corporeal in a less efficient, less perfect, less speedy manner than 
machines are designed to do. For typical youngsters, modern computers have 
become too complicated to learn anything from. Yet teenagers loveRaspberry Pi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/the-guardian-view-on-the-raspberry-pi-small-is-beautiful>
, a piece of cheap, programmable hardware, which allows them to hone their 
skills. The more time we spend in the digital world of swipes, the more we 
hanker for face-to-face opportunities. When technology is in sync with human 
imperfections, it creates a tactile interface to the world. It is this 
phenomenon perhaps that best explains the perceptible return of the real.
 