
It’s not often that Mark Zuckerberg invokes the values of Facebook to rebuke 
the people he works with, but this year, he reached a tipping point with the 
“deeply upsetting” views of one of the members of his board of directors, which 
he disavowed as “not represent[ing] the wayFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> or I think at all”. 


“Facebook stands for helping to connect people and giving them voice to shape 
their own future,”he wrote 
<https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10102645335962321>. “But to shape the 
future we need to understand the past.”

One might expect that those words were aimed at Peter Thiel, the Facebook 
board member who has buckedSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> political orthodoxy by 
backing Donald Trump’s xenophobic, Islamophobic, sexist, anti-science, and 
increasingly dictatorial campaign for president. After all, Trump’s ideology 
represents a direct threat to Facebook’s stated mission to “make the world more 
open and connected”.

But in fact, Zuckerberg’s reproof was directed at another board member, Marc 
Andreessen, for anill-advised series of tweets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/10/facebook-investor-marc-andreessen-apology-offensive-india-tweet-net-neutrality-free-basics>
 that appeared to express nostalgia for colonial rule of India. Amid Trump’s 
ongoing campaign toundermine his supporters’ faith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/donald-trump-rigged-election-poll-giuliani-gingrich-pence>
 in the country’s democratic processes, Andreessen’s transgression seems almost 
quaint.

Peter Thiel faces Silicon Valley backlash after pledging $1.25m to Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/project-include-y-combinator-donald-trump-peter-thiel>
And yet, Zuckerberg and Facebook remain silent on Thiel, who has not only 
served as a delegate and convention speaker for Trump, but this weekdonated 
$1.25m 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/technology/peter-thiel-donald-j-trump.html> 
to support Trump’s campaign, even as a flood of allegations of sexual 
misconduct scared off major donors and leaders of the Republican party.

Zuckerberg’s curious double standard with Thiel was echoed by Sam Altman, 
president of the influential startup incubator Y Combinator.

Over the weekend, Altman came under pressure to sever ties with Thiel, who 
serves as a “part-time partner” of Y Combinator. Altman has spoken out 
forcefully against Trump, whom he recentlycompared to Hitler 
<http://blog.samaltman.com/trump> in a blogpost. But he wrote 
<http://blog.samaltman.com/the-2016-election> Monday that he would not “start 
purging people for supporting the wrong political candidate”.

Altman’s support for Thiel does have its limits, however. “Of course, if Peter 
said some of the things Trump says himself, he would no longer be part of Y 
Combinator,” he wrote.

What those “things” might be is an open question, but it’s not hard to imagine 
that if Thiel angered the entire nation of India or repeated his2009 views 
<https://www.cato-unbound.org/2009/04/13/peter-thiel/education-libertarian> on 
the tragic consequences of women’s suffrage, Altman – and Zuckerberg – might 
find themselves compelled to pacify the public.

Money talks, and in Silicon Valley, it seems, money can say whatever it wants 
as long as one’s public statements (be theyconvention speeches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/peter-thiel-republican-national-convention-proud-to-be-gay>
 or Washington Postop-eds 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/peter-thiel-trump-has-taught-us-this-years-most-important-political-lesson/2016/09/06/84df8182-738c-11e6-8149-b8d05321db62_story.html?utm_term=.2732b34a76a1>
) obfuscate the bigotry that lies beneath.

Fans walk out of Amy Schumer show after she calls Trump a 'monster'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/17/amy-schumer-donald-trump-walkout-tampa-florida>
It is perhaps notable that the public support of one tech industry mogul for 
the Republican party nominee has produced such controversy. After all, no one 
blinks when a billionaire banker or industrialist is revealed to donate to 
conservatives.

“Do we think doctors are evil because Ben Carson is supporting Trump? Are you 
evil because there are journalists like Sean Hannity? When did we start 
analyzing entire industries and professions?” asked Anshu Sharma, a venture 
capitalist with Storm Ventures.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Thiel%20at%20Republican%20convention%3A%20'I%20am%20proud%20to%20be%20gay'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Thiel%20at%20Republican%20convention%3A%20%27I%20am%20proud%20to%20be%20gay%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fpeter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video&media=>
Peter Thiel at Republican convention in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/jul/22/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech-video>
It’s a fair point, but one that is undermined by the industry’s own PR, which 
constantly insists that tech companies are about more than just making money, 
but about changing the world (for the better). Couple that with the tech 
community’s high opinion of its own intelligence, and it’s not surprising that 
people hold it to a higher moral standard than they do Wall Street.

It’s a kind of tech exceptionalism that Sharma embodied when he added, “40% of 
America supports Trump ... And of the top 100 billionaires, one is supporting 
Trump. Isn’t that a good proof that we are 40 times better at judging than the 
rest of the nation.”

It’s not only observers and critics of the industry who are raising concerns 
about Thiel, but committed members of the community, fromdiversity in tech 
advocates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/project-include-y-combinator-donald-trump-peter-thiel>
 to venture capitalistChris Sacca 
<https://twitter.com/sacca/status/787491496073175041>.
Chris Sacca (@sacca) 
Hey @peterthiel <https://twitter.com/peterthiel>, nice @nytimes 
<https://twitter.com/nytimes> piece about your $1.5 million donation to Trump. 
Is that to fund more of these stickers?pic.twitter.com/FxYjwGD2RO 
<https://t.co/FxYjwGD2RO>
 <https://twitter.com/sacca/status/787491496073175041> October 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/sacca/status/787491496073175041> 
“It’s not that the tech industry is morally cleaner. It’s that it has such 
universal power over its users that it’s kind of important that we not allow 
that power to fall into the hands of monsters,” said Maciej Ceglowski, a 
developer and the owner of Pinboard, a social bookmarking site.

“Secondly, this is my industry, and I’m sickened to see it stand silently by 
and in tacit support of this,” he added.

Ceglowski was one of the sharpest critics of Y Combinators’s support of Trump, 
tweeting through hiscompany’s handle 
<https://twitter.com/Pinboard/status/787788273120751616>. 

He called Facebook’s continuing support of Thiel “disgraceful” but said he was 
targeting Y Combinator because he had little faith that Facebook would respond 
at all.

Pinboard (@Pinboard) 
Facebook has a board member who heard credible accusations of sexual assault 
and threw $1.25M at the perpetrator. This requires comment.
 <https://twitter.com/Pinboard/status/788157943006892032> October 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Pinboard/status/788157943006892032> 
Facebook did not respond to a request for comment on Thiel. 

The lesson Ceglowski said we can glean from tech’s response to Peter Thiel is 
the perfect public relations strategy for an industry that proclaims “Black 
Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/25/mark-zuckerberg-facebook-defacing-black-lives-matter-signs>
” while overwhelmingly failing to diversify its own staffs.

“Hate speech is fine as long as you find a proxy to do it,” he said. 
 