
Kerry Cassidy was driving trains at 125 miles an hour until she was 37 weeks 
pregnant. A driver for Great Western Railway on the high-speed route between 
Plymouth and London Paddington, she bats away any suggestion that the railways 
are a man’s domain. Modern trains have no need for heavy lifting: long gone are 
the days of shovelling dirty coal into the engine’s firebox. “As long as you 
can do the job then gender isn’t really an issue,” she says.

Yet women make up just 5.4% of approximately 19,000 train drivers in Britain, 
up from4.2% in 2012 
<http://www.aslef.org.uk/information/100011/102619/133274/on_track_with_diversity/>
, according to Aslef, the train drivers union. Progress on diversity has been 
slow – in part because staff turnover is low. Many train drivers stay in the 
job for decades.


To a lot of the men, I was like the proverbial turd in the swimming pool
Karen Harrison 
Cassidy, 35, has been a train driver for eight years. She was the only woman 
out of 12 on her training course, causing some people to tell her she was “a 
tickbox exercise” by the company. But she says a lot more women are coming 
through now, despite difficulties. “Roles aren’t advertised where women will 
see them,” she says. “I don’t think women are put off, I just don’t think they 
know the job is there.”


Some kids point and stare when they see Cassidy in the driver’s seat, and some 
depots don’t have female toilets or bins for sanitary products. But on the 
whole, the sector has progressed since Karen Harrison, the first female train 
driver who started her careerin 1978 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/corporate/about-tfl/culture-and-heritage/londons-transport-a-history/women-in-transport>
, said: “To a lot of the men, I was like the proverbial turd in the swimming 
pool.”


For Peter Austin, managing director of London Overground, attracting a more 
diverse workforce makes business sense. “I just think it’s a healthier 
workforce,” he says. “If you’re not reflecting the community you serve, I don’t 
really think that you can understand the community that you serve.”


The biggest barrier to diversity, he says, is “the stereotypical view that you 
have to be a man to be a train driver”.


Under former mayor Ken Livingstone, targets on diversity were written into 
London Overground’s contract, so it’s been a focus for the company since 2007. 
Today, some 9% of its drivers are women. The company, along withCrossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> and London Underground, have made 
more progress on this issue than many other train companies, partly because 
they’ve needed to hire a lot more train drivers to accommodate the growth of 
transport links in the capital.


But they’ve also targeted their recruitment. Ambassadors from London 
Overground, Austin says, have gone into schools to give careers advice and 
promote train-driving as a viable career choice for girls. Crossrail, which 
will employ more than 400 drivers when fully operational, made avideo featuring 
female train drivers <https://vimeo.com/149584358> discussing the benefits of 
the role for them, and teamed up with websites such asworkingmums.co.uk 
<http://www.workingmums.co.uk/> to create female-friendly adverts.


'Being a woman isn’t a barrier to working in the rail industry'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/may/15/being-a-woman-isnt-a-barrier-to-working-in-the-rail-industry>
Other companies have made sporadic progress. On track with diversity 
<http://www.aslef.org.uk/information/100011/102619/133274/on_track_with_diversity/>
, an independent report commissioned by Aslef in 2012, highlighted good 
practice among train operating companies. Northern Rail, for example, placed 
job adverts in the fitting rooms of New Look branches in Manchester and Leeds. 
The company also worked on its image: one ad depicted a pile of pink shoe boxes 
with employee benefits written on them and a strapline saying “a girl can never 
have too many”.


The union used the report to put pressure on train companies to recruit more 
women and ethnic minorities. It urged them to place job adverts where women are 
likely to read them, hold open days that target women and ensure interview 
panels are trained in preventing bias.


Far from feeling like they’re imposing on a male environment, female train 
drivers think the job is ideal for women. One of the biggest plus points is the 
salary. Georgiana Oana, who has been driving for London Overground for just 
over a year, earns more than £55,000 a year – and has just managed to put down 
a mortgage on a property without her partner’s input. Cassidy, meanwhile, a 
single mother, can easily afford childcare while she’s at work.


Oana, 33, was an internal recruit: after moving to the UK from Romania, she 
did some agency work, including cleaning and other operational roles for the 
railway. She spent a few years improving her English so that she’d be able to 
apply for a driving position.


What attracted her were the employee benefits. As well as free or heavily 
discounted rail travel, drivers get long holidays, flexible working hours and 
decent pensions and maternity packages. Although the job is intense and 
requires a lot of concentration, train drivers never take any work home with 
them. It’s shift work – but for Oana, that means more time off during the day 
to see her young children, who are two and eight years old. Every month she 
gets a seven-day break.


She sees no reason why women shouldn’t apply. “There’s nothing that I need 
help from a man to do in this job,” she says.


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 