
Across Britain, views, apparently, are being spoiled. In Cumbria, the 
great-great-great-great grandson of William Wordsworth is supportinga campaign 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/pylons-will-ruin-views-that-inspired-wordsworth-srvxdvxg9>
 to stop the National Grid building pylons close to the Lake District National 
Park that would allegedly wreck some beautiful vistas. Meanwhile down south,
Richmond is appalled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/london-mayor-urged-to-act-over-tower-that-compromises-st-pauls-vieww>
 by a new skyscraper in Stratford – on the opposite side of London – that will 
wreck a famous view of St Paul’s from Richmond Park.

London mayor urged to act over tower that 'compromises' St Paul's view
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/london-mayor-urged-to-act-over-tower-that-compromises-st-pauls-view>
So in an age of ecological catastrophe, political chaos and refugee crisis, 
there are still some people who have time to fret about the view from their 
Lakeland cottage or Richmond mansion. Is there any justification for preserving 
the picturesque in this ever-changing world?

It might help if we defined it. What we call a “view” is a landscape or 
townscape that pleases the eye, because it has something harmonious, inspiring 
or exciting about it, and also an underlying impression of coherence. It is, in 
short, like a picture. In the 18th century, when views started to be cherished, 
the term “picturesque” was enthusiastically applied to them. People went on 
tours to look at the picturesque. If they were rich enough they created 
picturesque landscapes on their estates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-cult-of-the-picturesque-ignores-the-reality-of-modern-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3de4ed6d410de97556cde695616490251e51892%2F98_120_1018_611%2F1018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cult%20of%20the%20picturesque%20view%20ignores%20the%20reality%20of%20modern%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-cult-of-the-picturesque-ignores-the-reality-of-modern-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cult%20of%20the%20picturesque%20view%20ignores%20the%20reality%20of%20modern%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-cult-of-the-picturesque-ignores-the-reality-of-modern-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3de4ed6d410de97556cde695616490251e51892%2F98_120_1018_611%2F1018.jpg>
 The view that campaigners are saying will be ruined by a new development in 
Stratford. Photograph: Architect's Journal 
If they were rich enough – and that’s the problem. Throughout its 250-year 
history, the cult of views has been tainted by elitism. The very word 
“picturesque” implies dishonesty and self-delusion. It means that from my point 
of view, the landscape in front of me appears pleasing. Things that don’t fit 
the picture don’t belong there, or must be ignored. Forget the peasant children 
starving in that lovely copse at the bottom of the hill. I can’t see them, or 
hear them crying from up here.And the woods look lovely 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/thomas-gainsborough-mr-and-mrs-andrews>
.

In the same way it seems a bit rich (literally) for residents of Richmond to 
complain that a building project in a part of east London that needs all the 
economic stimulus it can get is spoiling a particularly privileged view of St 
Paul’s. It is perhaps equally shortsighted for lovers of theLake District 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lake-district> National Park to worry about 
pylons infringing on this well-preserved landscape while implicitly letting 
other parts of the country be tangled up with as many pylons as energy 
companies feel like installing.

I’ve always found the Lake District a bit twee anyway, and not just because 
Wordsworth’s poetry used to bore me to tears at school. It is because it stands 
for a particularly false image of the picturesque. In Wales, not only are the 
mountains bigger and the lakes colder, but the idea of a landscape totally free 
from industry is obviously absurd. Anyone who walks in Wales, which has some of 
Britain’s most genuinely natural landscapes, knows that Britain’s long 
industrial history marks even the most breathtaking views. Every path up 
Snowdon leads past abandoned mining and quarrying sites. Even the names of the
Miners’ Track 
<http://www.eryri-npa.gov.uk/visiting/walking/mountain-walks/miners-track> and 
Pyg Track refer to these haunted relics of a working past.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-cult-of-the-picturesque-ignores-the-reality-of-modern-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d0d952efb8de27ae856ab7ba3e6c585050e801%2F0_0_3881_4526%2F3881.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cult%20of%20the%20picturesque%20view%20ignores%20the%20reality%20of%20modern%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-cult-of-the-picturesque-ignores-the-reality-of-modern-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cult%20of%20the%20picturesque%20view%20ignores%20the%20reality%20of%20modern%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-cult-of-the-picturesque-ignores-the-reality-of-modern-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d0d952efb8de27ae856ab7ba3e6c585050e801%2F0_0_3881_4526%2F3881.jpg>
 Crossing the Brook, circa 1815, by JMW Turner. Photograph: Print 
Collector/Getty Images 
Britain’s Romantic artists did not ignore the industrial revolution but saw 
energy and beauty in it. In JMW Turner’s paintingCrossing the Brook 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/turner-crossing-the-brook-n00497> 
(exhibited in 1815) the view in the foreground is rustic and timeless, yet in 
the distance, Turner shows industrial workings along Devon’s Tamar Valley in 
great detail. John Constable is even more forthright about modern reality in 
his paintingThe Opening of Waterloo Bridge 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/constable-the-opening-of-waterloo-bridge-whitehall-stairs-june-18th-1817-t04904>
 (exhibited in 1832). He shows thick black smoke pouring out of chimney stacks 
on the south bank of the Thames, putting colossal amounts of carbon into the 
atmosphere and unwittingly contributing to a global warming of which people in 
1832 knew nothing.

Hang on, wait – Constable is looking eastward along the Thames, and the dark 
smoke from those billowing chimneys overshadows his view of St Paul’s. So what 
would the view of Wren’s dome from Richmond have been like in 1832? Would you 
even have seen it through the thick smoke enveloping the capital?

There has never been a time when the landscape was pure and free from the mess 
of modern life. That is why the 18th-century idea of a “view” is such a false 
and complacent way of thinking about our environment. Views can’t be preserved, 
and anyway, they always tell some sort of lie. If cables are buried in the 
earth instead of being carried by pylons it may make for a better view, but it 
won’t change the damage to the planet being done by irresponsible energy use.

We need a new way of thinking about what makes a beautiful environment, one 
that includes humans and their creativity. We cannot be like 18th-century 
aristocrats enjoying a landscape from which we’ve had the tenant farmers 
evicted to improve the view. Instead we need to love the living, changing, 
growing world in which we live, and protect that.

 