
Capacity: 500 in the downstairs venue, 600 in the upstairs auditorium.


Who plays there: An impressively broad range of acts. Oran Mor, a grand 
converted church with a neon hula hoop wedged on its spire, situated in the 
heart of Glasgow’s fashionable west end, occupies an unusual place in the 
city’s live music ecosystem. It has a lovely upstairs auditorium, with 
impressive murals created by Scottish artist and authorAlasdair Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/14/alasdair-gray-hate-anybody-scottish-edinburgh-book-festival>
, but the majority of gigs take place in its crypt-like basement. The low 
ceiling can make the space feel almost as intimate as other underground Glasgow 
venues but the vibe is considerably less grimy and scuzzy, not least because it 
also functions asa celebrated lunchtime theatre space 
<http://www.oran-mor.co.uk/theatre/a-play-a-pie-and-a-pint/> and a nominally 
upmarket nightclub. Though not a hardcore CBGB-style sweatbox, Oran Mor has 
played host to an eclectic roster since it opened in 2004, including Lambchop, 
Amy Winehouse, Neon Neon and Rudimental. It’s particularly welcoming to roots 
and folk artists, and also seems to be the preferred venue for off-the-radar US 
acts making tentative UK inroads, such as crowdfunded troubadour Jonathan 
Coulton and cult podcast Welcome to Night Vale.


Cloakroom: Yes.


Admission: £10-£20.


Bar: A notably slick operation at the rear of the basement venue, where a pint 
of lager will set you back £3.60 (there’s also usually a promo beer bottle on 
for £2). If you fancy a pre- or post-gig dram, the always-bustling Oran Mor 
main bar – accessed by a different entrance – boasts more than 280 malt 
whiskies and is open unusually late.


Food: Not in the venues, although there are two restaurants situated elsewhere 
in the Oran Mor warren.


Toilets: Considerably above average.


Wheelchair access: Excellent. Even though Oran Mor’s performance spaces are 
either at the top or bottom of very steep stone stairs, there’s a customer lift 
located in the Brasserie that provides easy wheelchair access to both.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-oran-mor-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418729814780%2F0717c469-8cc0-4ba7-acc6-00716fddeb87-1355x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20Oran%20Mor%2C%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-oran-mor-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20Oran%20Mor%2C%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-oran-mor-glasgow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418729814780%2F0717c469-8cc0-4ba7-acc6-00716fddeb87-1355x2040.jpeg>
 The exterior of Oran Mor. Photograph: John Cooper/Alamy 
Sound: The Auditorium is as good as you might expect from a converted church, 
but the downstairs Venue is a little more problematic. Near the stage, you get 
a proper bass thump and decent mid-range. But more than any other venue in 
Glasgow, the downstairs in Oran Mor suffers from an excess of loud chatter. 
Whether it’s down to unpredictable basement acoustics or the stereotypically 
self-involved Glasgow west end demographic, unless you’ve managed to penetrate 
more than halfway through the crowd, you’re as likely to be hearing someone 
yammer about their weekend plans to try that new tapas place on Argyle Street 
as hear the artist on stage. It’s not a dealbreaker, but it absolutely requires 
you to be bold and push forward.


Where to stand: As noted, get as close to the stage as you can, particularly 
in the basement. If it’s crammed, carefully file down the wings of the venue, 
negotiating the cushioned seats and low tables, then politely cut in where the 
supporting pillars won’t obstruct your view. Once you’ve found your spot, do 
everyone a favour and refrain from talking about tapas.


Overall: It may never be the coolest venue in Glasgow but Oran Mor has a range 
of creature comforts that clearly appeal to both touring bands and fans of a 
certain age. Everything runs with a slickness and efficiency that could be 
described as impersonal, but it’s also the most likely place in Glasgow to see 
stadium-sized acts play secret or intimate gigs. Even if operating as a music 
venue can sometimes seem secondary to Oran Mor’s primary function of catering 
to well-heeled drinkers and diners til the early hours, the staff and techs do 
a tremendous job. And with the main bar staying open til at least 2am seven 
days a week, there’s plenty of time to dissect the gig over a pint afterwards.


Address: Top of Byres Road, Glasgow, G12 8QX


Telephone: 0141-357 6200


Website: oran-mor.co.uk <http://www.oran-mor.co.uk>


Public transport: It’s a five-minute walk up Byres Road from Hillhead Subway 
station, and accessible by buses – primarily the 6 services – that stop at the 
Botanic Gardens on Great Western Road.

 