
Pink is not a colour you associate with Northern Ireland. Depending which 
patch you're on, red-white-and-blue or green-white-and-orange have long been 
the dominant combinations. But, over the past few months, the tourist board and 
the media have been urging businesses and locals to "go pink" to celebrate 
hosting the Grande Partenza, the first three stages of theGiro d'Italia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/giro-d-italia> cycle race that starts in 
Belfast on 9 May and finishes across the border in Dublin on 11 May – pink 
being the colour of the jersey worn by the race leader.

And Northern Ireland hasn't disappointed. "Pretty in pink as cycle fever grips 
Northern Ireland" 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/local-national/northern-ireland/giro-ditalia-pretty-in-pink-as-cycle-fever-grips-northern-ireland-30204541.html>
 trumpeted a recent headline in the Belfast Telegraph, above a picture of a 
rosy-cheeked farmer with a shock of tinted hair posing with one of her newly 
dyed sheep. Benches outside the boozers in Hill Street in the rejuvenated 
Cathedral Quarter turned blowsy overnight, and florid-looking taxis wait to 
ferry the drinkers home. In the east of Belfast, a run of shopfronts along the 
Upper Newtownards Road have turned pink. On the Antrim coast, theHip Chip in 
Bushmills is serving cod in coral-coloured batter 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-26345266>and there's a 
freshly-painted tractor and bicycle outside the Sheep Island View hostel in 
Ballintoy.

"Anything Yorkshire reckons it can do, Northern Ireland can do better," says 
Antrim-born pro cyclist and author Michael Hutchinson. The Giro d'Italia is the 
second most significant bike race in the world after the Tour de France – which
starts in Yorkshire this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/16/tour-de-france-yorkshire-cambridge-essex-camping>
 (in case you hadn't heard).

"Growing up in Northern Ireland, we're used to being on the periphery of 
things, so it's weird and amazing that it's happening. But it's the kind of 
thing that Belfast and the north is very good at getting behind," Hutchinson 
says.
 Cyclists take a breather on the Giant’s Causeway. Photograph: Northern 
Ireland Tourist Board 
The Giro is probably the most important sporting event in Northern Ireland's 
history. Around 140,000 spectators are expected to line the roads, with an 
estimated TV audience of 775 million people in 174 countries. With such a 
global reach, Graham Little, the Northern Irish presenter of ITV4's The Cycle 
Show, reckons it's an opportunity for the country to rebrand itself in the eyes 
of the world. "There's been a strategy of attracting big events to Northern 
Ireland – the MTV awards in 2011, the Irish Open at Portrush in 2012 and 
Derry/Londerry as European City of Culture last year – to show we're 'normal' 
and the Troubles are behind us. It's another chapter on our journey of 
recovery."

This year marks only the 11th time the Giro has visited foreign shores since 
its inception in 1909. And it can only enhance Northern Ireland's image to bask 
in the stylish glow of an Italian event, with its tanned athletes in 
figure-hugging lycra, the carnival of the caravan, the passionate fans and its 
association with some of the most iconic riders in the history of the sport: 
Alfredo Binda, Gino Bartali, Fausto Coppi, Eddy Merckx, Marco Pantani, and, not 
forgetting Ireland's own Stephen Roche, who won the Giro in 1987. But Little 
believes one of the factors that won Giro organisers over is the "diverse and 
beautiful landscape we have in a compact country".
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FuviZYOo5wvs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FuviZYOo5wvs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FuviZYOo5wvs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Northern Ireland's "money shot" is undoubtedly the Coastal Causeway Route, one 
of Europe's most spectacular roads which forms part of the second stage of the 
race and sweeps along the rugged Antrim shoreline and through the glens, before 
heading back down into Belfast. The aerial shots along the route – taking in 
the crenellated ruins of Dunluce Castle, the vertiginous Carrick-a-Rede rope 
bridge, the basalt stacks of the Giant's Causeway, and the seaside villages of 
Ballycastle, Cushendun, Cushendall and Carnlough – will be a pleasant surprise 
for viewers who have an entirely different image of Northern Ireland.

With that in mind, we set off to cycle the most scenic part of the race, the 
218km second stage, and also preview stages one and three.

Stage one: Belfast, 21.7km team time trial

The place that launched one of the world's biggest ships is the starting point 
for the world's second biggest bike race next Friday at 5.45pm, with a team 
time trial starting in the Titanic Quarter before heading out along the 
Newtownards Road, climbing the one-mile hill to Stormont, before coming back 
along the Stranmillis Embankment by the River Lagan and ending at City Hall in 
Donegall Place.

Dave Kane Cycles in Ballyhackamore <http://www.davekanecycles.com/> (263 Upper 
Newtownards Road) has created a neon pink window display to celebrate the 
stage, with Giro shirts and a replica of Stephen Roche's 1987 winning Battaglin 
bike. Kaner's Corner, as 72-year-old owner Dave Kane has christened the patch 
outside his family-run shop, is where many club cyclists will position 
themselves for stage one. "This whole corner will be going mad on the day," 
says Dave, who shakes his head in disbelief at the prospect of such a major 
event passing his doorstep.

Other businesses have embraced the Giro theme but the owner of the Italian 
restaurant at no 279, a few doors down from the bike shop, has always been a 
cycling fan, and called his eateryIl Pirata 
<https://www.facebook.com/ilPirataBelfast>, the nickname of one of the most 
famous and controversial Giro winners, Marco Pantani. It's the perfect place to 
refuel on race day – if you can get in, as it's a no-reservation joint – 
serving small-plate Italian classics such as mozzarella fritti and mushroom 
arancini along with pizzas, ragus and pastas.

Stage two: Titanic Quarter to City Hall, Belfast, via the Coastal Causeway, 
218km


It's sobering to think that the pro-peloton will gobble up this distance in 
something like five hours, but it can also be done in two legs over a weekend, 
with an overnight stop on the Antrim coast to make it a slightly more 
comfortable prospect. It is worth taking your own road bike, as hire options 
are limited to hybrid and mountain bikes (see below).

The first stretch of this stage takes the direct route to the far north coast 
100km away. There is a moment, though, as you climb out of the city suburbs, 
with Cave Hill to your left, that you get the splendid view over Belfast Lough 
that provided the inspiration for Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels. On the 
Antrim Road, there's a nod to Ireland's cycling heritage as you pass the 
headquarters of Chain Reaction Cycles, the world's largest online bike retailer.

On a quick pit stop in Ballymena, we got a distant glimpse of Slemish mountain 
where, legend has it, a young Saint Patrick raised sheep. We then pushed on 
through a fairly flat stretch of countryside along the busy A26 until we turned 
right on to the famous Causeway Coastal Route. This is where the ride really 
comes alive with the lift of salty ozone in the air and stunning views of 
beize-coloured cliffs running out to sea. We skirted the edge of manicured 
Portrush golf course and rode past the ruins of Dunluce Castle, which appear to 
have melted into their clifftop hold over five centuries. Even more uplifting 
than the view, however, was the prospect of our overnight stop at the Bushmills 
Inn. The wheels on our bikes had barely stopped turning by the time we'd 
drained the first pint of Guinness in front of a log fire in one of its many 
snug alcoves.

The second half of our ride was 118km back down to Belfast, but we 
optimistically took a detour from the Giro route to marvel at something the 
peloton won't get to see – the Giant's Causeway, one of the world's natural 
wonders, with its thousands of perfectly-formed, hexagonal basalt columns 
stretching out along the coast. The climb back up from the Causeway was 
probably the steepest we encountered, but a greater challenge awaited when we 
rejoined the coastal road and tilted straight into a headwind that made us feel 
as if we were going backwards.
 A tractor and bicycle at Ballintoy, painted pink to celebrate the Giro 
d'Italia. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Nothing could detract from the views beyond the hedge rows, however, with 
low-scudding clouds shapeshifting the light over pastures running down to sandy 
coves. We passed only a couple of other cyclists as we pushed on to Ballintoy 
to find the famous pink tractor outside theSheep Island View hostel 
<http://www.sheepislandview.com/> (sheepislandview.com). We called in to chat 
to the owner's daughter, who pulled out a framed picture from the wheel arch of 
the tractor, showing an old boy standing by the side of the road with the sleek 
peloton blurring past, captioned: "What's the hurry boys – sure, you're in 
Ireland now."

We took that message to heart, though we didn't need much persuading to stop at
Morelli's, the Italian-Irish ice-cream parlour <http://morellisices.com/buy.php>
 overlooking Ballycastle marina. We knew a climb was coming up – through 
Ballypatrick forest, between the glens of Antrim and the coastline – and our 
legs were already crying out for the long freewheel down into Cushendall. Our 
plan had been to reach the harbour village of Carnlough, the halfway point, by 
lunchtime so that we could have chowder and wheaten bread at the Londonderry 
Arms to fortify us for the final leg back to Belfast. But we were well behind 
schedule, and we had to settle for a snack from a Spar. The seals we spied from 
the road at Waterfoot appeared to be bobbing their heads out of the water to 
mock us.

The rest of the ride was a battle against the wind as we ground through Larne 
and past Carrickfergus castle, our eyes fixed on the distant Harland and Wolff 
shipping cranes the other side of Belfast Lough that signalled the end of our 
road. When asked for his initial impressions at winning the first ever Giro 
d'Italia in 1909, Luigi Ganna, took a moment before responding: "My arse is 
killing me." We had a slight inkling of how he must have felt.

Stage three: Armagh to Dublin, 187km

Obviously, we didn't ride it. We were knackered. But in drive-by brief, the 
stage begins in the Shambles market of Armagh town before heading out through 
the apple orchards, on towards Newry, with the Ring of Gullion forming the 
backdrop, before crossing the border at Carrickasticken, through Dundalk and on 
to Dublin for a sprint finish on Upper Merrion Street.

Watch it here: the best Giro vantage points
 The race will pass the Carrick-a-Rede rope bridge on the Antrim coast. 
Photograph: David Soanes Photography/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
At Ballintoy, there's a small corkscrew climb and, if the wind is coming head 
on, there's sure to be a break away group here, which will make the peloton 
push on and make for an exciting bit of racing.
Marcus Christie, pro rider with  An Post Chain Reaction Sean Kelly team 
<http://www.anpost.ie/AnPost/IrishCycling/The_Sean_Kelly_Team/Gallery/An+Post+Chain+Reaction+Sean+Kelly+team+2013+squad.htm>

The peloton roaring down the Antrim coast road is going to produce pictures 
that we'll be seeing for years to come. So, I'd base myself in a cafe in 
Carnlough or Ballycastle, have an ice-cream, and watch the riders sweep by.
Michael Hutchinson, pro rider with In-Gear Quickvit RT, and author of Faster – 
The Obsession, Science and Luck Behind the World's Fastest Cyclists 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Faster-Obsession-Science-Fastest-Cyclists/dp/1408843757>

Around the Carrick-A-Rede rope bridge, there's a sharp climb. On the hill 
opposite, there's a car park that has a good view of the road and breathtaking 
views out over the sea.
Graham Little, presenter of ITV4's The Cycle Show 
<http://www.thecycleshow.co.uk/>

I'll be watching stage two at Ballycastle, a beautiful spot and also the start 
and finish of theGiant's Causeway Coast Sportive 
<http://www.giantscausewaycoastsportive.com/> that I help organise!
Beverley Pierson, Outdoor Recreation Northern Ireland 
<http://www.outdoorrecreationni.com/>

Me and the family will be watching the finish of stage two into Belfast. 
Watching a bunch sprint finishing in front of City Hall will be the highlight.
Paul Kane, Dave Kane Cycles <http://www.davekanecycles.com>

I'll be watching the team time trial halfway up Prince of Wales Avenue, the 
road up to the Northern Ireland Assembly buildings at Stormont, where there is 
quite a steep hill at the end, allowing you to spot the riders.
Jim Stokes, Belfast-based sports reporter

• The trip was provided by the Irish Tourist Board (ireland.com 
<http://www.ireland.com/en-gb>discovernorthernireland.com 
<http://www.discovernorthernireland.com>). Accommodation was provided by 
Malmaison Belfast (084469 30650,malmaison.com 
<https://www.malmaison.com/locations/belfast/>, doubles from £79) and Bushmills 
Inn (028-2073 3000,bushmillsinn.com <http://www.bushmillsinn.com/>, doubles 
from £158). Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com/en/>) flies to Belfast 
from various UK airports. Bikes were supplied by Chain Reaction Cycles (
chainreactioncycles.com <http://www.chainreactioncycles.com/>). Bike hire: 
Strandeen Bike Hire in Portstewart (028 7083 3872,strandeen.com 
<http://www.strandeen.com/local.html>, £15 a day with helmets); and Bushmills 
Cycle Hire (028 207 32869,bushmillscyclehire.co.uk 
<http://www.bushmillscyclehire.co.uk/>, £15 a day). Belfast City Bike Tours 
runs a Giro-themed Belfast tour (07780 496969,belfastcitybiketours.com 
<http://belfastcitybiketours.com/giro-ditalia14-tour-1>, three hours/20km, 
£25pp)
 