
Capacity: 2,550.

Who plays there: Ascending pop stars, rock bands new and established, visiting 
hip-hoppers, dance music veterans – the split-level Academy is Glasgow’s last 
rung on the mid-size venue ladder before the impersonal big rooms of the SECC 
andthe Hydro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/aug/26/gig-venue-guide-sse-hydro-glasgow>
. Since opening in 2003, this former cinema and bingo hall has hosted plenty of 
gigs by artists who’ve exploded in popularity between the initial booking and 
the actual show, as well as providing an intimate theatre-style space for huge 
acts looking to class things up. Adele played here four years ago, while in 
2006 the Killers sold out a gig in three minutes. Among the acts scheduled to 
appear are Clean Bandit, Sam Smith, Chic, Laura Marling and the Wu-Tang Clan. 
The venue is also home to Club Noir, the biggest burlesque night in the world


Cloakroom: Yes.


Admission: £12-£25.


Bars: Six in total – a large island bar as you enter, with an additional side 
bar on the left. There are two more bars nearer the stage, at each side of the 
main standing area, plus a mezzanine bar and high bar servicing the balcony. 
Pints are about £4, and a spirit-and-mixer will set you back £3.40. You can 
also get a two-pint plastic cup to cut down on repeat trips.


Food: No.


Toilets: Multiple options on the ground floor; on the balcony you have to 
thread your way past the boxes towards the stage.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-o2-academy-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424781354444%2Fde736d43-25ee-4168-8bd2-a328ad8d9960-2060x1348.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20O2%20Academy%2C%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-o2-academy-glasgow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20gig%20venue%20guide%3A%20O2%20Academy%2C%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fthe-gig-venue-guide-o2-academy-glasgow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424781354444%2Fde736d43-25ee-4168-8bd2-a328ad8d9960-2060x1348.jpeg>
 The O2 Academy, Glasgow. Photograph: Alamy 
Wheelchair access: The main floorspace is fully accessible, with a viewing 
platform and a lowered bar. After buying a standard ticket, call the box office 
on 0141-332 2232 (ext 2) to confirm your disabled booking and arrange a carer’s 
pass.


Sound: The Academy is a huge space, and the sound quality can be variable. The 
system has plenty of oomph but it can feel a bit muddy if you’re at the back of 
the balcony. A good rule of thumb is to position yourself near the sound desk, 
so you’re hearing roughly what the sound mixer is hearing. At the Academy, 
that’s at the rear of the main standing area.


Where to stand: If you’ve got a balcony ticket, there’s no assigned seating 
but it is set back a fair distance from the stage. Get there early and you 
might be able to bag a standing space in one of the boxes overlooking the 
stage. On the ground floor, three levels are linked by stairs that often create 
bottlenecks – best to get as close to the front as possible, because beyond the 
scrum at the bars near the stage, things tend to be less jammed. Academy gigs 
are often sold out and get hot quickly. Pro tip: there’s a large air-con vent 
tucked away after the first set of stairs on the left, which is good for a 
reviving blast of cool air.


Overall: It doesn’t have the venerable history of the Barrowland Ballroom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jan/14/gig-venue-guide-glasgow-barrowland-ballroom>
, or the gigantic mirrorball of its O2-branded sister venuethe ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/may/06/the-gig-venue-guide-o2-abc-glasgow>
, but the Academy has already secured an immortal place in pop music’s 
footnotes: it was where James Brown played his last ever UK show. Gigs tend to 
be boisterous affairs, where your enjoyment can be affected by a constantly 
fluid crowd. Get away from the heavy-traffic zones and be prepared to go with 
the flow for the best experience.


Address: 121 Eglinton Street, Glasgow, G5 9NT.


Telephone: 0141-332 2232 (tickets: 0844 477 2000).


Website: o2academyglasgow.co.uk <http://www.o2academyglasgow.co.uk/>


Public transport: It’s 10 minutes’ walk from Glasgow’s central station and 
close to Bridge Street subway, which gets busy after gigs. All buses going 
south of the city from Union Street stop nearby, including the 3, 4, 38 and 57 
services.

 