
1 What is the universe made of?


Astronomers face an embarrassing conundrum: they don't know what 95% of the 
universe is made of. Atoms, which form everything we see around us, only 
account for a measly 5%. Over the past 80 years it has become clear that the 
substantial remainder is comprised of two shadowy entities – dark matter  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/apr/03/dark-matter-space-station-physics>
anddark energy <>. The former, first discovered in 1933, acts as an invisible 
glue, binding galaxies and galaxy clusters together. Unveiled in 1998, the 
latter is pushing the universe's expansion to ever greater speeds. Astronomers 
are closing in on the true identities of these unseen interlopers.

2 How did life begin?

Four billion years ago, something started stirring in the primordial soup. A 
few simple chemicals got together and made biology – the first molecules 
capable of replicating themselves appeared. We humans are linked by evolution 
to those early biological molecules. But how did the basic chemicals present on 
early Earth spontaneously arrange themselves into something resembling life? 
How did we get DNA? What did the first cells look like? More than half a 
century after the chemist Stanley Miller proposed his "primordial soup" theory 
<http://www.abenteuer-universum.de/pdf/miller_1953.pdf>, we still can't agree 
about what happened. Some say life began in hot pools near volcanoes, others 
that it was kick-started by meteorites hitting the sea.

3 Are we alone in the universe?

Perhaps not. Astronomers have been scouring the universe for places where 
water worlds might have given rise to life, from Europaand Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jul/18/curiosity-rover-mars> in our 
solar system to planets many light years away. Radio telescopes have been 
eavesdropping on the heavens and in 1977 a signal bearing the potential 
hallmarks of an alien message was heard. Astronomers are now able toscan the 
atmospheres of alien worlds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/may/16/search-earth-wheels-kepler-mission>
 for oxygen and water. The next few decades will be an exciting time to be an 
alien hunter with up to 60bn potentially habitable planets in our Milky Way 
alone.

4 What makes us human?

Just looking at your DNA won't tell you – the human genome is 99% identical to 
a chimpanzee's and, for that matter, 50% to a banana's. We do, however, have 
bigger brains than most animals – not the biggest, but packed with three times 
as many neurons as a gorilla(86bn to be exact) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/blog/2012/feb/28/how-many-neurons-human-brain>
. A lot of the things we once thought distinguishing about us – language, 
tool-use, recognising yourself in the mirror –are seen in other animals 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/blog/2012/aug/22/bonobo-kanzi-flint-tools-logs>
. Perhaps it's our culture – and its subsequent effect on our genes (and vice 
versa) – that makes the difference. Scientists think that cooking and our 
mastery of fire may have helped us gain big brains. But it's possible that our 
capacity for co-operation and skills trade is what really makes this a planet 
of humans and not apes.

5 What is consciousness?

We're still not really sure. We do know that it's to do with different brain 
regions networked together rather than a single part of the brain. The thinking 
goes that if we figure out which bits of the brain are involved and how the 
neural circuitry works,we'll figure out how consciousness emerges,  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2012/mar/01/consciousness-eight-questions-science>
something that artificial intelligence and attempts to build a brain neuron by 
neuron may help with. The harder, more philosophical, question iswhy anything 
should be conscious in the first place. A good suggestion is that by 
integrating and processing lots of information, as well as focusing and 
blocking out rather than reacting to the sensory inputs bombarding us, we can 
distinguish between what's real and what's not and imagine multiple future 
scenarios that help us adapt and survive.

6 Why do we dream?

We spend around a third of our lives sleeping. Considering how much time we 
spend doing it, you might think we'd know everything about it. But scientists 
are still searching for a complete explanation of why we sleep and dream. 
Subscribers to Sigmund Freud's views believed dreams were expressions of 
unfulfilled wishes – often sexual – while others wonder whether dreams are 
anything but the random firings of a sleeping brain. Animal studies and 
advances in brain imaging have led us to a more complex understanding that 
suggests dreaming could play a role in memory, learning and emotions. Rats, for 
example, have been shown to replay their waking experiences in dreams, 
apparently helping them to solve complex tasks such as navigating mazes.

7 Why is there stuff?

You really shouldn't be here. The "stuff" you're made of is matter, which has 
a counterpart called antimatter differing only in electrical charge.When they 
meet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/mar/18/matter-antimatter-cern-jeff-forshaw>
, both disappear in a flash of energy. Our best theories suggest that the big 
bang created equal amounts of the two, meaning all matter should have since 
encountered its antimatter counterpart, scuppering them both and leaving the 
universe awash with only energy. Clearly nature has a subtle bias for matter 
otherwise you wouldn't exist. Researchers are sifting data from experiments 
like the Large Hadron Collider trying to understand why, with supersymmetry and 
neutrinos the two leading contenders.

8 Are there other universes?

Our universe is a very unlikely place. Alter some of its settings even 
slightly and life as we know it becomes impossible. In an attempt to unravel 
this "fine-tuning" problem, physicists are increasingly turning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/dec/01/comment.spaceexploration>
 to the notion of other universes.If there is an infinite number of them in a 
"multiverse" 
<http://www.dailygalaxy.com/my_weblog/2013/06/the-dark-flow-the-existence-of-other-universes-new-claims-of-hard-evidence.html>
 then every combination of settings would be played out somewhere and, of 
course, you find yourself in the universe where you are able to exist. It may 
sound crazy, but evidence from cosmology and quantum physics is pointing in 
that direction.

9 Where do we put all the carbon?

For the past couple of hundred years, we've been filling the atmosphere with 
carbon dioxide – unleashing it by burning fossil fuels that once locked away 
carbon below the Earth's surface.Now we have to put all that carbon back,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/15/energy-new-sources-robin-mckie>
or risk the consequences of a warming climate. But how do we do it? One idea is 
to bury it in old oil and gas fields. Another is to hide it away at the bottom 
of the sea. But we don't know how long it will stay there, or what the risks 
might be. Meanwhile, we have to protect natural, long-lasting stores of carbon, 
such as forests and peat bogs, and start making energy in a way that doesn't 
belch out even more.

10 How do we get more energy from the sun?

Dwindling supplies of fossil fuels mean we're in need of a new way to power 
our planet. Our nearest star offers more than one possible solution. We're 
already harnessing the sun's energy to produce solar power. Another idea is to 
use the energy in sunlight to split water into its component parts: oxygen, and 
hydrogen, which could provide a clean fuel for cars of the future. Scientists 
are also working on an energy solution that depends on recreating the processes 
going on inside stars themselves – they're buildinga nuclear fusion machine 
<http://www.efda.org/jet/>. The hope is that these solutions can meet our 
energy needs.

11 What's so weird about prime numbers?

The fact you can shop safely on the internet is thanks to prime numbers – 
those digits that can only be divided by themselves and one. Public key 
encryption – the heartbeat of internet commerce – uses prime numbers to fashion 
keys capable of locking away your sensitive information from prying eyes. And 
yet, despite their fundamental importance to our everyday lives, the primes 
remain an enigma.An apparent pattern within them – the Riemann hypothesis  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2010/nov/03/million-dollars-maths-riemann-hypothesis>
– has tantalised some of the brightest minds in mathematics for centuries. 
However, as yet, no one has been able to tame their weirdness. Doing so might 
just break the internet.

12 How do we beat bacteria?

Antibiotics are one of the miracles of modern medicine. Sir Alexander 
Fleming's Nobel prize-winning discovery led to medicines that fought some of 
the deadliest diseases and made surgery, transplants and chemotherapy possible. 
Yet this legacy is in danger – in Europe around 25,000 people die each yearof 
multidrug-resistant bacteria 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jan/24/antibiotic-resistant-bacteria-threat-medicine>
. Our drug pipeline has been sputtering for decades and we've beenmaking the 
problem worse through overprescription and misuse of antibiotics 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2013/jan/23/antibiotic-resistant-diseases-apocalyptic-threat>
 – an estimated 80% of US antibiotics goes to boosting farm animal growth. 
Thankfully, the advent of DNA sequencing is helping us discover antibiotics we 
never knew bacteria could produce. Alongside innovative, if gross-sounding, 
methods such as transplanting "good" bacteria from fecal matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/mar/31/bacteria-faecal-transplant-gut-mary-roach-gulp>
, and the search for new bacteria deep in the oceans, we may yet keep abreast 
in this arms race with organisms 3bn years our senior.

13 Can computers keep getting faster?

Our tablets and smartphones are mini-computers that contain more computing 
power than astronauts took to the moon in 1969. But if we want to keep on 
increasing the amount of computing power we carry around in our pockets, how 
are we going to do it? There are only so many components you can cram on to a 
computer chip.Has the limit been reached, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/jul/29/computer-chips-moores-law> 
or is there another way to make a computer? Scientists are considering new 
materials, such as atomically thin carbon – graphene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/nov/13/graphene-research-novoselov-geim-manchester>
– as well as new systems, such as quantum computing.

14 Will we ever cure cancer?

The short answer is no. Not a single disease, but a loose group of many 
hundreds of diseases, cancer has been around since the dinosaurs and, being 
caused by haywire genes, the risk is hardwired into all of us. The longer we 
live, the more likely something might go wrong, in any number of ways. For 
cancer is a living thing – ever-evolving to survive. Yet though incredibly 
complicated, through genetics we're learning more and more about what causes 
it, how it spreads and getting better at treating and preventing it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/aug/25/hiv-aids-cancer>. And know 
this: up to half of all cancers – 3.7m a year – are preventable; quit smoking, 
drink and eat moderately, stay active, and avoid prolonged exposure to the 
midday sun.

15 When can I have a robot butler?

Robots can already serve drinks and carry suitcases. Modern robotics can offer 
us a "staff" of individually specialised robots: they ready your Amazon orders 
for delivery, milk your cows, sort your email and ferry you between airport 
terminals. But a truly "intelligent" robot requires us to crack artificial 
intelligence. The real question is whether you'd leave a robotic butler alone 
in the house with your granny. And with Japan aiming to have robotic aides 
caring for its elderly by 2025, we're thinking hard about it now.

16 What's at the bottom of the ocean?

Ninety-five per cent of the ocean is unexplored. What's down there?  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/26/mariana-trench-james-cameron-mission>
In 1960, Don Walsh and Jacques Piccard travelled seven miles down, to the 
deepest part of the ocean, in search of answers. Their voyage pushed the 
boundaries of human endeavour but gave them only a glimpse of life on the 
seafloor. It's so difficult getting to the bottom of the ocean that for the 
most part we have to resort to sending unmanned vehicles as scouts. The 
discoveries we've made so far – from bizarre fish such as the barreleye, with 
its transparent head, to a potential treatment for Alzheimer's made by 
crustaceans – are a tiny fraction of the strange world hidden below the waves.

17 What's at the bottom of a black hole?

It's a question we don't yet have the tools to answer. Einstein's general 
relativity says that when a black hole is created by a dying, collapsing 
massive star, it continues caving in until it forms an infinitely small, 
infinitely dense point called a singularity. But on such scales quantum physics 
probably has something to say too. Except that general relativity and quantum 
physics have never been the happiest of bedfellows – for decades they have 
withstood all attempts to unify them. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jun/16/has-physics-gone-too-far> 
However, a recent idea – calledM-Theory <http://www.mtheory.co.uk/> – may one 
day explain the unseen centre of one of the universe's most extreme creations.

18 Can we live for ever?

We live in an amazing time: we're starting to think of "ageing" not as a fact 
of life, but a disease that can be treated and possibly prevented, or at least 
put off for a very long time. Our knowledge of what causes us to age – and what 
allows some animals to live longer than others – is expanding rapidly. And 
though we haven't quite worked out all the details, the clues we are gathering 
about DNA damage, the balance of ageing, metabolism and reproductive fitness, 
plus the genes that regulate this, are filling out a bigger picture, 
potentially leading to drug treatments. But the real question is not how we're 
going to live longer but how we are going to live well longer. And since many 
diseases, such as diabetes and cancer, are diseases of ageing, treating ageing 
itself could be the key.

19 How do we solve the population problem?

The number of people on our planet has doubled to more than 7 billion since 
the 1960s and it is expected that by 2050 there will be at least 9 billion of 
us. Where are we all going to live and how are we going to make enough food and 
fuel for our ever-growing population? Maybe we can ship everyone off to Mars or 
start building apartment blocks underground. We could even startfeeding 
ourselves with lab-grown meat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/aug/05/first-hamburger-lab-grown-meat-press-conference>
. These may sound like sci-fi solutions, but we might have to start taking them 
more seriously.

20 Is time travel possible?

Time travellers already walk among us. Thanks to Einstein's theory of special 
relativity, astronauts orbiting on the InternationalSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station experience time ticking 
more slowly. At that speed the effect is minuscule, but ramp up the velocity 
and the effect means that one day humans might travel thousands of years into 
the future. Nature seems to be less fond of people going the other way and 
returning to the past, however some physicists have concocted an elaborate 
blueprint for a way to do it using wormholes and spaceships. It could even be 
used to hand yourself a present on Christmas Day, or answer some of the many 
questions that surround the universe's great unknowns.

The Big Questions in Science: The Quest to Solve the Great Unknowns 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780233003955>
 is published by Andre Deutsch at £14.99 on 12 September. To buy a copy for 
£11.99 with free UK p&p,go to guardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780233003955>
 