
COASTAL ACTIVITIES

Learn to sail, or drive a powerboat, Norfolk

The natural harbours, saltmarshes and creeks of the north Norfolk coast are 
ideal for messing about in boats. In the villages on the Wash north of King's 
Lynn, you can learn to sail or drive a powerboat at Sailcraft Sea School in 
Brancaster or Norfolk Etc in Blakeney Harbour.

• Sailcraft (01485 210236, sailcraft.co.uk <http://www.sailcraft.co.uk>); 
two-hour introduction to dinghy sailing for eight-year-olds and over, £110. 
Norfolk Etc (01263 740704,norfolketc.co.uk <http://www.norfolketc.co.uk>); 
90-minute skippered Powerboat Experience,£145

Sea safaris nationwide
 Photograph: Laurie Campbell/Getty Images 
August is a good time to see minke whales, basking sharks, harbour porpoises, 
dolphins and seals in the west of Scotland, along with golden eagles and rare 
white-tailed sea eagles.

• Sealife Surveys Scotland, Tobermory, Isle of Mull (01688 302916, 
sealifesurveys.com <http://www.sealifesurveys.com>); two-hour eco-cruises: 
adults £15, children £12, family £50. Sea.fari Adventures (Skye), Isle of Skye 
(01471 833316,whalespotting.co.uk <http://www.whalespotting.co.uk>); two-hour 
cruise, adults £27, under-15s £21, family £86

Get on your bike, nationwide
 Photograph: Alamy 
A trip on two wheels is a great way to explore our coastline, with more 
cycle-friendly routes opening up all the time. Try the Camel Trail in Cornwall 
– an easygoing 18-mile, largely traffic-free, cycleway through some of the most 
interesting countryside in the south-west. Hire bikes at the start in Padstow. 
The National Cycle Network on Sustrans is generally a mine of info.

• Trail Bike Hire, Unit 6, South Quay, Padstow, Cornwall (01841 532594, 
trailbikehire.co.uk <http://www.trailbikehire.co.uk>); from £10 a day. Cycle 
Routes UK (cycle-route.com <http://www.cycle-route.com>), Sustrans (
sustrans.org.uk <http://www.sustrans.org.uk/what-we-do/national-cycle-network>) 

Birdwatching, Bridlington Bay, Yorkshire


In late August and September, thousands of migrating seabirds pass over the 
North Sea. Book an RSPB cruise from Bridlington North Pier and you'll have 
experts on hand to help you tell your auks from your sooty shearwaters. Armed 
with this knowledge, visit the Bempton Cliffs reserve, where, for close 
encounters of the bird kind, there's a feeding station. 

• Shearwater and skua cruises (01262 850959, RSPB.org.uk/events 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/events/>) last three and a half hours; adults £15, 
under-14s £7.50, family £37.50. Bempton Cliffs reserve (01262 851179,rspb.org.uk
 <http://www.rspb.org.uk/reserves/guide/b/bemptoncliffs/index.aspx>)

SEASIDE EVENTS

The 2010 Worthing International Birdman, East Sussex

Each year, teams of amateur engineers, enthusiasts and the unhinged throw 
themselves and their human-powered flying machines off Worthing Pier to see how 
far they get – in front of thousands of spectators. It's all for charity, with 
a £30,000 prize fund.

• 01903 203252, worthingbirdman.co.uk <http://www.worthingbirdman.co.uk>; 
free, 14 and 15 August

See an airshow, nationwide

Air displays are noisy, exciting and often by the sea. And they're usually 
free. Try Lowestoft (12 and 13 August), Eastbourne (12-15 August) or 
Bournemouth (19-22 August).

• airsceneuk.org.uk <http://www.airsceneuk.org.uk>; bournemouthair.co.uk 
<http://www.bournemouthair.co.uk>; lowestoftairfestival.co.uk 
<http://www.lowestoftairfestival.co.uk>)

Morelli's Italian Ice-cream Job, Portrush, County Antrim 


On 29 August hundreds of classic Minis from all over the world will gather on 
the Causeway coast. Make your way to the Dunluce Centre for noon where there'll 
be bouncy castles and trade stalls until 4pm, when a cavalcade will snake its 
way around the resort. The lovely people atMorelli's 
<http://www.ices.uk.com/index.html> in Dunluce Street will be giving out free 
ice-creams – if you're in the area, sample a Yellow Man sundae at their 
ice-cream parlour in nearby Portstewart.

• ccminiclub.co.uk 
<http://www.haven.com/parks/norfolk_essex/caister/index.aspx>. 
morellisofportstewart.co.uk <http://www.morellisofportstewart.co.uk/Home.html>

Go to a seaside festival, nationwide 

Music festivals are now a fixture of the UK summer. Some of this month's 
offerings include:Folk/roots/blues/jazz: Mull of Kintyre festival (19–22 August,
mokfest.com <http://www.mokfest.com>), Campbelltown,Argyll. Whitby Folk Week 
(21–27,whitbyfolk.co.uk <http://www.whitbyfolk.co.uk>), Yorkshire. Aberjazz 
(26–30,aberjazz.com <http://www.aberjazz.com>), Fishguard, Pembrokeshire. 
Southsea Folk & Roots festival (27-31,barkingspider.abelgratis.com 
<http://www.barkingspider.abelgratis.com/festival>), Southsea, Hampshire. Pop: 
Wizard (27–28,wizardfestival.com <http://www.wizardfestival.com>), Peterhead, 
Aberdeenshire. Solfest (27–29,solwayfestival.co.uk 
<http://www.solwayfestival.co.uk>), Maryport, Cumbria. Watchet music festival 
(27–29,watchetfestival.co.uk <http://www.watchetfestival.co.uk>), Watchet, 
Somerset.Classical: Serenata (26–28, serenatafestival.com 
<http://www.serenatafestival.com>), Smedmore Estate, Kimmeridge, Dorset.

• See also efestivals.co.uk <http://www.efestivals.co.uk>

A day at the races, Isle of Wight and nationwide
 Photograph: Alamy 
From 25 to 30 August, more than 40 marathon-class powerboats will be competing 
in the British Powerboat festival at Cowes, Isle of Wight. This year's "race 
village" promises live music, street theatre, stalls and fireworks. Or there's 
Ramsgate's rather more serene Royal Temple Yacht Club regatta from 16 to 21 
August.

• Powerboat festival (01590 626444, britishpowerboatfestival.co.uk 
<http://www.britishpowerboatfestival.co.uk>); free (race village: adults £7.50, 
children £2.50). Ramsgate Week (01843 591766,ramsgateweek.com 
<http://www.ramsgateweek.com>); free

COASTAL WALKS

Pendeen Watch to Ives, Cornwall, 14 miles

This rugged section of the South West Coast Path, just north of Land's End, is 
one of the toughest, with plenty of clifftop dips and climbs, but also one of 
the most rewarding. The landscape is wild and windswept, and along the way 
you'll find an old tin mine, an iron age fort, a lighthouse and the site of a 
shipwreck. You might spot seals, basking sharks and even whales.

• southwestcoastpath.com <http://www.southwestcoastpath.com>

Ravenscar to Scarborough, Yorkshire, 10.5 miles
 Photograph: Alamy 
Breathtaking views over Robin Hood's Bay make this section of the Cleveland 
Way national trail worth doing. The area was to be the site of a Victorian 
resort that was never finished – you'll find its spooky remains everywhere. 
Further on is Hayburn Wyke, a beautiful cove backed by steep, wooded cliffs and 
a waterfall. Take refreshments at Ravenscar Tearooms at Ravenscar, the Raven 
Hall Hotel (ravenhall.co.uk <http://www.ravenhall.co.uk>) and the Hayburn Wyke 
Inn (hayburnwykeinn.co.uk <http://www.hayburnwykeinn.co.uk>).

• See nationaltrail.co.uk/clevelandway 
<http://nationaltrail.co.uk/clevelandway/>; clevelandway.co.uk 
<http://clevelandway.co.uk/> 

Lower Largo to Crail, Fife, Scotland, 18 miles

King James VI described this part of Fife as a "beggar's mantle fringed with 
gold". The walk leads you along the coast from Lower Largo along the Fife 
Coastal Path, through the lovely fishing villages of Elie and Cellardyke, the 
larger fishing and yachting ports of Piteenweem and Anstruther, before finally 
reaching the little harbour of Crail.

Stop off at the fish bar at Anstruther – it's one of the best chippies in 
Scotland (01333 310518).

• Download a leaflet from fifecoastalpath.co.uk 
<http://fifecoastalpath.co.uk/publications_8.html> or see the Berwick to 
Aberdeen section of nationalcoastalpath.co.uk 
<http://www.nationalcoastalpath.co.uk/sections/section1/path2.html> 

Prestatyn to Llandudno, north Wales, 27 miles

By 2012, it should be possible to walk around the entire Welsh coastline. For 
now, though, try this new path, which was opened on 1 July. It runs along the 
north coast from Prestatyn to Llandudno's west shore, taking in a colony of 
little terns at Gronant dunes, and the Little and Great Ormes.

• See walking.visitwales.com <http://www.walking.visitwales.com>

Whitesands to Solva, Pembrokeshire, 13 miles

A moderately strenuous ramble through the Pembrokeshire Coast national park – 
a landscape of rugged cliffs, sandy beaches and wooded estuaries. This section 
of the coast path is close to the amenities and beaches of St David's and 
Solva, and its bus links access make it a good place for short or circular 
walks. The whole path stretches 186 miles from St Dogmaels to Amroth.

• See Pembrokeshire coast path (nationaltrail.co.uk 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk>). Pembrokeshire Coast national park (
pcnpa.org.uk <http://pcnpa.org.uk/>)
 