
The bus services bill was debated in the House of Lords before parliament 
broke up for the summer – and Labour and Liberal Democrat peers had strong 
words to say about one“nasty mean-minded little clause” 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/lords/2016-07-20/debates/16072030000576/BusServicesBill(HL)>
 in particular.

The proposed legislation has some good points, but in among the sensible 
policy there’s clause 21, which effectively bans local authorities from setting 
up bus companies to run bus services. In the Lords it was deemed “a piece of 
political dogma”, which “sticks out like a sore thumb”. Given that the bus 
services bill is intended to increase passenger numbers, improve services and 
devolve power, clause 21 doesn’t make sense. It potentially robs communities in 
England of opportunities to access high quality, low cost bus travel, which 
Nottingham, Reading and others already provide.

The council-run bus companies that still exist provide some of the best bus 
services in the country

We Own It <https://weownit.org.uk/>, and the 11,000 people that have signed a 
petition against clause 21 so far, think that local authority ownership of 
arms-length companies is an option that needs to be kept on the table. This 
could give councils more choice in achieving the aims of the bill, but it could 
also give councils more bargaining power in discussions about franchising with 
companies like First and Stagecoach.

The government says existing municipal bus companies won’t be affected by the 
bill, but other local authorities won’t be allowed to follow their lead. The 
clause goes further than the 1985Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> Act, which forced councils to ensure 
that any bus provision was provided at arms-length, by independent companies 
owned by local authorities. It means councils are no longer involved in the 
day-to-day running of the buses.

The attention that’s been paid to the bill so far has celebrated the shift to 
franchising – and rightly so. This will enable authorities with a mayor to 
follow the London model: bus services run by private companies under a 
franchising system, where contracts are put out to tender at a set price.

But at the same time, we also need to ask serious questions about clause 21: 
is it necessary? Will it help increase passenger numbers that, outside London, 
have been decreasing for years? And does it help local authorities?

Success stories

The evidence is pretty clear. The local authority-run bus companies that still 
exist – there are just 12 – provide some of the best bus services in the 
country and have some of the highest passenger numbers in the country, outside 
London.

Local authority-run bus companies, like Reading Buses and Nottingham City 
Transport, have won bus operator of the year in four of the last five years. 
Nottingham and Reading also have the second and third highest journeys per head 
outside London. Prior to 2014, Nottinghamincreased passenger numbers 13 years 
in a row <http://www.ukbusawards.org.uk/content/index.php/uk-bus-operator14-1>.

Companies do this by maintaining high levels of investment, even through the 
recession, and by offering a truly joined up transport policy through strong 
partnerships with the local authority. They also do extremely well at making 
cities cleaner and greener.

Do major transport projects only benefit wealthy commuters?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/31/major-transport-projects-commuters-hs2-crossrail>
Their success isn’t surprising. Research by Transport for Quality of Life 
<http://www.transportforqualityoflife.com/u/files/160314_Building_a_World-class_Bus_System_extended%20summary%20report_FINAL4_for_web.pdf>
 (pdf) looked at 16 essential attributes of a world-class bus system (such as 
coordinated timetables and simple area-wide fares) and found that deregulation 
– transfer from public bodies to private companies – is a major obstacle to 
achieving 13 of them.

Franchising is a step in the right direction – and performs better than 
deregulated systems like the one we have currently. But municipal operators can 
also address these issues, and in addition save us money. The report concludes 
that municipal operation would deliver greater financial gains than 
franchising. Putting a figure on it, the report suggests that public ownership 
of buses (outside London) would save us £506m a year – money that could be 
reinvested in better services.



Ultimately, clause 21 robs authorities of the chance to replicate the success 
stories seen in Nottingham, taking power away with one hand, while appearing to 
give it with another.

Matthew Bramall is a campaigner for We Own It <https://weownit.org.uk/>, an 
organisation calling for public services for people not profit.


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 