
As they watch a suicide bomber with explosives strapped to his chest walk 
through a London that feels on the brink of political collapse, some viewers 
may suspect that the new TV adaptation of Joseph Conrad’s novel,The Secret Agent
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-agent-9.html>, has been tweaked to 
maximise contemporary relevance.

Those elements, though, are in the original, making the BBC1 three-parter – 
withToby Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/14/tob-jones-always-look-on-the-bright-side>
 as Verloc, an anarchist who becomes involved in a plot to blow up Greenwich 
Observatory – the latest example of Conrad’s story becoming a prism through 
which modern political insecurities are viewed. It is a tactic that goes back 
to 1936, when Alfred Hitchcock filmed the story, under the titleSabotage 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0028212/>, as a reflection of the developing 
political pressures in Europe.

Ever since, the years that sees an adaptation of The Secret Agent is unlikely 
to have been a good one for democracy. The BBC put the book on the screen twice 
in quick succession, in 1967 and 1975, straddling an era of international 
instability, marked by the rise of sectarian violence in Northern Ireland, 
student riots in France and assassinations in the US. There had even been, in 
the early 70s, a period of actual anarchist terrorism in England, with bombings 
carried out by theAngry Brigade. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/24/the-angry-brigade-review-theatre-royal-plymouth-anarchist>

When the BBC again filmed the novel in 1992, with David Suchet as Verloc 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0417114/>, The Secret Agent again felt uncannily 
suited to a period of legislative turmoil and fear of terrorism: four years 
previouslyPan Am flight 103 had exploded over Lockerbie in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/dec/21/lockerbie-terrorism> in a bombing 
attributed to Libya, and the series aired during a spell in which governments 
were tumbling around the world, including those of Margaret Thatcher and the 
first President Bush, who had been undermined by a populist drive against the 
political establishment led by a billionaire political outsider, Ross Perot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fthe-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F774bf356902a3a287f7eb5a0b8cef53f9711d25c%2F0_0_4500_6733%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Secret%20Agent%3A%20%E2%80%8Ba%20timely%20BBC%20adaptation%20of%20Joseph%20Conrad's%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fthe-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Secret%20Agent%3A%20%E2%80%8Ba%20timely%20BBC%20adaptation%20of%20Joseph%20Conrad%27s%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fthe-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F774bf356902a3a287f7eb5a0b8cef53f9711d25c%2F0_0_4500_6733%2F4500.jpg>
 David Suchet as Verloc and Peter Capaldi as Vladimir in the 1992 BBC 
adaptation. Photograph: BBC 
The strong resonance of the novel in that epoch is shown by the fact that a 
movie version, written and directed by Christopher Hampton, followed in 1996, 
its release coming spookily soon after the apprehension by the FBI, ofTed 
Kaczynski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/07/unabomber-ted-kaczynski-brother-david-kaczynski-every-last-tie-book>
, an American domestic anarchist known as the “Unabomber”. A university 
professor, like the character inThe Secret Agent with the explosive coat, 
Kaczynski had used the pseudonym “Conrad”, and appears to have been an admirer 
of the novel.

Although no new screen version followed the 9/11 attacks, the book was 
regularly referenced in journalistic commentary on the atrocities. So, given 
this history, it is little surprise thatThe Secret Agent should turn up on 
British television in 2016, soon after terrorist attacks in France and Belgium, 
and in a summer when Donald Trump has become the most successful non-mainstream 
presidential candidate since Perot.

Conrad’s book still seems to be the fiction that best expresses western 
society’s concerns about terrorism and popular revolution. And, looking at the 
fictions on these subjects that have appeared in the subsequent 109 years, the 
story of Verloc has also influenced each intermittent wave of novels about 
terrorism, as writers responded to the threats from the IRA, Palestinian terror 
groups, al-Qaida and now Islamic State.

The fuse on this line of writing was lit in the first decade of the 20th 
century not only byThe Secret Agent but by another novel about anarchists that 
appeared one year later in 1908:The Man Who Was Thursday by GK Chesterton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/07/man-who-was-thursday-review>. 
Although Conrad’s Verloc inhabited an earlier London – the Greenwich bomb plot 
takes place in 1886, inspired by a real incident of that time – the books draw 
on the same subculture of political dissent. In Chesterton’s work, a squad of 
anti-anarchist police attempts to infiltrate the European Council of Anarchism, 
whose members maintain anonymity, in a strategy similar to the use of 
colour-coded aliases by the robbers in Tarantino’sReservoir Dogs, by each 
taking the name of a day of the week.

Another overlap between The Secret Agent and The Man Who Was Thursday is a 
contrast between the implications of the stories and the tone in which they are 
told, a distance signalled by subtitles. Conrad calls his novel “A Simple 
Tale”, and adopts a satirical and moralising attitude towards his characters: 
Verloc runs a Soho sex shop, while the anarchists with whom he consorts include 
one whose diet consists only of raw carrots. Categorised by Chesterton as “A 
Nightmare”,The Man Who Was Thursday develops into a farce of subterfuge, in 
which almost no one is who they claim to be or not to be. And, if Conrad saw in 
anarchism a chance to dramatise the worst aspects of human behaviour, 
Chesterton, an optimist and devout Roman Catholic believer, attempts a moral 
about the possibility of betterment.

For obvious historical reasons, the anarchist thriller soon enough gave way in 
Britain to the genre of war stories, first written by those who had served in 
the 1914-18 conflict, such as AP Herbert’sThe Secret Battle (1919), Ford Madox 
Ford’sParade’s End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/24/julian-barnes-parades-end-ford-madox-ford>
 (1924-28) andW Somerset Maugham’s Ashenden: The British Agent 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ashenden.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (1928). Veterans of the second world war subsequently reported back in another 
wave of conflict fiction, includingNicholas Monsarrat’s The Cruel Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/23/1000-novels-warfare> (1951) and 
two American works from the same year:From Here To Eternity by James Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/18/john-patterson-from-here-to-eternity>
 andHerman Wouk’s The Caine Mutiny 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/caine-mutiny.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
.

Naval war novels, such as Montsarrat’s and Wouk’s, are inevitably influenced 
by Conrad stories based on his career as a merchant seaman (Typhoon, Heart of 
Darkness), but The Secret Agent also strongly informs war literature.

When Alfred Hitchcock, in 1936, based a film on Maugham’s Ashenden, he gave it 
the Conradian titleSecret Agent, even though he was almost simultaneously 
engaged in the project to turnThe Secret Agent into the film that became 
Sabotage. But this confusion is illuminating, as there is a line of inheritance 
from anarchist to war literature, and, indeed, beyond that, to the next 
fictional growth area: espionage. The leaders in that field, Graham Greene and 
John le Carré, had recognisably read Conrad and Maugham.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fthe-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52852c8c8f07d736ccb486cb4e8a197c7b2f0608%2F0_0_3200_2126%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Secret%20Agent%3A%20%E2%80%8Ba%20timely%20BBC%20adaptation%20of%20Joseph%20Conrad's%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fthe-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Secret%20Agent%3A%20%E2%80%8Ba%20timely%20BBC%20adaptation%20of%20Joseph%20Conrad%27s%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fthe-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52852c8c8f07d736ccb486cb4e8a197c7b2f0608%2F0_0_3200_2126%2F3200.jpg>
 Bob Hoskins as Verloc in the 1996 film ofT he Secret Agent. Photograph: 
Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
Trails from The Secret Agent and espionage novels can then be traced into the 
next big burst of fiction about domestic terrorism following the outbreak of 
the Irish Troubles. The footprints of anarchist fiction can be found here too, 
as the Irish republican leader Michael Collins, a historical inspiration to the 
IRA, was a declared admirer ofThe Man Who Was Thursday, claiming to have 
learned from it that the best way of avoiding being hunted was not to seem to 
be hiding anything.

Troubles fiction began as early as 1973, when Jack Higgins (the pen name of 
Harry Patterson) publishedA Prayer for the Dying, in which the protagonist, 
Martin Fallon, is a former IRA killer trying to atone for his past. Higgins has 
also written a sequence of 21 novels sinceEye of the Storm 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/eye-of-the-storm.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (1992), featuring Sean Dillon, a former IRA hitman.

The most enduringly praised Troubles thriller, though, has been Gerald 
Seymour’sHarry’s Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/26/gerald-seymour-interview-thriller-writer>
 (1975), in which a British agent goes undercover to hunt the republican 
assassin of a British politician. Seymour had reported from Belfast for ITN and 
established the habit of fiction about Northern Irish terrorism initially being 
written by outsiders.

The American Paul Theroux <https://www.theguardian.com/books/paul-theroux> 
drew on his experience of living in London during the IRA bombing campaign for
The Family Arsenal (1976), based around a bombing cell in south London. Another 
literary immigrant, the Iranian-Rhodesian Doris Lessing, wroteThe Good Terrorist
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/good-terrorist.html> (1985), a novel that 
seems to hold deliberate echoes ofThe Secret Agent, as Alice, a middle-class 
communist, becomes involved with a cabal of London anarchists who, inspired by 
the IRA, transmute into terrorists. For understandable reasons of getting 
enough of the subject at home – and the genuine physical risk to publishers and 
writers who were perceived to be taking sides – Northern Irish writers have 
only fully tackled the topic in books written since the establishment of the 
peace process, by crime writers includingAdrian McKinty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adrian-mckinty>, Brian McGilloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/apr/22/mcgilloway-irish-crime-novels> 
andStuart Neville <http://www.stuartneville.com/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fthe-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb43c99ecc10cd01edfd8711df21d87b3f5bb757b%2F0_0_1773_1209%2F1773.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Secret%20Agent%3A%20%E2%80%8Ba%20timely%20BBC%20adaptation%20of%20Joseph%20Conrad's%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fthe-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Secret%20Agent%3A%20%E2%80%8Ba%20timely%20BBC%20adaptation%20of%20Joseph%20Conrad%27s%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fthe-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb43c99ecc10cd01edfd8711df21d87b3f5bb757b%2F0_0_1773_1209%2F1773.jpg>
Sabotage (1936), Hitchcock’s version of The Secret Agent. Photograph: 
Allstar/Granada 
The eruption of Catholic-Protestant violence in Northern Ireland was 
paralleled by increasing Israeli-Arab tension – from the six-day war of 1967 to 
the killing of Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics in 1972 and the Yom 
Kippur war of 1973 – and there is a porous border between the literatures of 
Irish and Middle Eastern terrorism. Seymour followedHarry’s Game with The Glory 
Boys 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/glory-boys.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (1976), in which an Arab terrorist teams up with an IRA assassin to attempt to 
kill an Israeli scientist who is visiting London.Thomas Harris, later to be 
fabled as the creator of Hannibal Lecter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/19/fiction.thomasharris>, has 
acknowledged that watching the Olympics massacre on television inspired him to 
write the thrillerBlack Sunday (1975), in which terrorists from the Palestinian 
Black September movement conspire to detonate a TV airship filled with 
explosives over the stadium hosting the American football Super Bowl.

Whereas Davidson’s and Harris’s books favour the Israeli perspective, a 
general realignment in western attitudes towards the Middle East was signalled 
by Le Carré’sThe Little Drummer Girl 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/little-drummer-girl.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (1983), in which, extending the moral ambiguity that the writer had brought to 
his cold war spy stories, a woman working as a double agent for Israeli and 
Palestinian security forces is destroyed by her conflict of loyalties.

The next swell of novels about bombers featured the Islamist extremism that 
began with al-Qaida and now continues via the various iterations of Isis. What 
is striking about this subgenre of terrorism fiction, though, is the extent to 
which it anticipated rather than retro-dramatised events. The concept of the 
suicide plane bomb had been a pivotal plotline inThe Better Angels, a 1979 
thriller by Charles McCarry, which also featured Ibn Awad, a radical Islamist 
warlord who seems a shivery premonition of Osama bin Laden. As McCarry is a 
former CIA agent, some aspects of his storytelling may have been informed by 
agency wargaming.
 The Northern Irish writer Stuart Neville, who has written about the Troubles. 
Photograph: Ulf Andersen/Getty Images 
Tom Clancy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tomclancy>, an author who had 
less formal but friendly links with the security establishment, also spookily 
previewed 9/11 inDebt of Honour 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/debt-of-honour.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (1994), in which a 747 is flown deliberately into the Capitol building, 
removing most of the United States government. (Read now, Harris’sBlack Sunday 
also feels prophetic in having imagined, more than a quarter of a century 
before it occurred, terrorist mass murder from the skies.)

Post-9/11, the threat coming from a state of mind rather than a single nation 
state became a common trope in novels, includingMcCarry’s Old Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/18/featuresreviews.guardianreview23>
 (2004), in which Ibn Awad reappears, although now seeming not the conception 
of Bin Laden but an inflection.

One of Bin Laden’s favoured weapons was the “clean skin” or “homegrown” 
terrorist, radicalised and turned against their own country. This concept is 
explored from very different national and literary angles inAt Risk 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/at-risk.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (2005), written by former MI5 bossStella Rimington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/15/stella-rimington-day-met-kgb>; 
John Updike <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnupdike>’s novel Terrorist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/05/shopping.fiction> (2006); and 
Chris Cleave’sIncendiary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/16/featuresreviews.guardianreview7> 
(2005), which, with grim serendipity, was published on the day of the 7/7 
attacks on the London transport system.

As state-of-mind bombings have graduated to the attempt to impose an Islamic 
state, mass attacks on cities have become a narrative commonplace in fiction: 
unlikely to sell in large quantities at transport hubs areAndy McNab’s Red 
Notice 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/red-notice.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (2012), in which 400 passengers are taken hostage in the Channel tunnel, and
Crisis, in which the UK capital is threatened with unparalleled massacre, by 
Frank Gardner <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/may/21/biography.features>
, the BBC’s security correspondent, who is one of the few victims of terrorism 
(shot and seriously injured by al-Qaida sympathisers in 2004) to have written 
in the genre.

The characters in these novels will hope that the terrorists they are up 
against prove to be as incompetent or eccentric as Conrad’s Verloc and the 
suicide-vested professor in the book that started the form.

• The Secret Agent <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07ltxsr> starts on 17 
July on BBC1 at 9pm.
 