
In a church hall in Newtownards, 10 miles from Belfast, the gentle chatter and 
clacking of crochet needles at the Wednesday afternoon friendship club is 
interrupted by the sound of music. Club regulars first fall silent and then 
quietly join in Father Martin O’Hagan’s rendition of How Great Thou Art as his 
rich tenor fills the room.


In other circumstances, the friendship club women might have paid good money 
to hear O’Hagan sing. But the parish priest is a well known figure around town, 
and anyone can walk into St Patrick’s church in Newtownards or Our Lady of the 
Visitation in neighbouring Comber most days to listen to a man who has 
performed for the pope, Prince Charles, the Irish president and audiences 
around the world.


Eight years after the Priests – Martin, his brother Eugene and David Delargy – 
smashed recordswith their debut album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/oct/12/popandrock1>, the trio’s new 
collection, Alleluia, is released on 7 October. The past five years have been 
largely spent celebrating mass, hearing confessions, praying with the sick and 
dying, baptising babies, nurturing the young and doing a million other things 
that make up a priest’s life, but in November they will be back on tour in the 
US. A film based on their lives, provisionally called Raising the Roof, is in 
pre-production in Hollywood.


Priests ready to make holy racket
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/apr/24/religion> 
The Priests became an instant success after signing with Sony in 2008 a few 
months after O’Hagan answered a phone call from an agent looking for a singing 
cleric. Their eponymous first album was released in more than 30 countries and
set a record <http://www.thepriests.org/biography.html> for the fastest-selling 
classical debut album. They collected gold and platinum discs across three 
continents.


“We didn’t expect that level of success at all,” says O’Hagan. “It developed 
over a short and intense period of time. We were absolutely flummoxed and 
delighted. It’s safe to say we were not your average boyband.”


The men – who have clocked up 84 years in the priesthood between them – 
insisted on a clause in their contract allowing them to juggle their parish 
commitments with their new celebrity status. The parishes always came first, 
they say, but it wasn’t easy to balance the growing demands of their lives.


“The first year we were faced with whole new experiences. We had to grapple 
with getting the balance right. We did three albums in three years,” says 
O’Hagan, acknowledging the risk of burnout.


“And the pressures are greater now than they’ve ever been. The numbers [of 
priests] are smaller, but the duties are as great. There are times when you 
think you should be pulling back.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-priests-return-singing-clerics-with-faith-power-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F236f145f6bf4cd483369b331b8deb09aaf150f47%2F55_78_3769_2261%2F3769.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Priests%3A%20return%20of%20singing%20clerics%20with%20faith%20in%20the%20power%20of%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-priests-return-singing-clerics-with-faith-power-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Priests%3A%20return%20of%20singing%20clerics%20with%20faith%20in%20the%20power%20of%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-priests-return-singing-clerics-with-faith-power-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F236f145f6bf4cd483369b331b8deb09aaf150f47%2F55_78_3769_2261%2F3769.jpg>
 (From left) Father Martin O’Hagan, Father David Delargy and Father Eugene 
O’Hagan at the Classical Brit Awards in 2010. Photograph: Mark Cuthbert/UK 
Press via Getty Images 
O’Hagan’s parish covers Newtownards and Comber, and his brother’s takes in 
Ballyclare and Ballygowan – small Catholic populations in overwhelmingly 
Protestant areas. In contrast, Delargy’s church, St Michael the Archangel, is 
in predominantly Catholic west Belfast.


In the 18 years since the Good Friday agreement, which ended 30 years of 
conflict between Catholic nationalists and Protestant unionists,Northern Ireland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> has been largely peaceful. 
But, say all three priests, sectarianism still creeps out from the shadows.


“When I came to Ballyclare in 2003, there were very few weekends when the 
church wasn’t stoned,” says Eugene O’Hagan. “Things have vastly improved, but 
you still see the last throes of the Troubles.”


Martin’s house has reinforced glass on its windows. “The house has always been 
a target. It’s died down a lot in the past few years, but there are still 
mavericks. There are still eggs and bottles thrown at night. Sectarianism is 
sometimes overt and sometimes very subtle. There’s a long way to go,” he says.


In Delargy’s overwhelmingly Catholic parish, there is also bigotry. “A lot of 
people find it hard to break free of deeply ingrained prejudices. People are 
much better at living together than in the past, but if you scratch the surface 
there are still very conflicted feelings.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-priests-return-singing-clerics-with-faith-power-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F414c63475590e30b750b7bc4c47aa9d8ea11ff43%2F0_182_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Priests%3A%20return%20of%20singing%20clerics%20with%20faith%20in%20the%20power%20of%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-priests-return-singing-clerics-with-faith-power-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Priests%3A%20return%20of%20singing%20clerics%20with%20faith%20in%20the%20power%20of%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fthe-priests-return-singing-clerics-with-faith-power-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F414c63475590e30b750b7bc4c47aa9d8ea11ff43%2F0_182_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A mural in west Belfast depicting the IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands. 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Dissident republicans are active in west Belfast, he says. “They’re still 
plotting and scheming, trying to create murder and mayhem, and recruiting among 
young people. They don’t have widespread support – people don’t want to go back 
to the bad old days – but some people also say the peace process hasn’t brought 
them what they wanted.”


The priests, all in their 50s, grew up through the Troubles. The O’Hagan boys 
lived in Derry – a “sombre, dark city then”, recalls Martin – at the time of
Bloody Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/30/bloody-sunday-anniversary-sparks-call-for-troubles-amnesty>
 when 13 civil rights protesters were shot dead by the British army. They met 
Delargy at school, and all three later studied in Rome as seminarians. They 
have sung together as a trio for four decades.


If a young person says he’s going to become a priest, people think ‘what’s 
wrong with you?’
Father David Delargy 
As well as the transformations wrought by conflict and peace in their 
communities, the Catholic church has changed since they were ordained in the 
1980s.


“It’s a different church now to the one I entered as a priest 30 years ago,” 
says Eugene. “There are not as many people, the church is not as central to 
people’s lives as it was for my parents’ generation. It’s a real challenge. The 
fish don’t jump into the boat.


“The [sexual] abuse scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/12/catholic-church-fights-clergy-child-sex-abuse-measures>
 has often eclipsed the church’s message and the damage wreaked on people’s 
lives has had a huge effect on church-going numbers.”

Attitudes towards joining the priesthood have changed, resulting in a dramatic 
fall in numbers, says Delargy. “I grew up in a generation where the practice of 
faith was very strong. It was a natural thing for a young man to want to serve 
God, and going into the priesthood was supported by families and communities.


“Now young people are growing up in families where faith is not taught or 
lived in the same way. They’re growing up in a culture which doesn’t support 
vocation. Attitudes to celibacy have changed – people now think it’s unhealthy. 
If a young person says he’s going to become a priest, people think ‘what’s 
wrong with you?’”


The church, he says, “has come to realise that ‘mission territory’ is where we 
live. You don’t have to get on a plane – this is where the work needs to be 
done. That creates a sense of urgency. There has been a wakeup call.”


At the Sacred Heart church in Ballyclare, seven women and two men, most over 
retirement age, turn up for midweek morning mass. Wearing traditional white 
vestments, Eugene celebrates the Eucharist – a performance with parallels to 
the concerts he and his confreres have given to audiences of up to 1,800. Both 
require a love of the theatrical.

Van Morrison – 10 of the best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/01/van-morrison-10-of-the-best>
There was inevitable debate among the three about what to include in their new 
album, which includes popular numbers within its broadly religious theme. The 
Beatles’ Eleanor Rigby – a song about loneliness and isolation, according to 
the sleeve notes – made the cut. Van Morrison’s Whenever God Shines His Light 
did not, to Eugene’s disappointment.

Despite their success, the priests have never considered permanently swapping 
their parishes for the glamour of celebrity. “You could escape and, yes, you 
look at other people’s lifestyles. But the parish comes first, we’re ingrained 
here,” says Martin.


Even with the extra workload, the men feel fortunate to have been able to 
combine their priestly vocations with their role as performers. “The bishop has 
never said, OK that’s enough, guys,” he adds. “Music reaches people, and 
crosses boundaries and frontiers. There is something healing about singing. 
It’s part of our ministry.”

 