
Shared ownership is being positioned by housing charity Shelter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/aug/29/shelter-calls-for-help-for-forgotten-families-of-first-time-buyers>
 and others as the future of home ownership for low- and middle-income 
households, and as a means to encourage investment in home building. However, 
shared ownership currently presents some significant legal flaws for the 
purchaser – not the least being that there is actually no 'shared ownership' at 
all.

As a solicitor who works in leasehold litigation, I am concerned that the 
significance of a case called Richardson v Midland Heart, from 2007, is not 
more widely known. Rebecca Richardson had purchased a 50% share of a property 
with housing association Midland Heart for £29,950 in 1995. The arrangement, a 
typical one, was that she paid rent on the other 50%. There was the usual 
staircasing option, by which Richardson could opt to pay more for a greater 
share, up to owning outright with 100%, but, again not uncommonly, she had not 
exercised this.

Unfortunately, Richardson got into arrears on the rent. Despite agreeing to 
allow the property to be sold, Midland Heart quickly brought possession 
proceedings underHousing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> Act 
1988. Midland Heart used a ground where if there are eight weeks of rent 
arrears when a notice is served and also at the date of the court hearing, the 
court must order possession, with no discretion to do otherwise.

The court found, reluctantly, that what Richardson had was an assured tenancy 
for 99 years (the length of the lease). She did not have a lease that could be 
protected, as it was not for the whole of the property. What is more, she had 
no right to the return of the £29,950 she had paid. The court made a possession 
order and Richardson lost the property.

In practice, this means that shared ownership is just a tenancy, with an 
expensive downpayment for an option to buy the whole property at a later date. 
The landlord or housing association remains the owner of the property up to the 
point of the 100% buyout and the tenant can be evicted for rent arrears 
regardless of how much of the property they supposedly own – and without being 
recompensed for that payment. A case this year suggested there may be a human 
rights claim for the return of that money, but this is untested.

Richardson paid for her 50% share up front, but if it were a mortgage the 
lender would almost certainly step in to pay off the rent arrears, adding the 
arrears and additional charges to the mortgage loan, to preserve its security 
and avoid the shared-ownership tenant being evicted. But the legal position 
remains the same.

There are other problems that, though not unique to shared ownership 
properties, occur more often with them. For example, frequently the housing 
association will itself only lease a number of flats in a block built by a 
developer, which it then sub-leases to people on a shared ownership basis. In 
this situation, the shared ownership leaseholder will often find that they have 
no way to enforce repairs to the building, as the housing association will have 
no responsibility for its condition. The shared ownership leaseholder may well 
face leaks, heating problems, or defective windows but be unable to make the 
landlord or freeholder carry out repairs, or be compensated, where a social 
tenant would at least be able to get compensation from their landlord.

These are major problems for the shared ownership model. The Richardson v 
Midland Heart problem will almost certainly need legislation to change. While 
shared ownership may well be the most promising route into home ownership for 
many, there are substantial risks for those taking that route.

Read more:
• Shared ownership flaws reveal void in young people's housing options 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/editors-blog/2013/sep/06/shared-ownership-home-ownership-young-people>
• Why is shared ownership not working for first-time buyers? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2014/feb/19/shared-ownership-first-time-buyers-property-ladder>
• Hannah Fearn: The problem with shared ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/editors-blog/2012/jul/06/shared-ownership-flexible-housing-market>

Giles Peaker is a partner in the housing and public law department at Anthony 
Gold Solicitors and editor of theNearly Legal Housing Law blog 
<http://nearlylegal.co.uk/blog/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the housing 
network <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for more news, analysis and 
comment direct to you
 