
Donald Trump says things that no other politician would dare, nor want, to 
say. His capacity to offend liberal America is an important part of his appeal. 
His sneering comments about Khizr and Ghazala Khan, the Muslim parents of a 
young soldier killed in Iraq by a suicide bomber in 2004, today earned hima 
blistering rebuke from Senator John McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/aug/01/donald-trump-muslim-american-soldier-hillary-clinton-election-live?page=with:block-579f5851e4b06a1d8acefc97#block-579f5851e4b06a1d8acefc97>
, himself a victim of the Trump invective. They have provoked another staunch 
Republican, Sally Bradshaw, who had been a senior adviser to the presidential 
candidate Jeb Bush, toleave the party 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/08/01/sally-bradshaw-senior-bush-confidant-leaves-the-gop/>
 and announce that she would support Hillary Clinton if there appeared to be 
any chance of a Trump victory. But other Republicans have resisted the Khans’ 
appeal to condemn their presidential candidate. That may be because they 
recognise that his capacity to say what most of Washington regard as unsayable 
reaches a part of the country that other candidates do not. The career of an 
earlier demagogue, Joseph McCarthy, was halted by one unforgettable question: 
“At long last, have you no sense of decency?” The more revealing question now 
is to ask what it is about the Trump shamelessness that makes it so attractive.

Mr Trump dramatises the rage of those who feel disenfranchised and he does it 
by breaking the taboos of political discourse. Every offensive remark he makes 
reveals a recognition that the shared values on which cultural taboos depend 
have been catastrophically eroded by joblessness and stagnant pay. Many of Mr 
Trump’s followers will not be shocked by what he says because they do not think 
that what seems to others a bizarre and unacceptable attack on rational 
political discourse violates the codes of honour and decency in the world that 
they are experiencing. He is the personification of the slogan “Are you 
thinking what we’re thinking?”, which backfiredso disastrously for the then 
Conservative leader, Michael Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/mar/08/election2005.politicalcolumnists>
, in Britain’s 2005 general election. Then, not enough voters were prepared to 
identify with the anti-immigration message that was part of the Tory campaign. 
Now, though, theBrexit referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
, like Mr Trump’s presidential campaign, has legitimised a different narrative, 
where the outrage of the respectable reinforces rather than undermines the 
message to those who feel excluded. It confirms that the messenger, whether 
it’s Nigel Farage or Donald Trump, is not part of an alien liberal elite but 
one of them. In a world dominated by respectable opinion, the vulgarities of Mr 
Trump only confirm that he’s on their side. He is indeed thinking what they are 
thinking.

This is a salutary experience for all those who thought irreversible norms had 
been established. When the Big Brother contestantJade Goody was pilloried 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/6687439.stm> for her racist comments 
on the show in 2007, it felt as if an important precedent had been set about 
the way people talked in public. It was clear from the angry and hostile 
reaction that popular opinion found her hostility to the Indian actor Shilpa 
Shetty unacceptable. So uniform was the public condemnation that it appeared 
that the degree of tolerance that it seemed to demonstrate could not be 
uninvented. Yet less than 10 years later, a democratic politician unveiled a
poster showing desperate refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 in flight from war in order to make an anti-migration argument that 
contributed to a vote in favour of leaving the EU.

At the same time, however, London elected a Muslim mayor, Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/sadiq-khan-elected-mayor-of-london-labour>
, andBristol a black mayor, Marvin Rees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/23/bristol-mayor-marvin-rees-racism-inequality>
; England’s team for Euro 2016 was its most diverse ever. For eight years, the 
US has had a black president. Brexit and the appeal of Donald Trump feed off a 
similar anger and fear, while in other parts of the two countries quite 
different norms prevail. These conflicting messages are not only an 
illustration of the geography of the sentiments of the disenfranchised. They 
are an important reminder that although the war for justice and equality is far 
from lost, every gain has to be defended, fiercely and intelligently.
 