
“Only use the dirty water to shower,” said Florence Mandible. “And don’t 
forget that ever since inflation hit 48% and the US dollar became next to 
worthless on the global currency markets, things are pretty tight around here.”

Her 12-year-old son, Willing, toyed with a .44 Colt that he had stolen from 
some Lat. Ever since the Mexicans took over the country and he was forced to 
speak Spanish at school, he had taken a keen interest in paramilitary 
survivalism, just like her brother Jarred who nobody ever mentioned. “Put that 
gun down and go and queue for some foodstuffs that will probably have gone off 
by the time you get home,” Florence said. She kind of missed the old days when 
the worst that seemed to happen was that a few bankers tried to fiddle the 
Libor rate.

In Washington, Avery Mandible was anxious that all of her patients were 
cancelling their therapy sessions because tax rates had gone up to 88%, 
interest rates had hit a new high of minus 23% and the only people left in work 
were those making money off the influx of Chinese tourists. She decided to call 
her sister on her FleX watch.

“Hi Florence,” she said. “I kinda just miss the stonage days of 2025 when the 
internet collapsed and no online financial transactions could be authorised. At 
least in those days a $50,000 bill still had some value.” “Me too, Avery,” 
Florence replied. “It sure is tough when US government borrowing has reached 
290% of GDP.”

“You shouldn’t worry too much,” said Avery. “My husband Lowell, the respected 
Georgetown economist, has modelled projections saying that even 385% is 
perfectly sustainable. Besides, we still have the backup of Grandpa Douglas’s 
millions. He’s now 95 and can’t live for ever.”

The Mandibles: A Family, 2029-2047 by Lionel Shriver – a vibrant vision of 
America in decline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/18/the-mandibles-a-family-2029-2047-by-lionel-shriver>
Both women’s FleX’s pinged. It was an alert from the US Treasury saying that 
everyone’s gold reserves were being nationalised and that even people’s teeth 
would be requisitioned by the army. “That means I am now also officially broke 
and can no longer care for my second wife, Luella, who is suffering from 
dementia,” said Grandpa Douglas. “So I will now have to go and live with my son 
Carter.”

“Why can’t you go and live with my sister, Enola?” Carter said. “At least she 
has some money in the alternative currency of bancors.” “In case you had 
forgotten,” Grandpa Douglas responded, anxious to use a word different to 
replied, “bancors are a proscribed currency, and Enola lives in France.”

“Well, you can’t live with me because now that the official annualised rate of 
inflation is now 215% I too am broke. We’ll all have to go and live with Lowell 
and Avery.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-mandibles-a-family-2029-2047-by-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F412250b0d0ca9461ca43bdafa1d0f38a28b5eec7%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Mandibles%3A%20A%20Family%2C%202029-2047%20by%20Lionel%20Shriver%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-mandibles-a-family-2029-2047-by-lionel-shriver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Mandibles%3A%20A%20Family%2C%202029-2047%20by%20Lionel%20Shriver%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fthe-mandibles-a-family-2029-2047-by-lionel-shriver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F412250b0d0ca9461ca43bdafa1d0f38a28b5eec7%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Novelist Lionel Shriver. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
“I’m afraid you can’t,” Lowell said grimly. “I’ve just been fired from my job, 
as unemployment has risen to 3,400%. We’re going to have to take our kids, 
Savannah, Goog and Bing, out of private schools and go and live with Florence 
in New York, where they will learn nothing with Lat kids.” “Guess what,” said 
Enola. “I’m fed up with nobody buying my novels in France so I am coming to 
live with Florence too.”

Grandpa Douglas, demented Luella, Carter, Lowell, Avery, Savannah, Goog, Bing, 
Enola, Willing and Florence all sat miserably in Florence’s tenement flat, 
searching for scraps of cloth with which to wipe their bottoms, while lamenting 
the fact that they were the victims of a strict novelistic determinism that 
only allowed them to talk at length about the economic apocalypse.

“I’ve got no money,” said Savannah. “I’m going to be a hooker.” “I’m going to 
steal stuff,” said Willing. “Does no one one have any redeeming qualities?” 
asked Bing. “No,” said Lionel.

Just then a group of people took over the flat and forced Grandpa Douglas, 
demented Luella etc to go and live in a tent in the park. Grandpa Douglas shot 
demented Luella and then himself. Lucky Grandpa and demented Luella.

2047: “I’m not enjoying living in a world where the US is a third-world state, 
where tax rates are 98% and every transaction is controlled by a treasury 
implant in my head,” said Willing, who had just killed someone who had killed 
several dozen other people. “Well, I’ve still got a bit of cash stashed away,” 
said Enola. “Why don’t we drive to the breakaway United States of Nevada and 
see if we can find Jarred?”

“To be honest, it’s not all it’s cracked up to be here either,” shrugged 
Jarred. Somehow, no one found that surprising.

Digested read, digested: The Unreadables.


 * John Crace will discuss his new Incomplete Shakespeare books with John 
Sutherland at aGuardian Live event 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/incomplete-shakespeare-with-john-crace-and-john-sutherland-24512237763>
 in London on Thursday 9 June.
 