
I start to appreciate the epic nature of our expedition when a group of young 
natives gather to watch. They stand in a huddle by the water’s edge, pointing 
and waving. Our guide, Greg Brookes, shouts at them. “Do you want to have a go 
at paddling?” But they run away. It’s as if they’ve never seen a canoe before.

The attack comes next day: a giant white warrior is sent to meet our boats and 
comes alongside, puffing out his chest, making unintelligible war cries and 
generally trying to provoke something. I turn my back and say, with the air of 
a man who has seen the world and knows a thing or two: “It’s all just macho 
posturing. He won’t attack.”
Coast to coast canoe route 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/travel_canoe_canal_web/giv-31114baoo0LuPBG0w/>
Seconds later there is a massive clatter and the swan is on the side of Greg’s 
canoe, wings battering the air, threatening to wrestle him into the water. A 
paddle waved in his face deters him and he retreats into the canal and sails 
off, head held high. We pull to the side, under a bridge that seems to mark the 
end of his territory, and breathe a sigh of relief.

I had not expected a simple canoe journey to become quite such a Homeric epic, 
but then the concept of crossing England from west coast to east by canoe is 
surprisingly new and, as yet, not fully tested.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500207136%2Fec604499-8d9c-4726-be14-3429b33b5d8a-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500207136%2Fec604499-8d9c-4726-be14-3429b33b5d8a-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Preparing to embark at Reedley marina 
Called the Desmond Family Canoe Trail – because controversial media mogul 
Richard Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/01/the-real-deal-autobiography-britains-most-controversial-media-mogul-richard-desmond-review>
 has donated £1.3m to the five-year project – it starts in Liverpool’s docks 
and finishes at the Humber estuary, via the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, several 
porterages around locks, a stretch of the Aire and Calder canal, plus a few 
miles of river Ouse, spanning the country in 150 miles. Not that we are doing 
the whole thing – I’ve cherrypicked a three-day section between Burnley and 
Bradford.

We start at Reedley marina <http://www.reedleymarina.co.uk/>, north of 
Burnely, and are soon paddling through the backyards of Nelson, a former mill 
town, which is where we encounter those young lads who seem bemused by canoes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442499902970%2F170e7b08-e278-4076-b38e-5f0e96c48d9c-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442499902970%2F170e7b08-e278-4076-b38e-5f0e96c48d9c-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Maddy and Greg Brookes drag their canoes from the waterside to the B&B 
Maddy, my 12-year-old daughter, is counting shopping trolleys as if they were 
water creatures: “There’s another one, Dad. I think it’s a female. Lovely 
plumage.”

We pass coots and moorhens nesting on piles of rubbish, gorgeous stonework 
bridges – all the ingenious craft of 18th-century navigational engineering laid 
out among the brambles – then the melancholy of empty mills and lost fortunes. 
This feels like archaeology, a fascinating canoe trip down the ages, into the 
gloom of the industrial revolution.

We emerge from under the M65 into rolling pastoral land and tie up at Blakey 
Hall Farm B&B <http://blakeyhallfarm.co.uk/> for a night, a stop we have great 
difficulty dragging ourselves away from next morning, so amazing is its 
breakfast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500070248%2F6e8509ab-cf46-4e99-8602-febc24470bbd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500070248%2F6e8509ab-cf46-4e99-8602-febc24470bbd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Friendly swans at Skipton 
Next day we have to skip a bit because access through the Foulridge tunnel has 
not yet been agreed. That’s the kind of work Greg is doing, slowly pulling all 
the elements together: maps, access and a network of helpers. The first of 10 
hubs, centres for events and information, opened in Bootle in July.

Having driven around the tunnel, we stop at Café Cargo 
<http://cafecargo.co.uk/> in Foulridge village. Its owner, Thomas Randall, is a 
mine of information on the canal – he’s lived with it all his life. “For most 
of its history the canal people never moved far. Some boats would just do a few 
miles up and down.”

As he talks a lost world emerges, a world of fustian and flax, of female 
leggers, who would lie on narrowboat roofs and propel the boats through the 
tunnel using their feet, of the ancient division between Yorkshire wool and 
Lancashire cotton. By this wriggling waterway the heart of northern England was 
intricately woven into a global economy that encompassed the slave plantations 
of South Carolina and the lawless goldfields of Ballarat in Australia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500331737%2F623e5dbc-be3e-4add-a534-44d8d50731f9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500331737%2F623e5dbc-be3e-4add-a534-44d8d50731f9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Maddy paddling near Bingley Five-Rise locks 
Absorbed by all the history, we are a bit late leaving, but are soon paddling 
past Barnoldswick – facing down that swan – and reaching theGreenberfield locks 
<http://www.towpathtreks.co.uk/llc/foulridge_greenberfield.html>. As canoes are 
not allowed in locks, Greg has devised an ingenious little canoe trolley to 
save us the hard work of portering our boats through this section, which has 
lovely long panoramas of moor and dale, punctuated by soft green tunnels of 
vegetation where kingfishers spear through the air.

Crossing into North Yorkshire, we stop for the night in Skipton, then resume. 
The wind is behind us and Maddy rigs up a sail. We are soon powering along, 
passing Silsden and reaching our final destination:Bingley Five-Rise locks 
<http://www.penninewaterways.co.uk/ll/bingleyfiverise.htm>, a spectacular piece 
of hydraulic engineering. When it opened in 1774, a crowd of 30,000 turned out 
to see what was one of the wonders of the modern world: a series of five locks 
that lifted boats through nearly 60 feet. Standing at the top, you have the 
sensation that the boats are climbing a cliff.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500446819%2F2583997f-195c-44ce-8513-79a07a07f3be-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20first%20coast-to-coast%20canoe%20route&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcanoeing-yorkshire-lancashire-liverpool-england-canal-river%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442500446819%2F2583997f-195c-44ce-8513-79a07a07f3be-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Bingley Five RIse locks 
If we hadn’t been calling a halt here, we would have had to porter our canoes 
down this mountain. Standing on the top lock gate, watching the lock-keeper at 
work, I imagine the canoes that will be hauled up and down here. For Greg, the 
objective is to revitalise the canal and the lives of some of the young people 
who live along its route, like those lads in Nelson. He wants to get them all 
paddling.

But my dreams are much bigger. Perhaps there might be a trans-England canoe 
race, teams competing for glory, like theIditarod sled race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/mar/18/iditarod-2015-the-toughest-dog-sled-race-on-earth-in-pictures>
 in Alaska or a Tour of Britain for paddlers. What a spectacle as they struggle 
up the Five-Rise, cheered on by Alpine horns and cow bells. Mind you, they’d 
also have to face the beast of Barnoldswick, the dreaded monster swan. He’s out 
there … waiting.

• Accommodation was provided by Blakey Hall Farm (doubles from £85 B&B, 
blakeyhallfarm.co.uk <http://blakeyhallfarm.co.uk/>). The Canal & River Trust 
<https://canalrivertrust.org.uk/#> website provides extensive advice about 
using the waterways. A licence is required, available either from the trust, or 
through membership ofBritish Canoeing <http://www.britishcanoeing.org.uk/>. The 
trust wants to hear from youth organisations, businesses, local authorities, 
charities, uniformed groups, canoe clubs, paddlers, schools and colleges that 
may be able to help. Seecanalrivertrust.org.uk/cc 
<https://canalrivertrust.org.uk/news-and-views/features/help-us-build-a-coast-to-coast-canoe-trail>
 for more information

 