
In Iris Murdoch’s novel The Black Prince, a popular writer named Arnold Baffin 
defends his regular production of books he knows are not as good as he’d like 
them to be: “Every book is the wreck of a perfect idea. The years pass and one 
has only one life. If one has a thing at all one must do it and keep on and on 
and on trying to do it better.” Character here presumably speaks for author, 
although one also suspects that poor silly Baffin’s platonic conception of a 
perfect idea is probably less perfect than he thinks. It’s a good bet thatIris 
Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/books/irismurdoch>’s perfect ideas were 
better.

A published philosopher whose first book was the first book in English on 
Jean-Paul Sartre <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jeanpaulsartre>, Murdoch 
wrote novels of ideas about love, as well as the occasional love letter to 
ideas. Obsession is everywhere in her fictional landscape, but characters are 
as likely to be obsessed with art as with sex. Adulteration is the game: 
nothing remains pure, certainly not fidelity to other people, or to social 
conventions, even the most deeply held. Her characters are most faithful to 
their conceptions of themselves, which are almost never shared by those around 
them. In her essay “The Sublime and the Beautiful Revisited”, Murdoch wrote 
that the most important thing for a novel to reveal, “not necessarily the only 
thing, but incomparably the most important thing, is that other people exist”. 
It was a point she made repeatedly outside her fiction: “In the moral life the 
enemy is the fat relentless ego,” as she wrote in “On ‘God’ and ‘Good’”.

Iris Murdoch is ‘promiscuous’ while Ted Hughes is ‘nomadic’. Why the double 
standards?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/27/iris-murdoch-letters-sexism> 
Although Murdoch consistently denied that her fiction explored her 
philosophical preoccupations, the project of forcing flawed protagonists to see 
beyond the blinkers of their own egotism defines most if not all of her 26 
published novels, among which two of the best areA Severed Head 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/severed-head.html> (1961) and The Sea, the Sea
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378706/> (1978). 
Both are narrated by self-regarding middle-class men with aspirations to 
aesthetic mastery. Fastidious and complacent, less wise and less kind than they 
like to think, they find their lives thrown into turmoil by their inability to 
recognise the agency, and desires, of those around them. These desires are 
always in part, but never exclusively, sexual: they are also a will to power. 
“Love is the extremely difficult realisation that something other than oneself 
is real,” Murdoch declared in “The Sublime and the Good”. “Love, and so art and 
morals, is the discovery of reality.”

Truth is not the same thing as realism, Murdoch tells us again and again: 
“People lie so, even we old men do,” as the narrator’s cousin tries to tell him 
inThe Sea, the Sea. “Though in a way, if there is art enough it doesn’t matter, 
since there is another kind of truth in the art.”

Murdoch’s novels are not merely cerebral exercises in ideas about moral 
philosophy, ethics and aesthetics, although those ideas shape her fiction. They 
are also shot through with the dark energies of occult forces, variously 
figured as Eros, the id, the unconscious, the repressed, the monstrous, the 
supernatural, the libidinous: all that the conscious mind cannot comprehend 
stalks her hapless protagonists, as their precarious fantasies of control are 
exposed for the delusions they are. Murdoch’s fictional experiments, as 
admirers such asAS Byatt <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/asbyatt> have 
written, fuse realism with the mystical, producing a very English magical 
realism at the point where 19th-century realism meets myth and fable. For 
Murdoch, artistic form was a temptation and compensation, a remedy for the 
contingent messiness of life, but also a consolatory falsification. She wrote 
that the novel was caught between the “journalistic” and the “crystalline”, the 
loose baggy monster that Henry James saw in the 19th-century novel, and 
modernist experiments in controlled, limited artifice. What feels to the 
characters like the forces of contingency battering away at them is just as 
likely to be their author’s implacable design, creating ruthless comedies of 
manners, and various manners of comedy. Around her intricate plotting orbit 
satires of art and morality, accountability and guilt, ethics and erotics.

Murdoch has been compared to James more than once in her interest in the moral 
consequences of relationships, of romance and society. Her sense of social and 
psychological satire owes much to his, as when her protagonist inThe Sea, the 
Sea chooses The Wings of the Dove 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wings-of-the-dove-2.html> to read, “another 
story of death and moral smash-up”. But James’s careful social realism is quite 
alien to Murdoch’s sense of the ludicrous in her plotting, the sheer pleasure 
she takes in her own designs, while her willingness to tell stories from the 
viewpoint of her protagonists’ immoral casuistries makes them like readingThe 
Portrait of a Lady 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377495/> from the 
perspective of Gilbert Osmond.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9NUbiDJiglA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9NUbiDJiglA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9NUbiDJiglA&media=>
 The official trailer for Richard Eyre’s film, Iris (2001) 
One such figure is the appalling Charles Arrowby, the complacent centre of The 
Sea, the Sea, which won the Booker prize in 1978. A failed playwright and 
actor, the tyrannically selfish Charles only found success in the theatre as a 
director, when he could exert his will over those around him (indeed he 
announces early on that any director who isn’t dictatorial isn’t doing his 
job). Charles fancies himself a Prospero, an old sorcerer abjuring a life of 
power and magic, but Murdoch gradually reveals that his most successful tricks 
were practised on himself. Charles has retired to a house by the sea, where he 
intends to write his memoirs. Insisting upon his need for solitude, he is irked 
when no letters come from his friends, and decides with characteristic 
high-handedness to summon a former lover, Lizzie, who once played Ariel to his 
Prospero, to keep house for him. He treats women as useful labour-saving 
devices, explaining, for instance, that he never learned to drive as long as he 
had girlfriends around: “Why keep bitches and bark yourself?” He confesses that 
he has been accused in the press of being a “power-crazed monster”, a charge of 
which he sounds slightly proud. Like the narrator ofA Severed Head, Charles is 
convinced of his own tenderheartedness, but Murdoch carefully shows the rage, 
misogyny and jealousy that fuel his self-absorption.

One by one, characters from Charles’s past intrude on his present, 
demonstrating a persistent sense of autonomy and agency that he finds deeply 
irritating. They all inform Charles at various times of precisely what his 
problem is, but his inability to recognise their accuracy is symptomatic of his 
failure: “You don’t respect people as people,” Lizzie bluntly informs him early 
on, “you don’t see them, you’re not really a teacher, you’re a sort of 
rapacious magician.” Once Charles discovers that his long-lost love Hartley, 
with whom he has remained obsessed for the 40 years since she left him (he 
admits with a pride some would consider misplaced), lives with her husband just 
up the road, he is overwhelmed by the compulsion to reverse the past. He 
becomes a kind of dementedJay Gatsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/08/100-best-novels-great-gatsby-scott-fitzgerlad-robert-mccrum>
, determined to undo the choices of the woman he is certain must still love 
him, all evidence to the contrary notwithstanding. What he calls loyalty, 
others would call mania – not to mention stalking, breaking and entering, and 
even kidnapping: when Hartley resists his efforts at rescuing her, Charles 
simply locks her up.

Murdoch has shared the fate of Plath and Woolf: the drama of her life contends 
in the public imagination with her work

During her captivity Hartley reasonably observes that Charles’s professed 
adoration for her is actually just rage that she left him: what he has been 
nursing is not devotion, but a grudge. “It’s resentment really,” she points 
out, “otherwise you wouldn’t be so unkind.” His response is to tell her that 
she has forced him into “a position where I have to play the bully, which is 
the role I detest most of all”. Charles may be the biggest bully in the 
20th-century English novel. When he finally realises he shouldn’t have 
kidnapped Hartley, it is only to conclude that his mistake was in locking her 
up: it was a strategic error, not a moral transgression. Charles’s solipsism is 
universalising, embracing all before it: “What we talked about I will now 
recount, since some of it is relevant to my situation,” he explains at one 
point, before adding: “Indeed, now I come to think of it, nearly everything in 
the world is relevant to my situation.”

The question Murdoch leaves the reader with is whether Charles ever undergoes 
whatThe Tempest calls a sea change, and finds redemption. Charles believes he 
does, and some critics have followed suit: but he has rarely been right about 
himself before. And, tellingly, his “memoir” has become a novel: “So I am 
writing my life, after all, as a novel! Why not? It was a matter of finding a 
form, and somehow history, my history, has found the form for me.” Perhaps 
that’s because everything Charles thought he knew about his world was always 
his own fiction. He has taken refuge in the fantasy of control that is magical 
thinking: otherwise known as fiction, making people up. As his cousin James 
wisely remarks: “We cannot just walk into the cavern and look around. Most of 
what we think we know about our minds is pseudo-knowledge.” And at the edge of 
the known world, there be monsters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Firis-murdoch-the-sea-the-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F318bd6a1ed4ff480a356146e1a9576605c692a30%2F0_37_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Sea%2C%20the%20Sea%20%E2%80%93%20Sarah%20Churchwell%20on%20the%20making%20of%20a%20monster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Firis-murdoch-the-sea-the-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Sea%2C%20the%20Sea%20%E2%80%93%20Sarah%20Churchwell%20on%20the%20making%20of%20a%20monster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Firis-murdoch-the-sea-the-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F318bd6a1ed4ff480a356146e1a9576605c692a30%2F0_37_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
 Murdoch with her husband, John Bayley, in 1997. Photograph: Rob Judges/Rex 
As a cultural figure, Murdoch has shared something of the posthumous fate of 
writers such asSylvia Plath <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sylviaplath> and 
Virginia Woolf <https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf>: the drama of 
her life contends in the public imagination with her own work. Memoirs by her 
husband,John Bayley <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/22/john-bayley>
, and Richard Eyre’s filmIris, in particular, defined her life around the poles 
of her defiant insistence on following her sexual desires where they took her, 
and the later years in which her great mind was shattered byAlzheimer’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alzheimers>. The cerebral image of 
philosopher-author is first subverted by the erotic exhaustiveness of her life, 
before the final, tragic twist of the assault by dementia, destroying her at 
the very source of her power. There is something mythical about such a fate, 
the terrible black poetry of it, which might almost belong in one of her novels.

But her art teaches us to continue to recognise her selfhood, the mystery and 
irreducibility of it, and to see morality in such an effort. All of her novels 
explore the contest between love and art as conduits to truth, and the ways in 
which contingency contends against form. Does art redeem? Does love? Or do we 
keep confusing our misunderstandings with metaphysics? Contingency is 
frightening, as all Murdoch’s characters know, capricious, unpredictable; but 
it is in the hazards of the fortuitous that life reveals itself. Love is also 
contingent, unpredictable, hazardous. Good art, Murdoch also said, is “the 
highest wisest voice of morality, it’s something spiritual – without good art a 
society dies. It’s like religion really – it’s our best speech and our best 
understanding – it’s a proof of the greatness and goodness which is in us.” 
Although Murdoch parses the grammar and traces the limits of love, she never 
stops believing in its moral force, or the spiritual potential of art. Art is 
impossible, so is love. And the only possible moral choice is to continue 
trying to achieve both, knowing that they are impossible.

• The Sea, the Sea & A Severed Head by Iris Murdoch has been reissued as an 
Everyman’s Library Contemporary Classic. To order a copy for £11.99, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378706/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 