
With Birthday Letters (No 4) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/22/100-best-nonfiction-books-birthday-letters-ted-hughes-sylvia-plath>
, this series has already identified the radioactivity buried within the work 
of Ted Hughes and Sylvia Plath, and recognised their place in the canon. With
Ariel, Plath’s second volume of poems, we approach the catalyst for 
20th-century poetry’s thermonuclear explosion.

First, the terrible circumstances surrounding the first appearance of Ariel 
are essential to any reading of Plath’s work. In the early years of her 
marriage toTed Hughes <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tedhughes>, Plath had 
been the junior partner. She was known as the author ofThe Colossus: and Other 
Poems(1960), a well-received first collection, described by the Guardian as an 
“outstanding technical accomplishment”, but not yet indicating the 
extraordinary power locked within Plath’s literary psyche.

The key to Plath’s final years, on top of the disintegration of her marriage 
to Hughes, lies in her lifelong fascination with her own death. As she 
expresses it in Ariel, her title poem, “I am the arrow… that flies. Suicidal, 
at one with the drive. Into the red eye...” Everything she wrote now was 
shadowed by this obsession.

Between 1961 and ’62, working fast and urgently, she completed her 
autobiographical novel,The Bell Jar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/04/100-best-novels-no-85-the-bell-jar-sylvia-plath>
, writing to her mother that what she had done “is to throw together events 
from my own life, fictionalising to add colour – I think it will show how 
isolated a person feels when he is suffering a breakdown… I’ve tried to picture 
my world and the people in it as seen through the distorting lens of a bell 
jar.”

The Bell Jar was released by William Heinemann (publisher of The Colossus) in 
London on 14 January 1963 under the pseudonym Victoria Lucas. This was a 
decision inspired by Plath’s desire to spare the feelings of her mother and a 
number of real-life characters in the novel. Plath’s first novel appeared in 
the midst of the most bitter English winter of the century, and aroused 
virtually no comment.

Meanwhile, Plath had begun to put together the manuscript that became the 
framework forAriel in early 1962. Restlessly focusing her poetic intention, she 
had changed its title from The Rival to A Birthday Present to Daddy to The 
Rabbit Catcher and finally to Ariel and Other Poems. She was now separated from 
Ted Hughes, whose affair with Assia Wevill had precipitated their break-up, and 
living alone with her two small children, Nick and Frieda, near Primrose Hill, 
London, in a house, 23 Fitzroy Road, once occupied by W B Yeats. By November 
1962, she was done.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Farielsylvia-plath-100-best-nonfiction-books-robert-mccrum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F648c45ebef88f2edc98ae402fdb14ca82f76b59b%2F0_462_1366_1706%2F1366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20100%20best%20nonfiction%20books%3A%20No%2017%20%E2%80%93%20Ariel%20by%20Sylvia%20Plath%20(1965)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Farielsylvia-plath-100-best-nonfiction-books-robert-mccrum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20100%20best%20nonfiction%20books%3A%20No%2017%20%E2%80%93%20Ariel%20by%20Sylvia%20Plath%20%281965%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Farielsylvia-plath-100-best-nonfiction-books-robert-mccrum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F648c45ebef88f2edc98ae402fdb14ca82f76b59b%2F0_462_1366_1706%2F1366.jpg>
 Plath and Hughes on their honeymoon in Paris. Photograph: Alamy 
Then, in the early morning hours of her last few weeks, she wrote those poems 
that, as she herself predicted, would “make my name”. All the poems written 
during the autumn of 1962, and into the new year, had been inspired by the 
intense solitude of her situation, and many of the final poems inAriel are 
attributable to her predicament as a young single mother, but also to her 
clinical depression and the incipient breakdown that culminated in her suicide 
in the early morning of 11 February 1963. (Al Alvarez’s account of this tragedy 
in his study of suicide,The Savage God 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/318839/>, remains the 
indispensable portrait of this psychodrama.)

The poignant circumstances of Plath’s death, as they became known, intensified 
the Anglo-American literary interest in the poet and her work. In 1965,The Bell 
Jarwas republished under her own name and quickly recognised as a dark classic 
of contemporary feminism. But it was the publication ofAriel in the same year 
(1966 in the US) that set the seal on her posthumous fame and reputation. Here 
was a collection of strange, disturbing, and confessional poems whose wild and 
exhilarating ferocity exerted a remarkable grip on the imagination of a new 
generation.

Robert Lowell, in his preface to the first edition of Ariel, describes these 
as poems that are “playing Russian roulette with six cartridges in the 
cylinder”. He was acknowledging what countless subsequent readers would 
discover for themselves: thatAriel is the volume on which Plath’s reputation as 
one of the most original, daring and gifted poets of the last century rests.

The manuscript Plath had left behind on her death was titled Ariel and Other 
Poems. But that manuscript would not appear for more than 40 years. Instead, a 
rather different book called simplyAriel (published by Faber & Faber) reached 
bookshops in the UK in 1965 and sold a phenomenal 15,000 copies in 10 months. 
In the US edition (varying slightly from the UK edition), 12 of Plath’s chosen 
poems were cut, 15 new ones added in their place; and several other poems moved 
from their original order.

Ted Hughes – of whom, towards the end of her life, she had written “I hate and 
despise him so I can hardly speak” – had made the changes, inviting many 
searching and explosive questions about his apparent conflict of interest as 
Plath’s executor and also the subject of her poetry. A generation would pass 
before an enraged feminist critique softened into a belated recognition that 
Hughes had fulfilled an almost impossible task with remarkable sensitivity and 
understanding. After all, the manuscript left behind at her death was still a 
work in progress.
 Plath’s novel The Bell Jar was originally published under a pseudonym. 
Among these groundbreaking, and often difficult, poems are numbered several 
classics: Lady Lazarus, Ariel, The Moon and the Yew Tree, Daddy and Stings. 
Plath’s fierce interrogation of herself and her feelings, and her unflinching 
honesty, came as a shocking revelation to poetry readers in the mid-1960s. 
Eventually, theAriel of 1965, edited by Ted Hughes, was complemented in 2004 by 
a new edition, masterminded by Frieda Hughes, Plath’s faithful daughter, which 
for the first time restored the selection and arrangement of the poems as her 
mother had left them.

In addition, finally, there is Ted Hughes’s own response (in Birthday Letters) 
to his dead wife’s phoenix-like resurgence. One of the most disturbing poems 
here is Suttee, his record of Plath’s emergence as a poet, in which Hughes 
casts himself as a midwife delivering an “explosion / Of screams” and before 
being “engulfed / In a flood, a dam-burst thunder / Of a new myth”, a birth 
that “sucked the oxygen out of both of us”.

Many of the poems in Birthday Letters address the conundrum of Plath’s other 
self. Hughes had already rehearsed this line of thought in his 1982 foreword to 
the first edition of Plath’s journals, claiming that, although he had “spent 
every day with her for six years, and was rarely separated from her for more 
than two or three hours at a time”, he had never seen “her show her real self 
to anybody – except, perhaps, in the last three months of her life”.

Despite the unreconciled dialogue between husband and wife, in many 
conflicting registers,Ariel survives the obsessive extra-literary attention 
directed towards Plath and Hughes in the more than 50 years since Plath’s 
suicide. For many readers, it is likely to remain one of the great volumes in 
the Anglo-American canon.

A signature sentence


“Dying

Is an art, like everything else,

I do it exceptionally well.”

From Lady Lazarus, Ariel

Three to compare

A Alvarez: The Savage God (1974)

Sylvia Plath: Letters Home: Correspondence 1950-63 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Letters-Home-Correspondence-Sylvia-Plath-ebook/dp/B004N3CBFW/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1463054578&sr=1-1&keywords=letters+home>
(ed Aurelia Plath) (1975)

Sylvia Plath: The Unabridged Journals 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/journals-of-sylvia-plath-2.html> (ed Karen V 
Kukil) (2000)

Ariel by Sylvia Plath is published in a Faber Modern Classics edition (£10.39).
Click here to buy it for £8.79 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ariel-3.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 