
A royal blue Aquascutum suit with shoulder pads and matching blouse which 
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> wore 
as she cast her vote in the 1987 election is to be donated to the V&A, one of 
six ensembles and a hat joining the national collection.

The museum announced on Friday that Thatcher’s son and daughter, Mark and 
Carol, had donated clothes worn by the late former prime minister.


The donation follows a row last year when the museum was accused of turning 
down an offer of Thatcher’s clothes. When the story broke it firstconfirmed  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/03/va-rejects-offer-to-showcase-margaret-thatchers-clothing>
rejecting some outfits, many of which were subsequently sold at a Christie’s 
auction.

That provoked an outcry, with Tory ministers and newspapers furious. The 
museum then appeared to change its stance, saying there had been no formal 
offer to ever reject.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatchers-outfits-to-join-va-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6658c12b3ea85d1e80d485f26b8aeca3e1704e0%2F0_813_4769_2861%2F4769.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20flowers%20and%20the%20power%3A%20Thatcher's%20outfits%20join%20V%26A%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatchers-outfits-to-join-va-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20flowers%20and%20the%20power%3A%20Thatcher%27s%20outfits%20join%20V%26A%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatchers-outfits-to-join-va-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6658c12b3ea85d1e80d485f26b8aeca3e1704e0%2F0_813_4769_2861%2F4769.jpg>
 Margaret Thatcher with her husband, Denis, casting their votes in 1987. 
Photograph: Steve Back/ANL/Rex/Shutterstock 
The museum’s chairman, Nicholas Coleridge 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-34734734>, told the BBC there had 
been “no letter, no meeting, no judgment ... no overture of any kind... and no 
turning down of her clothes at all”. He said the museum was open to acquiring 
them.

One year later, that is now happening. Claire Wilcox, the V&A’s senior curator 
of fashion, said the gift constituted “a record of the working wardrobe of one 
of the most influential and powerful women of the 20th century, and will form 
an important addition to the museum’s fashion collection”.

She added: “Baroness Thatcher was an internationally recognised political 
figure who used her wardrobe as a strategic tool to project power and inspire 
confidence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatchers-outfits-to-join-va-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb77a81cdd3c25b104f20ae9ae58b7e7a26344668%2F0_116_1344_806%2F1344.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20flowers%20and%20the%20power%3A%20Thatcher's%20outfits%20join%20V%26A%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatchers-outfits-to-join-va-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20flowers%20and%20the%20power%3A%20Thatcher%27s%20outfits%20join%20V%26A%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatchers-outfits-to-join-va-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb77a81cdd3c25b104f20ae9ae58b7e7a26344668%2F0_116_1344_806%2F1344.jpg>
 Thatcher at Denis’s funeral. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
“She was notable for supporting the British fashion industry, and patronised 
many of the leading designers of the day. Baroness Thatcher learnt to dress for 
the camera whilst in office, and interestingly, amended her wardrobe after the 
House of Commons became televised in November 1989.”

Thatcher was an early and enthusiastic adopter of power dressing, recalling in 
her 1993 memoir: “I took a close interest in clothes, as most women do, but it 
was also extremely important that the impression I gave was right for the 
political occasion.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatchers-outfits-to-join-va-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0018d09fd3e9c52be032f90855439b96f9dbc20%2F0_0_3600_5583%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20flowers%20and%20the%20power%3A%20Thatcher's%20outfits%20join%20V%26A%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatchers-outfits-to-join-va-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20flowers%20and%20the%20power%3A%20Thatcher%27s%20outfits%20join%20V%26A%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatchers-outfits-to-join-va-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0018d09fd3e9c52be032f90855439b96f9dbc20%2F0_0_3600_5583%2F3600.jpg>
 Thatcher at the lord mayor’s banquet in 1988. Photograph: Peter 
Brooker/Rex/Shutterstock 
A selection of the donated clothes, which will inevitably prompt mixed 
feelings and memories among visitors, will go on public display in the museum’s 
fashion gallery in December.

The most spectacular ensemble being donated is an Aquascutum evening suit of 
pink brocade with floor-length skirt and a sleeveless, iridescent silk opera 
cape with sweeping train. It was made for Thatcher’s appearance at the lord 
mayor’s banquet in 1988 at London’s Guildhall.

Other suits include a caramel silk crepe day dress, with a delicate floral 
print, by Daphne Scrimgeour, Thatcher’s personal dressmaker, which she wore at 
the Commonwealth heads of government meeting in New Delhi in 1983.

The hat being donated is a striking wide-brimmed black silk hat with feathers 
and velvet-flecked tulle, designed by Deida Acero, which Thatcher wore at the 
funerals of her husband, Denis, in 2003 and Ronald Reagan in 2004.

Tim Reeve, the deputy director of the V&A, said he was delighted the outfits 
had been given and would form part of the national collection.

“These carefully selected pieces tell an important story about Margaret 
Thatcher as a person as well as reflecting a significant period in British 
political history in the late 20th century. The V&A is very grateful to the 
family of Baroness Thatcher for their kind donation.”
 