
It can probably be assumed that most leave voters gave little thought to the 
consequences of Brexit for Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/10/the-guardian-view-on-brexit-and-ireland-another-closure-of-the-mind>
. Had they done so, they might have thought twice about what they were setting 
in train; for those consequences are wide ranging and potentially very serious. 
Of the many historic irresponsibilities that led to the Brexit vote, the 
failure to consider the Irish dimension is one of the most shameful and 
consequential. It reflects particularly badly on the predominantly English 
voters who madethat profoundly wrong choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/northern-irish-peace-sacrificed-english-nationalism>
.

Voters in Northern Ireland were, of course, different. They rightly thought 
about the consequences for the two parts of Ireland a lot. This is one reason 
whyNorthern Ireland voted 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-36614443> by 56% to 44% for the 
UK to remain in Europe. Nevertheless, just as in the case of Scotland, this 
significant part of the UK is being forced out of the EU against the wishes of 
the majority of its people. But the UK’s vote does not just override the north. 
It is also a unforgivably hostile gesture to this country’s most intimate and 
immediate neighbours, the Irish republic and its people.

The UK-Irish relationship is unique in many ways, including the impact of 
Brexit. Ireland is the only EU state with which the UK has a land border. The 
histories, cultures and economies of Britain and Ireland are likewise locked 
together in ways that do not apply in any other case. In particular, the needs 
ofNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> run through 
the state-to-state and people-to-people relationship in a manner and to a 
degree that has no equivalent in the rest of the EU. Cooperation between the UK 
and Ireland, partly based on EU membership, has been a cornerstone of the peace 
process. Many in Ireland are justifiably aghast at what Brexit may entail and 
feel badly let down, or worse, by Britain.

This week, the House of Lords EU committee and its six sub-committees are 
publishingdaily reports 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/eu-select-committee-/news-parliament-2015/brexit-co-ordinated-inquiries-publication-week/>
 designed to underscore the high seriousness of issues raised by Brexit. 
Today’s first report of the six is about the Brexit challenge for Ireland. This 
is a good and deliberate piece of symbolism – British insularity too often 
takes a special toll in Ireland. But it is also more than that.

Brexit raises major questions about every aspect of the British-Irish 
relationship. These include the broad economic impact on two intertwined 
countries. More particularly there is the impact on the now softly enforced 
Irish land border of any future restrictions to the movement of goods, 
especially serious if the UK left the customs union, and of people. The 
implications for the common travel area between Ireland and the UK must also be 
considered, along with the future status, for instance in terms of voting 
rights, of UK and Irish citizens in one another’s countries. And then there is 
effect of Brexit on the stability of NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, both in the context of structures 
underpinning the peace process and, just as important, from any sort of 
hardening of the Irish land border.

The Lords committee is absolutely right to back the Irish government’s view 
that these relationships require a unique solution within any wider Brexit 
settlement. The best way to achieve this, as the committee says, is for the EU 
and its member states to allow the UK and Irish governments to draft a 
bilateral agreement, along with the Northern Ireland executive, within that 
wider Brexit deal.

The main aims of that agreement, which the EU would have to approve in the 
end, should be to maintain the open land border, continue the common travel 
area, preserve the reciprocal rights of UK and Irish citizens in one another’s 
countries, uphold the right to Irish (and thus EU) citizenship for people in 
Northern Ireland, and reaffirm the arrangements in the Northern Ireland peace 
process agreements. The EU ought to embrace this approach, as should the UK 
government. But there is no getting away from the fact that, while these are 
now shared problems which need shared and urgent solutions, it is the 
lamentable Brexit vote that has inflicted the whole avoidable and destabilising 
business on Ireland.
 