
It’s not often you get invited to stay in a pigsty. It’s even less often that 
you accept. But when the invitation comes from theNational Trust 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/> and promises sea views away from any 
neighbours in north Devon, there is only one sensible response.

That’s how I came to be making my way on foot along the South West Coast Path 
<http://www.southwestcoastpath.com/> from Westward Ho! 
<http://www.westwardhodevon.com/> to Peppercombe 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/Search-and-book/landmark-groups/peppercombe1/> 
in mizzly rain, bound for a pigsty. At 630 miles long – running between 
Minehead, in Somerset, and Poole Harbour, in Dorset – stretches of thisNational 
Trail <http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/> are walked every year by millions of 
people (6.2 million in 2011). Until now, the accommodation options for 
multi-day trips were B&Bs – comfy but not for the budget-conscious – or 
campsites, a good money saver, but involving a much heavier backpack and not so 
good in rain and wind.

Thank goodness, then, that the National Trust, which owns many sections of 
this coastal walk, has just opened its first bothy – a good alternative, at 
least for one night only.

Essentially a stone tent, a bothy is defined as a building created for another 
purpose (this was a piggery built between 1900 and 1920) and now used by 
outdoors lovers as a basic shelter. Looked after by the volunteer-runMountain 
Bothies Association <http://www.mountainbothies.org.uk/>, most are found in 
Scotland (where they were once shepherds’ or gamekeepers’ huts) with a handful 
in mountainous areas of Wales and northern England. Visitors need to bring the 
basics: cooking stove, sleeping bag and mat – but crucially bothies offer four 
solid walls and a roof.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Fmy-night-in-a-devon-bothy-that-was-once-a-pigsty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433871611360%2F86f144bc-0b60-4392-80b0-f14f67bb361c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Devon%20bothy%20that%20was%20once%20a%20pigsty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Fmy-night-in-a-devon-bothy-that-was-once-a-pigsty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Devon%20bothy%20that%20was%20once%20a%20pigsty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Fmy-night-in-a-devon-bothy-that-was-once-a-pigsty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433871611360%2F86f144bc-0b60-4392-80b0-f14f67bb361c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Basic but solid … the bothy has running water but no electricity. 
This bothy is part of a new National Trust scheme to get people into the great 
outdoors. “We’re looking at more ways for visitors to use the special places we 
care for,” says National Trust head of holidays James Ingham. “Bothies offer 
the chance to pare things down to bare essentials.”

UK wilderness adventures: bothy to bothy in the Highlands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/21/walking-bothy-highlands-sutherland-scotland>
The National Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/national-trust> started 
offering cottage stays in the 1950s – these now include water towers, 
lighthouses and a roundhouse – and has three other bothies, all in the Lake 
District (but these aren’t camping bothies as they have hot showers, cookers 
and rangers on hand to help you out).

Damp and bedraggled from my half-day walk, I arrive up a newly laid stone 
track through trees a little way from the shingle beach at Peppercombe. I peer 
between the leaves and spot a whitewashed stone hut with a tin roof. At the 
stable-style door, I punch in the padlock code given to me when I booked (once 
you book, it’s yours exclusively for the night), then enter the gleaming white 
space.

The fireplace is sadly defunct (no fires are allowed inside). But there’s a 
shelf with National Trust leaflets and a visitors’ book, and two large, raised 
sleeping platforms, each a little higher than a standard bed and wide enough 
for two, with windows letting light in (there is no electricity). It’s basic, 
but embroidered curtains add a country-cottage feel. There’s a small worktop 
and a sink with cold running water. The “kitchen” window looks out on to 
wildflowers and bracken, then across to theIsle of Lundy 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/lundyisland/>.

As the rain eases, I hang my jacket over a beam and spread my kit around to 
dry. I head back outside to watch the sky glow orange in the dusk. At the back 
of the building I find the toilet, a small wooden lean-to hut. This is quite a 
luxury in bothying terms, where usually a shovel is the only bathroom apparatus 
provided.
 Loo view… the stunning coastline which can be seen from a neatly cut hole in 
the toilet door. Photograph: Alamy 
I had brought a dehydrated pasta meal for my dinner but, happily, the Coach 
and Horses pub <http://www.thebestpubindevon.co.uk/> is just 10 minutes’ walk 
up the private road to Horns Cross, so I have a Sunday roast then return to my 
hut to read about the area by candlelight and snuggle into my sleeping bag, 
listening to the rain tap on the windows. I sleep easily, free from the worries 
of loose guylines or billowing fabric that I usually suffer when spending the 
night in a tent, and wake with the dawn chorus. A deer grazes on the path 
outside.

With some walking planned for the day to the cobbled village of Clovelly 
<http://www.clovelly.co.uk/> to the west, I take advantage of the space a bothy 
offers, poring over my fully opened map, luxuriating in getting ready in a 
space where I can stand up straight, and making breakfast with no damp canvas 
walls slapping against my arms.

Before leaving, I pick up the visitors’ book and smile as I leaf through all 
the blank pages waiting for people to write in them. If this bothy proves a 
success, the National Trust will restore and open five more similar old 
buildings on the coast between north Cornwall and west Somerset, from former 
shepherd’s huts to fishermen’s shelters and, of course, pigsties. And the best 
thing is – we’re all invited.

• Accommodation was provided by Peppercombe Bothy, which sleeps four, with 
exclusive use £20 a night. Book in advance at
nationaltrust.org.uk/holidays/camping/bothies-bunkhouses/ 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/holidays/camping/bothies-bunkhouses/>

Phoebe Smith’s latest book is Wild Nights: Camping Britain’s Extremes 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282312/> (Summersdale, 
£9.99). To buy a copy for £7.99 including UK p&p, call 0330 333 6846 or visit 
bookshop.theguardian.com
 