
Unlike the prevalent model in the UK, the US and Australia, where festivals 
occur in hyper-concentrated bursts of creative energy, Ong Keng Sen builds his 
festival with a slow burn.

Now in his third year as director of the Singapore International Festival of 
Arts <https://www.sifa.sg/sifa/> (Sifa), Ong languorously stretches its 20 
works out over a six-week period, itself proceeded by a “pre-festival of ideas” 
–The Open <https://www.sifa.sg/theopen/> (also curated by Ong) – run over three 
weeks in June and July.

It’s an interesting model, which sacrifices intensity of engagement for a 
relationship that wants to linger. The overarching theme of the 2016 festival, 
which runs until 17 September, is “potentialities”, and you feel like the 
biggest potential Ong is reaching for is a chance to slowly infiltrate and 
shift the minds of his audiences over months.

In this, it is unashamedly a festival for the residents of Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore>. Visiting for a weekend, the 
vibrant city always calls. When a visitor’s day is spent with just one show, 
Sifa becomes more about the city itself than the art, the internationalism of 
the festival reflected through the internationalism of the city at every turn. 
It also means that any brief fling with the festival, such as mine, cannot help 
but create a lopsided understanding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa25412990d79023867492389f650d111cdf919d5%2F0_0_1518_853%2F1518.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Arab%20spring%2C%20Robert%20Lepage%20and%20a%20mass%20bed-in%3A%20how%20Singapore%20is%20rethinking%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Arab%20spring%2C%20Robert%20Lepage%20and%20a%20mass%20bed-in%3A%20how%20Singapore%20is%20rethinking%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa25412990d79023867492389f650d111cdf919d5%2F0_0_1518_853%2F1518.jpg>
 Sardono W Kusumo’s Expanded Cinema, which screens newly digitised Super 8 
footage of his early performances inside theatres and in public spaces, and 
footage he shot himself in the 60s and 70s. Photograph: Sardono W Kusumo/Sifa 
2016 
Of the four works over the 2016 opening weekend, none were by Singaporean 
artists. There was no dance or work in public space presented, and the more 
artistically and politically challenging works – particularly in a country 
where artoperates under censorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/16/why-singapore-censors-objected-to-an-oscar-wilde-play-with-an-all-male-cast>
 – were also yet to come.

The Indonesian artist Sardono W Kusumo is celebrated at this year’s Sifa and 
the first of three presentations of his work isExpanded Cinema 
<https://www.sifa.sg/sifa/show/The-Sardono-Retrospective-Presents-Expanded-Cinema-Mature-18/>
, tucked away in a dark gallery on the bright and beautiful grounds of the 
Malay Heritage Centre. This installation screens newly digitised Super 8 
footage: both his early performances inside theatres and in public spaces, and 
footage he shot himself, throughout the world but always returning to 
Indonesia, in the 60s and 70s.

These silent films – proudly wearing the crackling and degradation of the film 
stock – play alongside Kusumo’s 2016 feature-length experimental film, Raden 
Saleh After 200 Years. On three screens a young Kusumo dances on top of ruins; 
a child smiles and plays for the camera; Indonesian boys dance in a circle. 
Seemingly looking down at them is Kusumo of today: a stately figure in long 
hair and a crisp beard, standing on the streets of Paris.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F206f7ce009d43d408d11941f1b73b29edb10637d%2F0_33_3744_4879%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Arab%20spring%2C%20Robert%20Lepage%20and%20a%20mass%20bed-in%3A%20how%20Singapore%20is%20rethinking%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Arab%20spring%2C%20Robert%20Lepage%20and%20a%20mass%20bed-in%3A%20how%20Singapore%20is%20rethinking%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F206f7ce009d43d408d11941f1b73b29edb10637d%2F0_33_3744_4879%2F3744.jpg>
 Hamlet | Collage by Robert Lepage, in which the actor Yevgeny Mironov 
singlehandedly takes on all of the roles in Hamlet in a spinning cube. 
Photograph: Sergey Petrov/Sifa 2016 
There is a sheering of the timeline: we see only Kusumo as a young and 
inquisitive dancer in his 20s, and as a leading contemporary artist of today. 
But, despite the gap, together they paint a picture of a man whose art has 
consistently explored the intersection of traditional Javanese dance with 
contemporary practice, and whose energy and rigour shows no signs of slowing 
down.

The retrospective of Kusumo’s work is a significant artistic investment by the 
festival as is Ong’s commitment to reaching beyond the current international 
festival touring circuit. WhileRobert Lepage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/03/robert-lepage-interview-needles-opium-barbican>
 is a festival staple, rather than bringing to Sifa one of his two current 
widely touring works,Needles and Opium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/08/needles-and-opium-review-robert-lepage-barbican-miles-davis-jean-cocteau>
 or887 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/14/robert-lepage-887-edinburgh-festival-review>
, Ong has instead brought his first Russian production, Hamlet | Collage, to be 
performed outside of Russia for the first time.

As with his 1991 work Needles and Opium, Hamlet | Collage takes place in a 
cube seemingly suspended above the stage. The work is at its most gratifying 
when Lepage’s direction leans into the hypnotism of Carl Fillion’s set: a 
single space creating infinite worlds, as a man plays with a dizzying number of 
characters.

The cube spins, projections carefully tracked onto its surface, set pieces 
folding in and out, as Yevgeny Mironov singlehandedly takes on all of the roles 
in Hamlet. Bookended with scenes set inside a mental hospital, Lepage suggests 
this telling is all in a man’s mind.

Perhaps that is explanation enough for the seeming clash of aesthetics through 
the piece but the framing device fails to maintain any potency through the 
work: Mironov’s magnetising performance is enough of an artistic intervention 
alone.

From the distillation of Hamlet told through one body, Ahmed El Attar’s The 
Last Supper swarms a chaotic Egyptian extended family together at a family 
dinner.

At times it feels six or seven plays are happening simultaneously: some 
spoken, others told through clicked fingers, silent gestures, or withering 
glances. It makes it a challenging work to experience through surtitles – 
follow the details of a conversation here, the details of an interaction there 
are lost.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c803294902cbc4d62b44fa253ed25a55f0eba32%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Arab%20spring%2C%20Robert%20Lepage%20and%20a%20mass%20bed-in%3A%20how%20Singapore%20is%20rethinking%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Arab%20spring%2C%20Robert%20Lepage%20and%20a%20mass%20bed-in%3A%20how%20Singapore%20is%20rethinking%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c803294902cbc4d62b44fa253ed25a55f0eba32%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The cast of Ahmed El Attar’s The Last Supper, which exposes an unseen side of 
Egypt’s Arab spring. Photograph: Mostafa Abdel Aly/Sifa 2016 
But El Attar builds his work to explode in cacophony: for us non-Arabic 
speakers, the explosion just comes sooner.

For many in the Sifa audience, El Attar exposes an unseen side of Egypt’s Arab 
spring. Instead of the chaos on the streets, we see an upper-class family who 
wish only that this distraction will shortly be over. Disguised as a comedy, 
the humour distracts from the seeping darkness and final punch of the work’s 
dissection of privilege in a story of racism, classism, capitalism, sexism and 
the pull towards and rally against the superpower of the United States. If the 
full complexity of El Attar’s work can’t be understood through translation, his 
rallying call stands clear.

The quietest intervention by the festival on the opening weekend is Fernando 
Rubio’s Everything By My Side. Although typically performed by actors of the 
country where the work is being staged, here – in a nod to Ong’s consistent 
international focus – one Singaporean actor is joined by a woman from each of 
the nine previous countries that presented it. Often performed in exposed 
public places – Canary Wharf, Hudson Park – at Sifa, the work is sequestered 
away on the top floor of the National Gallery: a necessary cove from 
Singapore’s thick heat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe56ac8689cad8e7cb319e336d1e8c9009ca0a35f%2F0_624_3448_4544%2F3448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Arab%20spring%2C%20Robert%20Lepage%20and%20a%20mass%20bed-in%3A%20how%20Singapore%20is%20rethinking%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Arab%20spring%2C%20Robert%20Lepage%20and%20a%20mass%20bed-in%3A%20how%20Singapore%20is%20rethinking%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-arab-spring-robert-lepage-and-a-mass-bed-in-how-singapore-is-rethinking-festivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe56ac8689cad8e7cb319e336d1e8c9009ca0a35f%2F0_624_3448_4544%2F3448.jpg>
 Fernando Rubio’s Everything By My Side. Photograph: Kong Chong Yew/Sifa 2016 
It is hard not to think a dimension of the work is lost in its removal from 
public eyes. But, in a country so filled with energy – for an outsider, a 
seemingly unrelenting hustle – perhaps this is the space most acutely needed 
for it.

We are faced with a quiet room, 10 welcoming beds, and 10 women with 10 
accents – a reflection of the hundreds of accents that buzz around the city. 
The words they speak almost don’t matter. All there is is their sweet murmur, 
their intensity of eye contact, the folding of hair behind a new found 
partner’s eye and a moment of silent, private, breath.

One of the most intriguing and exciting aspects of Ong’s programming is his 
commitment to exposing his audiences to multiple works from single artists: but 
this means the 10-minute performance of Everything By My Side feels incomplete 
without seeing its counterpart in Rubio’sTime Between Us 
<https://www.sifa.sg/sifa/show/Time-Between-Us-General/>, a 108-hour 
performance that will take part in a small wooden house built in the centre of 
bustling Marina Bay Sands. And what does it mean to see Kusumo’s archival video 
dance projects from the 60s and 70s without being able to watch his latest 
dance work,Black Sun <https://www.sifa.sg/sifa/show/sardono-black-sun/>, 
commissioned by Sifa?

A weekend at Sifa brings to Singapore’s arts world a new light on the 
conversations between some of the world’s leading contemporary voices in 
performance. But, by design, merely dipping into it doesn’t do it justice: this 
is a festival designed to be experienced as curation quietly stitching its way 
through the fabric of the city. Ong has designed a festival to be savoured: it 
is only as a whole, one feels, that its potential can be realised.

• Singapore International Festival of Arts <https://www.sifa.sg/sifa/> runs 
until 17 September
 