
Once upon a time, the educated reader in, for example, the 17th or even the 18
thcentury could load an essential library of classics on to a horse and cart. 
Even in Victorian times, you could easily masquerade as well-read with a 
wagonload of books. Today, you might fill a container truck with all the titles 
you considered to be representative of the western intellectual tradition – and 
still find yourself playing catch-up.


Today, in what I have described elsewhere on this site as a golden age of 
reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/08/deep-media-fiction-web-mccrum>, 
there are so many books to investigate, in so many genres: popular culture, 
anthropology, biography, travelogue, philosophy, reportage, history, memoir and 
on and on. The discriminating contemporary reader, drowning in ink, both real 
and virtual, faces an almost impossible challenge. Where to start? How to go 
on? Where to stop? Thus: the raison d’etre of the popularity of book lists.


The 100 best novels written in English: the full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/17/the-100-best-novels-written-in-english-the-full-list>
Focus on the Anglo-American novel, and the list-making project is not 
disreputable: it has a discernible literary critical purpose. As I discovered 
during the two years in which I put togetherthe Guardian/Observer’s 100 best 
novels in English series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/17/the-100-best-novels-written-in-english-the-full-list>
, the satisfaction of such an exercise came from the weekly exploration of a 
teeming, baggy, and multitudinous genre.


Not only did I make many wonderful discoveries within the Anglo-American canon 
(translations were excluded),the dialogue with our readers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/03/the-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list>
 – passionate, instructive, confessional and sometimes vituperative – was also 
enriched by the exchange and debate surrounding a shared literary experience.


As the series got under way in chronological order, dedicated readers 
following the sequence could easily speculate about my next week’s choice. 
Sometimes, indeed, they actually influenced future selections, or provided 
painful reminders of books I had unaccountably overlooked.


Unlike fiction, nonfiction is not a genre. It’s a headache

There was, moreover, an entertaining posse of maverick contributors lobbying 
hard for impossible choices – books and writers on the wilder fringe of the 
literary-critical radar. But even at its most contentious moments, the 100 best 
novels was held together by the loose discipline of genre – its purpose was to 
examine storytelling, fictional narrative and the imagination. There was, 
additionally, the artistic glue of the thing called style. Every single title 
listed had some distinctive stylistic quality that set it apart from its 
contemporaries; it was plainly unique.


Unlike fiction, nonfiction is not a genre. It’s a headache. Compiling 100 
great books of nonfiction in English takes the reader into a universe of titles 
unrestricted by the limitations of a canon or the strictures of critical 
theory. Anything goes – so long as it’s in English (once again, to keep things 
manageable, we have excluded translations).

That, indeed, is the problem with the recent contention that contemporary 
nonfiction now challenges fiction for seriousness and importance: such a claim 
lacks definition. Ranging through philosophy, history,belles lettres and 
biography, one’s responses and choices are much more personal, even capricious, 
and more contingent on education, background, experience and – yes – sheer 
prejudice. The emerging focus of a nonfiction list must reflect less a 
tradition (as in fiction) than the evolving history of Anglo-American relations.


Stepping out of the comfort zone of genre, a nonfiction list quickly 
encounters some awkward questions. How, first of all, to define “great”? There 
is, for instance, what I think of as “the Darwin question”. On the Origin of 
Species will obviously find a place here, as will (spoiler alert) Johnson’s 
Dictionary, Wollstonecraft’s Vindication, Hume’s History, Woolf’s A Room of 
One’s Own, and Tom Paine’s Common Sense, or possibly The Rights of Man. But do 
such choices establish impossibly high criteria ? AreDawkins (No 10) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/04/100-best-nonfiction-books-10-selfish-gene-richard-dawkins>
 orHawking (No 6) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/07/100-best-nonfiction-books-6-brief-history-of-time-stephen-hawking>
 to be compared to Darwin? CanSontag (No 16) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/16/against-interpretation-susan-sontag-100-best-nonfiction-books>
 orDidion (No 2) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/08/100-best-nonfiction-books-2-the-year-of-magical-thinking-joan-didion-robert-mccrum>
 be spoken of in the same breath as Woolf or Wollstonecraft?


My answer – by whose uncertain light this series will continue to advance into 
the shadowy vastness of the literary universe that does not encompass fiction – 
is that the Anglo-American tradition is a galaxy with many stars. There are 
meteors of gold, azure and vermillion, but in the background there are also 
impressive constellations of black, silver and grey.


In the coming weeks, I plan to select self-help and cookery books, reportage 
and etiquette manuals as well as philosophy and economics. The guiding 
principle is that all these titles should, in some sense, have made a 
discernible contribution to who we are today, and to the way we live, think and 
write. Nonfiction (which is not a genre) also includes (according to library 
classification conventions) poetry and drama. I intend to choose poets and 
playwrights as well as polemicists and politicians.


Another, and final, word on the numbering convention employed by this list: we 
are going backwards from the present into the past, in a reverse chronology, 
hoping to discover adventitious connections between new and old, modern and 
ancient, while also varying the readers’ experience.


What makes a book great? with Frances Hardinge and Robert McCrum – books 
podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2016/jan/29/great-fiction-non-frances-hardinge-robert-mccrum-podcast>
As this list unfolds, the task of selecting 100 great works of nonfiction does 
not get any easier. After 20 selections, I am already regretting some omissions:
John Berger’s Ways of Seeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/apr/02/how-we-made-ways-seeing>; Alex 
Comfort’s The Joy of Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/28/stop-calling-me-doctor-sex-comfort>
; andJanet Malcolm’s The Journalist and the Murderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jun/06/janet-malcolm-a-life-in-writing>
 to name three. Currently, I am struggling withNoam Chomsky’s Syntactic 
Structures 
<http://entertainment.time.com/2011/08/30/all-time-100-best-nonfiction-books/slide/syntactic-structures-by-noam-chomsky/>
 (1957). Very many commentators and critics have singled it out as a book of 
great importance and influence, which is indisputably true when you read the 
literature surrounding it. And yet … I have to confess that the book itself is 
virtually unreadable, and almost impossible for the lay reader to understand. 
How can a list such as this include a book it cannot explain? Watch this space.

More than most fiction, all these titles bear – often explicit – traces of the 
times in which they were written and researched. As an informal biography of an 
evolving culture – initially Anglo, then Anglo-American, and now global – in 
all its many moods, this list makes its own, fallible stab at an unofficial 
summary, with the usual caveat that, at the end of the day, it’s just my choice.
 