
In 1816, only four years after the Brothers Grimm brought out a collection of 
fairy tales carefully selected and edited for the use of children, ETA Hoffmann 
published his Nutcracker and Mouse King. To the extent that Hoffmann’s fairy 
tale introduced rather weird, even scary elements, his story departed 
significantly from what the Grimm brothers would have considered proper. It 
would seem that Hoffmann had a very different approach to what was 
uncomfortable and upsetting for children. But most of his fantastic tales that 
focus on the scary aspects of childhood memories —involving children, dolls, or 
automata — were actually written for adults. Thus The Sandman, published in the 
same year, might shock its readers by reminding us of the fragility of our sane 
and safe reality. At the same time, however, this story also demonstrates how 
literature and the arts are uniquely able to deal with the uncanny elements 
lurking in our midst.

The Sandman by ETA Hoffmann – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/18/sandman-eta-hoffmann-uncanny-essay-freud>
In The Sandman we learn how an aspiring young poet, Nathan, is confronted with 
his most traumatic childhood memories and ultimately driven into madness and 
death. A certain salesman of optical devices, Coppola, seems to Nathan to be 
the very same sinister visitor who used to visit his father during Nathan’s 
childhood. Each evening before the visitor’s arrival, Nathan’s mother would 
send the children quickly to bed. She would scare them with the old wives’ tale 
of the Sandman, who throws sand into the eyes of unruly children to make the 
eyes jump out of their heads, allowing the Sandman to collect and feed them to 
his own children. Young Nathan, overwhelmed with curiosity, manages to hide 
behind the curtain of the closet in his father’s study and watch the two men 
conduct an alchemical experiment. Their faces hideously distorted by the flames 
of a hidden stove, what he sees both fascinates and utterly frightens the boy. 
When Nathan is discovered, his father’s visitor utters the most violent threats 
and the boy loses consciousness. One year later the visitor returns for one 
final evening, which ends with an explosion that kills Nathan’s father.

Although this scene contains the traumatic core of the story, it merely 
constitutes part of the story’s introduction. The main section of The Sandman 
deals with Nathan’s attempts at coping with the revivals of his trauma, 
beginning with his effort to convince his rationalist girlfriend, Clara, of the 
acute threat embodied by Coppola. Nathan’s effort takes the form of a fantastic 
poem — a narrative about how Coppola appears at the moment of their marriage, 
tears out Clara’s eyes, and throws them as glowing projectiles into Nathan’s 
heart — but it misfires. Clara is not impressed and calmly tells Nathan to toss 
his crazy tale into the fire, which leads him to push her away while yelling, 
“You lifeless, accursed automaton!” This brings about the first onset of 
Nathan’s madness, followed by more reminders of his childhood trauma. A fire 
forces him to move to another apartment, which faces the home of a Professor 
Spalanzani and his beautiful “daughter” Olympia. At a festive soirée it becomes 
clear that, in contrast to everybody else, Nathan alone does not see that 
Olympia is not alive. She is, in fact, merely an automaton, a doll that moves 
only when wound up.

The tale heads into its dark conclusion when Nathan finds Spalanzani violently 
fighting with Coppola over Olympia’s eyeballs. Nathan would have killed the 
professor, but passersby come to his rescue. After a temporary stay at the 
lunatic asylum Nathan returns to his senses. Sometime later, on a promenade 
through town, Nathan invites Clara to climb with him to the top of an 
observation tower. As they gaze at the distant mountains and forests, Clara 
calls Nathan’s attention to a gray bush that seems to be approaching. 
Retrieving Coppola’s telescope from his pocket, Nathan glances sideways at 
Clara and starts yelling, “Turn around my little wooden doll,” as he tries to 
push her off the tower. Clara’s brother manages to rescue her, but the mad 
Nathan throws himself off the tower while yelling Coppola’s sales pitch: “Sköne 
Oke—Sköne Oke” (Pretty eyes—pretty eyes).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-sandman-tale-of-madness-and-trauma-still-haunts-200-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e40547071df5f32beb1740265e06e0114411ec7%2F0_0_2813_1689%2F2813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Sandman%3A%20tale%20of%20madness%20and%20trauma%20still%20haunts%2C%20200%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-sandman-tale-of-madness-and-trauma-still-haunts-200-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Sandman%3A%20tale%20of%20madness%20and%20trauma%20still%20haunts%2C%20200%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-sandman-tale-of-madness-and-trauma-still-haunts-200-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e40547071df5f32beb1740265e06e0114411ec7%2F0_0_2813_1689%2F2813.jpg>
 Ernst Theodor Amadeus Hoffmann, left, in a painting with actor Ludwig Devrient 
from 1810. Photograph: Ullstein Bild/ullstein bild via Getty Images 
ETA Hoffmann was an artist with many talents and a lover of the performing 
arts. He wrote 49 tales and two novels, composed eight operas, and was also a 
productive music critic and a conductor. He liked to drink and smoke, 
especially in Berlin’s famousLutter und Wegner restaurant, where he would 
socialise with fellow artists and writers. Apart from his life as an artist, he 
was intermittently employed in the domain of law and criminal justice for 
nearly 20 years. Late in his life he served as a judge in an appellate court; 
he was also actively engaged in the very first legal debates about the insanity 
defense. Well-read in the medical literature about madness, he knew his own 
demons but he was not mentally deranged. As one of the leading writers of 
fantastic fiction, however, he kept exploring the porous boundaries between 
sanity and madness, between everyday reality and sudden, unsettling intrusions 
of the supernatural into our familiar world. His work influenced poets, 
writers, choreographers, and composers of music and of opera across the 19th 
and 20th centuries. As the author of Nutcracker and Mouse King, the tale that 
gave rise to Marius Petipa’s famous ballet set to Tchaikovsky’s score, he is 
still with us.

ETA Hoffmann’s fantastic tales, especially The Sandman, provide a rich and 
complex account of traumatic encounters as scenarios of seduction and 
sexualisation. He presents these encounters as deeply embedded in the world of 
bourgeois familial intimacy, which gives them a concrete historical reality. 
But Hoffmann also weaves through his tales a deep engagement with the arts — 
with storytelling, masquerade, dance, and music — which introduces complex 
patterns of marvellous surprises, grotesque distortions, and fantastic twists 
and turns. These make the reader wonder about the status of such 
materialisations from the most terrifying, ridiculous, and ardently desired 
dreams of our childhood. The doll that might be actually alive when she sings 
and dances, or the larger-than-life mice that come at night and threaten to 
bite the beautiful princess, whose parents offended them, these grotesque and 
uncanny elements are already externalizations. Such elements beg to be 
illustrated, staged, and marvelled at by readers and audiences of adaptations 
of Hoffmann’s work. In other words, what makes these tales special is their 
artistry that invites not only their readers’ critical engagement but also the 
productive, active engagement of other artists.

Hoffmann’s tales allow for engaged criticism, as well as productive reception 
in the living arts. Opera and dance seem to be especially conducive to the 
adaptation of Hoffmann’s work. Olympia’s famous song as performed byNatalie 
Dessay at the Chorégie d’Orange in 2000 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NqZQXkLtP9s> is not only very comical but also 
quite scary: through the invocation of the grotesque, the change of scale, the 
presence of dolls of an enormous size in the background, and the fusion of a 
human body with the legs of a marionette. To the extent that these 
performance-based artworks require continued creative adaptation for a 
contemporary audience, artists might draw further inspiration from a return to 
Hoffmann’s work. Mark Morris did so when he abandoned the traditional 
choreography of Petipa, which is based on a sweetened adaption of Hoffmann’s 
“Nutcraker and Mouse King” (in the form of Alexandre Dumas’s translation). 
Instead,Mark Morris’s Hard Nut <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-7yCCVvfmPY> 
goes back to Hoffmann’s original tale. He choreographs a ballet that integrates 
Drosselmeier’s scary tale, The Hard Nut, told to the sick Marie. In doing so 
Morris not only bring into the ballet the darker sides of sibling rivalry—as 
well as the particular intimacy and similarity among uncle Drosselmeier, the 
Nutcracker, and Marie’s lover—but also allows for flowers and snowflakes with 
all kinds ofbodies and genders <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsK33m6f3o8>.

These quite wonderful performances and adaptations show us something familiar 
about the practice of translation. In most cases the shelf life of a 
translation is much shorter than that of the original. Consequently, 
translations need to be redone and updated by returning to the original. If we 
wonder how we are still haunted by Hoffmann’s The Sandman two hundred years 
later, it will be worthwhile to go back to his story and reread it.

*****

 * Dorothea E. von Mücke is professor of Germanic languages at Columbia 
University and the author of The Practices of the Enlightenment: Aesthetics, 
Authorship and the Public (2015). While her research primarily focuses on the 
European Enlightenment, she is also interested inliterature’s relationship to 
the visual arts 
<http://nonsite.org/article/sebalds-after-nature-authorship-at-the-threshold-of-representation>
.  