
As a child growing up in the early 1980s, I often daydreamed of space 
exploration and interstellar frontiers. The leap into outer space seemed 
tantalizingly close. In the science fiction stories I read, the chronology of 
the future was also the potential biography of adulthood. One story projected a 
settlement on Mars in 1995; another depicted the grim labor of asteroid mining 
a decade later; a third imagined an encounter with alien artifacts in the Alpha 
Centauri system after 2020. The common thread in these stories, easily intuited 
even by an 11-year-old, was the lesson that the Earth was not our home.

Now the science fiction dream of leaving the planet behind appears to be 
coming true. One of the most striking effects of climate change — often 
remarked upon by writers — is its power to unsettle our basic understanding of 
the modern world. Our planet is changing into a strange and unstable new 
environment, in a process seemingly outside technological control. The fossil 
fuels that once promised mastery over nature have turned out to be tools of 
destruction, disturbing the basic biogeochemical processes that make our world 
habitable. Even the recent past is no longer what we thought it was. Scientists 
are telling us that the whole territory of modern history, from the end of 
World War II to the present, forms the threshold to a new geological epoch.

Related: Google's satellite timelapses show the inconvenient truth about our 
planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/dec/05/google-timelapse-satellite-pictures-earth-climate-change>

Our new planet is emerging quickly. The global climate is only one of nine 
earth system processes under threat. Land use is changing rapidly thanks to 
urbanization, agriculture, and population pressure. The rate of biodiversity 
loss is increasing in many ecosystems. Acidification is affecting marine 
biodiversity as well as the capacity of oceans to absorb carbon dioxide. The 
supply of fresh water in many regions is deteriorating. Aerosol loading and 
ozone depletion threaten the stability of the earth system’s atmosphere. 
Industrial agriculture has perturbed the global nitrogen and phosphorus cycles. 
Finally, chemical pollution may pose a risk not just at the local or regional 
level but also worldwide. Indeed, the planet’s biosphere bears so many marks of 
anthropogenic influence that it no longer possible to uphold the age-old 
distinction between the realm of wilderness and the world of human habitation.

To call attention to this unprecedented danger, the atmospheric chemist Paul 
Crutzen and the ecologist Eugene Stoermer in 2000 proposed a new name for the 
geological epoch we inhabit: the Anthropocene. For the first time, humans have 
become the prime drivers of the planetary climate. We have left behind the 
relatively stable pattern of natural variability that governed the environment 
in the Holocene epoch, beginning some 11,700 years ago. In the original 
formulation, Crutzen and Stoermer picked 1784 as the origin of the new epoch: 
the year of James Watt’s patent for a steam engine with a separate condenser. 
Britain’s early transition into the fossil fuel economy marked the end of the 
Holocene. More recently, the Working Group on the Anthropocene, established to 
validate the epoch in formal stratigraphic terms, has shifted the chronology of 
the Anthropocene from the Industrial Revolution to the Great Acceleration—the 
economic boom after World War II.

From a geological perspective, the dating of the Anthropocene turns on the 
problem of how to identify a stable and durable stratigraphic signal that might 
be detected by observers in a distant future. What sort of fossils will we 
leave behind? Geologists sometimes joke about the Coca-Cola layer of modern 
civilization. Among the plausible candidates proposed by the Working Group on 
the Anthropocene are microplastics, metal alloys, and artificial isotopes. Such 
stratigraphic markers must be placed in their historical context. The 
scientific identification of the Anthropocene with the year 1945 gives us not 
just a plausible geological end to the Holocene, but also a watershed that fits 
comfortably with a great body of scholarly work about the historical 
consequences of World War II.

The Great Acceleration, like the Anthropocene, is a concept of fairly recent 
coinage. It surfaced in an interdisciplinary workshop in 2005 and was 
popularized by Will Steffen in the discourse on planetary change. The name was 
meant to echo Karl Polanyi’s famous thesis about the rise of market society and 
the social basis of all economies. But the Great Acceleration takes Polanyi’s 
approach a step further by suggesting an environmental foundation to economic 
development. Postwar growth must be understood in not only its social but also 
its biophysical context. In scientific terms, the Great Acceleration captures 
the systemic and interrelated impacts of economic development on the biosphere. 
It is closely connected to the idea of “planetary boundaries” put forward in 
2009 by the environmental scientist Johan Rockström and his group of 
collaborators.

“Planetary boundaries” represent approximate quantitative values for 
thresholds of environmental risks beyond which we can expect nonlinear and 
irreversible change on a continental or planetary level. Most famously, climate 
scientists have warned that any carbon emissions above 350 parts per million 
(ppm) represents unacceptable danger to the welfare of the planet and humanity. 
The big rise in emissions that brought us past this threshold happened in the 
past three generations. While the origin of fossil fuel burning goes back to 
the Industrial Revolution (which set us on an emissions path beyond the 
Holocene’s natural variability of 260 to 285 ppm), the truly dramatic rise in 
carbon dioxide emissions, from 310 to 400 ppm, has occurred between 1950 and 
2015. The concept of the Great Acceleration encourages us to conceive of 
postwar capitalism as a biogeochemical process: the history of post-Fordism, 
the triumph of the welfare state,les trente glorieuses, and the rise of the 
BRIC powers all contributed to the upward trend of emissions and the increasing 
disequilibrium of the carbon cycle.

A dark picture of the present moment emerges in the Indian novelist Amitav 
Ghosh’s recent bookThe Great Derangement: Climate Change and the Unthinkable. 
The title captures his scathing diagnosis of the condition of literature and 
culture in the age of the Anthropocene. Why is it, he asks, that the literary 
world has responded to climate change with almost complete silence? How can we 
explain the fact that writers of fiction have overwhelmingly failed to grapple 
with the ongoing planetary crisis in their works? For Ghosh, this silence is 
part of a broader pattern of indifference and misrepresentation. Contemporary 
arts and literature are characterized by “modes of concealment that [prevent] 
people from recognizing the realities of their plight.” By failing to engage 
with climate change, artists and writers are contributing to an impoverished 
sense of the world, right at the moment when art and literature are most needed 
to galvanize a grassroots movement in favor of climate justice and carbon 
mitigation. Ghosh himself grapples with this question not in a work of fiction 
but in a wide-ranging essay about the relation of literature to science, 
history, and politics. The arc of the argument carries him from the birth of 
the novel to the industrialization of Asia, from the environmental politics of 
the military security state to, in a move that might surprise some observers, 
an examination of how organized religion might take the lead in promoting 
future mitigation efforts.

According to Ghosh, the cause of the “great derangement” is a certain kind of 
rationality. The authors who invented the bourgeois novel relied on probability 
to win the trust of their readers. Plots and characters were embedded in 
accounts of material life that gave them the sheen of ordinary experience, 
reflecting the regularity of middle-class life. This literary strategy rested 
in turn, at least in part, on the worldview of the Victorian natural sciences. 
In Charles Lyell’s geology, all explanations depended on a principle of 
uniformity. Nature acted in the same incremental way in all places and times. 
Change was always gradual and never catastrophic. The literary effect of 
bourgeois probability was to banish the account of extraordinary or bizarre 
happenings to marginal genres like the Gothic tale, romance novel, and science 
fiction. This externalization of the strange and unlikely explains the failure 
of modern novels and art to wrestle with anthropogenic climate change.
 Pump jacks in an oil field over the Monterey Shale formation in California. 
Critics of fracking in California cite concerns over water usage and possible 
chemical pollution of ground water sources. Photograph: David McNew/Getty Images
Bourgeois reason takes many forms. The uniformitarian geology of Lyell had 
affinities with classical political economy. In Adam Smith’s economic vision, 
the natural world was fundamentally stable and benign. There was no room for 
sudden oscillations of climate. Famine was the product of political meddling 
with markets, not a failure of natural supply. Indeed, the self-regulating 
properties of the free market were supposed to reflect the homeostatic balance 
of the natural order. Here political economists were indebted to 18th-century 
natural history and the concept of an economy of nature. This conceit about a 
fundamental fit between the economy and the natural world has enjoyed a long 
afterlife in classical liberal thought. One way to think about the longevity of 
these Enlightenment ideas is to see them as ideological manifestations of 
Holocene stability. The small variability of temperature and carbon dioxide 
levels for more than 11,000 years has given rise to deep-seated habits and 
ideas about the harmony of the natural world. In the Holocene, it made quite a 
bit of sense to idealize the environment as a stable envelope for the economy. 
The commitment to indefinite economic growth espoused by the economics 
profession in the postwar era is perhaps its most triumphant expression. 
Ironically, the new 1945 start date for the Anthropocene implies that such 
Promethean optimism reached its peak just as the Holocene world came to an end.

While human population has tripled in the postwar era, demographic growth is 
not in itself an indicator of high emissions; despite sustained population 
increase, Afghanistan has emitted only a fraction of the carbon dioxide of 
affluent countries. But Ghosh insists that demographic baselines matter as much 
as rates of growth. Consider a simple counterfactual scenario: if the 
population of the United States had been 10 times smaller, we would expect a 
drastically lower pattern of emissions. Conversely, if the large populations of 
Asia had industrialized earlier, consuming more fossil fuel in the past, we 
would likely have arrived at the critical boundary for dangerous climate change 
more quickly. By definition, the carbon footprint of any given nation is a 
product of the size of the fossil-burning population. Ghosh concludes that 
European imperialism held back the entry of Asia into the fossil fuel economy, 
but that when China and India finally adopted coal and oil on a large scale in 
the 1980s, this proved a decisive turning point for the planet, bringing “the 
climate crisis to a head.”

For Ghosh, the entry of Asia into the Great Acceleration drives home a bitter 
truth about the environmental foundation of the modern economy. As a latecomer 
on the stage, Asia has “unwittingly stumble[d] upon the secret that is the key 
to the plot.” By driving up worldwide demand for energy and resources while at 
the same time increasing the amount of waste and pollution in the system, Asian 
growth is pushing the economy closer to the critical boundaries that must be 
maintained in order to keep the planet habitable. The lesson of this 
“revelatory experiment,” Ghosh insists, “is that the patterns of life that 
modernity engenders can only be practiced by a small minority of the world’s 
population.” The promise of the Great Acceleration cannot be universalized: 
“Every family in the world cannot have two cars, a washing machine, and a 
refrigerator—not because of technical or economic limitations but because 
humanity would asphyxiate in the process.”
 A brick factory in Dhaka, Bangladesh in December 2016. Brick fields across 
the country illegally use firewood instead of coal. About 2m tons of firewood 
is burned in the brick fields per year, which facilitates deforestation. The 
high chimneys along the Buriganga, Turag and Dhaleshwari river side, 
surrounding the Dhaka city, pollute the environment and pour harmful smoke into 
the air. Photograph: Rehman Asad / Barcroft Images 
If this is a correct assessment, then the basic aims of economic development 
and social justice will need to be redefined in order to accommodate the 
realities of growth on a finite planet. In theory, a transition to renewable 
energy and sustainable agriculture would provide much-needed ecological relief, 
yet the task of scaling up new technologies to meet growing demand is truly 
monumental. Despite the lip service given in the Paris Agreement to a maximum 
of 2.0°C, emissions are likely to exceed this goal by a significant amount. To 
make things worse, the calendar of emissions leaves little time for popular 
mobilization. Ghosh admits that the “horizon in which effective action can be 
taken is very narrow.” On the political side, we also have to reckon with the 
power of entrenched interests. Ghosh rightly suggests that fossil fuel growth 
is at the heart of the dominant system of power. Will the richest nations 
voluntarily give up their positions of preeminence in the name of climate 
justice? Defenders of the modern state have for centuries embraced economic 
growth as the key to maintaining territorial and military power. An “equitable 
regime of emissions” aimed at “contraction and convergence” directly challenges 
this global distribution of power and wealth. Far more likely than voluntary 
degrowth and climate justice is a strategy of “open-ended counter-insurgency, 
militarized borders, [and] aggressive anti-immigration policing” — what 
Christian Parenti calls the “politics of the armed lifeboat.”

Related: Climate change with Amitav Ghosh and Aaron Thier – books podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2016/nov/18/climate-change-amitav-ghosh-aaron-thier-books-podcast>

But despite Ghosh’s dark sense of realism about our political options, he 
still manages to find hope in surprising places. “The very speed with which the 
crisis is now unfolding,” he notes, might save many parts of the world from the 
destructive social and cultural consequences of the Great Acceleration. Still 
more provocatively, Ghosh proposes that religious traditions might offer the 
most effective social basis for popular resistance. Ghosh observes that 
religious movements could “mobilize people in far greater numbers” than secular 
organizations. Religious belief reaches beyond the boundaries of nation states 
and embraces “intergenerational, long-term responsibilities” that “do not 
partake of economistic ways of thinking.” Indeed, the “idea of the sacred” 
involves an “acceptance of limits and limitations” that strongly resembles the 
ethos of stewardship and simple living central to radical forms of climate 
justice. Could it be that religious belief, with its appreciation of “nonlinear 
change” (i.e., apocalypse and planetary disaster), might be our best resource 
in breaking the spell of Holocene thought?

Some of us might worry that religious tradition is just as likely to subvert 
earth system science as it is to support it. But I take Ghosh’s broader point 
to be salutary. The magnitude of environmental change we now face will demand a 
fundamental reorientation of modern politics, economics, and culture. This is 
the only way to make a home on our new planet.

 * Fredrik Albritton Jonsson is an associate professor of British history and 
conceptual and historical studies of science at the University of Chicago. He 
is the author of Enlightenment’s Frontier (2013) and, with Vicky Albritton, 
Green Victorians (2016).
 