
Name: The Brex Pistols.

Combined age: Pushing 200.

Appearance: The smirking faces of 2016.

I don’t know who these people are but I hate them already. You do know who 
they are, though 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/all-the-president-elects-men-donald-trump-nigel-farage-photo>
. They’re Nigel Farage and his gang.

Oh God, he’s got a gang? Yep. It’s him and Breitbart UK editor (and very 
briefly Ukip leadership contender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/raheem-kassam-pulls-out-of-ukip-leadership-contest>
)Raheem Kassam <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raheem_Kassam>, along with 
Leave.EU’s founder Arron Banks and communications director Andy Wigmore. You 
may have seen a photo of them with Donald Trump recently.

You mean the photo that looked like it came from the set of a godawful Cocoon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cocoon_(film)> remake starring high-ranking 
Scientologists and the winners of a Channel 5 daytime gameshow?Ah, you’ve seen 
it.

All the president-elect's men: that golden Trump photo op
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/all-the-president-elects-men-donald-trump-nigel-farage-photo>
These people are terrible. Who gave them that awful name? Kassam. He tweeted a 
picture of the group standing outside Trump Tower, andcaptioned it “The Brex 
Pistols” <https://twitter.com/RaheemKassam/status/797649380564172800>.

Why are we even talking about them? Because they’re the UK’s highest-profile 
political representatives. Farage was the first foreign politician to meet 
Trump after his election win, remember.

But he’s a joke. He couldn’t get the population of Margate to turn him into an 
MP last year.And yet, as far as the world is concerned, he’s now the UK’s 
smiling face of populist rebellion.

But he isn’t even wearing a poppy in that photo. You’re right. The tabloids 
would throw a fit if they noticed.

If it helps, it looks like Farage is wearing an UK/US flag pin instead. So 
much for UK independence, I guess.

How much longer do I have to keep looking at this? It depends. How much do you 
enjoy watching a radioactive-looking reality show star get Human Centipeded by 
the worst men in Britain inside what appears to be a Russian oligarch’s wet 
dream?

Not at all. Then stop looking. You’ll have plenty more chances to see it in 
your grandchildren’s history books, right at the start of the chapter where 
everything goes wrong because a Dulwich College graduate and a billionaire with 
a literal golden door managed to convince everyone that they were men of the 
people.

I look forward to that. Only kidding. The world will end long before you have 
grandchildren.

Do say: “Your Brex is on fire.”

Don’t say: “Brex Lives of the Potato Men.”
 