
Tucked away in the chancellor’s autumn statement was the news that Manchester 
city council is to receive a £78m grant 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/new-multi-million-pound-theatre-250m-8220160>
 towards a new “large-scale, ultra-flexible arts space”, described as combining 
the qualities of the London Coliseum and the Tate Modern turbine hall. The 
building will rise on the site of the former Granada studios, and will be a 
home for performances in all genres across the year, as well as providing a 
permanent home for theManchester international festival <http://www.mif.co.uk/>.

Nothing comes from nothing. Manchester has been pouring resources into 
culture, notably with the foundation of the biennial festival in 2007, which 
has staged projects by artists as varied asarchitect Zaha Hadid 
<http://www.mif.co.uk/event/js-bach-zaha-hadid-architects>, performance artist 
Marina Abramović 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2009/jul/06/marina-abramovic-manchester-festival-adrian-searle>
 and the bandKraftwerk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jul/05/steve-reich-kraftwerk-pop-review>
. The council has long wished to establish a new cultural building: plans to 
create a Covent Garden of the north at the Palace theatre, in partnership with 
the Royal Opera House, foundered on the rocks of the financial crisis. The new 
space, to be called the Factory in homage to the famousrecord label 
<http://www.factoryrecords.net/>, will add to an impressive bedrock of cultural 
organisations in Manchester and Salford, such as the city museums, the 
Bridgewater Hall, the BBC and HOME,a new building combining cinemas, theatres 
and exhibition spaces <http://homemcr.org/>, due to open next year.

“Culture plays a central role in our growth strategy,” the council leader, Sir 
Richard Leese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2014/nov/19/sir-richard-leese-elected-mayor-for-greater-manchester>
, said this week. The notion that culture is instrumental in creating wealth 
became a part of mainstream Labour thinking in mid-1990s, according to Robert 
Hewison’s new book on British cultural policy,Cultural Capital 
<http://www.versobooks.com/books/1760-cultural-capital>. Tony Blair, visiting 
Australia to woo Rupert Murdoch in 1995, became enamoured with a Labor party 
report calledCreative Nation 
<http://apo.org.au/research/creative-nation-commonwealth-cultural-policy-october-1994>
, which stated that “this cultural policy is also an economic policy”. 
Manchester council believes that within a decade the Factory will produce 2,300 
full-time jobs and add £134m a year to the city economy.

The Factory, of course, is not a factory – not in the sense that made 
Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> and its satellites the 
hub of the industrial revolution. Its presence will create skilled jobs in 
technical and creative roles, but many will be in the uncertain and casual 
worlds of hospitality and tourism. The creative industries arguably offer a 
more fugitive economic prospect than the manufacturing industries.

Nevertheless, the Factory is to be welcomed as a bold move by Manchester 
towards placing culture at the centre of its civic identity. Mr Leese and his 
colleagues have shown an impressive pragmatism in lining up their interests 
with George Osborne’s increasingly serious-looking plan of strengthening the 
cities of the north. Mr Osborne has indicated that his door is open to 
suggestions from other ambitious cities. Attempts at regeneration through 
“landmark” cultural buildings have in the past foundered, but there is every 
chance that canny Manchester will be successful in running its new Factory. 
Yet, in the end, a city’s commitment to culture is more to be welcomed as a way 
of building community, as a repository for shared memories and as a fund of 
personal enrichment, than as a replacement for cotton mills.
 