
Thomas Kuhn (1922-1996) did not invent the concept of scientific revolution, 
but he gave it a special meaning and created a phrase – “paradigm shift” – so 
popular that it received the ultimate accolade: no fewer than fourNew Yorker 
spoofings 
<http://www.condenaststore.com/-sp/I-m-afraid-you-ve-had-a-paradigm-shift-New-Yorker-Cartoon-Prints_i8479697_.htm>
 (from 1974 to 2009). On its first appearance, we find a sexy young woman in 
bell-bottom trousers at a Manhattan cocktail party flattering a balding 
metropolitan with: “Dynamite, Mr Gerston. You’re the first person I heard use 
the word ‘paradigm’ in real life.”

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (hereafter The Structure) commands the 
attention of a list such as this for its remarkable influence on our 
understanding of science and also its continued grip on our interpretative 
response to scientific history.The Structure is a work of ideas more than style 
(its prose can sometimes seem rather heavy going), but one might argue that 
Kuhn, an American physicist and philosopher of science, had triggered his own 
paradigm shift with the publication of this seminal monograph, a book 
demonstrating that however powerful science might be, it remains as flawed as 
the scientists who explore its many mysteries.

Kuhn’s account of science and its development differed radically from 
traditional versions. Previously, the standard account saw steady, cumulative 
“progress”. Kuhn, however, only saw discontinuities – “normal” and 
“revolutionary” phases in which scientific communities would be thrown into 
periods of crisis and uncertainty. Such revolutionary phases, Kuhn argues, 
correspond to those conceptual breakthroughs that lay the foundations for the 
periods of continuity that follow.

Kuhn’s challenge to long-standing linear notions of scientific progress was 
itself a revolution

The Structure is very much a book of the late 20th century. It began forming 
in Kuhn’s mind in the late 1940s, when he was just a graduate student in 
theoretical physics. As is often pointed out, a book that has reshaped the 
philosophy of science was actually conceived and written by a physicist who, 
having taught an undergraduate course on “physical science for the 
non-scientist”, was exposed to scientific history, and (to his surprise) found 
his basic conceptions about the nature of the discipline radically undermined. 
SoThe Structure is, in a profound sense, a young man’s book, rooted in its 
time. The science it addresses is dominated by the post-Einstein physics of the 
cold war. Indeed, 1962, the year in which Kuhn’s ideas were first published, 
was also the year of the Cuban missile crisis. And while physics was 
undoubtedly the alpha male among the sciences whenThe Structure was being 
written, change was already afoot. With No 15 in this series,The Double Helix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/09/the-double-helix-james-d-watson-100-best-nonfiction-books>
(1968), we have already seen how, after the 1950s, the molecular biology of DNA 
was set to sweep the board. Since then, biotechnology and the marriage of 
computer science with genetics and even neurology have become the cutting edge 
of scientific research.

Steven Weinberg on the history of science - podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2015/feb/13/steven-weinberg-history-science-podcast>
Yet, against the odds, Kuhn remains evergreen. His great insight, which owed 
something to Kant, but was based on his own study of the Copernican revolution, 
was provocatively at odds withKarl Popper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/sep/10/karl-popper-enemy-uncertainty>
 (a later entry in this series). Kuhn’s description of the dialectic of change 
in science (the making of a paradigm; the recognition of anomalies, with an 
ensuing crisis; finally, the resolution of the crisis by a new paradigm) still 
holds true today, albeit in a radically different intellectual environment 
dominated by information science and biotechnology. Kuhn’s argument for an 
episodic model of scientific development in which periods of continuity are 
interrupted by passages of revolutionary science remains disputed by some, but 
is widely accepted within most circles. He himself has written that, “because I 
insist that what scientists share is not sufficient to command uniform assent 
about such matters as the choice between competing theories or the distinction 
between an ordinary anomaly and a crisis-provoking one, I am occasionally 
accused of glorifying subjectivity and even irrationality.”

Kuhn’s challenge to long-standing linear notions of scientific progress and 
his argument that transformative ideas do not spring from a gradual process of 
experimentation, but from eureka moments that disrupt conventional wisdom and 
offer unanticipated breakthroughs, were themselves a revolution. If turning a 
world of thought upside down is the mark of a superior paradigm, thenThe 
Structure has been, for more than half a century now, a howling success. As the 
Observer’s John Naughton has written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/19/thomas-kuhn-structure-scientific-revolutions>
:“A Google search for [the phrase paradigm shift] returns more than 10m hits.” 
More significantly, it scores a reference inside no fewer than 18,300 titles 
sold by Amazon. Kuhn’s scholarly monograph, says Naughton, is also “one of the 
most cited academic books of all time. If ever a big idea went viral, this is 
it”.

Kuhn’s Structure continues to be hugely influential in the history of science 
and in many related areas (economics, sociology, philosophy and history). Since 
publication, it has sold more than 1.4m copies, been widely translated and is 
routinely listed as one of the books most frequently cited in the arts and 
humanities of the latter half of the 20th century. In highbrow commentary, 
lowbrow marketing and psephological analysis, “paradigm shift” has become a 
cliche of social and political change.

A signature sentence

“History, if viewed as a repository for more than anecdote or chronology, 
could produce a decisive transformation in the image of science by which we are 
now possessed.”

Three to compare

Immanuel Kant: The Critique of Pure Reason 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/files/4280/4280-h/4280-h.htm> (1781)
Karl Popper: The Open Society and Its Enemies 
<https://archive.org/details/opensocietyandit033120mbp> (1945)
Thomas S Kuhn: The Essential Tension 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?vid=ISBN0226458067&redir_esc=y> (1977)


Click here to buy The Structure of Scientific Revolutions for £10.50 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/structure-of-scientific-revolutions.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 