
Theaster Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/03/theaster-gates-artist-chicago-dorchester-projects>
 was already thinking about hardware stores before he walked into Ken’s shop on 
the corner of 93rd and Halsted in the South Side of Chicago. It was the kind of 
place saturated with years of expertise, dozens of small wooden drawers filled 
with screws, bolts and bits of pipe.


Ken had bought the shop in 1970 from Italian immigrants who had built up the 
business in the 1930s, but after four decades running this dusty institution, 
the kind that is being wiped off the map ofChicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago>, he wanted to retire. And so 
Gates bought the shop from him – hosepipes, hooks, hammers and all.


For Gates, it was not such a strange move. He may have begun his art career as 
a potter, but his work is as much preoccupied withregenerating Chicago’s South 
Side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/30/theaster-gates-sanctum-situations-a-month-open-mike-fun-bristol>
 where he lives – an area entrenched in poverty and gang violence – as it is 
creating pieces that sit prettily in a white gallery space. This week, however, 
Gates has taken his project one step further – and part way round the world.
True Value <http://www.bbdib.com/B%26B_Hardware/Home.html>, as his new show is 
titled, sees the artist transplant Ken’s entire hardware store, including all 
30,000 objects that lined its displays, to the affluent setting of the 
Fondazione Prada in Milan.

As Gates sees it, hardware stores are more than the sum of their stock. They 
are the gatekeepers of expertise, containing the objects that keep our 
crumbling world together that little bit longer. They represent the valuable 
knowledge of plumbers, electricians and builders, the “shamans” of this world, 
as Gates reverently refers to them. “I found myself preoccupied not with the 
painting but with the paint and the manufacturing of paint and the alchemy of 
pigments,” he says in Milan. “Nowhere represents the ‘before’, the raw 
materials, more than a hardware store.”

Yet, all across the world, these shops are closing down, swallowed whole by 
superstores where you can buy a screw with your groceries, do some yoga on site 
and get a flat white for the way home. We fix less and less, preferring to buy 
a new sink than mend a tap, and our furniture comes ready-made or constructed 
from characterless flatpacks. What happens to the legacy of those hardware 
stores when the last one finally disappears? What do we lose when craft no 
longer infuses our material lives?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ftheaster-gates-nuts-and-bolts-fondazione-prada-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6dea40089ea434798ae1724f9a88f0aff50131d%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theaster%20Gates%20on%20the%20nuts%20and%20bolts%20of%20life%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0all%2030%2C000%20of%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ftheaster-gates-nuts-and-bolts-fondazione-prada-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theaster%20Gates%20on%20the%20nuts%20and%20bolts%20of%20life%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0all%2030%2C000%20of%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ftheaster-gates-nuts-and-bolts-fondazione-prada-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6dea40089ea434798ae1724f9a88f0aff50131d%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 ‘It takes a certain kind of muscly body to push a 40ft tar mop around’ ... 
Theaster Gates. Photograph: Ukartpics/Alamy Stock Photo 
Despite toying briefly with keeping Ken’s shop running in Chicago, 
particularly as faithful customers kept stopping by to pick up mousetraps or 
hosepipes, Gates began to think of other ways he could honour Ken and the 
objects he had lived among for 40 years.

Theaster Gates, the artist whose latest project is regenerating Chicago
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/06/theaster-gates-artist-latest-project-is-regenerating-chicago-artes-mundi>
“Sadly I just didn’t have the capacity to keep the store going,” says Gates. 
“But I started to think about what the truth of this hardware store going away 
means, not only for Chicago but for small, family-owned businesses that are 
being squeezed out around the world. Could the hardware store be a stand-in for 
the failure of local economy globally?”

It was Ken who helped Gates move the shop to his Chicago studio, and the 
conversations it sparked between the pair were recorded and now play in the 
store’s latest incarnation in Milan. By moving it wholesale, Gates wants people 
to take a moment to consider – and appreciate – the knowledge implicit in all 
30,000 objects hanging on those hooks. That, even when this shop is ripped from 
its local neighbourhood, rebuilt 4,526 miles away and redefined as art, we can 
see both what is lost and what remains. The more modern society devalues the 
skills of craftsmen, says Gates, the more removed it becomes from the elements 
that make and hold together our material world, the more that society – or the 
immaterial world – “is very quickly falling apart”.

True Value also throws light on Gates’s complex attitude to gender. He nods at 
the suggestion that hardware is the bastion of a certain kind of masculinity, 
that American can-do ethos, but shrugs off the suggestion that gender is ever a 
black and white issue. “Hinduism has already told us that at best humans are 
gender fluid … look, I would never talk directly about gender in the work that 
I do, but I understand there’s always a grappling with the parts of my life 
that are extremely gender biased – whether that’s male or female.”

Pointing behind him, where the shop’s objects are carefully 
colour-co-ordinated, Gates smiles bashfully. “It takes a particular kind of 
shopkeeper to organise the screws in such a way right? But,” he pauses to pick 
up a book at his feet and crinkles his face in concentration, “it takes another 
type of person who knows that if I wanted to screw this book, which is about 
1.12in, into 5in plywood, I would need a 2.25in screw.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ftheaster-gates-nuts-and-bolts-fondazione-prada-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac8956788a5cf22efcb81c76d5c9a65eb4ab02e6%2F120_116_1373_824%2F1373.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theaster%20Gates%20on%20the%20nuts%20and%20bolts%20of%20life%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0all%2030%2C000%20of%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ftheaster-gates-nuts-and-bolts-fondazione-prada-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theaster%20Gates%20on%20the%20nuts%20and%20bolts%20of%20life%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0all%2030%2C000%20of%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ftheaster-gates-nuts-and-bolts-fondazione-prada-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac8956788a5cf22efcb81c76d5c9a65eb4ab02e6%2F120_116_1373_824%2F1373.jpg>
 Gates’s work on Milan. Left: Cabinet Work. Right: True Value. Both at 
Photograph: Delfino Sisto Legnani Studio/Fondazione Prada 
The youngest child in a family of eight older sisters, Gates moves from being 
softly spoken to adopting the booming cadence of a preacher, his voice and body 
filling an auditorium with an undeniably masculine power (his mother hoped he 
would become a priest and he still sings in a gospel choir). He speaks 
detachedly of a recent love affair that came to a fractious end, but then 
admits to recently crying uncontrollably when confronted with the art ofPol Bury
 <http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/pol-bury-841>.

Gates’s relationship with his father, a former tar roofer, is referenced 
frequently in his work – his father’s old mop and bucket and a canvas painted 
with tar feature in the Milan exhibition – but it was his mother, a 
schoolteacher, to whom Gates was devoted. Only after her death in 2011, and on 
her instruction, did he finally reach out to his father, and the pair slowly 
rebuilt a bond through tarring roofs together. “It takes a certain kind of 
muscly body to push a 40ft tar mop around,” he says with a flicker of a smile, 
“but when you do it, you do it like you’re dancing.”

Is gentrification inevitable – and inevitably bad?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/16/gentrification-inevitable-bad-urban-change>
Nothing he does is about nostalgia, insists Gates – it’s about power. The 
disappearance of local hardware stores speaks to the disappearance of local 
community, local government and therefore local power in the face of large 
conglomerates, creating a world where “profit will trump humanity”. “Every day 
people become less employed because there are fewer businesses that do more,” 
Gates laments. “So I think if there’s anything nostalgic, it’s that desire to 
see everyday people having control over their lives, a direct engagement.”

The restoration of local power is how Gates differentiates his ongoing 
“ethical development” of theGreater Grand Crossing 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/theaster-gates-ingenuity-awards-chicago-180957203/?no-ist>
 neighbourhood in Chicago from gentrification by another name. Rather than 
pricing people out, he says, it is about creating spaces of beauty where they 
can come together. This outlook is gaining traction, with Gates recently 
engaged in a Chicago-wide project to reimagine civic buildings and also 
appointed to the small panel who helped Barack Obama choose the final design 
for his Presidential Library in the South Side.

In Milan, Gates used his staged hardware store as a platform to reach out to 
theferrementas – traditional Italian hardware shops – that have existed for 
decades in the city but are as much of a dying breed as they are in Chicago. 
The exhibition flyer invites people to visit Ferrementa Vigano, which has been 
open since 1927, and the day before the show opened, Gates met with 80-year-old 
Ada Comoretto who has run aferrementa in the now affluent Milanese 
neighbourhood of Corso Como, for her whole life. Comoretto was very moved by 
the show, says Gates, because it illustrated what she has always known yet the 
world has seemingly forgotten – that there is as much knowledge in a screw as 
in a book.

 * True Value 
<http://www.fondazioneprada.org/project/theaster-gates-true-value/?lang=en> is 
on at Fondazione Prada, Milan, to 25 September
 