
Theresa May has moved to stop Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> interfering in the UK’s 
relationship with Donald Trump, as Downing Street prepares its own diplomatic 
offensive to smooth over relations with the US president-elect.

The prime minister is expected to fly out to the US to meet the 
president-elect at the “earliest opportunity”, while sources revealed the 
Foreign Office is preparing a meeting between Boris Johnson and vice-president 
elect Mike Pence within weeks.

It comes just days after Trump rolled out the red carpet for Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/12/nigel-farage-arrives-in-new-york-to-meet-president-elect>
 during an hour-long meeting in New York over the weekend in a move that was 
widely seen as a source of diplomatic humiliation for May.

Farage has offered to help May get to know Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/13/nigel-farage-donald-trump-crispin-blunt-ukip>
 but No 10 categorically shut down that idea on Monday and signalled that it 
was trying to expedite its own efforts to build bridges with the new US 
administration.

“The president-elect talked about enjoying the same close relationship that 
Reagan and Thatcher did.I don’t remember there being a third person in that 
relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/theresa-may-does-not-need-third-person-nigel-farage-in-trump-relationship-no-10>
,” May’s official spokeswoman said.

Farage reacted with anger to the rejection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/pm-betraying-national-interest-by-rejecting-my-trump-offer-says-farage>
, accusing the prime minister and her “ghastly apparatchiks” of betraying the 
national interest by refusing to capitalise on his good relationship with Trump.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fuk-government-must-mend-fences-with-donald-trump-says-nigel-farage-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20government%20must%20%E2%80%98mend%20fences%E2%80%99%20with%20Donald%20Trump%2C%20says%20Nigel%20Farage%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fuk-government-must-mend-fences-with-donald-trump-says-nigel-farage-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20government%20must%20%E2%80%98mend%20fences%E2%80%99%20with%20Donald%20Trump%2C%20says%20Nigel%20Farage%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fuk-government-must-mend-fences-with-donald-trump-says-nigel-farage-video&media=>
UK government must ‘mend fences’ with Donald Trump, says Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/14/uk-government-must-mend-fences-with-donald-trump-says-nigel-farage-video>
The Ukip leader claimed No 10 could do with his expertise since members of 
Trump’s team have long memories about disobliging remarks made about the 
president-elect, arguing there were “fences to be mended”.

“Nobody in this administration in the UK has any connections with the Trump 
team at all, and yet they are prepared on behalf of the country to cut off 
their noses to spite their faces,” he told LBC.

His closest ally, Arron Banks, told the Guardian it was “nuts” for May not to 
appreciate that Farage effectively had a “hotline to the White House” and 
Trump’s new chief strategistSteve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/stephen-bannon>.

The Ukip donor and Brexit backer claimed Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/theresa-may-is-nuts-not-to-use-nigel-farages-hotline-to-the-white-house>
 had already had an in-depth discussion with Trump about global politics on 
issues from immigration to Nato and would be able to offer valuable diplomatic 
insight.

“It was about an hour and we talked about all sorts, whether Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> was going to deliver Brexit. 
It was not a jokey meeting. They were really going through all the big issues,” 
he said.

According to those present, Trump did not know the names of many UK 
politicians but understood the issues around Brexit, including immigration.

The comments come amid reports of a cabinet split in which some ministers 
urged May to use Farage’s links to Trump.

However, cabinet members and Tory MPs have played down the idea of division, 
with many arguing it would not be appropriate for Ukip leader to act as a 
conduit.

The international trade secretary, Liam Fox, is understood not to have had any 
contact with Farage or those close to him, nor to have spoken to journalists.

George Osborne, the former chancellor, told ITV’s Agenda that there was no way 
May would be “contracting foreign policy out to Nigel Farage”.

Nigel Adams, a Tory MP with strong links to senior US politicians, said May 
and her ministers were best placed to handle the relationship with Trump.

“I find it inconceivable that somebody who has made it his duty to try and 
unseat Conservative councillors and MPs over the past few years be rewarded 
with an official role representing a Conservative-led government,” he said.

Although he said there was no harm in picking Farage’s brain given his close 
links to the US, he pointed out that Tory cabinet ministers such as Fox had 
similarly strong links.

Mark Field, a Tory vice-chair on international issues, has spent the past 18 
months building relations between his party and theRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>.

He said it was unfair to criticise officials such as the UK ambassador to the 
US,Sir Kim Darroch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/uk-must-become-global-leader-in-free-trade-theresa-may-brexit-vote-donald-trump-election>
, over their links to Trump’s team, pointing out that they had been dealing 
with Democrats in government for eight years.

“Donald Trump was an unconventional candidate who appeared to come out of the 
blue, so everyone was slightly flat-footed,” he said.


Field also argued that May was right to reject Farage’s advances, saying the 
key diplomatic link was a “government to government relationship”.

It comes as sources suggested Johnson could travel to the US by the end of the 
year in a bid to build links with the incoming Republican administration after 
being extended an informal invitation from Pence.


Johnson – who is also likely to meet former US speaker Newt Gingrich – struck 
a positive note on Monday as he claimed Trump’s election should be seen as a 
“moment of opportunity” for the UK. After complaining about the“whinge-o-rama” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/boris-johnson-doom-and-gloom-donald-trump-nigel-farage-theresa-may>
 in response to the election result, Johnson added: “I think there is a lot to 
be positive about and it is very important not to pre-judge the president-elect 
or his administration.”

The moves are part of a concerted effort to ensure that the election result 
does not sour relations between Britain and the US, with May planning to travel 
to the US for a face-to-face meeting with Trump himself.

This comes as the prime minister warned that Trump’s election, like Brexit, 
had sent a message to “global elites” but also mounted a staunch defence of 
globalisation and free trade.

“People – often those on modest to low incomes living in rich countries like 
our own – see their jobs being outsourced and wages undercut. They see their 
communities changing around them and don’t remember agreeing to that change,” 
she said.

“They see the emergence of a new global elite who sometimes seem to play by a 
different set of rules and whose lives are far removed from their everyday 
existence. And the tensions and differences between those who are gaining from 
globalisation and those who feel they are losing out have been exposed ever 
more starkly through the growth of social media.”

She said liberalism and globalisation were a force for good, but admitted that 
politicians had failed to look at the impact on people closer to home. “When 
you fail to see that the liberal consensus that has held sway for decades has 
failed to maintain the consent of many people, you’re not the champion of 
liberalism but the enemy of it,” she said.
 