
If you were Ted Cruz <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz>, and 
needed to break into the news cycle, consolidate conservative support, and stop 
the Trump juggernaut, what would you do? Easy: pick on Muslims.

We’ve come to expect this from a party whose supposedly moderate candidates 
are still prejudiced 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/2/4/10918372/marco-rubio-muslims-media>. Even so, 
Cruz’s latest move still has the power to dismay.

The presidential hopeful has named Frank Gaffney as a national security 
adviser to his campaign team. For those of you who don’t know him, Gaffney is a 
conspiracy theorist whose obsessive focus on Islam and Muslims is clear from 
his statedconcerns about 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2010/02/24/can-this-possibly-be-true-new-obama-missile-defense-logo-includes-a-crescent/>
 a “worrying pattern of official US submission to Islam and the 
theo-political-legal program the latter’s authorities call Shariah”. He 
believes the redesigned logo of the Missile Defense Agency, for example 
“appears ominously to reflect a morphing of the Islamic crescent and star with 
the Obama campaign logo”.

It’s hard to find a better description of American decline: from the country 
that repeatedly put men on the moon to the country whose national security 
experts are searching for secret Islamic lunar motifs in government images.

That’s not to say that terrorists aren’t dangerous, that it’s Islamophobic to 
fear radicals, or that there aren’t deeply problematic interpretations of 
Islam. But they are neither as widespread nor as dangerousas anti-Muslim 
alarmists like Gaffney 
<https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/frank-gaffney-jr>
 claim they are. As an American Muslim myself, who has worked for years with 
Muslim communities and advised on national security questions, I am endlessly 
amazed at the insecurities and anxieties of the American right.

Ronald Reagan faced down the Soviet Union. His purported heirs, however, have 
become convinced that the world’s most powerful nation is on the verge of being 
taken over by Islamists. This isn’t just silly, though. It’s downright 
dangerous. The war on terror was predicated on arguments like Gaffney’s. But 
one crucial part of it, Operation Iraqi Freedom, actually opened the door to 
Isis in the first place.

Which is why Gaffney’s place on Cruz’s national security team should concern 
you, even if you’re not American or Muslim.

Cruz is, with Kasich, the only Republican alternative to Trump. If there is a 
contested convention, there is a possibility he could be the nominee. And 
though it seems unlikely, he is still one of the five people with a shot at 
being our next president. Imagine, for a moment, that Frank Gaffney were 
advising a President Cruz on the right response to Isis or on a new Middle 
Eastern crisis. He might shape the president’s relationship to American Muslim 
communities, which is genuinely terrifying, because Gaffney has no relationship 
to American Muslim communities except to demonize us, mislead the public about 
us – witness his claim, paraded most recently by Trump, that “27% of Muslims 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/03/17/opinions/trump-attitude-muslims-obeidallah/index.html>
” are “militants”.

Three more of Cruz’s proposed national security advisers are from Gaffney’s 
thinktank, the Center for Security Policy. There’s no evidence of new or fresh 
thinking here, not the least hint that Senator Cruz is aware of the lack of 
correspondence between Gaffney’s theories and reality, the fact that most 
Muslims do not conform to the stereotypes he presents, or even any serious 
commitment to making America safe, let alone a nation that can lead.

Imagine, instead, a Republican candidate picking a national security adviser 
who is Muslim, who has roots in Muslim communities, who can build relationships 
of meaningful durability. Someone who is trusted and reasonable, who can point 
out the difference between perceived threat and actual danger, and guide us to 
a more responsible foreign policy, a healthier and savvier relationship with 
hundreds of millions of people, a safer America and a safer planet.


Maybe that’s just asking for the (crescent) moon.

 