
Thanks to Hollywood’s baffling inability to produce anything that wasn’t first 
a book, a question that gets asked more and more these days is: “Should I read 
the original?” There is no default answer. Sometimes, the book is so far 
removed that reading it lends nothing new to the cinematic experience; 
sometimes “the book” is actually eight chunky volumes in an epic fantasy 
series, and an intimidating experience for the casual reader. Sometimes – 
unthinkably – the adaptation is better than the book.

There is a rich list of fiction being adapted this year, so here is a guide to 
which books are worth experiencing on their own, before seeing the version 
overseen by producers panicking because there is not enough stabbing and too 
much bonking. And indeed, on that note …

Film: Fifty Shades Darker 


What’s it about? Twentysomething Ana continues to enjoy more sexual 
shenanigans with emotionless billionaire Christian Grey in this sequel toFifty 
Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/15/fifty-shades-of-grey-bdsm-enthusiasts>
.

Will it stay faithful to the book? Maybe. There is more “kinky fuckery” in 
this sequel, as Christian puts it, but Hollywood was very uncomfortable with 
the racier parts of the first book, so it will be a surprise if you get to see 
such delights as ice-cream foreplay, pool-table spanking and handjobs at sea 
make it to the screen.

Should I read the book? No. The plot veers into preposterous, afternoon-TV 
soap territory, and in between all the crazed stalkers and helicopter sabotage, 
EL James’s writing is as stilted and ridiculous as ever. Tipping the Velvet, 
Delta of Venus, or even the Argos catalogue all offer better erotic writing.

How long do I have to read it? Until 10 February. 

Film: T2 Trainspotting 
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
T2: Trainspotting - full trailer for the sequel to the 1996 hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/03/t2-trainspotting-trailer-for-the-sequel-danny-boyle-ewan-mcgregor-video>
What’s it about? Everyone’s favourite smackheads are back, and this time 
they’re making porn. Years after Renton ran off with everyone’s drug money, 
Sick Boy turns up at Renton’s club in Amsterdam with a proposition: make an 
adult film and share the financial reward. Hijinks ensue.

Will it stay faithful to the book? It has changed the title from Porno, but 
even if it does deviate further, T2 is in the safe hands of Trainspotting 
director Danny Boyle, who knows his way around a film – and a Welsh novel.

Should I read it? As Ali Smith wrote in her review for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/24/fiction.irvinewelsh>, Porno was 
a sign thatIrvine Welsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/24/q-and-a-irvine-welsh-trainspotting>
 does still have good books in him. If you liked Trainspotting, another turn 
with Renton and the gang is a sick joy. Welsh’s dedication to authenticity in 
his dialogue makes for a unique, if not always pleasant experience for 
first-timers (read Begbie’s Scottish-English passages out loud for maximum 
impact), so it might not be for everyone. But as Boyle proved with the first 
film, Welsh books and Welsh adaptations can be exclusively celebrated as their 
own successes.

How long do I have to read it? Until 3 March.

Film: Wilson 

What’s it about? Lonely, middle-aged misanthrope Wilson lives an aimless life 
until he discovers he has a teenage daughter who was put up for adoption. He 
reunites with his ex-wife to track down said offspring and build a new, messy 
family unit.

Will it stay faithful to the book? No. It might stay true to Daniel Clowes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/28/daniel-clowes-interview-comics-ghost-world-art-school-confidential>
’s comic in tone, but as that was made up of 70-odd strips with days and years 
in between each vignette, Wilson is not exactly a plot-driven affair.

Should I read it? Yes. Clowes has a way of capturing suburban American misery 
like no other comic writer, and his illustrations are beautiful. Woody 
Harrelson’s Wilson looks a tad more wacky than Clowes’s dowdy, deluded loner.

How long do I have to read it? Until 24 March.

Film: Ghost in the Shell 
 Scarlett Johansson in Ghost in the Shell. Photograph: Paramount Pictures 
What’s it about? In a cyberpunk near-future Japan, cyborg Motoko Kusanagi 
works for an elite counter-cyberterrorism team. Expect existential musings 
about humanity interspersed with giant-robot smackdowns.

Related: Worse than a whitewash: has Ghost in the Shell been Hollywoodised? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/nov/14/whitewash-ghost-in-the-shell-hollywoodised-mamoru-oshii-rupert-sanders-scarlett-johansson>

Will it stay faithful to the book? The film has already been accused of 
whitewashing by casting a caucasian American as a Japanese robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/18/scarlett-johansson-ghost-in-the-shell-max-landis>
, so it remains to be seen how Hollywood will handle the Asian-ness of the 
source material. There are many manga books, anime films and TV shows of Ghost 
in the Shell, and this filmis using bits of all of them 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/we-finally-know-what-part-of-ghost-in-the-shell-the-mov-1788549513>
.

Should I read it? Maybe. The manga <https://www.theguardian.com/books/manga> 
is stylish, philosophical and visually striking. But it is also long – about 20 
books in all – and occasionally gets lost in its own cleverness. If you can’t 
face reading all the manga but still want to get up to speed,the 1995 anime 
film is very good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/19/hollywood-ghost-in-the-shell>.

How long do I have to read it? Until 31 March.

TV: The Handmaid’s Tale
 Joseph Fiennes as the Commander in The Handmaid’s Tale. Photograph: Hulu 
What’s it about? The US has been overtaken by a theocratic military 
dictatorship and renamed Gilead, where Old Testament-inspired rules are law. As 
most women are sterile, the fertile ones are kept as breeding tools for 
powerful men and their barren wives.Margaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/15/margaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize>
’s classic follows Offred – literally, Of Fred – as she navigates her dangerous 
new world and develops a twisted relationship with Fred, AKA the Commander 
(Joseph Fiennes), for whom she is assigned to provide children.

Will it stay faithful to the book? It had better.

Should I read it? Yes. As well as being an intelligent criticism of patriarchy 
and puritanism, The Handmaid’s Tale is as pacy and compelling as any 
mass-market thriller. Atwood’s book deserves its status as a dystopian classic 
alongside Nineteen Eighty-four and Brave New World.

How long do I have to read it? Until 26 April.

Film: The Circle

What’s it about? Think Black Mirror set in Apple HQ. Mae Holland lands a job at
The Circle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/09/circle-dave-eggers-review>, a 
giant tech company that makes SeeChange: a light, portable camera that records 
everything the wearer does. Initially impressed with her new workplace, Mae 
begins to lose herself, sacrificing her personal liberties and right to privacy 
in the name of the company.

Will it stay faithful to the book? Probably.

Should I read it? If you like Dave Eggers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/daveeggers>, yes. If you haven’t tried 
him, choose another Eggers book first – What Is the What, perhaps, or A 
Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius.

How long do I have to read it? Until April.

TV: American Gods 

What’s it about? A convict is given an early release from prison when his wife 
suddenly dies. Once out, he is offered a job as a bodyguard for a mysterious 
stranger who calls himself Mr Wednesday, but is actually the Norse god Odin. 
Wednesday is travelling across the US, gathering up other old and forgotten 
gods who are also living in plain sight, for a showdown with the new gods 
America believes in – media, technology and capitalism.


Will it stay faithful to the book? Doubtful – but that’s no bad thing. 
Showrunner Bryan Fuller has said the episodes will follow individual characters 
rather thanNeil Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/26/neil-gaiman-terry-pratchett-tv-invasion-likely-stories-good-omens>
’s story. Gaiman himself has also updated and added some new gods to better 
reflect what today’s Americans put their faith in – guns, for one.

Should I read it? Odin’s beard! Yes. This is a fantasy that is epic but not 
convoluted, witty but not ridiculous, political but accessible.

How long do I have to read it? Until April. It is also around 600 pages long, 
so ready, get set, and go.

Film: The Dark Tower
 Idris Elba as Roland Deschain in The Dark Tower. Photograph: Ilze 
Kitshoff/Sony Pictures 
What’s it about? Stephen King’s epic series smashes classic westerns and 
traditional fantasy together to create a rich world in which time does not flow 
as it should, cyborg bears roam the land and ancient gas pumps are worshipped 
as gods.Roland Deschain is a gunslinger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/dec/13/stephen-king-the-gunslinger>
 – a knightly order formed of the descendants of King Arthur – and he’s on a 
quest to track down “the man in black” and find the Dark Tower, the nexus of 
all possible universes.

Will the producers stay faithful to the book? If they know the kinds of fans 
they’re dealing with here, they will.

Should I read it? Yes – parallel worlds, wormholes and alternate personalities 
are not for everyone, butStephen King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> is a wonderfully readable 
writer and the end of the series is one of the best ever written. It may look 
like a daunting series – there are eight books – but the first is surprisingly 
short if you want to dip your toes in before the film comes out.

How long do I have to read it? Until 28 July.

TV: Alias Grace
 Margaret Atwood. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
What’s it about? This is the year of Atwood adaptations. Her 1996 novel is 
based on the true story of Grace Marks, a housemaid who was jailed in 1843 for 
the bloody murders of her employer, Thomas Kinnear, and his housekeeper, Nancy 
Montgomery. Did she do it? You’ll have to read it to find out.

Will it stay faithful to the book? If Netflix can retain as many unanswered 
questions and as much moral complexity as the book, this could be the best 
true-crime show of the year.

Related: Margaret Atwood: ‘All dystopias are telling you is to make sure 
you’ve got a lot of canned goods and a gun’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/15/margaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize>

Should I read it? The novel’s unique narration makes this murky tale even 
murkier: there is the unreliable Grace, whose thoughts and speech blend into 
each other; Dr Jordan, Grace’s physician, who contradicts his own thoughts with 
correspondence; plus various newspaper reports, letters and poems … all these 
texts flesh out Grace’s case in a way TV might struggle to replicate. And 
anyway, it’s Atwood, so yes, read it.

How long do I have to read it? Maybe until tomorrow. Maybe six months. Like 
modern pop stars, Netflix has a tendency to suddenly drop their creations on an 
unsuspecting world, so get cracking.
 