
When Irish republicans sat down with members of the British government in 1921 
to negotiate what became the Anglo-Irish Treaty, ending Ireland’s war of 
independence, the state ofNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, and thus the partition of 
Ireland, was already a reality, having formally come into being earlier that 
year.

Brexit secretary: no return to 'hard' border in Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/01/brexit-secretary-no-return-to-hard-border-in-ireland>
To prevent the negotiations breaking down over Irish republican demands for an 
end to this partition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/14/eamon-de-valera-will-to-power-review>
, the British government concocted a cunning plan for a boundary commission to 
review the border in accordance with the “wishes of the inhabitants” and with 
due regard to economic and geographic conditions.

Irish negotiators maintained the commission would produce favourable findings 
that would lead to a significant territorial gain, ultimately making unity with 
Northern Ireland much more likely. The eventualreport of the boundary 
commission in 1925 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/jan/28/northernireland1>
 – involving only a minimal transfer of territory from Northern Ireland to the 
south, and even some transfer in the other direction – shattered these 
illusions, leading to a hasty agreement between Dublin, London and Belfast to 
leave the border as it was. And so it has remained since, all 300 miles of it.

Historical context is essential to understanding the significance of the news 
that Britain wants to shift its immigration controls back to Irish ports and 
airports to avoid the introduction of a “hard” border between Northern Ireland 
and the Republic after Brexit. Despite much rhetorical and emotional attachment 
to reunification, and a disastrous IRA campaign targeting the border from 
1956-62, pragmatism has dominated the southern Irish approach to the border 
question. Anglo-Irish and north-south relations noticeably improved from the 
1960s, with a particular focus on trade. The outbreak of the Troubles, from the 
late 1960s, led to numerous crises but was eventually solved by the peace 
process and the Good Friday agreement of 1998. This agreement maintains that it 
is “for the people of the island ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> alone, by agreement between the two 
parts respectively and without external impediment, to exercise their right of 
self-determination”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrexit-plan-divide-britain-ireland-uk-border%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b46f48124675284fc005d13567e05546ecd3dae%2F0_71_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20Brexit%20plan%20will%20divide%20Britain%20and%20Ireland%20once%20more%20%7C%20Diarmaid%20Ferriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrexit-plan-divide-britain-ireland-uk-border%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20Brexit%20plan%20will%20divide%20Britain%20and%20Ireland%20once%20more%20%7C%20Diarmaid%20Ferriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fbrexit-plan-divide-britain-ireland-uk-border%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b46f48124675284fc005d13567e05546ecd3dae%2F0_71_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Passport control at Dublin airport, where Britain wants tighter controls to be 
imposed. Photograph: Niall Carson/PA 
Following the Brexit vote in June, when 56% of Northern Ireland’s electorate 
voted to remain in the EU,historian Ian McBride argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/brexit-northern-irish-politics-border-eu-good-friday-agreement>
 that the Good Friday agreement “clearly envisaged that Northern Ireland’s 
future constitutional arrangements would be worked out in the context of 
continuing partnership between the north and the south, and between politicians 
in London and Dublin”. And he added: “To remove Northern Ireland from Europe 
without its consent is not only morally wrong and politically risky; it is also 
a rejection of the fundamental bilateralism of the peace process”.

The Brexit result also raised this bizarre question: given that, under the 
Good Friday agreement, those born in Northern Ireland can be citizens of the UK 
or Ireland or both, can they now be both EU and non-EU citizens?

During the referendum campaign, the then Northern Ireland secretary, Theresa 
Villiers, claimed that the Common Travel Area between Britain and Ireland – 
based on administrative agreements of 1922 and 1952 confirming the special 
status of Irish citizens in Britain and vice versa – means there isno need for 
a “hard border” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/24/arlene-foster-northern-ireland-martin-mcguinness-border-poll-wont-happen>
. Now her successor, James Brokenshire, insists London and Dublin will work 
closely together to “strengthen the external border” of the travel area in 
order to combat illegal migration into Britain once it leaves the EU.

One hundred years after the 1916 Rising, older arguments about Irish 
psychological independence may resurface

But the reality is that the Common Travel Area would be an external border to 
the EU as a whole; and what Britain may regard as a better alternative to a 
“hard” Irish border may be wishful thinking. For all the soothing rhetoric from 
Irish foreign affairs minister Charles Flanagan about sharing information and 
systems to counteract illegal immigration, he also warns: “This will be a 
decision not just by the UK or Irish governments but ultimately also by the 27 
EU states.”

This will be a difficult balancing act, given Ireland’s continuing membership 
of the EU. Brexit represents the Republic’s greatest challenge since joining 
the EEC in 1973, because the Irish government needs to emphasise both Irish 
distinctiveness from Britain and the two nations’ common needs. Senior members 
of the Irish government, because of their fear of a “hard” north-south border, 
are playing down the significance of Brokenshire’s suggestions; but moves to 
make ports of entry proxy border posts for Britain are likely to stir 
opposition. One hundred years after the 1916 Rising, some of the older 
arguments about Irish psychological independence may resurface as a reaction to 
Britain seeking to “use” Ireland and its borders to assert its new isolationist 
status.

Éamon de Valera: A Will to Power review – the man who made modern Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/14/eamon-de-valera-will-to-power-review>
Almost 40 years ago, a senior Irish civil servant, irritated that the Republic 
was being taken for granted by Britain, urged the Irish government “to bring 
out once more again the fact that we are not an appendage of the British in the 
European communities”.

In the last few years such tensions have eased, and there have been frequent 
and accurate assertions that Anglo-Irish relations have never been better. The 
sense of an “invisible” Irish border has also greatly improved relations 
between Northern and southern Ireland. The “soft border”, over which 30,000 
people travel each day, is even more valuable now as both economies are exposed 
to the consequences of Brexit.

When he took over as Ireland’s first minister for external affairs in 1922, 
Desmond FitzGerald said simply: “Britain is our most important external 
affair.” That was because of what Britain and Ireland had in common, but also 
because of what fundamentally divided them. This Irish border question has the 
alarming potential to undermine much of the painstaking progress that has been 
made in Anglo-Irish relations, shifting the emphasis away from reconciliation 
and common interests, and back to what divides.
 