
Jonny Bairstow reaches three figures and looks to the skies

Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> can seem very distant when 
you’re sitting on a train chugging through the white forests of Scandinavia, 
especially when the broadband connection is up and down and only strong enough 
for a text service anyway. But England really did have 500, Ben Stokes really 
did have 200 and Jonny Bairstow really was 95 not out in the heat and sunshine 
of Cape Town as lunch was taken on Day Two of the second Test.

Three years earlier, Young Jonny Bairstow (he’ll always be “Young” Jonny 
Bairstow – some players just are) had been on 95 against the same opponents 
with the the Lord’s Honours Board engraver sharpening his blade, when Morne 
Morkel did what most observers expected sooner or later and bowled him, the 
Yorkie’s bottom hand dragging the bat across the line from off to leg, a 
deserved maiden century left out in the middle.

FCC cricket podcast: Arun Harinath and The Maccabees' Felix White review 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/16/fcc-cricket-podcast-end-year-review-arun-harinath-maccabees-felix-white>
England fans were disappointed, perhaps none more so that the many kids 
waiting every morning by the Nursery Ground with whom YJB had posed for 
selfies, the big cheesy grin under the mop of red hair flashed by phones over 
and over again. Ten minutes later, carrot top the dead giveaway, I saw him 
besieged again by the Tavern Stand, patient on his walk back to the dressing 
room, perhaps remembering his own days on the other side of the ropes.

In the period since 2012, he had been in and out of the side, never quite a 
specialist keeper, never quite a specialist batsman, but scoring mountains of 
runs for Yorkshire as they secured two County Championships, the eccentricities 
being expunged from his technique. A 79 in the first Test in Durban (his best 
since the near miss at Lord’s) was a confidence builder and, then, in the wake 
of Ben Stokes’ assault and after a nervous lunch, suddenly thehelmet was off, 
the arms aloft and the eyes cast heavenwards 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/blogs/content/story/968901.html>. A 
three-and-a-half-year wait was over.

Or maybe the wait was much longer than that. Jonny’s father, David, played 25 
times for England, never improving on the 59 he made on Test debut. David took 
his own life 18 years previously (to the week), Jonny and his family 
confronting that anniversary every “Happy New Year everybody!” since. The son 
scored the century for his team, but he also scored it for the father – and for 
everyone who remembered the gritty, pugnacious Tyke with a tear in their eye 
whether in sunny Cape Town or snowy Sweden.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fcricket-2016-england-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb863a7ad6ff785279f8b4b40d5bc96a021501c4b%2F0_0_2277_1620%2F2277.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20memories%20of%20cricket%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fcricket-2016-england-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20memories%20of%20cricket%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fcricket-2016-england-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb863a7ad6ff785279f8b4b40d5bc96a021501c4b%2F0_0_2277_1620%2F2277.jpg>
 Jonny Bairstow celebrates after scoring a century against South Africa in Cape 
Town. Photograph: Mike Hutchings/Reuters 
Misbah-ul-Haq pushes on and pushes up

The Media Centre at Lord’s late in the day changes character from the quiet 
buzz ofsotto voce conversations as old friends catch up and the shape of the 
day’s play might be discussed, to a place of industry, keyboards tapping as 
deadlines approach, the odd curse thrown into the air if a Microsoft Windows 
Update unexpectedly kicks in. The scorer’s announcements are listened to more 
keenly, as those stats are dropped into copy soon to appear on screens around 
the world.

Like most colleagues, I was probably typing words like “Misbah’s single takes 
him to a well-deserved century” in a tweet for an “on the whistle” report when 
I heard genuine laughter peal around me and a few people ask “did you see 
that?” and a lot more ask “What? What happened?” – the journalist’s nightmare 
of missing the day’s big story was suddenly an unwelcome possibility.

The TV screens soon showed us what many of us had missed 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uV3vSo4STak>. On reaching three figures, 
Pakistan’s 42-year-old captain had offered a salute to his team-mates and back 
room staff and dropped to the turf to crank out 10 press-ups like a man half 
his age. It was a beautifully judged gesture, a small joke against himself, a 
genuine show of gratitude to the staff who had led the squad’s pre-tour 
conditioning programme and a reminder that, even after some of Pakistan’s 
darkest cricketing hours, Misbah knew that cricket was just a game – albeit a 
glorious one.

Ravichandran Ashwin lands one perfectly
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fcricket-2016-england-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a3c79b6f9cb9800a30d93d4f817b32d969f0d70%2F0_68_2602_1735%2F2602.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20memories%20of%20cricket%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fcricket-2016-england-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20memories%20of%20cricket%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F99-94-cricket-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fcricket-2016-england-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a3c79b6f9cb9800a30d93d4f817b32d969f0d70%2F0_68_2602_1735%2F2602.jpg>
 Ravichandran Ashwin takes Bairstow’s wicket. Photograph: Danish 
Siddiqui/Reuters 
High on the list of players enjoying great years in 2016, one would find the 
names of Jonny Bairstow (using the springboard of his Cape Town ton to register 
all kinds of batting and keeping records) and India’s Michelle Machine, 
Ravichandran Ashwin.


In the Mumbai Test, with England’s inexorably sliding towards defeat in the 
match and series, only the two Yorkies had held up Virat Kohli’s men, Joe Root 
making 77 and Jonny Bairstow on 51. So Ashwin bowled and the ball hit 
Bairstow’s pads right in front of the stumps, plainly LBW. Nothing to see here. 
Except…

I was commentating at Guerilla Cricket, describing the action ball-by-ball, 
but I couldn’t work out what had happened exactly. It looked wrong and I 
couldn’t do my job for the listeners. Had the ball taken the leading edge and 
would the coming review would save Bairstow? Had the bat become tangled with 
the pad somehow? Had Bairstow suffered an uncharacteristic rush of blood and 
suddenly attempted to hit the ball into the Arabian Sea, the slog failing?

Three memories of cricket in 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/99-94-cricket-blog/2015/dec/29/cricket-2015-buttler-khan-ashes-watson>
The review revealed all. Ashwin had delivered the carrom ball – not much used 
in the series so far – from the front of the hand and poor Bairstow hadn’t 
picked it at all. Pitching on a length on middle, it turned to off and squared 
up the England batsman who missed it by (perhaps) the width of a set of stumps 
as he played for the off break. I had been confused by the sheer space between 
the ball and the bat as one went one way, the other going the other. I had, 
quite literally, not believed my eyes.

If not quite as spectacular as Shane Warne’s Ball of the Century 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rOVei8iTyM8>, it was every bit as magnificent 
an example of the spinner’s art and an illustration of a great player in peak 
form producingexactly what he wanted at the exact moment he wanted it 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lwyFHwfuC0g>. One for R. Ashwin’s mantlepiece.

• This article appeared first on The 99.4 Cricket Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> on Twitter
 