
Banksy's Bristol

Before Banksy <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/banksy> became a 
world-famous artist, he was just another kid on the streets of Bristol with a 
can of spray paint in his hands. Some of his earliest work is hidden around the 
city, and spotting it makes for a great self-guided walking tour.

Start your walk at The Thekla <http://www.theklabristol.co.uk/>, a huge former 
cargo ship-turned-music venue located at East Mud Dock in Bristol Harbour. 
Banksy's painting ofThe Grim Reaper, a white, hooded figure in a rowing boat, 
can be seen spray painted on its side at the tide mark.

From the harbourside, head towards Park Street. Banksy's artwork Well Hung 
Lover – a naked man hanging from a window – is actually on the side of a sexual 
health clinic on Frogmore Street, but the best views are from the bridge at the 
bottom of Park Street that crosses over Frogmore. TheBristol Museum and Art 
Gallery 
<http://www.bristol.gov.uk/page/leisure-and-culture/bristol-museum-and-art-gallery>
 is at the top of Park Street, and Banksy's sculpture Angel Bust, a statue of 
an angel with a paint pot on her head, can be seen in the main foyer.

From here, head north towards Stokes Croft, where you'll find plenty of trendy 
clothes shops, record stores and quirky boutiques. This is the heart of 
Bristol's cultural quarter, and Banksy's paintingMild Mild West is located next 
to the creative hubThe Canteen <http://www.canteenbristol.co.uk/>, where you 
can also stop for a snack. The whole area resembles an outdoor gallery with 
colourful graffiti that transforms the walls and buildings – a must for street 
art fans.

Now catch the No 13 bus from stop C on Penn Street towards Frenchay, getting 
off at Robertson Road in Easton. It's slightly further out of the centre, but 
Banksy used to live in the area and it contains some of his oldest works and so 
is a mecca for enthusiasts.Cat and Dog – an early Banksy painting of a 
graffiti-spraying cat, being approached by two threatening dogs – is located on 
Foster Street, on a wall covered in fantastic street art by many different 
artists.

View Banksy's Bristol 
<https://maps.google.co.uk/maps/ms?msa=0&msid=215903437085759108032.0004ef8c8cd59989dabe6&ie=UTF8&t=m&ll=51.460959,-2.581701&spn=0.018717,0.039482&z=14&source=embed>
 in a larger map 
Finally, head north-west out of Easton along Fishponds Road, where you will 
find his hugely popularGorilla in a Pink Mask on a wall of the former North 
Bristol Social Club. It was mistakenly painted over in 2011, then partially 
restored and now appears as a ghostly figure looming out of the mist.
wherethewall.com/tours <http://www.wherethewall.com/tours>

Manchester music walk

This mini-pilgrimage, created by Inspiral Carpets' drummer, Craig Gill, traces 
the Manchester music scene's hotspots, from the grandeur of the Free Trade Hall 
to the flat where Noel Gallagher wrote Oasis's early songs.

Start on Peter Street at the Free Trade Hall, the former music venue that was 
the scene of the Sex Pistols' gig of 1976 – so influential it supposedly led to 
the formation of Joy Division, the Smiths, the Fall and Buzzcocks.

Next, head down Mount Street. At the crossing with Windmill Street you'll see 
theManchester Exhibition Centre, formerly the legendary G-Mex music venue where 
New Order, the Smiths, Inspiral Carpets and Happy Mondays played. The shot used 
on the Smiths' Rank LP was taken here.

Turn left then right down Lower Mosley Street past The Bridgewater Hall, home 
to Manchester's Hallé Orchestra.

View  Manchester music walk 
<https://maps.google.co.uk/maps/ms?msa=0&msid=215903437085759108032.0004ef9b79db383eee9d5&ie=UTF8&t=m&ll=53.478214,-2.242413&spn=0.008939,0.019741&z=15&source=embed>
 in a larger map 
Crossing the junction at Whitworth Street, walk down Little Peter Street and 
you'll find what used to beTJ Davidson's rehearsal studio, where Joy Division 
recorded the Love Will Tear Us Apart video. Oasis played their first gig inThe 
Boardwalk next door, a former club now an office block. Also on this road is 
Sun House, Tony Wilson's loft apartment, next door to his label Factory 
Records. Back at Whitworth Street junction, the flats on the corner are where 
Wilson's nightclubThe Haçienda stood, before it was demolished in 2002. Go east 
up Whitworth Street toThe Ritz, the venue for The Smiths' first gig, and a 
block of flats calledIndia House. Noel Gallagher wrote Definitely Maybe while 
living in No 47. Finish your walk by heading back to the Northern Quarter for a 
pint atDry Bar on Oldham Street, opened by Tony Wilson in 1989 – myth has it 
that Liam Gallagher and Shaun Ryder were barred from it for their rock'n'roll 
antics.
manchestermusictours.com <http://www.manchestermusictours.com/>

Dublin literary walk

One of our favourite routes across the city traces a line between the statues 
of James Joyce and Oscar Wilde, taking in the grand Trinity College, where many 
of Ireland's most celebrated writers studied.

Start near the corner of North Earl Street and O'Connell Street, under the 
statue of James Joyce, born in Dublin in 1882. Head down O'Connell Street 
towards theAbbey Theatre on Abbey Street, established in 1904 by the poet WB 
Yeats, the activist Edward Martyn and the dramatist Lady Gregory, who were 
passionate about promoting the arts to strengthen Irish national pride. The 
theatre was rebuilt after it burned down in 1951.

Cross over O'Connell Bridge and go down D'Olier Street passing the former 
offices ofthe Irish Times. At the traffic island on nearby Westmoreland Street 
stands astatue of the Dublin-born poet Thomas Moore, who helped burned Byron's 
memoirs after they were deemed too scandalous to be published.

Continue on towards Trinity College, whose alumni include Jonathan Swift, Bram 
Stoker, Jo Shapcott and Ann Enright. Do not pass beneath its famous Campanile 
when the bell tolls; college superstition decrees that you will fail all your 
exams. From the bell tower head left into Fellows' Square to see the illuminated
Book of Kells manuscript in the college library. Created by Celtic monks in the 
Abbey of Kells in around c800, its lavishly decorated pages contain the four 
Gospels and the New Testament.

Exiting the campus, turn left on Lincoln Place and you'll pass Sweny's, the 
former pharmacy that appears in Joyce's Ulysses, and where you can pick up a 
box of the "sweet lemony" soap made famous by the novel. Head down Merrion 
Street, entering the park by the first small gate, for a rendezvous with Oscar 
Wilde, whom you'll find reclining on a large stone. Wilde lived atNo 1 Merrion 
Square during 1855-76 and WB Yeats at No 82 during 1922-28.

View Dublin literary walk  
<https://maps.google.co.uk/maps/ms?msa=0&msid=204109031581504929709.0004ef8c323c2d1cc36ab&ie=UTF8&t=m&z=15&source=embed>
 in a larger map 
Your journey ends with coffee and cake in one of the grand mahogany booths at 
Bewley's Cafe <http://bewleys.com/bewleys-grafton-street-cafe> on Grafton 
Street. It is a hub of Dublin cultural life, and regulars included Joyce, 
Patrick Kavanagh and Samuel Beckett.
 